Mixing Predictions for Online Metric Algorithms

Antonios Antoniadis * 1 Christian Coester * 2 Marek Eliáš * 3 Adam Polak * 4 Bertrand Simon * 5

Abstract

predictions (e.g., machine-learned) related to the future input. These predictions may be inaccurate, so a challenge
is to simultaneously utilize high-quality predictions to their
best advantage while at the same time avoiding to be misled
by erroneous predictions.

A major technique in learning-augmented online
algorithms is combining multiple algorithms or
predictors. Since the performance of each predictor may vary over time, it is desirable to use
not the single best predictor as a benchmark, but
rather a dynamic combination which follows different predictors at different times. We design
algorithms that combine predictions and are competitive against such dynamic combinations for
a wide class of online problems, namely, metrical task systems. Against the best (in hindsight)
unconstrained combination of ℓ predictors, we obtain a competitive ratio of O(ℓ2 ), and show that
this is best possible. However, for a benchmark
with slightly constrained number of switches between different predictors, we can get a (1 + ϵ)competitive algorithm. Moreover, our algorithms
can be adapted to access predictors in a banditlike fashion, querying only one predictor at a time.
An unexpected implication of one of our lower
bounds is a new structural insight about covering
formulations for the k-server problem.

An important technique in the field of learning-augmented
algorithms is the method of combining multiple algorithms
into a single hybrid algorithm that leverages the advantages
of all individual algorithms. The basic idea goes back to
several decades before the area of learning-augmented algorithms was born and also has applications, for example, in
pure online algorithms: Fiat et al. (1990) defined a MIN operator on algorithms for the k-server problem that combines
several algorithms into one whose cost matches the best of
them up to a constant factor, and they used this technique
to obtain the first competitive algorithm for the k-server
problem.
In learning-augmented algorithms, similar combination techniques are employed for several purposes. Firstly, they are
frequently used to make algorithms robust against prediction errors by combining an algorithm that mostly follows
predictions with a classical online algorithm that ignores
predictions (see, e.g., Lykouris & Vassilvitskii (2021); Purohit et al. (2018); Rohatgi (2020); Antoniadis et al. (2020);
Wei (2020); Bamas et al. (2020); Bansal et al. (2022)). In
fact, one might argue that almost all algorithms that utilize predictions while being robust to their error are at least
implicitly a kind of combination of two algorithms. A second purpose, as employed by Antoniadis et al. (2021), is to
combine several differently parameterized versions of the
same algorithm in order to perform nearly as well as the version with the best parameter choice. These aforementioned
works, like the majority of research in learning-augmented
algorithms, focus on settings where a single predictor provides suggestions to the algorithm.

1. Introduction
Motivated by the power of machine-learned predictions, the
field of learning-augmented algorithms has been growing
rapidly in recent years. In the classical field of online algorithms, an input sequence is revealed to an algorithm
over time and it is assumed that at all times, no information
about the future part of the input is available. In contrast,
a learning-augmented algorithm additionally has access to
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Twente, The Netherlands 2 University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
3
Bocconi University, Milan, Italy 4 Max Planck Institute
for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany 5 CNRS / IN2P3
Computing Center, Villeurbanne, France. Correspondence
to: Antonios Antoniadis <a.antoniadis@utwente.nl>, Christian Coester <christian.coester@cs.ox.ac.uk>, Marek Eliáš
<marek.elias@unibocconi.it>, Adam Polak <apolak@mpiinf.mpg.de>, Bertrand Simon <bertrand.simon@cnrs.fr>.

However, a third and perhaps the most relevant application
of combining several algorithms in the learning-augmented
realm is to be able to deal with multiple predictors. In
practice it is often the case that several predictors are available, but they produce potentially conflicting advice; for
example, there may be different ML models based on different methods or tailored to specific scenarios, or several
human experts with contrary opinions. Since it is not clear

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

