NUNO: A General Framework for
Learning Parametric PDEs with Non-Uniform Data

Songming Liu 1 Zhongkai Hao 1 Chengyang Ying 1 Hang Su 1 2 Ze Cheng 3 Jun Zhu 1 2

Abstract
The neural operator has emerged as a powerful tool in learning mappings between function
spaces in PDEs. However, when faced with realworld physical data, which are often highly nonuniformly distributed, it is challenging to use
mesh-based techniques such as the FFT. To address this, we introduce the Non-Uniform Neural
Operator (NUNO), a comprehensive framework
designed for efficient operator learning with nonuniform data. Leveraging a K-D tree-based domain decomposition, we transform non-uniform
data into uniform grids while effectively controlling interpolation error, thereby paralleling the
speed and accuracy of learning from non-uniform
data. We conduct extensive experiments on 2D
elasticity, (2+1)D channel flow, and a 3D multiphysics heatsink, which, to our knowledge, marks
a novel exploration into 3D PDE problems with
complex geometries. Our framework has reduced
error rates by up to 60% and enhanced training
speeds by 2× to 30×. The code is now available
at https://github.com/thu-ml/NUNO.

Non-Uniform Data
of

Global
Interpolation

Large Information
Loss

Zoom In:

Subdomain
Interpolation

Small Information
Loss

Figure 1: Illustration of non-uniform data. The physical
quantity f (x, y) varies greatly at the center but remains
smooth in the far field, prompting a higher concentration of
sensors (blue dots) in the center. Direct global interpolation
may overlook these variations and yield a substantial error.
Instead, our approach involves decomposing the domain into
five subdomains and adaptively applying grids of varying
sizes (denoted by different colored lines) to minimize error.

data-driven surrogate models, approximates the mapping
from the parameter function to the solution of PDEs. When
inference, one forward pass is several orders of magnitude
faster than traditional numerical methods (Li et al., 2020a).

1. Introduction
In many fields such as fluid dynamics (Cebeci et al., 2005)
and electromagnetism (de Castro et al., 2014), scientists and
engineers often resort to numerical simulation rather than
expensive experiments to study the behavior of physical
systems under different parameters. However, traditional
numerical methods can be too time-consuming for complex
physical systems characterized by partial differential equations (PDEs) (Hao et al., 2022). Neural operator, a class of

Among recently developed neural operators, mesh-based
neural operators are typically fast and accurate, whose input
and output are specified as uniform grids. For example,
Fourier neural operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2020a) can efficiently extract highly nonlinear and nonlocal features and
perform accurate predictions via the fast Fourier transform
(FFT). Besides, a uniform grid is naturally compatible with
a discretization of PDEs, which is the basis of many important works (Long et al., 2018; Gin et al., 2021; Liu et al.,
2022). However, real-world physical data are usually highly
non-uniformly distributed (see Figure 1 for an illustration),
and mesh-based methods are difficult to apply due to large
interpolation errors. To overcome this limitation, some
attempts to develop mesh-less neural operators (Lu et al.,

1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, THBI
Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, Tsinghua
University 2 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
3
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence. Correspondence to: Jun
Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

