Eventual Discounting Temporal Logic Counterfactual Experience Replay

Cameron Voloshin 1 Abhinav Verma 2 Yisong Yue 1 3

Abstract

using Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) to specify agent behavior have been studied (see Section 7). LTL can express desired characteristics of future paths of a system (Baier & Katoen, 2008), allowing for precise and flexible task/behavior
specification. For example, we may ask for a system to
repeatedly accomplish a set of goals in specific succession
(see Section 2 for more examples).

Linear temporal logic (LTL) offers a simplified
way of specifying tasks for policy optimization
that may otherwise be difficult to describe with
scalar reward functions. However, the standard
RL framework can be too myopic to find maximally LTL satisfying policies. This paper makes
two contributions. First, we develop a new valuefunction based proxy, using a technique we call
eventual discounting, under which one can find
policies that satisfy the LTL specification with
highest achievable probability. Second, we develop a new experience replay method for generating off-policy data from on-policy rollouts via
counterfactual reasoning on different ways of satisfying the LTL specification. Our experiments,
conducted in both discrete and continuous stateaction spaces, confirm the effectiveness of our
counterfactual experience replay approach.

Without significant assumptions, there is no precise signal on the probability of a policy satisfying an LTL objective. Existing work overwhelmingly uses Q-learning
with a sparse RL heuristic (Bozkurt et al., 2020; Cai et al.,
2021a) meant to motivate an agent to generate trajectories
that appear to satisfy the task. First, these heuristics involve
complicated technical assumptions obscuring access to nonasymptotic guarantees, even in finite state-action spaces.
Second, sparse reward functions pose substantial challenges
to any gradient-based RL algorithm since they provide poor
signal to adequately solve credit assignment. Resolving
sparsity involves using a hierarchical approach (Bozkurt
et al., 2020) or re-introducing reward-shaping (Hasanbeig
et al., 2018). See Section 7 for elaboration on prior work.

1. Introduction

Our contributions. In this paper, we focus on model-free
policy learning of an LTL specified objective from online
interaction with the environment. We make two technical
contributions. First, we reformulate the RL problem with
a modified value-function proxy using a technique we call
eventual discounting. The key idea is to account for the
fact that optimally satisfying the LTL specification may not
depend on the length of time it takes to satisfy it (e.g., “eventually always reach the goal”). We prove in Section 4 that
the optimal policy under eventual discounting maximizes
the probability of satisfying the LTL specification.

In the standard reinforcement learning (RL) framework, the
goal is to develop a strategy that maximizes a reward function in an unknown environment. In many applications of
RL, a practitioner is responsible for generating the reward
function so that the agent will behave desirably after the
learning process. However, it can be challenging to convey real-world task specifications through scalar rewards
(Randløv & Alstrøm, 1998; Toromanoff et al., 2019; Ibarz
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021; Ng et al., 1999; Yang et al.,
2022). Colloquially known as reward-shaping, practitioners
often resort to using heuristic ”breadcrumbs” (Sorg, 2011)
to guide the agent towards intended behaviors. Despite the
“reward function is enough” hypothesis (Sutton & Barto,
2018; Silver et al., 2021)), some tasks may not be reducible
to scalar rewards (Abel et al., 2021).

Second, we develop an experience replay method1 to address the reward sparsity issue. Namely, any LTL formula
can be converted to a fully known specialized finite state
automaton from which we can generate multiple counterfactual trajectories from a single on-policy trajectory. We
call this method LTL-guided counterfactual experience replay. We empirically validate the performance gains of our
counterfactual experience replay approach using both finite
state/action spaces as well as continuous state/action spaces
using both Q-learning and Policy Gradient approaches.

In response to these challenges, alternative RL frameworks
1
Caltech 2 Penn State 3 Latitude AI. Correspondence to:
Cameron Voloshin <cvoloshin@caltech.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

Code here: https://github.com/clvoloshin/RL-LTL

