Von Mises Mixture Distributions for Molecular Conformation Generation
Kirk Swanson 1 Jake Williams 1 Eric Jonas 1

Abstract

like nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) chemical shifts,
are measured on timescales considerably longer than the
timescale of molecular motion. At room temperature, most
molecules are not static and adopt a wide variety of conformations. These properties are therefore computed as
expectations with respect to the probability density that governs molecular conformations, known as the Boltzmann
distribution. This density is given by

Molecules are frequently represented as graphs,
but the underlying 3D molecular geometry (the locations of the atoms) ultimately determines most
molecular properties. However, most molecules
are not static and at room temperature adopt
a wide variety of geometries or conformations.
The resulting distribution on geometries p(x) is
known as the Boltzmann distribution, and many
molecular properties are expectations computed
under this distribution. Generating accurate samples from the Boltzmann distribution is therefore
essential for computing these expectations accurately. Traditional sampling-based methods are
computationally expensive, and most recent machine learning-based methods have focused on
identifying modes in this distribution rather than
generating true samples. Generating such samples
requires capturing conformational variability, and
it has been widely recognized that the majority
of conformational variability in molecules arises
from rotatable bonds. In this work, we present
VonMisesNet, a new graph neural network that
captures conformational variability via a variational approximation of rotatable bond torsion
angles as a mixture of von Mises distributions.
We demonstrate that VonMisesNet can generate
conformations for arbitrary molecules in a way
that is both physically accurate with respect to the
Boltzmann distribution and orders of magnitude
faster than existing sampling methods.

p(x) =

e−E(x)/kB T
,
Z

(1)

where x ∈ Rn×3 is the set of atomic coordinates that define a conformation over the n atoms, E(x) is the potential
energy, T is the temperature, Z is a normalizing constant,
and kB is the Boltzmann constant (Tuckerman, 2010). E(x)
has been modeled extensively using fundamental chemistry
knowledge. For example, there are classical mechanicsbased force fields, such as the widely-used Merck Molecular Force Field (MMFF) (Halgren, 1996), and quantum
mechanical-based approaches, such as Density Functional
theory (DFT).
Generating accurate samples from this distribution is essential for computing accurate molecular property expectations.
However, sampling from p(x) is very challenging because it
is a high-dimensional and multi-modal distribution; generating samples from high-dimensional distributions is a classic
problem in computational statistics (Liu, 2008).
The complexity in the Boltzmann distribution is primarily
due to the large number of degrees of freedom that a given
molecule possesses. These degrees of freedom are typically
defined in terms of three types of so-called internal coordinates: bond lengths, which are distances between pairs
of bonded atoms; bond angles, which are angles between
bonds connected to a common atom; and torsions, which are
dihedral angles formed by four consecutively bonded atoms.
The number of degrees of freedom therefore increases substantially as a function of molecule size.

1. Introduction
Accurate prediction of molecular properties is an important
task in computational chemistry. Many physical and chemical properties are dependent on a molecule’s 3D conformations, and some properties, such as spectroscopic properties

There are a variety of classical approaches to conformation
generation, including stochastic methods and systematic
methods (Hawkins, 2017). Some stochastic methods, such
as Markov Chain Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics,
attempt to generate samples from the Boltzmann distribution
(which we refer to below as “Boltzmann samples”) but can
suffer from long runtimes on the order of minutes or even

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Kirk Swanson <swansonk1@uchicago.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

