Answering Complex Logical Queries on Knowledge Graphs
via Query Computation Tree Optimization

Yushi Bai 1 Xin Lv 1 Juanzi Li 1 Lei Hou 1
FOL ? 𝒗: ∃𝒖. 𝐨𝐜𝐜𝐮𝐩𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧 𝒖, 𝐩𝐡𝐢𝐬𝐢𝐜𝐢𝐬𝐭 ∧ 𝐰𝐢𝐧 𝒖, 𝟏𝟗𝟐𝟏 𝐍𝐨𝐛𝐞𝐥 𝐩𝐫𝐢𝐳𝐞 ∧ 𝐛𝐨𝐫𝐧_𝐢𝐧(𝒖, 𝒗)

Abstract
Answering complex logical queries on incomplete knowledge graphs is a challenging task,
and has been widely studied. Embedding-based
methods require training on complex queries and
may not generalize well to out-of-distribution
query structures. Recent work frames this task
as an end-to-end optimization problem, and it
only requires a pretrained link predictor. However, due to the exponentially large combinatorial search space, the optimal solution can only
be approximated, limiting the final accuracy. In
this work, we propose QTO (Query Computation Tree Optimization) that can efficiently find
the exact optimal solution. QTO finds the optimal solution by a forward-backward propagation
on the tree-like computation graph, i.e., query
computation tree. In particular, QTO utilizes the
independence encoded in the query computation
tree to reduce the search space, where only local
computations are involved during the optimization procedure. Experiments on 3 datasets show
that QTO obtains state-of-the-art performance on
complex query answering, outperforming previous best results by an average of 22%. Moreover, QTO can interpret the intermediate solutions
for each of the one-hop atoms in the query with
over 90% accuracy. The code of our paper is at
https://github.com/bys0318/QTO.

DAG

phisicist

intermediate variables:

occupation-1 𝒖

∧
1921 Nobel prize

win-1

𝒖 born_in

𝒗

𝒖
one-hop decomposition:

KGE
u=?
value
Einstein 0.9
Newton 0.1
…

𝒖 := Albert Einstein
Set of viable entity assignments
𝒗 := Germany

Figure 1. FOL and DAG expressions of a complex logical query.
The complex query can be decomposed to three one-hop queries,
as marked by the dashed boxes. KGE model can answer the onehop queries with likelihood scores.

of downstream tasks, in this paper, we focus on complex
logical query answering on knowledge graphs (Hamilton
et al., 2018; Ren & Leskovec, 2020), which is a fundamental
and practical task.
Complex logical queries can be represented with First-Order
Logic (FOL) that includes conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨),
negation (¬), and existential quantifier (∃). A more straightforward way is to represent their computation graphs as
Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs), and solve them by traversing the KG and assigning viable entities to the intermediate
variables according to their structures (Dalvi & Suciu, 2007;
Zou et al., 2011). For example, we show the FOL and
DAG representations of a complex logical query “Where
was the physicist who won the Nobel prize in 1921 born?”
in Figure 1.

1. Introduction

Real-world KGs often suffer from incompleteness, making
it impossible to answer a complex query with missing links
by traversing the KG. Inspired by the success of knowledge
graph embedding (KGE) (Bordes et al., 2013; Dettmers
et al., 2018; Bai et al., 2021) on answering one-hop KG
queries, a line of research proposes to answer complex logical queries by learning embeddings for the intermediate
variables (Hamilton et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2019; Ren &
Leskovec, 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Zhu
et al., 2022). Typically, these methods need to be trained on
millions of generated complex logical queries, with large
training time overhead, and they struggle to generalize to

Knowledge graph (KG) stores structural knowledge in the
form of triplet, which connects a pair of entities (nodes) with
a relational edge. Knowledge graph also supports a variety
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist; KIRC, Institute for Artificial Intelligence; Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. Correspondence to: Lei Hou
<houlei@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

