NA2 Q: Neural Attention Additive Model for Interpretable
Multi-Agent Q-Learning

Zichuan Liu 1 Yuanyang Zhu 1 Chunlin Chen 1

Global

𝑜𝑖

Intervention

𝑢𝑖

Agent 1
Agent 1

Agent 2

𝑄𝑡𝑜𝑡

Agent 2

Agent 2

Sub-contrib

𝒔

Value decomposition is widely used in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning, however, its implicit credit assignment mechanism
is not yet fully understood due to black-box networks. In this work, we study an interpretable
value decomposition framework via the family
of generalized additive models. We present a
novel method, named Neural Attention Additive
Q-learning (NA2 Q), providing inherent intelligibility of collaboration behavior. NA2 Q can explicitly factorize the optimal joint policy induced
by enriching shape functions to model all possible coalitions of agents into individual policies.
Moreover, we construct identity semantics to promote estimating credits together with the global
state and individual value functions, where local
semantic masks help us diagnose whether each
agent captures relevant-task information. Extensive experiments show that NA2 Q consistently
achieves superior performance compared to different state-of-the-art methods on all challenging
tasks, while yielding human-like interpretability.

Sub-contrib

Abstract

Agent 1
Figure 1. An example of value decomposition via the GAMs family
in MARL, where s ∈ S is the global state, fk ∈ {f1 , · · · , f1...n }
denotes the contribution of a shape function to learning individual
or pairwise action values, and Qtot denotes the joint action value.

box neural structures, where the underlying decision process
and credit assignment mechanisms are difficult for humans
to understand and interpret. Hence, explicitly understanding
the decision-making processes and deducing the contribution of agents is still crucial in the MARL community.

1. Introduction
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
has been proven to hold considerable promise for addressing
many challenging real-world problems, e.g., autonomous
driving (Kiran et al., 2021), scene understanding (Chen
et al., 2019), and robotics (Kober et al., 2013; Lillicrap et al.,
2016). Value decomposition (Rashid et al., 2018; Son et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2021) has witnessed success in handling
the joint action-value function effectively in value-based
MARL methods. This progress has been fueled by black-

A growing body of work attempts to demystify the decisionmaking process of deep reinforcement learning. Instancespecific approximation methods aim to explain black-box
predictions via the Shapley value (Wang et al., 2020) or clustering (Zahavy et al., 2016) techniques in post-hoc explanation techniques. However, these interpretable methods are
considered computationally expensive (Slack et al., 2021)
and unstable (Ghorbani et al., 2019), i.e., they often misrepresent models or agents’ decisions. Other works (Bastani
et al., 2018; Silva et al., 2020) have resorted to imitation
learning to generate post-hoc global explanations aimed at
distilling agent strategies, which lack the transparency of
the original model and do not guarantee performance in

1
Department of Control Science and Intelligence Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to:
Yuanyang Zhu <yuanyang@smail.nju.edu.cn>, Chunlin Chen
<clchen@nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

