On Uni-Modal Feature Learning in Supervised Multi-Modal Learning

Chenzhuang Du * 1 Jiaye Teng * 1 Tingle Li 2 Yichen Liu 1 Tianyuan Yuan 1 Yue Wang 3 Yang Yuan 1 4 5
Hang Zhao 1 4 5

Abstract

et al., 2020b; Xiao et al., 2020), representation learning
(Radford et al., 2021) and robotics (Chen et al., 2020a).

We abstract the features (i.e. learned representations) of multi-modal data into 1) uni-modal
features, which can be learned from uni-modal
training, and 2) paired features, which can only
be learned from cross-modal interactions. Multimodal models are expected to benefit from crossmodal interactions on the basis of ensuring unimodal feature learning. However, recent supervised multi-modal late-fusion training approaches
still suffer from insufficient learning of uni-modal
features on each modality. We prove that this
phenomenon does hurt the model’s generalization
ability. To this end, we propose to choose a targeted late-fusion learning method for the given
supervised multi-modal task from Uni-Modal
Ensemble (UME) and the proposed Uni-Modal
Teacher (UMT), according to the distribution of
uni-modal and paired features. We demonstrate
that, under a simple guiding strategy, we can
achieve comparable results to other complex latefusion or intermediate-fusion methods on various multi-modal datasets, including VGG-Sound,
Kinetics-400, UCF101, and ModelNet40.

Liang et al. (2022) analyzes multi-modal model behavior
by studying the uni-modal importance, cross-modal interactions and so on. In this paper, according to how the
features (i.e. learned representations) of multi-modal data
can be learned in supervised learning, we abstract them
into two categories: (1) uni-modal features, which can be
learned from uni-modal training, and (2) paired features,
which can only be learned from cross-modal interactions.
Ideally, we hope that multi-modal models can learn paired
features through cross-modal interactions on the basis of
ensuring that enough uni-modal features are learned.
However, recent supervised multi-modal late-fusion training methods still suffer from learning insufficient uni-modal
features of each modality in tasks where uni-modal priors
are meaningful 1 (Peng et al., 2022). Specifically, in linear
probing, the encoders from multi-modal learning perform
worse than those from uni-modal learning. We term this phenomenon as Modality Laziness and illustrate that in Figure 1.
In this paper, we prove that it does hurt the generalization
ability of the model, especially when uni-modal features
are dominant in given task.
Besides the laziness problem, another shortcoming of recent
late-fusion approaches is complex to implement. For example, G-Blending (Wang et al., 2020b) needs an extra split
of data to estimate the overfitting-to-generalization ratio to
re-weight the losses and then re-train the model again and
again. OGM-GE (Peng et al., 2022), which dynamically
adjusts the gradients of different modalities during training,
needs to tune too many hyper-parameters, including the start
and end epoch of the gradient modulation, an “alpha” used
to calculate the coefficients for the modulation and whether
adaptive Gaussian noise Enhancement (GE) is needed. The
more complicated thing is that these hyper-parameters need
to be re-tuned on new datasets 2 .

1. Introduction
Multi-modal signals, e.g., vision, sound, text, are ubiquitous
in our daily life, allowing us to perceive the world through
multiple sensory systems. Inspired by the crucial role that
multi-modal interactions play in human perception and decision (Smith & Gasser, 2005), substantial efforts have been
made to build effective and reliable computational multimodal systems in fields like multimedia computing (Wang
*
Equal contribution 1 IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 University
of California, Berkeley 3 Massachusetts Institute of Tech4
nology
Shanghai
Artificial
Intelligence
Laboratory
5
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute.
Correspondence to: Chenzhuang Du <ducz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Hang Zhao
<hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>.

To this end, more simple and effective methods are urgently needed. We pay attention to the learning of
1

Uni-modal prior here means that we get predictions only according to one modality in multi-modal tasks.
2
https://github.com/GeWu-Lab/OGM-GE_
CVPR2022

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

