Probabilistic Contrastive Learning Recovers
the Correct Aleatoric Uncertainty of Ambiguous Inputs

Michael Kirchhof 1 Enkelejda Kasneci 2 Seong Joon Oh 3
tuition by a theoretical result: under weak assumptions,
the embeddings learned under an InfoNCE (Oord et al.,
2018) loss are exactly equal to the true latent vectors, up to
a rotation of the spherical latent space. This comes from
a nonlinear Independent Component Analysis (ICA) perspective (Comon & Jutten, 2010). It assumes an unknown
nonlinear generative process that transforms true latents into
our observations. Contrastively trained encoders invert this
nonlinear function and recover the original latent space.

Abstract
Contrastively trained encoders have recently
been proven to invert the data-generating process:
they encode each input, e.g., an image, into
the true latent vector that generated the image
(Zimmermann et al., 2021). However, real-world
observations often have inherent ambiguities. For
instance, images may be blurred or only show
a 2D view of a 3D object, so multiple latents
could have generated them. This makes the
true posterior for the latent vector probabilistic
with heteroscedastic uncertainty. In this setup,
we extend the common InfoNCE objective and
encoders to predict latent distributions instead of
points. We prove that these distributions recover
the correct posteriors of the data-generating process, including its level of aleatoric uncertainty,
up to a rotation of the latent space. In addition to
providing calibrated uncertainty estimates, these
posteriors allow the computation of credible intervals in image retrieval. They comprise images
with the same latent as a given query, subject to
its uncertainty. Code is at https://github.
com/mkirchhof/Probabilistic_
Contrastive_Learning.

This holds for the class of generative processes that are deterministic and injective, so that each image could have been
generated by only one latent vector. This is often violated in
practice. In Figure 1, the lower image of an animal is in lowresolution, so it is impossible to tell which exact species,
i.e., which latent variables, underlie the image. In fact, most
scenarios in the wild involve some form of such aleatoric
uncertainty, including 3D-to-2D projections (Chen et al.,
2021), partially covered objects (Kraus & Dietmayer, 2019),
or images with a low resolution or bad crop (Li et al., 2021).
It also manifests itself outside the image domain, such as
in the inherent ambiguity of natural language (Chun et al.,
2022) or measurement noise in general (Meech & StanleyMarbell, 2021). Quantifying such uncertainties is a key goal
of the recent reliable machine learning efforts (Tran et al.,
2022; Galil et al., 2023). This has use cases in safety-critical
downstream applications like medical imaging (Barbano
et al., 2022). If an image is too ambiguous, a model can
reject it or defer the prediction to a human. Another application is active learning, where we want to choose samples
with high uncertainty (Lewis & Catlett, 1994).

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning (Chen et al., 2020) trains encoders to
output embeddings that are close to one another for semantically similar inputs and far apart for unsimilar inputs. This
general notion of similarity allows transferring pretrained
encoders to downstream tasks (Wang et al., 2022; Ardeshir
& Azizan, 2022; Islam et al., 2021; Khosla et al., 2020).

This work generalizes the previous theoretical result to this
more challenging setting. We do not assume that generative
process is an injective and deterministic function, but allow
it to be a conditional distribution. We propose Monte-Carlo
InfoNCE (MCInfoNCE), a probabilistic analog of InfoNCE.
It trains encoders to predict distributions over the possible
latents, called probabilistic embeddings (Oh et al., 2019; Shi
& Jain, 2019). We prove that MCInfoNCE attains its global
minimum when the encoder recovers the true posteriors of
the generative process, up to a rotation of the latent space;
both in terms of both the mean (which latent is most likely
to have generated the image) and the variance (the level of

Recently, Zimmermann et al. (2021) corroborated this in1
University of Tübingen, Germany 2 TUM University, Munich,
Germany 3 University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center, Germany.
Correspondence to: Michael Kirchhof <michael dot kirchhof at
uni dash tuebingen dot de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

