Detecting Out-of-distribution Data through In-distribution Class Prior

Xue Jiang 1 2 Feng Liu 3 Zhen Fang 4 Hong Chen 5 Tongliang Liu 6 7 Feng Zheng 1 Bo Han 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
How to reliably deploy machine learning models into realworld scenarios has been attracting more and more attention
(Huang et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020). In
real-world scenarios, test data usually contain known and unknown classes (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017). We expect the
deployed model to eliminate the interference of unknown
classes while classifying known classes well. Nevertheless,
current models tend to be overconfident in the unknown
classes (Nguyen et al., 2015), and thus confusing known
and unknown classes, which increases the risk of deploying
these models in the real world. Especially, if the scenarios
are life-critical (e.g., car-driving scenarios), we cannot take
the risks of deploying unreliable models in them. This motivates researchers to study out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, where we need to identify unknown classes (i.e., OOD
classes) and classify known classes (i.e., in-distribution (ID)
classes) well at the same time (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017).

Given a pre-trained in-distribution (ID) model,
the inference-time out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to recognize OOD data during the
inference stage. However, some representative
methods share an unproven assumption that the
probability that OOD data belong to every ID
class should be the same, i.e., these OOD-toID probabilities actually form a uniform distribution. In this paper, we show that this assumption makes the above methods incapable when
the ID model is trained with class-imbalanced
data. Fortunately, by analyzing the causal relations between ID/OOD classes and features,
we identify several common scenarios where the
OOD-to-ID probabilities should be the ID-classprior distribution and propose two strategies to
modify existing inference-time detection methods: 1) replace the uniform distribution with the
ID-class-prior distribution if they explicitly use
the uniform distribution; 2) otherwise, reweight
their scores according to the similarity between
the ID-class-prior distribution and the softmax
outputs of the pre-trained model. Extensive experiments show that both strategies can improve the
OOD detection performance when the ID model
is pre-trained with imbalanced data, reflecting the
importance of ID-class prior in OOD detection.
The codes are available at https://github.
com/tmlr-group/class_prior.

In the OOD detection, a well-known branch is to develop
the inference-time/post hoc OOD detection methods (Huang
et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020; Lee et al.,
2018a; Sun et al., 2021), where we are given a pre-trained
ID model and then aim to recognize upcoming OOD data
well. The key advantage of inference-time OOD detection
methods is that the classification performance on ID data
will be unaffected since we only use the ID model instead
of changing it. A general strategy to design a large-scalefriendly inference-time OOD detection method is to propose
a socre function by using the ID model’s information. For
example, the maximum softmax probability (MSP) uses the
ID model’s outputs (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017), and GradNorm uses the ID model’s gradients (Huang et al., 2021). If
the score of a data point is smaller, then this data point is an
OOD data point with a higher probability.

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern
University of Science and Technology 2 Department of Computer
Science, Hong Kong Baptist University 3 University of Melbourne
4
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney 5 College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University 6 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
7
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney. Correspondence to:
Feng Zheng <f.zheng@ieee.org>.

Class imbalance issue is natural in real-world applications
(Cao et al., 2019; Park et al., 2022). Models trained on
classes with fewer samples are often insufficiently trained,
leading to higher inter-class confusion risks. The presence
of fragile classification boundaries can affect the OOD detection performance of the model. However, some representative methods (Huang et al., 2021; Hendrycks & Gimpel,
2017) share an unproven assumption: the probability that
an OOD data point xout belongs to each ID class i is always

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

