Approximate Causal Effect Identification under Weak Confounding

Ziwei Jiang 1 Lai Wei 1 Murat Kocaoglu 1

Abstract

exercise and cholesterol in various age groups is discussed
by Glymour et al.(2016). In this study, the cholesterol level
is negatively correlated with the amount of weekly exercise
within each age group. But if the age data is not observed,
the cholesterol level appears positively correlated with the
amount of exercise. This is known as Simpson’s paradox,
where the confounding variable of age causes the sign reversal. If the variable age is not observed in the data, the true
causal effect of exercise on cholesterol is not identifiable.
Numerous studies have addressed this problem in different settings (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Pratt & Schlaifer,
1988; Pearl, 2022).

Causal effect estimation has been studied by many
researchers when only observational data is available. Sound and complete algorithms have been
developed for pointwise estimation of identifiable causal queries. For non-identifiable causal
queries, researchers developed polynomial programs to estimate tight bounds on causal effect.
However, these are computationally difficult to
optimize for variables with large support sizes. In
this paper, we analyze the effect of “weak confounding” on causal estimands. More specifically,
under the assumption that the unobserved confounders that render a query non-identifiable have
small entropy, we propose an efficient linear program to derive the upper and lower bounds of
the causal effect. We show that our bounds are
consistent in the sense that as the entropy of unobserved confounders goes to zero, the gap between
the upper and lower bound vanishes. Finally, we
conduct synthetic and real data simulations to
compare our bounds with the bounds obtained
by the existing work that cannot incorporate such
entropy constraints and show that our bounds are
tighter for the setting with weak confounders.

It is well known that the causal effect can be estimated from
observational data if we could control for the confounders,
which means the confounders are included in the observational data (Lindley & Novick, 1981; Rubin, 1974; Pearl,
1995). Tian and Pearl (2002) provide conditions for the
identifiability of causal queries.
One approach for addressing non-identifiable causal queries
involves making additional untestable assumptions either
on the variables or on the parametric form of the model.
For example, with linear model assumption, instrumental
variables can be used to estimate the Average Treatment
Effect (ATE) even if unobserved confounders exist (Bowden & Turkington, 1990). However, these approaches are
limited to specific settings due to the restriction of variables
or the expressive power of the parametric model assumptions. Many recent studies have focused on alleviating this
constraint by using machine learning models as the function
for the instrumental variable (Singh et al., 2019; Xu et al.,
2020).

1. Introduction
Estimating the causal effect has long been a question of
great interest in a wide range of fields, such as marketing (Jung et al., 2022), healthcare (Lv et al., 2021; Meilia
et al., 2020), social science (Freedman, 2010), and machine
learning (Pearl, 2019). The causal relation differs from the
statistical association due to the existence of unobserved
confounders, variables that affect both the treatment and
outcome, which create a spurious association, causing the
statistical association to deviate from the true causal effect.
An example study of the causal relationship between weekly

The other type of approach makes no additional assumptions but attempts to obtain bounds for the causal effect
instead of point identification. This is also known as partial identification. With instrumental variables, Kilbertus
et al. (2020) studied bounds on ATE without the assumption that unobserved confounders affect variables additively.
Padh et al.(2022) extend this idea to continuous treatments.
Zhang and Bareinboim (2021) developed a method to bound
causal effects on continuous outcomes. Recent works using generative neural networks for partial identification in
high dimensional continuous settings (Hu et al., 2021; Balazadeh Meresht et al., 2022).

1

Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence
to: Ziwei Jiang <jiang622@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

