Trustworthy Policy Learning under the Counterfactual No-Harm Criterion

Haoxuan Li 1 Chunyuan Zheng 2 Yixiao Cao 1 Zhi Geng 3 Yue Liu 4 Peng Wu 3

Abstract

et al., 2022), and many counterfactual-based metrics are proposed to quantify the policy’s trustworthiness (Kusner et al.,
2017; Nabi & Shpitser, 2018; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al.,
2019), which makes the algorithm try to understand, for the
individuals, what the outcome would be if an alternative
intervention had been implemented (Pearl, 2009).

Trustworthy policy learning has significant importance in making reliable and harmless treatment decisions for individuals. Previous policy learning approaches aim at the well-being
of subgroups by maximizing the utility function
(e.g., conditional average causal effects, post-view
click-through&conversion rate in recommendations), however, individual-level counterfactual
no-harm criterion has rarely been discussed. In
this paper, we first formalize the counterfactual
no-harm criterion for policy learning from a principal stratification perspective. Next, we propose
a novel upper bound for the fraction negatively
affected by the policy and show the consistency
and asymptotic normality of the estimator. Based
on the estimators for the policy utility and harm
upper bounds, we further propose a policy learning approach that satisfies the counterfactual noharm criterion, and prove its consistency to the
optimal policy reward for parametric and nonparametric policy classes, respectively. Extensive
experiments are conducted to show the effectiveness of the proposed policy learning approach for
satisfying the counterfactual no-harm criterion.

Nevertheless, the counterfactual harmlessness of policy
learning is rarely discussed, which would prevent an active
intervention on the individuals from having worse outcomes
than the natural state without the intervention (Richens et al.,
2022). This also serves as the basic principle of the Hippocratic oath (Sokol, 2013) that ”First do no harm”, and similar principles can be found from Lin (2006); Mill (1966);
Asimov (2004). Towards this end, previous studies employ
group causal effects to define the utility to learn individualized treatment policies (Bertsimas et al., 2016; Kitagawa &
Tetenov, 2018; Athey & Wager, 2021), however, they can
only maximize the average benefit of subgroups, without
satisfying the counterfactual no-harm for individuals.
In this paper, we formally discuss the cause of counterfactual
harm from a principal stratification perspective (Frangakis
& Rubin, 2002), by dividing the units into groups by the
joint value of the potential outcomes. We then formalize the
utility functions of the conditional average treatment effect
(CATE)-based (Chipman et al., 2010; Johansson et al., 2016;
Shalit et al., 2017; Wager & Athey, 2018; Künzel et al.,
2019; Shi et al., 2019) and the recommendation-based (Ma
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022) policy
learning and discuss the explicit solutions of the optimal
policy. Unfortunately, neither of them is able to satisfy the
individual counterfactual no-harm, which is summarized
as pursuing only the maximal causal effect gain of the subpopulation is not sufficient to achieve reliable and no-harm
decision making for individuals.

1. Introduction
Policy learning determines the individuals who should be
treated based on their covariates (Murphy, 2003), and it
is important that a decision made by an algorithm can be
trusted by humans (Floridi, 2019; Kaur et al., 2022). Specifically, trustworthy policy learning requires that the learned
policy has beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, justice,
and explicability (Thiebes et al., 2021; Floridi, 2019; Kaur
1

The basic challenge for satisfying the counterfactual noharm criterion from subgroups to individuals is that, since
each unit can be only assigned with one treatment, we always observe the corresponding potential outcome, but not
both, which is also known as the fundamental problem of
causal inference (Holland, 1986; Morgan & Winship, 2015).
We follow Kallus (2022b) to consider the fraction negatively
affected (FNA), and further propose a metric to quantify
the fraction harmed by the policy. Specially, we extend Li

2

Center for Data Science, Peking University Department
of Mathematics, University of California, San Diego 3 School of
Mathematics and Statistics, Beijing Technology and Business University 4 Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics,
Renmin University of China. Correspondence to: Yue Liu <liuyue stats@ruc.edu.cn>, Peng Wu <pengwu@btbu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

