Node Embedding from Neural Hamiltonian Orbits in Graph Neural Networks

Qiyu Kang * 1 Kai Zhao * 1 Yang Song 2 Sijie Wang 1 Wee Peng Tay 1

Abstract

not be a proper choice for the node embedding. Recently,
hyperbolic GNNs (Chami et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019)
propose to embed nodes into a hyperbolic space instead
of the conventional Euclidean space. It has been shown
that tree-like graphs can be inferred more accurately by
hyperbolic GNNs.

In the graph node embedding problem, embedding spaces can vary significantly for different
data types, leading to the need for different GNN
model types. In this paper, we model the embedding update of a node feature as a Hamiltonian
orbit over time. Since the Hamiltonian orbits generalize the exponential maps, this approach allows
us to learn the underlying manifold of the graph
in training, in contrast to most of the existing
literature that assumes a fixed graph embedding
manifold with a closed exponential map solution.
Our proposed node embedding strategy can automatically learn, without extensive tuning, the underlying geometry of any given graph dataset even
if it has diverse geometries. We test Hamiltonian
functions of different forms and verify the performance of our approach on two graph node embedding downstream tasks: node classification and
link prediction. Numerical experiments demonstrate that our approach adapts better to different
types of graph datasets than popular state-of-theart graph node embedding GNNs. The code is
available at https://github.com/zknus/
Hamiltonian-GNN.

Real-world graphs often have complex and varied structures,
which can be more effectively represented by utilizing different geometric spaces. As shown in Figure 1, the Gromov
δ-hyperbolicity distributions1 (Gromov, 1987) of various
datasets exhibit a range of diverse values. This indicates that
it is not optimal to embed each dataset with diverse geometries into a single globally homogeneous geometry. Works
like (Zhu et al., 2020b) have attempted to embed graph
nodes in a mixture of the Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces,
where the intrinsic graph local geometry is attained from
the mixing weight. In several studies, including (Gu et al.,
2018; Bachmann et al., 2020; Lou et al., 2020), researchers
use (products of) constant curvature Riemannian spaces for
graph node embedding where the spaces are assumed to
be spherical, hyperbolic, or Euclidean. The work (Xiong
et al., 2022) considers a special pseudo-Riemannian manifold named pseudo-hyperboloid that is of constant nonzero
curvature and is diffeomorphic to the product manifolds of
a unit sphere and the Euclidean space.
Embedding nodes in the aforementioned restricted (pseudo)Riemannian manifolds is achieved through the exponential
map in closed forms, which is essentially a geodesic curve
on the manifolds as the projected curve of the cogeodesic
orbits on the manifolds’ cotangent bundles (Lee, 2013; Klingenberg, 2011). In our work, we propose to embed the nodes,
via more general Hamiltonian orbits, into a general manifold, which generalizes the above graph node embedding
works.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Yue et al., 2019; Ashoor
et al., 2020; Kipf & Welling, 2017b; Zhang et al., 2022; Wu
et al., 2021) have shown remarkable inference performance
on graph-structured data, including, but not limited to, social
media networks, citation networks, and molecular graphs
in chemistry. Most existing GNNs embed graph nodes in
Euclidean spaces without further consideration of the dataset
graph geometry. For some graph structures like the treelike graphs (Liu et al., 2019), the Euclidean space may

Manifolds have a diverse set of applications in physics,
and their usage and development can be found interwoven
throughout the literature. From the physics perspective, the
cotangent bundles are the natural phase spaces in classical
mechanics (De León & Rodrigues, 2011) where the physical system evolves according to the basic laws of physics
modeled as differential equations on the phase spaces. In

*
1
Equal contribution
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 C3 AI, Singapore. Correspondence to: Qiyu Kang
<kang0080@e.ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
If the δ-hyperbolicity distribution is more concentrated at
lower values, the more hyperbolic the graph dataset.

1

