spred: Solving L1 Penalty with SGD

Liu Ziyin * 1 Zihao Wang * 2

Abstract

In contrast, with complicated models like neural networks,
gradient descent (GD) has been the favored method of optimization because of its scalability on large-scale problems
and simplicity of implementation. However, gradient descent has yet to be shown to work well in solving the L1
penalty because the L1 penalty is not differentiable at zero,
precisely where the model becomes sparse. In fact, there is
a large gap between the conventional L1 learning and deep
learning literature. Many tasks, such as feature selection,
that L1 -based methods work well cannot be tackled by deep
learning, and achieving sparsity in deep learning is almost
never based on L1 . This gap between conventional statistics
and deep learning is perhaps because no method has been
demonstrated to efficiently solve the L1 penalized objectives
in general nonlinear settings, not to mention incorporating
such methods within the standard backpropagation-based
neural network training pipelines. Thus, optimizing a general nonconvex objective with L1 regularization remains an
important open problem.

We propose to minimize a generic differentiable
objective with L1 constraint using a simple
reparametrization and straightforward stochastic
gradient descent. Our proposal is the direct generalization of previous ideas that the L1 penalty may
be equivalent to a differentiable reparametrization
with weight decay. We prove that the proposed
method, spred, is an exact differentiable solver
of L1 and that the reparametrization trick is completely “benign” for a generic nonconvex function.
Practically, we demonstrate the usefulness of the
method in (1) training sparse neural networks to
perform gene selection tasks, which involves finding relevant features in a very high dimensional
space, and (2) neural network compression task,
to which previous attempts at applying the L1 penalty have been unsuccessful. Conceptually,
our result bridges the gap between the sparsity in
deep learning and conventional statistical learning.

The foremost contribution of our work is to theoretically
prove and empirically demonstrate that a reparametrization
trick, also called the Hadamard parametrization, allows for
solving arbitrary nonconvex objectives with L1 regularization with gradient descent. The method is simple and takes
only a few lines to implement in any modern deep-learning
framework. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the proposed
method is compatible with and can be boosted by common
training tricks in deep learning, such as minibatch training,
adaptive learning rates, and pretraining. See Figure 1 for an
illustration.

1. Introduction
In many problems, optimization of an objective function
under an L1 constraint is of fundamental importance (Santosa and Symes, 1986; Tibshirani, 1996; Donoho, 2006; Sun
et al., 2015; Candes et al., 2008). The advantage of the L1
penalized solution is that they are sparse and thus highly
interpretable, and it could be of great use if we can broadly
apply the L1 penalty to general problems. However, L1 has
only seen limited use in the case of simple models such as
linear regression, logistic regression, or dictionary learning,
where effective optimization methods are known to exist.
As soon as the model becomes as complicated as a neural
network, it is unknown how to optimize an L1 penalty.

2. Related Works
L1 Penalty. It is well-known that the L1 penalty leads to a
sparse solution (Wasserman, 2013). For linear models, the
objectives with L1 regularization are usually convex, but
they are challenging to solve because the objective becomes
non-differentiable precisely at the point where sparsity is
achieved (namely, the origin). The mainstream literature
often proposes special algorithms for solving the L1 penalty
for a specific task. For example, the original lasso paper
suggests a method based on the quadratic programming
algorithms (Tibshirani, 1996). Later, algorithms such as
coordinate descent (Friedman et al., 2010) and least-angle

*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Tokyo 2 HKUST. Correspondence to: Liu Ziyin <liu.ziyin.p@gmail.com>, Zihao Wang
<zwanggc@cse.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

