Beyond the Edge of Stability via Two-step Gradient Updates

Lei Chen 1 Joan Bruna 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Given a differentiable objective function f (θ), where θ ∈
Rd is a high-dimensional parameter vector, the most basic
and widely used optimization method is gradient descent
(GD), defined as

Gradient Descent (GD) is a powerful workhorse
of modern machine learning thanks to its scalability and efficiency in high-dimensional spaces. Its
ability to find local minimisers is only guaranteed
for losses with Lipschitz gradients, where it can be
seen as a ‘bona-fide’ discretisation of an underlying gradient flow. Yet, many ML setups involving
overparametrised models do not fall into this problem class, which has motivated research beyond
the so-called “Edge of Stability” (EoS), where
the step-size crosses the admissibility threshold
inversely proportional to the Lipschitz constant
above. Perhaps surprisingly, GD has been empirically observed to still converge regardless of
local instability and oscillatory behavior. The incipient theoretical analysis of this phenomena has
mainly focused in the overparametrised regime,
where the effect of choosing a large learning rate
may be associated to a ‘Sharpness-Minimisation’
implicit regularisation within the manifold of minimisers, under appropriate asymptotic limits. In
contrast, in this work we directly examine the
conditions for such unstable convergence, focusing on simple, yet representative, learning problems, via analysis of two-step gradient updates.
Specifically, we characterize a local condition involving third-order derivatives that guarantees existence and convergence to fixed points of the
two-step updates, and leverage such property in
a teacher-student setting, under population loss.
Finally, starting from Matrix Factorization, we
provide observations of period-2 orbit of GD in
high-dimensional settings with intuition of its dynamics, along with exploration into more general
settings.

θ(t+1) = θ(t) − η∇θ f (θ(t) ),

(1)

where η is the learning rate. For all its widespread application across many different ML setups, a basic question
remains: what are the convergence guarantees (even to a
local minimiser) under typical objective functions, and how
they depend on the (only) hyperaparameter η? In the modern context of large-scale ML applications, an additional key
question is not only to understand whether or not GD converges to minimisers, but to which ones, since overparametrisation defines a whole manifold of global minimisers, all
potentially enjoying drastically different generalisation performance.
The sensible regime to start the analysis is η → 0, where
GD inherits the local convergence properties of the Gradient
Flow ODE via standard arguments from numerical integration. However, in the early phase of training, a large learning
rate has been observed to result in better generalization (LeCun et al., 2012; Bjorck et al., 2018; Jiang et al., 2019;
Jastrzebski et al., 2021), where the extent of “large” is measured by comparing the learning rate η and the curvature
of


the loss landscape, measured with λ(θ) := λmax ∇2θ f (θ) ,
the largest eigenvalue of the Hessian with respect to learnable parameters. Although one requires supθ λ(θ) < 2/η to
guarantee the convergence of GD (Bottou et al., 2018) to (local) minimisers 1 , the work of (Cohen et al., 2020) noticed
a remarkable phenomena in the context of neural network
training: even in problems where λ(θ) is unbounded (as in
NNs), for a fixed η, the curvature λ(θ(t) ) increases along the
training trajectory (1), bringing λ(θ(t) ) ≥ 2/η (Cohen et al.,
2020). After that, a surprising phenomena is that λ(θ(t) ) stably hovers above 2/η and the neural network still eventually
achieves a decreasing training loss — the so-called “Edge
of Stability”. We would like to understand and analyse the
conditions of such convergence with a large learning rate
under a variety models that capture such observed empirical

1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York 2 Center for Data Science, New York University,
New York. Correspondence to: Lei Chen <lc3909@nyu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
One can replace the uniform curvature bound by
supθ;f (θ)≤f (θ(0) ) λ(θ).

1

