Understanding the Impact of Adversarial Robustness on Accuracy Disparity

Yuzheng Hu 1 Fan Wu 1 Hongyang Zhang 2 Han Zhao 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
The existence and prevalence of adversarial examples (Dalvi
et al., 2004; Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015) in
the state-of-the-art deep learning models have made adversarial robustness an active field of research, where humanimperceptible perturbations to the original data can arbitrarily disrupt the model prediction. However, it has been
empirically observed that the improvement in robustness
usually comes with costs in accuracy. In particular, there
might exist a trade-off between robust accuracy and standard
accuracy (Tsipras et al., 2019; Kolter & Madry, 2018), and it
may also lead to the so-called accuracy disparity (Chi et al.,
2021), a notion of unfairness in the literature of algorithmic
fairness. In particular, it is shown that when compared to
standard training, the constraint of adversarial robustness
might further exacerbate the discrepancy of standard accuracy among difference classes (Croce et al., 2021; Benz
et al., 2021a;b).

While it has long been empirically observed that
adversarial robustness may be at odds with standard accuracy and may have further disparate impacts on different classes, it remains an open question to what extent such observations hold and
how the class imbalance plays a role within. In
this paper, we attempt to understand this question
of accuracy disparity by taking a closer look at
linear classifiers under a Gaussian mixture model.
We decompose the impact of adversarial robustness into two parts: an inherent effect that will
degrade the standard accuracy on all classes due
to the robustness constraint, and the other caused
by the class imbalance ratio, which will increase
the accuracy disparity compared to standard training. Furthermore, we also show that such effects
extend beyond the Gaussian mixture model, by
generalizing our data model to the general family of stable distributions. More specifically, we
demonstrate that while the constraint of adversarial robustness consistently degrades the standard
accuracy in the balanced class setting, the class
imbalance ratio plays a fundamentally different
role in accuracy disparity compared to the Gaussian case, due to the heavy tail of the stable distribution. We additionally perform experiments on
both synthetic and real-world datasets to corroborate our theoretical findings. Our empirical results
also suggest that the implications may extend to
nonlinear models over real-world datasets. Our
code is publicly available on GitHub1 .

Despite fruitful and intriguing empirical observations, rigorous understanding of how adversarial robustness affects
standard accuracy or accuracy disparity has not been extensively explored from a theoretical perspective. In fact,
it is not clear whether such a trade-off is inherent, even in
the linear setting under a Gaussian mixture model. If it is,
then what are the fundamental factors that contribute to this
potential drop of accuracy and the increase of accuracy disparity? To the best of our knowledge, there are only a few
works (Tsipras et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022)
that partially attempt to approach these problems. However,
the existing analyses are restricted to examples with specific
choices of parameters, which oversimplifies the problem and
makes it unclear whether the conclusions continue to hold
in more general settings. We provide further discussions on
the related work in Section 6.
Our Contributions. Towards answering the above questions, we provide a theoretical study of the impact of adversarial robustness on accuracy disparity in the presence
of class imbalance (Johnson & Khoshgoftaar, 2019). We
consider the classification problem under a common Gaussian mixture model with linear classifiers. We then further
generalize our analysis to a broader family of stable distributions. For each data distribution, we decompose the
impact of adversarial robustness into two parts, an intrinsic

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA 2 David R. Cheriton School of
Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada.
Correspondence to: Yuzheng Hu <yh46@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/Accuracy-Disparity/
AT-on-AD

1

