Doubly Optimal No-Regret Learning in Monotone Games

Yang Cai 1 Weiqiang Zheng 1

Abstract

tral object of a series of recent studies in online learning and
optimization (Hsieh et al., 2019; Golowich et al., 2020a;a;
Lin et al., 2020; Hsieh et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022; Cai et al.,
2022b). Monotone games, first introduced by Rosen (1965),
encompass many commonly studied games as special cases
such as two-player zero-sum games, convex-concave games,
λ-cocoercive games (Lin et al., 2020), zero-sum polymatrix
games (Bregman & Fokin, 1987; Daskalakis & Papadimitriou, 2009; Cai & Daskalakis, 2011; Cai et al., 2016), and
zero-sum socially-concave games (Even-Dar et al., 2009).
In this paper, we investigate the following fundamental question:

We consider online learning in multi-player
smooth monotone games. Existing algorithms
have limitations such as (1) being only applicable to strongly monotone games; (2) lacking the
no-regret guarantee; (3) having only asymptotic
or slow O( √1T ) last-iterate convergence rate to
a Nash equilibrium. While the O( √1T ) rate is
tight for a large class of algorithms including
the well-studied extragradient algorithm and optimistic gradient algorithm, it is not optimal for
all gradient-based algorithms. We propose the
accelerated optimistic gradient (AOG) algorithm,
the first doubly optimal no-regret learning algorithm for smooth monotone games. Namely,√our
algorithm achieves both (i) the optimal O( T )
regret in the adversarial setting under smooth and
convex loss functions and (ii) the optimal O( T1 )
last-iterate convergence rate to a Nash equilibrium
in multi-player smooth monotone games. As a
byproduct of the accelerated last-iterate convergence rate, we further show that each player suffers only an O(log T ) individual worst-case dynamic regret, providing an exponential improve√
ment over the previous state-of-the-art O( T )
bound.

How fast can the players’ day-to-day behavior converge
to a Nash equilibrium in monotone games
if players act according to a no-regret learning algorithm?
(*)
In this context, “day-to-day behavior” is used to describe
the collective strategy adopted by the agents during each
iteration of the repeated game. Our question lies at the heart
of the area of learning in games, as illustrated in (Fudenberg
et al., 1998; Sorin, 2002; Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006).
The aim here is to discern whether simple and intuitive
learning rules or algorithms (also termed ‘dynamics’ in
game theory literature) can lead to the convergence of a
joint strategy towards an equilibrium when used by agents
to adapt their strategies. The presence of such a learning
algorithm offers a logical explanation for the emergence
of equilibrium from repetitive interactions, which may not
always exhibit complete rationality.

1. Introduction
We consider multi-agent online learning in games (CesaBianchi & Lugosi, 2006), where the agents engaged in repeated play of the same game. In this model, the game (i.e.,
the agents’ payoff functions) is unknown to the agents, and
they must learn to play the game through repeated interaction with the other agents. We focus on a rich family of
multi-player games – monotone games that has been the cen-

Regret is the central metric used in online learning to measure the performance of a learning algorithm. In the classical
single-agent setting, online learning considers the following
repeated interaction between a player and the environment:
(i) at day t, the player chooses an action xt ∈ Ω ⊆ Rd ;
(ii) the environment selects a loss function ft (·), and the
player receives the loss ft (xt ) along with some feedback
(such as the loss function ft (·), the gradient ∇ft (xt ), or
just the loss ft (xt )) and the process repeats. The regret is
definedP
as the difference between the cumulative loss of the
T
player t=1 ft (xt ) and the cumulative loss of the best fixed
PT
action in hindsight minx∈Ω t=1 ft (x). A single-agent on-

1
Department of Computer Science,
Yale University,
New
Haven,
USA.
Correspondence
to:
Yang
Cai
<yang.cai@yale.edu>,
Weiqiang
Zheng
<weiqiang.zheng@yale.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

