Random Shuffle Transformer for Image Restoration

Jie Xiao 1 Xueyang Fu 1 Man Zhou 1 Hongjian Liu 1 Zheng-Jun Zha 1
layer l+1: SW-MSA

layer l: W-MSA

Abstract
Non-local interactions play a vital role in boosting performance for image restoration. However,
local window Transformer has been preferred due
to its efficiency for processing high-resolution
images. The superiority in efficiency comes at
the cost of sacrificing the ability to model nonlocal interactions. In this paper, we present that
local window Transformer can also function as
modeling non-local interactions. The counterintuitive function is based on the permutationequivariance of self-attention. The basic principle
is quite simple: by randomly shuffling the input,
local self-attention also has the potential to model
non-local interactions without introducing extra
parameters. Our random shuffle strategy enjoys elegant theoretical guarantees in extending the local
scope. The resulting Transformer dubbed ShuffleFormer is capable of processing high-resolution
images efficiently while modeling non-local interactions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of ShuffleFormer across a variety
of image restoration tasks, including image denoising, deraining, and deblurring. Code is available at https://github.com/jiexiaou/
ShuffleFormer.

shifted
window

local window to
perform self-attention

(a) Local attention with shifted window strategy
layer l+1: CW-MSA

layer l: W-MSA

random
shuffle

inverse
shuffle

(b) Local attention with random shuffle strategy

Figure 1: The comparison between shifted window strategy
and our proposed random shuffle strategy.

have pushed the state-of-the-art for various image restoration tasks. Recently, vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2021) have achieved comparable or even
better performance across a number of vision tasks. Similarly, there are also numerous literature studying how to
make Transformer suitable for these pixel-level regression
tasks. IPT (Chen et al., 2021) adopts the standard Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), which conducts
global self-attention across spatial dimension, for image
processing. IPT enjoys the typical advantage—modeling
global interactions—of the standard Transformer. However,
IPT inevitably suffers from quadratic complexity in both
computation and memory usage, which hinders its application to high-resolution images. Local window Transformers, e.g., SwinIR (Liang et al., 2021) and Uformer (Wang
et al., 2022), first partition the input into non-overlapping
local windows, and restrict computation of attention in a
local window. In order to enable inter-window interactions,
shifted window strategy (Liu et al., 2021; Tolstikhin et al.,
2021) is employed, which, however, still cannot escape the
local scope brought by window partition. The complexity
of local window Transformer is linear to the input resolution, making it more suitable for processing high-resolution
images. In conclusion, there exists an unpleasing trade-off
between modeling non-local interactions and efficiency in

1. Introduction
Image restoration is typically an ill-posed inverse problem
aiming to reconstruct the high-quality clean image from
its low-quality counterpart, which lays the foundation for
various vision tasks. According to the degradation process, image restoration can be categorized into many subtasks, e.g., denoising, super-resolution, deblurring, deraining and compression artifact reduction. With the popularity of deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015), deep neural
networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
Correspondence to: Xueyang Fu <xyfu@ustc.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

