No One Idles: Efficient Heterogeneous Federated Learning with Parallel Edge
and Server Computation

Feilong Zhang 1 Xianming Liu 1 2 Shiyi Lin 1 Gang Wu 1 Xiong Zhou 1 Junjun Jiang 1 2 Xiangyang Ji 3

Abstract

laboratively train a shared model without exposing their
private data (Shokri & Shmatikov, 2015; Konečnỳ et al.,
2016; Kairouz et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020). The main advantage of FL is the decoupling of model training from the
necessity of directly accessing to the training data. Thus,
in many data-sensitive scenarios, such as applications in
biomedicine (Xu et al., 2021b; Courtiol et al., 2019; Xu
et al., 2021b) and finance (Long et al., 2021; Pfitzner et al.,
2021), FL can significantly reduce the concern of privacy
and security.

Federated learning suffers from a latency bottleneck induced by network stragglers, which hampers the training efficiency significantly. In addition, due to the heterogeneous data distribution
and security requirements, simple and fast averaging aggregation is not feasible anymore. Instead, complicated aggregation operations, such
as knowledge distillation, are required. The time
cost for complicated aggregation becomes a new
bottleneck that limits the computational efficiency
of FL. In this work, we claim that the root cause
of training latency actually lies in the aggregationthen-broadcasting workflow of the server. By
swapping the computational order of aggregation and broadcasting, we propose a novel and
efficient parallel federated learning (PFL) framework that unlocks the edge nodes during global
computation and the central server during local
computation. This fully asynchronous and parallel pipeline enables handling complex aggregation and network stragglers, allowing flexible
device participation as well as achieving scalability in computation. We theoretically prove that
synchronous and asynchronous PFL can achieve
a similar convergence rate as vanilla FL. Extensive experiments empirically show that our
framework brings up to 5.56× speedup compared with traditional FL. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Hypervoyager/PFL.

Following the pioneer FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017),
most existing FL schemes work in synchronous manner
(SyncFL), in which each round includes the following steps
(Zhang et al., 2023): 1) the central server broadcasts the
latest global model to edge devices; 2) each edge device then
updates its local model with the private data, and uploads
the local model update to the central server; 3) once all
local updates are received, the central server conducts the
aggregation operation to produce the next global model. In
the scenario of device heterogeneity, which widely exists in
practical applications, two issues heavily hinder the training
efficiency of SyncFL:
– Network Stragglers. Device heterogeneity inevitably introduces network stragglers, which take much longer time
to complete local training than common ones. According to
the rule that aggregation is conducted after all local updates
are received, due to either the slowest training speed or dropping out mid-round, the slowest-responding client becomes
the bottleneck of training efficiency of heterogeneous FL.
– Complicated Global Aggregation. The weighted average
manner is widely applied for global aggregation, which is
simple and fast. As a result, in most existing FL schemes,
the aggregation time spent in the central server is ignored.
However, for the scenario of FL over heterogeneous devices, directly averaging local models is not feasible anymore, since local models may have diverse structures and
sizes. Recently, some methods attempt to address the model
heterogeneity by performing knowledge distillation in the
server side (Zhu et al., 2021b; Lin et al., 2020), leading to
complicated aggregation operation. When the time cost for
aggregation is significant, as shown in Fig.1-(a), devices
are blocked to wait for the central server, which limits the

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging distributed machine
learning framework that enables numerous devices to col1
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute pf Technology, Harbin,
China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 3 Department of
Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence
to: Xianming Liu <csxm@hit.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

