Quantum 3D Graph Learning with Applications to Molecule Embedding

Ge Yan 1 Huaijin Wu 1 Junchi Yan 1

Abstract

been well developed for learning latent node embedding
on molecules (Schütt et al., 2017; Unke & Meuwly, 2019;
Gasteiger et al., 2019; 2021). However, the mainstream of
such researches is still facing the challenges of better processing the 3D Cartesian coordinates and learning the latent
representation of the 3D graph structure.

Learning 3D graph with spatial position as well
as node attributes has been recently actively studied, for its utility in different applications e.g.
3D molecules. Quantum computing is known
a promising direction for its potential theoretical
supremacy for large-scale graph and combinatorial problem as well as the increasing evidence for
the availability to physical quantum devices in the
near term. In this paper, for the first time to our
best knowledge, we propose a quantum 3D embedding ansatz that learns the latent representation
of 3D structures from the Hilbert space composed
of the Bloch sphere of each qubit. Specifically,
the 3D Cartesian coordinates of nodes are converted into rotation and torsion angles and then
encode them into the form of qubits. Moreover,
Parameterized Quantum Circuit (PQC) is applied
to serve as the trainable layers and the output of
the PQC is adopted as the final node embedding.
Experimental results on two downstream tasks,
molecular property prediction and 3D molecular
geometries generation, demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. We show the capacity and
capability of our model with the evaluation on
the QM9 dataset (134k molecules) with very few
parameters, and its potential to be executed on a
real quantum device.

On the other hand, there are also emerging lines of researches in the area of quantum computing. State-of-theart quantum computing hardwares are now stepping into
the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era, which
leads to the possibility to implement applications in specific
scientific domains in the near term (Preskill, 2018; Arute
et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020). The
overlap between quantum computing and machine learning has emerged as one of the most encouraging areas for
quantum computing, as termed by quantum machine learning (Biamonte et al., 2017). Quantum paradigms or hybrid
paradigms have been carefully designed to fulfill quantum
supremacy in quantum chemistry problems (Aspuru-Guzik
et al., 2005; O’Malley et al., 2016). Existing approaches
mainly focus on the quantum simulation of molecular energies, which enables effective prediction of chemical reaction
rates. However, these quantum approaches (Romero et al.,
2018; Peruzzo et al., 2014; O’Malley et al., 2016; Yung
et al., 2014) are still simulating the energies of certain small
molecules like H2 , LiH, BeH2 , etc.
In this paper, we aim to develop a full quantum algorithm,
and shed lights on quantum machine learning approaches
solving molecular problems instead of showing supremacy
over the classical molecule learning approaches. The proposed method is totally different from the mainstream quantum approach Unitary Coupled Cluster (UCC), which is
a unsupervised learning approach with uniquely designed
circuit for each molecule. Graph learning may not be as
precise as molecular simulation approaches for property
prediction, but they have the ability to learn hundreds or
thousands of molecules and predict the properties for more
complex molecules.

1. Introduction
Graph representation, or specifically 3D graph representation as considered in this paper, has received extensive
attention over the last decade. Beyond tasks like node
classification or link prediction, it further facilitates various downstream applications such as molecular property
prediction (Liu et al., 2021) and drug design (Gaudelet
et al., 2021). Recently, machine learning approaches have
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, and MoE
Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Correspondence to: Junchi Yan <yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Specifically, we first convert the 3D Cartesian coordinates
of the atoms into three geometries: distance, rotation angle,
and torsion angle. Then we encode the angles and distance
as well as the atom type (a discrete variable), into qubits. A
distance threshold is used so that each time a focal atom is

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

