Spherical Inducing Features for Orthogonally-Decoupled Gaussian Processes
Louis C. Tiao 1 * Vincent Dutordoir 2 3 Victor Picheny 3

Abstract

et al., 2022). In spite of their many advantages, GPs are
often compared unfavourably to deep neural networks (NNs)
for their poor scalability to large datasets, and their inability
to capture rich hierarchies of abstract representations (Calandra et al., 2016; Wilson et al., 2016; Ober et al., 2021).
While GPs are the infinite-width limit of NNs and therefore,
in theory, have infinitely more basis functions (Neal, 1996),
these basis functions are static and fully determined by the
covariance function (MacKay et al., 1998). This makes it
difficult for GPs to flexibly adapt to complex and structured
data from which it is beneficial for the basis functions to
learn and encode useful representations.

Despite their many desirable properties, Gaussian
processes (GPs) are often compared unfavorably
to deep neural networks (NNs) for lacking the
ability to learn representations. Recent efforts to
bridge the gap between GPs and deep NNs have
yielded a new class of inter-domain variational
GP s in which the inducing variables correspond
to hidden units of a feedforward NN. In this work,
we examine some practical issues associated with
this approach and propose an extension that leverages the orthogonal decomposition of GPs to mitigate these limitations. In particular, we introduce
spherical inter-domain features to construct more
flexible data-dependent basis functions for both
the principal and orthogonal components of the
GP approximation and show that incorporating
NN activation features under this framework not
only alleviates these shortcomings but is more
scalable than alternative strategies. Experiments
on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach.

Considerable research effort has been devoted to sparse
approximations for GPs (Csató & Opper, 2002; Seeger et al.,
2003; Quinonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005; Snelson &
Ghahramani, 2005). Not least of these is sparse variational
GP s ( SVGP s) (Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al., 2013; 2015a).
Such advances have not only improved the scalability of GPs,
but also unlocked more flexibility in model specification.
In particular, the use of inter-domain inducing variables in
SVGP (Lázaro-Gredilla & Figueiras-Vidal, 2009) effectively
equips the GP approximation with data-dependent basis
functions. Recent works have exploited this to construct a
new family of SVGP models in which the basis functions
correspond to activations of a feed-forward NN (Sun et al.,
2020; Dutordoir et al., 2021). By stacking multiple layers
to form a deep GP (DGP) (Damianou & Lawrence, 2013),
the propagation of the predictive distribution accurately
resembles a forward-pass through a deep NN.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide a powerful framework
for reasoning about unknown functions and are ubiquitous
in probabilistic machine learning (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006). They are data-efficient, innately robust to over-fitting,
and can flexibly encode priors through their covariance function. Last but not least, by virtue of their ability to faithfully
capture predictive uncertainty, they form the backbone of
many sequential decision-making methods that require reliable uncertainty estimates to balance trade-offs such as
exploration and exploitation, e.g. in reinforcement learning (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011), Bayesian optimization (Garnett, 2023), and probabilistic numerics (Hennig

In this paper, we show that while this approach results in
a posterior predictive with a more expressive mean, the
variance estimate is typically less accurate and tends to
be over-dispersed. Additionally, we examine some practical challenges associated with this method, such as limitations on the use of certain popular kernel and NN activation
choices. To address these issues, we propose an extension
that aims to mitigate these limitations. Specifically, when
viewed from the function-space perspective, the posterior
predictive of SVGP depends on a single set of basis functions
that is determined by only a finite collection of inducing
variables. Recent advances introduce an orthogonal set of
basis functions as a means of capturing additional variations remaining from the standard basis (Salimbeni et al.,
2018; Cheng & Boots, 2017; Shi et al., 2020). We extend

*
Work done while at Secondmind 1 University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia 2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
3
Secondmind, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to: L. Tiao
<louis.tiao@sydney.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

