Boosting Graph Contrastive Learning via Graph Contrastive Saliency

Chunyu Wei 1 * Yu Wang 1 * Bing Bai 1 * Kai Ni 2 David J. Brady 3 Lu Fang 1

Abstract

domain expertise and is often time-consuming and expensive (Hu et al., 2020b; Sun et al., 2020). In contrast, selfsupervised learning (SSL) pretraining offers a promising
alternative, enabling effective representation learning of
models without labeling efforts.

Graph augmentation plays a crucial role in achieving good generalization for contrastive graph selfsupervised learning. However, mainstream Graph
Contrastive Learning (GCL) often favors random
graph augmentations, by relying on random node
dropout or edge perturbation on graphs. Random augmentations may inevitably lead to semantic information corruption during the training,
and force the network to mistakenly focus on semantically irrelevant environmental background
structures. To address these limitations and to
improve generalization, we propose a novel selfsupervised learning framework for GCL, which
can adaptively screen the semantic-related substructure in graphs by capitalizing on the proposed
gradient-based Graph Contrastive Saliency (GCS).
The goal is to identify the most semantically discriminative structures of a graph via contrastive
learning, such that we can generate semantically meaningful augmentations by leveraging
on saliency. Empirical evidence on 16 benchmark datasets demonstrates the exclusive merits
of the GCS-based framework. We also provide
rigorous theoretical justification for GCS’s robustness properties. Code is available at https:
//github.com/weicy15/GCS.

Contrastive learning is one of the most popular paradigms of
SSL, demonstrating impressive progress in the field of computer vision (CV) (Chen et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020). Recently, graph contrastive learning (GCL) techniques start to
emerge by translating the central spirits of contrastive learning into graph-structured data (You et al., 2020). Among
different algorithm variations, effective graph augmentation
constructions turn out to be the bread and butter for the GCL
methods to achieve success (Suresh et al., 2021). However, random augmentation is still a default for conventional
graph SSL (You et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020; Rong et al.,
2020), which lead to intrinsic drawbacks in achieving good
representation generalization:
• Semantic information corruption. Random augmentation can easily corrupt semantic information and destroy the predictive structure of the graph. For example,
specific topological structures in molecules are critical
for chemistry functioning. Random augmentation may
destroy such structures (Li et al., 2022b).
• Environmental information overemphasis. The predictive structure of a graph sometimes is only determined by a small subset of nodes/edges, with the majority of remaining nodes/edges being environmental
background information irrelevant to semantics (Yu
et al., 2022). Random augmentations might mistakenly
encourage GNNs to focus on dominant background
information during contrastive learning instead of semantics (Suresh et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful frameworks
for modeling non-Euclidean structured data, with practical
applications in the fields like biochemistry, physics, and
social science (Senior et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020a; Shlomi
et al., 2021). However, conventional training methods for
GNNs usually require human annotations, which requires

To partially mitigate the above concerns, we probe an alternative solution and propose the unsupervised Graph Contrastive Saliency (GCS) learning method particularly tailored for graph SSL1 . GCS takes inspiration from recent
advancements in explanation methods such as Graph Rationalization (GR) (Wu et al., 2022; Sui et al., 2022; Liu et al.,

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electronic Engineering,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Holo Technology (Beijing)
Co., Ltd., Beijing, China 3 University of Arizona, Arizona, USA.
Correspondence to: Lu Fang (www.luvision.net) <fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
This paper focuses on training self-supervised GNNs for
graph-level tasks, but the idea may generalize to node-level tasks.

1

