Sequential Predictive Conformal Inference for Time Series

Chen Xu 1 Yao Xie 1

Abstract

need to be principled ways to perform uncertainty quantification for complex prediction models such as random
forests (Breiman, 2001) and neural networks (Lathuilière
et al., 2019).

We present a new distribution-free conformal prediction algorithm for sequential data (e.g., time
series), called the sequential predictive conformal
inference (SPCI). We specifically account for the
nature that time series data are non-exchangeable,
and thus many existing conformal prediction algorithms are not applicable. The main idea is
to adaptively re-estimate the conditional quantile
of non-conformity scores (e.g., prediction residuals), upon exploiting the temporal dependence
among them. More precisely, we cast the problem of conformal prediction interval as predicting
the quantile of a future residual, given a userspecified point prediction algorithm. Theoretically, we establish asymptotic valid conditional
coverage upon extending consistency analyses in
quantile regression. Using simulation and realdata experiments, we demonstrate a significant
reduction in interval width of SPCI compared to
other existing methods under the desired empirical coverage.

Conformal prediction (CP) has become a popular
distribution-free technique to perform uncertainty quantification for complex machine learning algorithms. However,
conformal prediction for time series has been a challenging
case because such data do not satisfy the exchangeability assumption in conformal inference, and thus we need to adjust
existing or even develop new sequential CP algorithms with
theoretical guarantees. The challenges also arise in realworld applications where time series data tend to have significant stochastic variations and strong correlations. These
challenges are illustrated via a real-data example for solar
energy prediction, as shown in Figure 1, where the prediction residuals (using random forest as prediction algorithm)
are still highly correlated. Besides the temporal correlation
in the prediction residuals (or conformity scores in general),
we observe that a notable feature of sequential conformal
prediction is that the prediction residuals can be obtained
as “feedback” to the algorithm. For instance, for one-step
ahead prediction, the prediction accuracy of the prediction
algorithm is revealed immediately after one-time step. Thus,
the recent prediction residuals reveal whether or not the
predictive algorithm is performing well for that segment
of data. Such feedback structure is illustrated in Figure 2,
which highlights the conceptual difference between traditional conformal and sequential conformal prediction methods. We specifically exploited such feedback structure in
designing the sequential conformal prediction algorithms.

1. Introduction
Uncertainty quantification for prediction algorithms is essential for statistical and machine learning models. Sequential prediction or time-series prediction aims to predict the
subsequent outcome based on past observations. Uncertainty quantification in the form of prediction intervals is of
particular interest for high-stake domains such as finance,
energy systems, healthcare, and so on (Harries et al., 1999;
Dı́az-González et al., 2012; Cochran et al., 2015). Classic approaches for prediction interval are typically based
on strong parametric assumptions of time-series models
such as autoregressive and moving average (ARMA) models (Brockwell et al., 1991), which impose strong distribution assumptions on the data-generating process. There

More precisely, both the traditional conformal inference
and the sequential conformal inference considered in this
paper are general-purpose wrappers that can be used around
any predictive model for any data and proceed by defining
“non-conformity scores”. However, there are also significant differences: Traditional conformal prediction assumes
exchangeable training and test data to obtain performance
guarantees, which leads to exchangeable non-conformity
scores, and cannot receive feedback during prediction. In
contrast, sequential CP observes non-exchangeable data
sequences and leverages feedback during prediction.

1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
Correspondence to: Yao Xie <yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we propose a sequential predictive confor-

1

