Pricing Experimental Design: Causal Effect, Expected Revenue and Tail Risk

David Simchi-Levi 1 2 3 4 Chonghuan Wang 1 4 5

Abstract

(see, e.g., Xiong et al. 2019; Bojinov et al. 2022), one of the
primary objectives of pricing experiments is to estimate the
casual effect of price, which in our context is also known
as price elasticity. This objective has been a central focus
in both experimental design literature and fields such as
marketing (see, e.g., Tellis 1988; Bijmolt et al. 2005) and
operations management (see, e.g., Chintagunta et al. 2002;
Kocabıyıkoğlu & Popescu 2011) for the past decades. Estimating price elasticity not only enhances understanding of
the market, but also provides valuable long-term rewards
for the seller. For example, it can inform decisions such
as settling on a fixed and permanent price for the future,
or adjusting pricing in response to inventory backlogs or
upcoming promotions, or even designing new products or
services that align with consumer preferences.

When launching a new product, historical sales
data is often not available, leaving price as a crucial experimental instrument for sellers to gauge
market response. When designing pricing experiments, there are three fundamental objectives: estimating the causal effect of price (i.e., price elasticity), maximizing the expected revenue through
the experiment, and controlling the tail risk suffering from a very huge loss. In this paper, we reveal the relationship among such three objectives.
Under a linear structural model, we investigate
the trade-offs between causal inference and expected revenue maximization, as well as between
expected revenue maximization and tail risk control. Furthermore, we propose an optimal pricing
experimental design, which can flexibly adapt to
different desired levels of trade-offs. Through the
optimal design, we also explore the relationship
between causal inference and tail risk control.

Recently, there has been growing attention paid to the inexperiment performance, which refers to the revenue that
the seller can collect during the experimental period. This
short-term reward is also essential and needs to be carefully
considered in many cases, particularly for products with
relatively short life cycles (Ferreira et al. 2016), limited inventory (Xu et al. 2019) or in the online service economy
(Scott 2015). Recent advances in dynamic pricing have been
found to be effective in earning short-term rewards, particularly when the price-dependent demand models are not fully
known. To achieve optimal in-experiment performance,
sellers must strike a delicate balance between exploring
(learning about the demand) and exploiting (charging estimated optimal prices) (see, e.g., Keskin & Zeevi 2014;
Qiang & Bayati 2016; Ban & Keskin 2021).

1. Introduction
The importance of understanding the market response to
new products or services cannot be overstated for today’s
online platforms. In the absence of informative historical
data, price always serves as the primary or even sole experimental instrument that sellers can use to gain insights into
market demand. The seller can use adaptive pricing strategies during experimental periods such as a product launch.
As a result, designing efficient and reliable pricing experiments is becoming increasingly crucial (Xu et al. 2019;
Bastani et al. 2022). However, in real world, the objectives
of the pricing experiments could be very different.

There is a trade-off between the long-term and the shortterm rewards. Gaining a very accurate understanding of
price elasticity through experimentation could disrupt the
balance between exploration and exploitation that is necessary for achieving optimal short-term revenue, because it
may require more investment in learning demand models.
As a result, the pursuit of long-term rewards may come at
the expense of short-term rewards. Additionally, the decisions that optimize short-term rewards may not necessarily
be the best for long-term rewards. This can result in a “shortsighted” policy, particularly if after-experiment revenues are
given more weight than in-experiment revenues. Furthermore, having a high-quality estimator of price elasticity is
beneficial for both long-term and short-term rewards. A

Without a doubt, like most experiments on online platforms
1
Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems, MIT
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, MIT 3 Operations Research Center, MIT 4 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, MIT 5 Center for Computational Science and Engineering,
MIT. Correspondence to: David Simchi-Levi <dslevi@mit.edu>,
Chonghuan Wang <chwang9@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

