Regression with Sensor Data Containing Incomplete Observations

Takayuki Katsuki 1 Takayuki Osogami 1

Abstract

: Observed sensor outputs
: Actual magnitude of phenomenon
Sensor value

This paper addresses a regression problem in
which output label values are the results of sensing the magnitude of a phenomenon. A low value
of such labels can mean either that the actual
magnitude of the phenomenon was low or that
the sensor made an incomplete observation. This
leads to a bias toward lower values in labels and
the resultant learning because labels may have
lower values due to incomplete observations, even
if the actual magnitude of the phenomenon was
high. Moreover, because an incomplete observation does not provide any tags indicating incompleteness, we cannot eliminate or impute them.
To address this issue, we propose a learning algorithm that explicitly models incomplete observations corrupted with an asymmetric noise that
always has a negative value. We show that our
algorithm is unbiased as if it were learned from
uncorrupted data that does not involve incomplete
observations. We demonstrate the advantages of
our algorithm through numerical experiments.

Actual low values

Low values from incomplete points

: Points without incomplete observations
: Points with incomplete observations

Figure 1. Sensor values with incomplete observations. Low values
can mean either actual low magnitude or incomplete observation.

the label representing the magnitude of a phenomenon from
explanatory variables, where the label is observed with a
sensor and is not necessarily in agreement with the actual
magnitude. We use the term “label” even though we address
the regression problem; a label is thus real-valued in this
paper.
For example, the body movements of a patient are typically
measured with an intrusive sensor attached to the chest
or wrist. If we can learn a reliable regression function
that predicts the magnitude of the body movements (label)
from the values of non-intrusive bed sensors (explanatory
variables) (Mullaney et al., 1980; Webster et al., 1982; Cole
et al., 1992; Tryon, 2013), we can replace intrusive sensors
with non-intrusive ones, which will reduce the burden on
patients.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses a regression problem for predicting the
magnitude of a phenomenon when an observed magnitude
involves a particular measurement error. The magnitude
typically represents how large a phenomenon is or how
strong the nature of the phenomenon is. Such examples of
predicting the magnitude are found in several application
areas, including pressure, vibration, and temperature (Vandal et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2017; Wilby et al., 2004; Tanaka
et al., 2019). In medicine and healthcare, the magnitude may
represent pulsation, respiration, or body movements (Inan
et al., 2009; Nukaya et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2016; Alaziz
et al., 2016; 2017; Carlson et al., 2018).

1
IBM Research - Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Takayuki Katsuki <kats@jp.ibm.com>.

Although the sensors that measure the label generally have
high accuracy, they often make incomplete observations,
and such incomplete observations are recorded as low values instead of missing values. This leads to the particular
challenge illustrated in Fig. 1, where a low value of the
label can mean either that the actual magnitude of the phenomenon was low or that the sensor made an incomplete
observation, and there are no clues to distinguish between
the two.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Such incomplete observations are prevalent when measuring the magnitude of a phenomenon. For example, the
phenomenon may be outside the coverage of a sensor, or

More specifically, we learn a regression function to predict

1

