On the Importance of Feature Decorrelation for
Unsupervised Representation Learning in Reinforcement Learning

Hojoon Lee 1 2 Koanho Lee 1 Dongyoon Hwang 1 Hyunho Lee 2 Byungkun Lee 1 Jaegul Choo 1
similarity

Abstract

action

Recently, unsupervised representation learning
(URL) has improved the sample efficiency of Reinforcement Learning (RL) by pretraining a model
from a large unlabeled dataset. The underlying
principle of these methods is to learn temporally
predictive representations by predicting future
states in the latent space. However, an important
challenge of this approach is the representational
collapse, where the subspace of the latent representations collapses into a low-dimensional manifold. To address this issue, we propose a novel
URL framework that causally predicts future
states while increasing the dimension of the latent
manifold by decorrelating the features in the latent
space. Through extensive empirical studies, we
demonstrate that our framework effectively learns
predictive representations without collapse, which
significantly improves the sample efficiency of
state-of-the-art URL methods on the Atari 100k
benchmark. The code is available at https:
//github.com/dojeon-ai/SimTPR.

transition
policy

feature
decorrelation
encoder

encoder

encoder

𝑥!:#

𝑥!:#

𝑥
(b) Finetuning stage

(a) Pretraining stage

Figure 1. SimTPR framework. At pretraining, the encoder is
trained to predict future states while decorrelating the encoded
features in the latent space. Then, the pretrained encoder is used
as a prior to optimize the policy at the finetuning stage.

datasets by adopting the pretrain then finetune paradigm in
RL (Oord et al., 2018; Stooke et al., 2021; Schwarzer et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2022).
In this paradigm, the agent trains an encoder from the offline
dataset during the pretraining phase. Subsequently, during
the finetuning phase, the agent leverages this encoder to
efficiently optimize the policy for a downstream task with a
limited number of online interactions. When the action or
reward labels are present in the offline dataset, pretraining
is typically performed in a supervised manner, with the
goal of predicting the labels for each state (Christiano et al.,
2016; Kumar et al., 2020; Fujimoto et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2021). Despite their simplicity, the acquisition of the labels
is often limited, as it requires additional effort from human
annotators. As a result, recent studies have focused on
developing unsupervised representation learning methods
from the datasets that only consist of states, which are easily
accessible, large, and do not require any additional labeling
process (Hafner et al., 2019c; Stooke et al., 2021; Seo et al.,
2022; Baker et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made a significant
advance in solving various sequential decision-making problems (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2017;
Raghu et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2019; Nie et al., 2021).
The learning process of RL is inherently online, involving
an iterative loop of data collection and policy optimization.
However, in many real-world problems, the availability of
online data collection is often limited as it can be expensive
(e.g., robotics, and educational agents) or even dangerous
(e.g., autonomous driving, and healthcare) (Levine et al.,
2020; LeCun, 2022). To alleviate the burden of online
data collection, researchers have explored the use of offline

RL has a rich history of research on unsupervised representation learning from states, with seminal studies dating back
to the 1990s and early 2000s (Dayan, 1993; Tesauro et al.,
1995; Littman & Sutton, 2001; Singh et al., 2003). A common principle across these studies is learning temporally
predictive representations, which are obtained by training a
model to predict future states using an autoregressive tran-

1
KAIST 2 KaKao Enterprise. Correspondence to: Hojoon Lee
<joonleesky@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

