On Computing Optimal Tree Ensembles

Christian Komusiewicz * 1 Pascal Kunz * 2 3 Frank Sommer * 1 Manuel Sorge * 4

Abstract

dom subsets of) the training data and, in the classification
phase, aggregate their outcomes by majority voting. The
random-forests method has received a tremendous amount
of attention for its simplicity and improved accuracy over
plain decision trees (Breiman, 2001; Verikas et al., 2011;
Kulkarni & Sinha, 2013; Rokach, 2016). Commonly, fast
heuristics without performance guarantees are used for computing random forests (Kulkarni & Sinha, 2013; Rokach,
2016), in particular for computing the individual decision
trees in the forest. For plain decision trees, researchers lately
made several advances in computing optimal decision trees,
that is, decision trees that provably optimize criteria such
as minimizing the tree size (Bessiere et al., 2009; Narodytska et al., 2018; Carrizosa et al., 2021; Demirović et al.,
2022). With that increased amount of attention also came
theoretical advances, showing the limits and opportunities
for developing efficient exact algorithms for computing decision trees (Ordyniak & Szeider, 2021; Kobourov et al., 2022;
Eiben et al., 2023). One impetus to computing optimal decision trees is that minimizing the size reduces tendencies
to overfitting (Bessiere et al., 2009; Demirović et al., 2022).
It is conceivable that such benefits transfer to globally optimizing the tree ensembles computed by random forests.
However, apart from sporadic hardness results (Tamon & Xiang, 2000), we are not aware of exact algorithmic research
for tree ensembles. In this work, we aim to initiate this
direction; that is, we begin to build the theoretical footing
for exact algorithmics of computing optimal tree ensembles and provide potential avenues for exact algorithms that
are guaranteed to provide optimal results with acceptable
worst-case running times.

Random forests and, more generally, (decision-)tree ensembles are widely used methods
for classification and regression. Recent algorithmic advances allow to compute decision trees
that are optimal for various measures such as
their size or depth. We are not aware of such
research for tree ensembles and aim to contribute
to this area. Mainly, we provide two novel algorithms and corresponding lower bounds. First, we
are able to carry over and substantially improve
on tractability results for decision trees, obtaining a (6δDS)S · poly-time algorithm, where S
is the number of cuts in the tree ensemble, D
the largest domain size, and δ is the largest number of features in which two examples differ. To
achieve this, we introduce the witness-tree technique which also seems promising for practice.
Second, we show that dynamic programming,
which has been successful for decision trees, may
also be viable for tree ensembles, providing an
ℓn · poly-time algorithm, where ℓ is the number
of trees and n the number of examples. Finally,
we compare the number of cuts necessary to classify training data sets for decision trees and tree
ensembles, showing that ensembles may need exponentially fewer cuts for increasing number of
trees.

1. Introduction

We study the algorithmic properties of two canonical
formulations of the training problem for tree ensembles:
We are given a set of training examples labeled with two
classes and a number ℓ of trees and we want to compute a
tree ensemble containing ℓ trees that classifies the examples
consistently with the given class labels.1 We want to
minimize either the sum of the tree sizes, resulting in the
problem M INIMUM T REE E NSEMBLE S IZE (MTES), or
the largest size of a tree in the ensemble, resulting in the

Random forests is a method for classification or regression
in which we construct an ensemble of decision trees for (ran*
Equal contribution 1 Fakultät für Mathematik und Informatik,
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Germany 2 Algorithmics and
Computational Complexity, TU Berlin, Germany 3 Algorithm
Engineering, HU Berlin, Germany 4 Institute of Logic and
Computation, TU Wien, Austria. Correspondence to: Christian Komusiewicz <c.komusiewicz@uni-jena.de>, Pascal Kunz
<p.kunz.1@tu-berlin.de>, Frank Sommer <frank.sommer@unijena.de>, Manuel Sorge <manuel.sorge@ac.tuwien.ac.at>.

1
To keep the presentation focused, we consider mainly the
case without training error. See the conclusion for extensions to
minimizing training error.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

