Delay-Adapted Policy Optimization and Improved Regret
for Adversarial MDP with Delayed Bandit Feedback

Tal Lancewicki 1 Aviv Rosenberg 2 Dmitry Sotnikov 2

Abstract

clude communication between agents (Chen et al., 2020a),
video streaming (Changuel et al., 2012) and robotics (Mahmood et al., 2018). To mitigate the gap in the PO literature,
we study PO in the challenging adversarial MDP model
(i.e., costs change arbitrarily) under bandit feedback with
arbitrary unrestricted delays.

Policy Optimization (PO) is one of the most popular methods in Reinforcement Learning (RL).
Thus, theoretical guarantees for PO algorithms
have become especially important to the RL community. In this paper, we study PO in adversarial
MDPs with a challenge that arises in almost every
real-world application – delayed bandit feedback.
We give the first near-optimal regret bounds for
PO in tabular MDPs, and may even surpass stateof-the-art (which uses less efficient methods). Our
novel Delay-Adapted PO (DAPO) is easy to implement and to generalize, allowing us to extend
our algorithm to: (i) infinite state space under the
assumption of linear Q-function, proving the first
regret bounds for delayed feedback with function
approximation. (ii) deep RL, demonstrating its
effectiveness in experiments on MuJoCo domains.

PO with delays was previously studied by Lancewicki et al.
(2022b), but their regret bounds are far from optimal and
scale with (K + D)2/3 , where K is the number of episodes
and D is the total delay.
achieved
√ Recently, Jin et al. (2022)
√
e 2 S AK + (HSA)1/4 H D) regret (ignear-optimal O(H
noring logarithmic factors), where S, A and H are the number of states, actions, and the episode length, respectively.
However, their algorithm is not based on PO, but on the OREPS method (Zimin & Neu, 2013) which requires solving
a computationally expensive global optimization problem
and cannot be extended to function approximation (FA).
On the other hand, PO algorithms build on highly efficient
local-search and extend naturally to FA (Tomar et al., 2022).
Our Contributions. In this paper, we vastly expand our
understanding of PO and delayed feedback. We propose
a novel Delay-Adapted PO method, called DAPO, which
measures changes in the agent’s policy over the time of
the delays and adapts its updates accordingly. First, we
establish the power of DAPO in tabular MDPs, i.e., finite
number of states and actions. We prove DAPO attains the
first near-optimal
regret
√
√ bound for PO with delayed feedback
e 3 S AK + H 3 D). This bound is tighter than (Jin
O(H
et al., 2022) when the delay term is dominant and the number
of states is significantly larger than the horizon (which is
the common case). Moreover, it matches the lower bound
of Lancewicki et al. (2022b) in the delay term up to factors
of H, showing for the first time that the delay term in the
regret does not need to scale with S or A. Importantly, if
there is no delay, it matches the best known regret for PO
(Luo et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Policy Optimization (PO) is one of the most widely-used
methods in Reinforcement Learning (RL). It has demonstrated impressive empirical success (Levine & Koltun,
2013; Schulman et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018), leading to increasing interest in understanding its theoretical
guarantees. While in recent years we have seen great advancement in theory of PO (Shani et al., 2020b; Luo et al.,
2021; Chen et al., 2022b), our understanding is still very
limited when considering delayed feedback – an important
challenge that occurs in most practical applications. For
example, recommendation systems often learn the utility
of a recommendation based on the number of user conversions, which may happen with a variable delay after the
recommendation was issued. Other notable examples in1
Tel Aviv University (Research conducted while the author was
an intern at Amazon Science) 2 Amazon Science. Correspondence
to: Tal Lancewicki <lancewicki@mail.tau.ac.il>, Aviv Rosenberg
<avivros007@gmail.com>.

Next, we show DAPO is easy to implement and naturally
extends to function approximation in two important settings:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1. Linear-Q. We extend DAPO to MDPs with linear FA
under standard assumptions (Luo et al., 2021) that Qfunctions are linear in some known low-dimensional
1

