Long-Tailed Recognition by Mutual Information Maximization
between Latent Features and Ground-Truth Labels
Min-Kook Suh 1 Seung-Woo Seo 1

Abstract

ber of samples while the remaining classes, i.e., tail classes,
have only a small number of samples. The most straightforward remedy to this problem is to rebalance the training
dataset through weighted sampling. However, it is a suboptimal strategy that may be detrimental to the accuracy of the
head classes (Wang et al., 2017).

Although contrastive learning methods have
shown prevailing performance on a variety of
representation learning tasks, they encounter difficulty when the training dataset is long-tailed.
Many researchers have combined contrastive
learning and a logit adjustment technique to address this problem, but the combinations are done
ad-hoc and a theoretical background has not yet
been provided. The goal of this paper is to provide the background and further improve the performance. First, we show that the fundamental
reason contrastive learning methods struggle with
long-tailed tasks is that they try to maximize the
mutual information between latent features and
input data. As ground-truth labels are not considered in the maximization, they are not able
to address imbalances between classes. Rather,
we interpret the long-tailed recognition task as a
mutual information maximization between latent
features and ground-truth labels. This approach
integrates contrastive learning and logit adjustment seamlessly to derive a loss function that
shows state-of-the-art performance on long-tailed
recognition benchmarks. It also demonstrates
its efficacy in image segmentation tasks, verifying its versatility beyond image classification.
Code is available at https://github.com/
bluecdm/Long-tailed-recognition.

Recently, contrastive learning (Oord et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2020a; Khosla et al., 2020) is widely used in representation learning and showing state-of-the-art performance on
various tasks. The contrastive learning framework learns
representations by pushing latent features from the same
sample closer and separating them from different samples.
However, its performance degrades on long-tailed datasets
as the samples are imbalanced (Cui et al., 2021). Therefore,
several works have been conducted to adapt it to the longtailed recognition tasks (Cui et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022)
by combining it with logit adjustment techniques (Ren et al.,
2020; Menon et al., 2021), which is another method to solve
the long-tailed recognition task that modulates the prediction score of networks based on the appearance frequency of
classes. Although previous methods empirically show that
combining contrastive learning and logit adjustment boosts
performance, they do not provide the theoretical meaning
of the combination.
In this paper, we describe the theoretical meaning of the
combination and provide an improved method for combining contrastive learning and logit adjustment. We find that
the performance of previous contrastive learning methods
degrade on long-tailed datasets because they aim to maximize the mutual information (MI) between the latent features and input data. These approaches do not consider the
imbalance of label distribution, as the ground-truth label
is not involved in the maximization. Instead, we propose
maximizing the MI between latent features and ground-truth
labels, allowing the consideration of label distribution.

1. Introduction
A supervised classification task has been an active research
topic for decades. However, its performance is still unsatisfactory when the dataset shows a long-tailed distribution,
where a few classes, i.e., head classes, contain a major num-

By replacing the input data term with the ground-truth label
term, we derive a general loss function that encompasses
various other methods. The derived loss function includes
a likelihood of latent feature term and a prior of classes
term, and different ways of modeling these terms lead to
different previous methods. For example, the softmax crossentropy loss for a balanced dataset and the logit adjustment

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: MinKook Suh <bluecdm@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

