Federated Heavy Hitter Recovery under Linear Sketching

Adria Gascon 1 Peter Kairouz 1 Ziteng Sun 1 Ananda Theertha Suresh 1

Abstract

Bonawitz et al., 2017; Corrigan-Gibbs et al., 2020; Bell
et al., 2020). For instance, for closed domain histogram
applications, the users can first “one-hot” encode their data
into a vector of length d (the size of the domain) and then
participate in a secure vector summation protocol to make
the aggregate histogram (but never the individual user contributions) available to the service provider.

Motivated by real-life deployments of multiround federated analytics with secure aggregation,
we investigate the fundamental communicationaccuracy tradeoffs of the heavy hitter discovery
and approximate (open-domain) histogram problems under a linear sketching constraint. We propose efficient algorithms based on local subsampling and invertible bloom look-up tables (IBLTs).
We also show that our algorithms are informationtheoretically optimal for a broad class of interactive schemes. The results show that the linear
sketching constraint does increase the communication cost for both tasks by introducing an extra
linear dependence on the number of users in a
round. Moreover, our results also establish a separation between the communication cost for heavy
hitter discovery and approximate histogram in
the multi-round setting. The dependence on the
number of rounds R is at most logarithmic for
heavy hitter discovery√whereas that of approximate histogram is Θ( R). We also empirically
demonstrate our findings.

Federated heavy hitters recovery. The abovementioned
solution requires Ω(d) communication. However, in many
real life applications the domain size is very large or even
unknown a priori. For example, the set of new URLs can be
represented via 8-bit character strings of length 100, and can
thus take d = 256100 values, which is clearly impossible
to support in practice. In such settings, linear1 sketching
is often used to reduce the communication load. For example, Melis et al. use secure count-min sketch aggregation
for privacy preserving training of recommender systems,
and Corrigan-Gibbs & Boneh rely on count-min sketches
for gathering browser statistics, i.e. aggregate histogram
queries. Similarly, Hu et al. rely on secure aggregation of
variants of Flajolet-Martin sketches for distributed cardinality estimation. Boneh et al. uses sketching to reduce the cost
for distributed subset-histogram queries. In the work closest
to ours, Chen et al. show that count-sketches can be used
to recover the heavy hitter items (i.e. frequently appearing
items) while reducing the communication overhead. All
these protocols operate in the single-round setting.

1. Motivation
Collecting and aggregating user data drives improvements in
the app and web ecosystems. For instance, learning popular
out-of-dictionary words can improve the auto-complete feature in a smart keyboard, and discovering malicious URLs
can enhance the security of a browser. However, sharing
user data directly with a service provider introduces several
privacy risks.

Sketching in multi-round aggregation schemes. Even
though count-sketches are great step towards solving the
heavy hitters problem, this approach has only been analyzed
in the single round data aggregation setting. However, most
commonly deployed systems for federated analytics employ
multi-round schemes for data aggregation (Bonawitz et al.,
2019). This is primarily because (a) not all users are available around the same time, (b) the population may be very
large (in the billions of devices) and therefore the server
has to aggregate data over batches for bandwidth/compute
reasons, and (c) running the cryptographic secure vector
summation protocol has compute and communication costs

It is thus desirable to only make aggregated data available to the service provider, rather than directly sharing
(unanonymized) user data with them. This is typically
achieved via multi-party cryptographic primitives, such as
a secure vector summation protocol (Melis et al., 2016;
1
Google Research. Authorship is in alphabetical order. Correspondence to: Ziteng Sun <zitengsun@google.com>.

1
Linearity is necessary because non-linear compression/sketching schemes would not work under the secure vector
summation primitive which only makes the sum of client-held
vectors available to the server.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

