The Power of Learned Locally Linear Models for Nonlinear Policy
Optimization

Daniel Pfrommer * 1 Max Simchowitz * 1 Tyler Westenbroek 2 Nikolai Matni 3 Stephen Tu 4

Abstract

tice. For one, most systems of practical interest are nonlinear, and therefore exact global recovery of system dynamics suffers from a curse of dimensionality. And second, the
nonlinear dynamics render any natural trajectory planning
problem nonconvex, making global optimality elusive. In
this work, we focus on learning-based trajectory optimization, the “inner-loop” in MPC. We ask when can we obtain
rigorous guarantees about the solutions to nonlinear trajectory optimization under unknown dynamics?

A common pipeline in learning-based control is
to iteratively estimate a model of system dynamics, and apply a trajectory optimization algorithm
- e.g. iLQR - on the learned model to minimize
a target cost. This paper conducts a rigorous
analysis of a simplified variant of this strategy
for general nonlinear systems. We analyze an
algorithm which iterates between estimating local linear models of nonlinear system dynamics
and performing iLQR-like policy updates. We
demonstrate that this algorithm attains sample
complexity polynomial in relevant problem parameters, and, by synthesizing locally stabilizing gains, overcomes exponential dependence in
problem horizon. Experimental results validate
the performance of our algorithm, and compare
to natural deep-learning baselines.

We take as our point of departure the iLQR algorithm (Li
& Todorov, 2004). Initially proposed under known dynamics, iLQR solves a planning objective by solving an iterative linear control problem around a first-order Taylor expansion (the Jacobian linearization) of the dynamics, and
second-order Taylor expansion of the control costs. In solving this objective, iLQR synthesizes a sequence of locallystabilizing feedback gains, and each iLQR-update can be
interpreted as a gradient-step through the closed-loop linearized dynamics in feedback with these gains. This has the
dual benefit of proposing a locally stabilizing policy (not
just an open-loop trajectory), and of stabilizing the gradients to circumvent exponential blow-up in planning horizon. iLQR, and its variants (Todorov & Li, 2005; Williams
et al., 2017), are now ubiquitous in robotics and control applications; and, when dynamics are unknown or uncertain,
one can simply substitute the exact dynamics model with
an estimate (e.g. Levine & Koltun (2013)). In this case, dynamics are typically estimated with neural networks. Thus,
Jacobian linearizations can be computed by automated differentiation (AutoDiff) through the learned model.

1. Introduction
Machine learning methods such as model-based reinforcement learning have lead to a number of breakthroughs in
key applications across robotics and control (Kocijan et al.,
2004; Tassa et al., 2012; Nagabandi et al., 2019). A popular technique in these domains is learning-based modelpredictive control (MPC) (Morari & Lee, 1999; Williams
et al., 2017), wherein a model learned from data is used
to repeatedly solve online planning problems to control
the real system. It has long been understood that solving MPC exactly–both with perfectly accurate dynamics
and minimization to globally optimality for each planning problem–enjoys numerous beneficial control-theoretic
properties (Jadbabaie & Hauser, 2001).

Contributions. We propose and analyze an alternative to
the aforementioned approach of first learning a deep neural model of dynamics, and then performing AutoDiff to
conduct the iLQR update. We consider a simplified setting
with fixed initial starting condition. Our algorithm maintains a policy, specified by an open-loop input sequence
and a sequence of stabilizing gains, and loops two steps:
(a) it learns local linear model of the closed-loop linearized
dynamics (in feedback with these gains), which we use to
perform a gradient update; (b) it re-estimates a linear model
after the gradient step, and synthesizes a new set of set
gains from this new model. In contrast to past approaches,

Unfortunately, the above situation is not reflective of prac*
Equal contribution 1 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Texas, Austin 3 University of Pennsylvania 4 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Daniel Pfrommer
<dpfrom@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

