Dividing and Conquering a BlackBox to a Mixture of Interpretable Models:
Route, Interpret, Repeat

Shantanu Ghosh 1 Ke Yu 2 Forough Arabshahi 3 Kayhan Batmanghelich 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Model explainability is essential in high-stakes applications
of AI, e.g., healthcare. While Blackbox models (e.g., Deep
Learning) offer flexibility and modular design, post hoc explanation is prone to confirmation bias (Wan et al., 2022),
lack of fidelity to the original model (Adebayo et al., 2018),
and insufficient mechanistic explanation of the decisionmaking process (Rudin, 2019). Interpretable-by-design
models overcome those issues but tend to be less flexible
than Blackbox models and demand substantial expertise to
design. Using a post hoc explanation or adopting an inherently interpretable model is a mutually exclusive decision to
be made at the initial phase of AI model design. This paper
blurs the line on that dichotomous model design.

ML model design either starts with an interpretable model or a Blackbox and explains it
post hoc. Blackbox models are flexible but
difficult to explain, while interpretable models
are inherently explainable. Yet, interpretable
models require extensive ML knowledge and tend
to be less flexible and underperforming than their
Blackbox variants. This paper aims to blur the
distinction between a post hoc explanation of a
Blackbox and constructing interpretable models.
Beginning with a Blackbox, we iteratively carve
out a mixture of interpretable experts (MoIE) and
a residual network. Each interpretable model
specializes in a subset of samples and explains
them using First Order Logic (FOL), providing
basic reasoning on concepts from the Blackbox.
We route the remaining samples through a flexible
residual. We repeat the method on the residual
network until all the interpretable models explain
the desired proportion of data. Our extensive
experiments show that our route, interpret, and
repeat approach (1) identifies a diverse set of
instance-specific concepts with high concept
completeness via MoIE without compromising in
performance, (2) identifies the relatively ªharderº
samples to explain via residuals, (3) outperforms
the interpretable by-design models by significant
margins during test-time interventions, and (4)
fixes the shortcut learned by the original Blackbox. The code for MoIE is publicly available
at: https://github.com/batmanlab/
ICML-2023-Route-interpret-repeat.

The literature on post hoc explanations is extensive. This includes model attributions ( (Simonyan et al., 2013; Selvaraju
et al., 2017)), counterfactual approaches (Abid et al., 2021;
Singla et al., 2019), and distillation methods (Alharbi et al.,
2021; Cheng et al., 2020). Those methods either identify
key input features that contribute the most to the network’s
output (Shrikumar et al., 2016), generate input perturbation
to flip the network’s output (Samek et al., 2016; Montavon
et al., 2018), or estimate simpler functions to approximate
the network output locally. Post hoc methods preserve the
flexibility and performance of the Blackbox but suffer from
a lack of fidelity and mechanistic explanation of the network
output (Rudin, 2019). Without a mechanistic explanation,
recourse to a model’s undesirable behavior is unclear. Interpretable models are alternative designs to the Blackbox
without many such drawbacks. For example, modern interpretable methods highlight human understandable concepts
that contribute to the downstream prediction.
Several families of interpretable models exist for a long time,
such as the rule-based approach and generalized additive
models (Hastie & Tibshirani, 1987; Letham et al., 2015;
Breiman et al., 1984). They primarily focus on tabular data.
Such models for high-dimensional data (e.g., images) primarily rely on projecting to a lower dimensional human
understandable concept or symbolic space (Koh et al., 2020)
and predicting the output with an interpretable classifier.
Despite their utility, the current State-Of-The-Art (SOTA)
are limited in design; for example, they do not model the

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston
University, MA, USA 2 Intelligent Systems Program, University of
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 3 MetaAI, MenloPark, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Shantanu Ghosh <shawn24@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

