Stochastic Policy Gradient Methods:
Improved Sample Complexity for Fisher-non-degenerate Policies

Ilyas Fatkhullin 1 Anas Barakat 1 Anastasia Kireeva 2 Niao He 1

Abstract

most popular and efficient classes of Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms. Combined with deep neural networks,
modern PG algorithms (Silver et al., 2014; Schulman et al.,
2015; 2017) have shown impressive empirical success in
several challenging tasks involving large and even continuous state and action spaces.

Recently, the impressive empirical success of policy gradient (PG) methods has catalyzed the development of their theoretical foundations. Despite
the huge efforts directed at the design of efficient
stochastic PG-type algorithms, the understanding
of their convergence to a globally optimal policy
is still limited. In this work, we develop improved
global convergence guarantees for a general class
of Fisher-non-degenerate parameterized policies
which allows to address the case of continuous
state action spaces. First, we propose a Normalized Policy Gradient method with Implicit Gradi˜ −2.5 )
ent Transport (N-PG-IGT) and derive a 𝒪(𝜀
sample complexity of this method for finding a
global 𝜀-optimal policy. Improving over the previ˜ −3 ) complexity, this algorithm
ously known 𝒪(𝜀
does not require the use of importance sampling
or second-order information and samples only one
trajectory per iteration. Second, we further im˜ −2 ) by considering
prove this complexity to 𝒪(𝜀
a Hessian-Aided Recursive Policy Gradient ((N)HARPG) algorithm enhanced with a correction
based on a Hessian-vector product. Interestingly,
both algorithms are (𝑖) simple and easy to implement: single-loop, do not require large batches of
trajectories and sample at most two trajectories
per iteration; (𝑖𝑖) computationally and memory efficient: they do not require expensive subroutines
at each iteration and can be implemented with
memory linear in the dimension of parameters.

In this class of methods, in order to learn a parameterized
policy, the agent performs stochastic gradient ascent in the
policy parameter space to maximize its expected return 𝐽(𝜃),
where 𝜃 ∈ R𝑑 are parameters of the policy parameterization. Given the non-concavity of the policy optimization
objective, several works in the literature have focused on the
convergence of the policy parameter to an 𝜀-approximate
first-order stationary point (FOSP), i.e., ‖∇𝐽(𝜃)‖ ≤ 𝜀. This
performance measure allows to define the sample complexity of PG methods as the number of random trajectory simulations (or samples) required to find an 𝜀-approximate
FOSP of the expected return function. In particular, using
a similar analysis to stochastic gradient descent in nonconvex smooth optimization (Ghadimi and Lan, 2013), it has
˜ −4 )
been shown that Vanilla-PG (REINFORCE) enjoys a 𝒪(𝜀
sample complexity (see for e.g., Yuan et al. (2022b)). In
the last few years, spurred by the development of variancereduction techniques in stochastic optimization, there has
been a tremendous amount of work in designing variancereduced variants of the PG method to improve sample efficiency. Unlike in classical supervised learning, the sampling
distribution is non-stationary in RL due to policy update.
Therefore, adapting variance-reduction techniques to PG
methods requires to carefully address this non-stationarity.
The majority of works address this issue by introducing
importance sampling (IS) weights to correct the distribution
shift. However, the use of the IS mechanism often requires
a strong unverifiable assumption stating that the variance
of IS weights is bounded. Recently, Shen et al. (2019);
Salehkaleybar et al. (2022) proposed a promising alternative
to IS, which incorporates the second-order information to
correct the distribution shift due to the policy update. In
terms of sample complexity, both approaches guarantee to
find an 𝜀-FOSP with ˜
𝒪(𝜀−3 ) samples. For stochastic optimization, this complexity was recently shown to be optimal
and unimprovable even when higher order stochastic oracle
and smoothness are available (Arjevani et al., 2020). There-

1. Introduction
Dating back to the works of Williams (1992); Sutton et al.
(1999), Policy Gradient (PG) methods constitute one of the
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: I.F. <ilyas.fn979@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 𝑡ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

