Exact Inference in High-order Structured Prediction

Chuyang Ke 1 Jean Honorio 1

Abstract

the structured prediction tasks above, is to recover the global
structure by exploiting many local structures. Take social
networks as an example. A widely used assumption in social
network analysis is homophily — users with similar profiles
and preferences are more likely to become friends (Ke &
Honorio, 2018; 2019). Intuitively, a structured prediction
algorithm tends to assign two users the same label, if they
have a higher affinity score. Similarly, the same idea can be
motivated in the context of Markov random fields (MRFs).
Assume all entities form an undirected graph G = (V, E),
structured prediction can be viewed as the task of solving
the following inference problem (Bello & Honorio, 2019):

In this paper, we study the problem of inference in
high-order structured prediction tasks. In the context of Markov random fields, the goal of a highorder inference task is to maximize a score function on the space of labels, and the score function
can be decomposed into sum of unary and highorder potentials. We apply a generative model
approach to study the problem of high-order inference, and provide a two-stage convex optimization algorithm for exact label recovery. We also
provide a new class of hypergraph structural properties related to hyperedge expansion that drives
the success in general high-order inference problems. Finally, we connect the performance of our
algorithm and the hyperedge expansion property
using a novel hypergraph Cheeger-type inequality.

X

maximize
y∈L|V|

+

cv (l) · 1[yv = l]

v∈V,l∈L

X

cv1 ,v2 (l1 , l2 ) · 1[yv1 = l1 , yv2 = l2 ] ,

(1)

(v1 ,v2 )∈E
l1 ,l2 ∈L

1. Introduction
Structured prediction has been widely used in various machine learning fields in the past 20 years, including applications like social network analysis, computer vision, molecular biology, natural language processing (NLP), among
others. A common objective in these tasks is assigning /
recovering labels, that is, given some possibly noisy observation, the goal is to output a group label for each entity
in the task. In social network analysis, this could be detecting communities based on user profiles and preferences
(Ke & Honorio, 2022b; Kelley et al., 2012). In computer
vision, researchers want the AI to decide whether a pixel is
in the foreground or background (Nowozin et al., 2011). In
biology, it is sometimes desirable to cluster molecules by
structural similarity (Nugent & Meila, 2010). In NLP, partof-speech tagging is probably one of the most well-known
structured prediction task (Weiss & Taskar, 2010).

where L is the space of labels, cv (l) is the score of assigning
label l to node v, and cv1 ,v2 (l1 , l2 ) is the score of assigning
labels l1 and l2 to neighboring nodes v1 and v2 . In the
MRF and inference literature, the two terms in (1) are often
referred to as unary and pairwise potentials, respectively.
The inference formulation above allows one to recover the
global structure, by finding a configuration that maximizes
the summation of unary and pairwise local scores.
However, entities in many real-world problems could interact beyond the pairwise fashion. Take the social network
example again, but this time let us focus on the academia
co-authorship network: many published papers are written
by more than two authors (Liu et al., 2005). Such highorder interactions cannot be captured by pairwise structures.
Geometrically, the co-authorship network can no longer be
represented by a graph. As a result, the introduction of
hypergraphs is necessary to model high-order structured
prediction problems.

From a methodological point of view, a standard approach in
1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence to: Chuyang Ke
<cke@purdue.edu>.

In this paper, we study the problem of high-order structured
prediction, in which instead of using pairwise potentials,
high-order potentials are considered. Using the MRF formulation, we are interested in inference problems of the

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

