Spherical Fourier Neural Operators:
Learning Stable Dynamics on the Sphere
Boris Bonev 1 Thorsten Kurth 1 Christian Hundt 1 Jaideep Pathak 1 Maximilian Baust 1 Karthik Kashinath 1
Anima Anandkumar 1 2

Abstract
Fourier Neural Operators (FNOs) have proven to
be an efficient and effective method for resolutionindependent operator learning in a broad variety of application areas across scientific machine
learning. A key reason for their success is their
ability to accurately model long-range dependencies in spatio-temporal data by learning global
convolutions in a computationally efficient manner. To this end, FNOs rely on the discrete
Fourier transform (DFT), however, DFTs cause
visual and spectral artifacts as well as pronounced
dissipation when learning operators in spherical
coordinates by incorrectly assuming flat geometry. To overcome this limitation, we generalize
FNOs on the sphere, introducing Spherical FNOs
(SFNOs) for learning operators on spherical geometries. We apply SFNOs to forecasting atmospheric dynamics, and demonstrate stable autoregressive rollouts for a year of simulated time
(1,460 steps), while retaining physically plausible
dynamics. The SFNO has important implications
for machine learning-based simulation of climate
dynamics that could eventually help accelerate
our response to climate change.

(a) ground truth

(b) AFNO

(c) FNO, non-linear

(d) SFNO, linear

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of temperature predictions
(t850) over Antarctica at 4380h (730 autoregressive steps). The
SFNO shows no visible artifacts even after six-month-long rollouts.
Models which use FFT and do not incorporate spherical geometry
are not stable for long rollouts compared to SFNO. The AFNO
model breaks down early and shows large visible artifacts everywhere. In the non-linear FNO model, artifacts are less pronounced
but increase in magnitude with time and towards the poles.

1. Introduction
Climate change is arguably one of the greatest challenges
facing humanity today. Modeling Earth’s complex weather
and climate accurately, and in a computationally efficient
manner, has massive implications for science and society
across the enterprise of climate prediction, mitigation, and
adaptation.

Weather and climate modeling has traditionally relied on
principled physics- and process-based numerical simulations that solve the partial differential equations (PDEs)
governing the fluid dynamics, thermodynamics, and other
physics of the Earth system. These equations are discretized
and solved on a grid, but the wide range of spatial and
temporal scales, as well as complex nonlinear interactions
across these scales, necessitate fine grids and high resolution
making these computations extremely expensive.

1
NVIDIA Corp., Santa Clara, USA 2 Caltech, Pasadena,
USA. Correspondence to: Boris Bonev <bbonev@nvidia.com>,
Thorsten Kurth <tkurth@nvidia.com>, Christian Hundt
<chundt@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Machine learning (ML) provides alternative approaches to
1

