Automatic Data Augmentation via Invariance-Constrained Learning

Ignacio Hounie 1 Luiz F. O. Chamon 2 Alejandro Ribeiro 1

Abstract

and Miyake, 1982) to the invariant attention mechanism
in Alphafold (Jumper et al., 2021). However, embedding
invariances and symmetries in model architectures is hard
in general and when possible, often incurs a high computational cost. This is the case, of rotation invariant neural
network architectures that rely on group convolutions, which
are feasible only for small, discrete transformation spaces
or require coarse undersampling due to their high computational complexity (Cohen and Welling, 2016; Finzi et al.,
2020).

Underlying data structures, such as symmetries or
invariance to transformations, are often exploited
to improve the solution of learning tasks. However, embedding these properties in models or
learning algorithms can be challenging and computationally intensive. Data augmentation, on the
other hand, induces these symmetries during training by applying multiple transformations to the
input data. Despite its ubiquity, its effectiveness
depends on the choices of which transformations
to apply, when to do so, and how often. In fact,
there is both empirical and theoretical evidence
that the indiscriminate use of data augmentation
can introduce biases that outweigh its benefits.
This work tackles these issues by automatically
adapting the data augmentation while solving the
learning task. To do so, it formulates data augmentation as an invariance constrained learning problem and leverages Monte Carlo Markov Chain
(MCMC) sampling to solve it. The result is an
algorithm that not only does away with a priori
searches for augmentation distributions, but also
dynamically controls if and when data augmentation is applied. We validate empirically our
theoretical developments in automatic data augmentation benchmarks for CIFAR and ImageNet100 datasets. Furthermore, our experiments show
how this approach can be used to gather insights
on the actual symmetries underlying a learning
task.

A widely used alternative consists of modifying the data
rather than the model. That is, to augment the dataset by
applying transformations to samples in order to induce the
desired symmetries or invariances during training. Data augmentation, as it is commonly known, is used to train virtually
all state-of-the-art models in a variety of domains (Shorten
and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). This empirical success is supported by theoretical results showing that, when the underlying data distribution is invariant to the applied transformations, data augmentation provides a better estimation of
the statistical risk (Chen et al., 2019; Sannai et al., 2019;
Lyle et al., 2020; Shao et al., 2022). On the other hand,
applying the wrong transformations can introduce biases
that may outweigh these benefits (Chen et al., 2019; Shao
et al., 2022).
Choosing which transformations to apply, when to do so,
and how often, is thus paramount to achieving good results.
However, it requires knowledge about the underlying distribution of the data that is typically unavailable in learning
settings. Several approaches to learning an augmentation
policy or distribution over a given set of transformations
exist, such as reinforcement learning (Cubuk et al., 2018),
genetic algorithms (Ho et al., 2019), density matching (Lim
et al., 2019; Cubuk et al., 2020; Hataya et al., 2020), gradient matching (Zheng et al., 2022), bi-level optimization (Li
et al., 2020b; Liu et al., 2021), jointly optimizing over transformations using regularised objectives (Benton et al., 2020),
variational bayesian inference (Chatzipantazis et al., 2021),
bayesian model selection (Immer et al., 2022) and alignment
regularization (Wang et al., 2022). Nevertheless, optimization based methods often require computing gradients with
respect to transformations (Chatzipantazis et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2020b) and several of these methods resort to computationally intensive search phases, optimization of auxiliary

1. Introduction
Exploiting the underlying structure of data is a key principle
of data analysis. Its use has been fundamental to the success of machine learning solutions, from the translational
equivariance of convolutional neural networks (Fukushima
1
University of Pennsylvania 2 University of Stuttgart. Correspondence to: Ignacio Hounie <ihounie@seas.upenn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

