Collaborative Causal Inference with Fair Incentives
Rui Qiao 1 Xinyi Xu 1 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract

growth from applying a particular nutrient (Rubin, 1990;
2005). Various causal inference methods have been designed for interventional data (from experimental trials) and
observational data (from historical records). However, the
collected data may be of low quality: Data sparsity and
non-representativeness for the population of interest are the
major obstacles to accurately estimating the treatment effect
(e.g., efficacy of drugs). For example, patients prefer to visit
the hospitals nearby, which results in each hospital having
few and demographically biased records that give rise to
data sparsity and non-representativeness, respectively. If the
hospitals perform causal inference individually, then they
are likely to get inaccurate treatment effect estimates and
potentially fail to prescribe the most efficacious medications
(Masic et al., 2008).

Collaborative causal inference (CCI) aims to improve the estimation of the causal effect of treatment variables by utilizing data aggregated from
multiple self-interested parties. Since their source
data are valuable proprietary assets that can be
costly or tedious to obtain, every party has to be
incentivized to be willing to contribute to the collaboration, such as with a guaranteed fair and sufficiently valuable reward (than performing causal
inference on its own). This paper presents a reward scheme designed using the unique statistical
properties that are required by causal inference
to guarantee certain desirable incentive criteria
(e.g., fairness, benefit) for the parties based on
their contributions. To achieve this, we propose a
data valuation function to value parties’ data for
CCI based on the distributional closeness of its
resulting treatment effect estimate to that utilizing the aggregated data from all parties. Then,
we show how to value the parties’ rewards fairly
based on a modified variant of the Shapley value
arising from our proposed data valuation for CCI.
Finally, the Shapley fair rewards to the parties are
realized in the form of improved, stochastically
perturbed treatment effect estimates. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our reward
scheme using simulated and real-world datasets.

Collaborative causal inference (CCI) uses the aggregation
of shared data from participating parties (e.g., company,
organization, or individual) to overcome the issues of data
sparsity and non-representativeness. Consequently, they
obtain more accurate and statistically significant treatment
effect estimates. Such estimates for medical treatments help
doctors improve their prescriptions, while those for nutrients
help farmers determine appropriate amounts of nutrients and
the associated costs to improve their overall profits from
crop yields. By using the data from all parties, simple aggregation or multi-source causal inference (Bareinboim &
Pearl, 2016; Dersimonian & Laird, 1986; Guo et al., 2021;
Xiong et al., 2021) competitively yield the most accurate
and statistically significant estimate (i.e., the most valuable
estimate whose exact value is to be defined later) which is
accessible to every party. However, such classes of methods rely on the willingness of all parties to share their data,
which is not always the case. In practice, parties are often
self-interested (Chalkiadakis et al., 2011; Sim et al., 2020;
2021; Smith, 2018; Tay et al., 2022; Thibaut, 1960) and
unwilling to share their valuable and proprietary source data
in the collaboration because the process of data collection is
costly. So, some parties may consider it unfair if the others
with less valuable data can benefit equally from the same
most valuable estimate as themselves. Without active participation, the amount of data available for causal inference is
insufficient to be effective for existing solutions. This motivates the need to promote collaboration with guaranteed
benefit and fairness (Adams, 1963; Konow, 2000; Tabibnia
& Lieberman, 2007) for self-interested parties; Appendix A

1. Introduction
Causal inference estimates the causal effect of treatment
variables for some target population(s) and is widely
adopted across various fields. In healthcare, hospitals perform causal inference of the efficacy of drugs (Glass et al.,
2013; Hernán et al., 2002; Wendling et al., 2018). In agriculture, causal inference is used to determine the achievable
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore. 2 Institute for Infocomm Research,
A∗ STAR, Republic of Singapore. Correspondence to: Xinyi Xu
<xinyi.xu@u.nus.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

