Paging with Succinct Predictions

Antonios Antoniadis * 1 Joan Boyar * 2 Marek Eliáš * 3 Lene M. Favrholdt * 2 Ruben Hoeksma * 1
Kim S. Larsen * 2 Adam Polak * 4 Bertrand Simon * 5

Abstract

given a fast cache memory with capacity to simultaneously
store at most a constant number, k, of pages. Requested
pages, according to a sequence of page requests, have to be
loaded into the cache to be served by the operating system.
More specifically, pages are requested one by one in an
online fashion, and each request needs to be immediately
served upon its arrival. Serving a page is done at zero cost
if the requested page currently resides in the cache. If this
is not the case, then a page fault occurs and the page has to
first be loaded into the cache (after potentially evicting some
other page to make space). This incurs a fixed cost. The
underlying algorithmic question is to decide which page to
evict each time a page has to be loaded into the cache, with
the goal to minimize the total incurred cost, i.e., the total
number of page faults.

Paging is a prototypical problem in the area of
online algorithms. It has also played a central
role in the development of learning-augmented algorithms. Previous work on learning-augmented
paging has investigated predictions on (i) when
the current page will be requested again (reoccurrence predictions), (ii) the current state of
the cache in an optimal algorithm (state predictions), (iii) all requests until the current page gets
requested again, and (iv) the relative order in
which pages are requested. We study learningaugmented paging from the new perspective of
requiring the least possible amount of predicted
information. More specifically, the predictions
obtained alongside each page request are limited
to one bit only. We develop algorithms satisfy all
three desirable properties of learning-augmented
algorithms – that is, they are consistent, robust
and smooth – despite being limited to a one-bit
prediction per request. We also present lower
bounds establishing that our algorithms are essentially best possible.

1

Paging has been extensively studied and is well-understood.
There exists an optimal offline algorithm, LFD (longest forward distance), that simply follows the so-called Belady’s
rule: always evict the page that will be requested again
the furthest in the future. Note that Belady’s rule can only
be applied to the offline variant of the problem, where all
future page requests are known to the algorithm. With respect to online algorithms, no deterministic online algorithm
can obtain a competitive ratio1 smaller than k (Sleator &
Tarjan, 1985). Two simple deterministic algorithms that
are k-competitive (Sleator & Tarjan, 1985) exist: FIFO
(evict the oldest page in the cache) and LRU (evict the least
recently used/requested page from the cache). Fiat et al.
(1991) developed a randomized algorithm called M ARK that
is (2Hk − 1)-competitive2 (Achlioptas et al., 2000). Furthermore this is tight, up to a constant factor of 2, since no
randomized algorithm can obtain a competitive ratio better
than Hk (Fiat et al., 1991). Later, optimal Hk -competitive
randomized algorithms were discovered (Achlioptas et al.,
2000; McGeoch & Sleator, 1991).

Introduction

Paging (also known as caching) is a classical online problem,
and an important special case of several other online problems (Borodin & El-Yaniv, 1998), which can be motivated
through resource management in operating systems. You are
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Twente, Enschede,
Netherlands 2 University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark 3 Bocconi University, Milan, Italy 4 Max Planck Institute
for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany 5 IN2P3 Computing
Center and CNRS, Villeurbanne, France. Correspondence to:
Antonios Antoniadis <a.antoniadis@utwente.nl>, Joan Boyar
<joan@imada.sdu.dk>, Marek Eliáš <elias@ba30.eu>,
Lene M. Favrholdt <lenem@imada.sdu.dk>,
Ruben
Hoeksma <r.p.hoeksma@utwente.nl>, Kim S. Larsen
<kslarsen@imada.sdu.dk>, Adam Polak <apolak@mpiinf.mpg.de>, Bertrand Simon <bertrand.simon@cc.in2p3.fr>.

The above results are tight in the worst case, although inputs
encountered in many practical situations may allow for a
better performance. The novel research area of learningaugmented algorithms attempts to take advantage of such
1
Competitive ratio is the standard performance metric for online algorithms, see Section 1.1 for a definition.
P
2
Hk = ki=1 1/i is the k’th harmonic number. Recall that
ln k ≤ Hk ≤ 1 + ln k.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

