LeadFL: Client Self-Defense against Model Poisoning in Federated Learning

Chaoyi Zhu 1 Stefanie Roos 1 Lydia Y. Chen 1
which mislead the model to make inaccurate inferences on
images with certain triggers.

Abstract
Federated Learning is highly susceptible to backdoor and targeted attacks as participants can manipulate their data and models locally without
any oversight on whether they follow the correct
process. There are a number of server-side defenses that mitigate the attacks by modifying or
rejecting local updates submitted by clients. However, we find that bursty adversarial patterns with
a high variance in the number of malicious clients
can circumvent the existing defenses. We propose a client-self defense, LeadFL, that is combined with existing server-side defenses to thwart
backdoor and targeted attacks. The core idea of
LeadFL is a novel regularization term in local
model training such that the Hessian matrix of
local gradients is nullified. We provide the convergence analysis of LeadFL and its robustness
guarantee in terms of certified radius. Our empirical evaluation shows that LeadFL is able to mitigate bursty adversarial patterns for both iid and
non-iid data distributions. It frequently reduces
the backdoor accuracy from more than 75% for
state-of-the-art defenses to less than 10% while
its impact on the main task accuracy is always
less than for other client-side defenses.

The attack severity is closely related to the number of malicious clients that are chosen over time. Federated learning
proceeds in rounds. Usually, in each round, a certain number of clients are selected from a large pool. If the selection
is random and by the server, the number of malicious clients
chosen varies greatly even if the overall fraction of malicious clients in the pool stays constant. Figure 1 displays
an example for 5 selected clients over 5 rounds. As a consequence, in some rounds, the fraction, malicious clients
make up the majority of the clients, which allows them to
launch a strong attack.
The number of malicious clients varies every round

Poisoned Model
from last round

Server-side
Defense

Perturbed
Model

round
Malicious Clients

Local Training
Poisoned
Model

Benign Clients
: Distribute Global Model

Perturbed
Model

: Upload Model Updates

LeadFL
perturb

Figure 1: Bursty adversarial patterns with the number of
malicious clients chosen varying greatly between rounds

1. Introduction

Defense mechanisms (Blanchard et al., 2017; Fung et al.,
2020; Muñoz-González et al., 2019; Xia et al., 2019;
Mhamdi et al., 2018; Ozdayi et al., 2021; Panda et al., 2022;
Yin et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2022; Rieger et al., 2022;
Gupta et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022) have been designed to
mitigate the attacks. The majority of these attacks are serverside, meaning the federator assigns updates that appear to
be malicious a low weight during aggregation or completely
excludes them from the aggregation. These defenses have
been shown to be effective against sophisticated attacks
when the number of malicious selected clients is constant
and low (Nguyen et al., 2022; Panda et al., 2022; Rieger
et al., 2022). In addition to demonstrating the empirical effectiveness, theoretical frameworks, such as certified radius
on models (Panda et al., 2022) and inference samples (Xie

Federated Learning (FL) realizes collaborative learning
without the need to share possibly sensitive raw data. Clients
submit intermediate local models to a server, the federator,
who aggregates these models. In order to achieve models
of high accuracy, high-quality local models and effective
aggregation algorithms are needed. Adversarial clients can
reduce the accuracy, either overall or on specific tasks, by
manipulating their local data and the submitted model. For
instance, malicious clients can launch backdoor attacks,
1
Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands. Correspondence to: Lydia Y. Chen <lydiaychen@ieee.org>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

