Shortest Edit Path Crossover: A Theory-driven Solution to the Permutation
Problem in Evolutionary Neural Architecture Search

Xin Qiu 1 Risto Miikkulainen 1 2

Abstract

2018; Chen et al., 2018; Miikkulainen et al., 2021). One
major branch of NAS approaches are the black-box NAS
methods, which require only zeroth-order information about
the objectives. While reinforcement learning (RL) contributed to the early success of black-box NAS methods
(Zoph & Le, 2017), population-based search has emerged
recently as a popular and empirically more powerful alternative (Real et al., 2017; 2019; Ying et al., 2019), achieving
SOTA performance in various benchmarks and real-world
domains (Real et al., 2017; Elsken et al., 2019; Real et al.,
2019; So et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2022). Population-based
NAS is usually based on evolutionary algorithms (EAs) (Liu
et al., 2021), which mimic natural evolution by maintaining
a population of solutions and evolving them through mutation and crossover. Mutation provides for local search (i.e.
refinement), while crossover implements a directed global
search, and thus constitutes the engine behind evolutionary discovery. However, most recent evolutionary NAS
methods are limited to mutation only (Real et al., 2017;
Fernando et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018; Elsken et al., 2019;
Real et al., 2019; So et al., 2021; Co-Reyes et al., 2021; Gao
et al., 2022), which has also been used extensively in simple
hill-climbing/local search methods (White et al., 2021a;b).

Population-based search has recently emerged as
a possible alternative to Reinforcement Learning (RL) for black-box neural architecture search
(NAS). It performs well in practice even though
it is not theoretically well understood. In particular, whereas traditional population-based search
methods such as evolutionary algorithms (EAs)
draw much power from crossover operations, it
is difficult to take advantage of them in NAS.
The main obstacle is believed to be the permutation problem: The mapping between genotype
and phenotype in traditional graph representations
is many-to-one, leading to a disruptive effect of
standard crossover. This paper presents the first
theoretical analysis of the behaviors of mutation,
crossover and RL in black-box NAS, and proposes
a new crossover operator based on the shortest edit
path (SEP) in graph space. The SEP crossover
is shown theoretically to overcome the permutation problem, and as a result, have a better expected improvement compared to mutation, standard crossover and RL. Further, it empirically outperform these other methods on state-of-the-art
NAS benchmarks. The SEP crossover therefore
allows taking full advantage of population-based
search in NAS, and the underlying theory can
serve as a foundation for deeper understanding of
black-box NAS methods in general.

The main obstacle in applying crossover to NAS is the
permutation problem (Radcliffe, 1992; 1993), also known
as the competing conventions problem (Montana & Davis,
1989; Schaffer et al., 1992). This problem is due to isomorphisms in graph space, i.e., functionally identical architectures are mapped to different encodings/representations,
making crossover operations disruptive. A number of possible solutions to this problem have been proposed in the
neuroevolution community (Thierens, 1996; Stanley & Miikkulainen, 2002; Dragoni et al., 2014; Mahmood et al.,
2007; Wang et al., 2018; Uriot & Izzo, 2020). However, they
either only work on fixed or constrained network topologies,
or are limited to one particular algorithm or search space;
none of them generalize to arbitrary graphs or architectures
such as those that might arise from NAS. Moreover, prior
work has focused only on empirical verification without a
theoretical analysis of potential solutions. Theoretical understanding of search efficiency of mutation, crossover, and
RL is still lacking in black-box NAS.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS), a technique for automatically designing architectures for neural networks, outperforms human-designed models in many tasks (Zoph et al.,
1
Cognizant AI Labs, San Francisco, USA 2 The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, USA. Correspondence
to: Xin Qiu <qiuxin.nju@gmail.com>, Risto Miikkulainen
<risto@cognizant.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

