MAHALO: Unifying Offline Reinforcement Learning and
Imitation Learning from Observations

Anqi Li 1 Byron Boots 1 Ching-An Cheng 2

Abstract

2018). In these domains, it is more practical to consider an
offline setting (Levine et al., 2020), where data is collected
by behavioral policies satisfying certain criteria.

We study a new paradigm for sequential decision
making, called offline policy learning from observations (PLfO). Offline PLfO aims to learn
policies using datasets with substandard qualities:
1) only a subset of trajectories is labeled with
rewards, 2) labeled trajectories may not contain
actions, 3) labeled trajectories may not be of high
quality, and 4) the data may not have full coverage. Such imperfection is common in real-world
learning scenarios, and offline PLfO encompasses
many existing offline learning setups, including
offline imitation learning (IL), offline IL from observations (ILfO), and offline reinforcement learning (RL). In this work, we present a generic approach to offline PLfO, called Modality-agnostic
Adversarial Hypothesis Adaptation for Learning
from Observations (MAHALO). Built upon the
pessimism concept in offline RL, MAHALO optimizes the policy using a performance lower bound
that accounts for uncertainty due to the dataset’s
insufficient coverage. We implement this idea by
adversarially training data-consistent critic and
reward functions, which forces the learned policy to be robust to data deficiency. We show that
MAHALO consistently outperforms or matches
specialized algorithms across a variety of offline
PLfO tasks in theory and experiments. Our code
is available at https://github.com/AnqiLi/mahalo.

There are two main approaches to solving decision making problems offline: offline imitation learning (IL) (Chang
et al., 2021; Kidambi et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021) and offline RL (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020). Offline
IL generally does not assume access to the reward. Theses
approaches learn with a small set of expert demonstrations
and potentially a separate dynamics dataset with unknown
quality. Offline IL seeks to mimic expert behavior while
avoiding distribution shift caused by using offline datasets.
Offline imitation learning from observations (ILfO) (Kidambi et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022) further relaxes the requirements of expert actions. ILfO allows learning from
experts with different action spaces (Edwards et al., 2020),
or when the expert has a different action modality or a embodiment (Cao & Sadigh, 2021; Radosavovic et al., 2021).
Offline RL, on the other hand, does not require expert-level
demonstrations. It instead assumes that each transition in
the offline dataset is labeled with reward. The goal of offline
RL is to learn a policy which 1) always improves upon
the behavioral policy (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Laroche et al.,
2019), and 2) can outperform any other policies whose
state-action distribution is covered by data (Xie et al., 2021).
However, in real-world applications, it is expensive to either acquire expert-level demonstrations (even if they are
observation-only), or label every transition with reward. In
this paper, we propose a more general and realistic formulation called offline Policy Learning from Observations
(PLfO). Our goal is to learn from datasets where 1) a subset
of trajectories is labeled with rewards, 2) labeled trajectories
may not contain actions, 3) labeled trajectories may not be
of high quality, and 4) the overall data may not have full
coverage. The flexibility of this formulation allows us to
directly take advantage of more data sources, such as dynamics data collected for other tasks and reward data collected
by a non-expert agent with a different action space.

1. Introduction
Online reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great
promise in solving simulated tasks (Silver et al., 2016;
Mnih et al., 2015). However, exploratory interactions with
the environment, which are central to online RL, often
can not be afforded in risk-sensitive applications, such as
robotics (Ibarz et al., 2021) and healthcare (Gottesman et al.,
1
University of Washington 2 Microsoft Research. Correspondence to: Anqi Li <anqil4@cs.washington.edu>.

Offline PLfO considers two offline datasets: the reward
dataset DR = {(s, r, s0 )} and dynamics dataset DA =
{(s, a, s0 )}, where the dynamics dataset is consistent with

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

