Detecting Adversarial Data by Probing Multiple Perturbations
Using Expected Perturbation Score

Shuhai Zhang * 1 2 Feng Liu * 3 Jiahao Yang 1 Yifan Yang 1 Changsheng Li 4 Bo Han 5 Mingkui Tan 1 6

1. Introduction

Abstract
Adversarial detection aims to determine whether
a given sample is an adversarial one based on the
discrepancy between natural and adversarial distributions. Unfortunately, estimating or comparing
two data distributions is extremely difficult, especially in high-dimension spaces. Recently, the
gradient of log probability density (a.k.a., score)
w.r.t. the sample is used as an alternative statistic
to compute. However, we find that the score is
sensitive in identifying adversarial samples due
to insufficient information with one sample only.
In this paper, we propose a new statistic called
expected perturbation score (EPS), which is essentially the expected score of a sample after various perturbations. Specifically, to obtain adequate
information regarding one sample, we perturb it
by adding various noises to capture its multi-view
observations. We theoretically prove that EPS
is a proper statistic to compute the discrepancy
between two samples under mild conditions. In
practice, we can use a pre-trained diffusion model
to estimate EPS for each sample. Last, we propose an EPS-based adversarial detection (EPSAD) method, in which we develop EPS-based
maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) as a metric
to measure the discrepancy between the test sample and natural samples. We also prove that the
EPS-based MMD between natural and adversarial
samples is larger than that among natural samples.
Extensive experiments show the superior adversarial detection performance of our EPS-AD.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be sensitive to
adversarial samples that are generated by adding imperceptible perturbations to the input but may mislead the model to
make unexpected predictions (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Niu et al., 2022; 2023; Li et al., 2023).
Adversarial samples threaten widespread machine learning
systems (Li & Vorobeychik, 2014; Ozbulak et al., 2019),
which raises an urgent requirement for advanced techniques
to improve the robustness of models. Among them, adversarial training introduces adversarial data into training
to improve the robustness of models but suffers from significant performance degradation and high computational
complexity (Laidlaw et al., 2021; Wong et al., 2020); adversarial purification relies on generative models to purify
adversarial data before classification, which still has to compromise on unsatisfactory natural and adversarial accuracy
(Shi et al., 2021; Yoon et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2022).
In contrast, another class of defense methods, called adversarial detection, could be achieved by detecting and rejecting adversarial examples, which are friendly to existing
machine learning systems due to the almost lossless natural
accuracy, and can help to identify security-compromised input sources (Abusnaina et al., 2021). Adversarial detection
aims to tell whether a test sample is an adversarial sample, for which the key is to find the discrepancy between
the adversarial and natural distributions. However, existing
adversarial detection approaches primarily train a tailored
detector for specific attacks (Feinman et al., 2017; Ma et al.,
2018; Lee et al., 2018) or for a specific classifier (Deng et al.,
2021), which largely overlook modeling the adversarial and
natural distributions, resulting in their limited performance
against unseen attacks or transferable attacks.

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Software Engineering,
South China University of Technology, China 2 Pazhou Laboratory, China 3 The University of Melbourne 4 Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 5 Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University 6 Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education, China. Correspondence to: Mingkui Tan <mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn>, Bo Han <bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>,
Changsheng Li <lcs@bit.edu.cn>.

Unfortunately, it is non-trivial to estimate or compare two
data distributions, especially in high-dimension spaces. One
alternative approach is to estimate the gradient of log probability density with respect to the sample, i.e., score. This
statistic has emerged as a powerful means for adversarial
defense (Yoon et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2022) and diffusion
models (Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021; Huang
et al., 2021). However, how to effectively exploit the score
function for adversarial detection is not well studied.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

