On Kinetic Optimal Probability Paths for Generative Models

Neta Shaul 1 Ricky T. Q. Chen 2 Maximilian Nickel 2 Matt Le 2 Yaron Lipman 2 1

Abstract

generative models which make use of predefined probability
paths pt , constituting a process interpolating between the
target (data) distribution q and the prior (noise) distribution
p. The training procedure of these models can be generally
described as a regression task of a neural network, vt (x; θ),
to some vector quantity, ut , that allows sampling from the
interpolation process:

Recent successful generative models are trained
by fitting a neural network to an a-priori defined
tractable probability density path taking noise to
training examples. In this paper we investigate
the space of Gaussian probability paths, which
includes diffusion paths as an instance, and look
for an optimal member in some useful sense. In
particular, minimizing the Kinetic Energy (KE)
of a path is known to make particles’ trajectories simple, hence easier to sample, and empirically improve performance in terms of likelihood
of unseen data and sample generation quality.
We investigate Kinetic Optimal (KO) Gaussian
paths and offer the following observations: (i)
We show the KE takes a simplified form on the
space of Gaussian paths, where the data is incorporated only through a single, one dimensional
scalar function, called the data separation function. (ii) We characterize the KO solutions with
a one dimensional ODE. (iii) We approximate
data-dependent KO paths by approximating the
data separation function and minimizing the KE.
(iv) We prove that the data separation function
converges to 1 in the general case of arbitrary
normalized dataset
√ consisting of n samples in d
dimension as n/ d → 0. A consequence of
this result is that the Conditional Optimal Transport
√(Cond-OT) path becomes kinetic optimal as
n/ d → 0. We further support this theory with
empirical experiments on ImageNet.

L(θ) = Ept (x) ℓ(vt (x; θ), ut (x)),

(1)

where ℓ(v, u) is some cost function, and L is the total loss
objective that is stochastically estimated and optimized during training. A notable family of algorithms that fits into
this framework are diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2020) as well as the recent Flow-Matching models,
(Lipman et al., 2022; Albergo & Vanden-Eijnden, 2022; Liu
et al., 2022; Neklyudov et al., 2022) generalizing the principles used in diffusion models training and apply them to
simulation-free continuous normalizing flows (CNFs, (Chen
et al., 2018)) training. In particular, (Song et al., 2020; Lipman et al., 2022) show that diffusion models also fall into
the simulation-free CNF framework. CNFs parameterize the
generation process via a flow vector field ut , which defines
the probability path pt .
In order to make the loss in equation 1 tractable, all these
methods are confined to a family of Gaussian probability
paths
(
P=

pt pt (x) =

)

Z
pt (x|x1 )q(x1 )dx1

(2)

defined by the conditional Gaussian probabilities
pt (x|x1 ) = N (x|at x1 , m2t I), on specific training examples
x1 ∼ q. The space P allows scalable unbiased approximations of the loss in equation 1 and therefore it is of particular
interest. Within this space, diffusion models construct pt
as a diffusion markov process and (Lipman et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2022) draw inspiration from optimal transport to
define the conditional probabilities. The different choices
of previously explored paths are based on known processes,
empirical heuristics (Karras et al., 2022) or learned paths
(Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Kingma et al., 2021b), but there
is no theoretical result analyzing the optimality of those
paths.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep generative models have become very
powerful both in terms of sample quality and density estimation (Rombach et al., 2021; Gafni et al., 2022). The
recent revolution is mainly led by a class of time-dependent
1
Weizmann Institute of Science 2 Meta AI (FAIR). Correspondence to: Neta Shaul <Neta.Shaul@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

