A Unifying Framework to the Analysis of Interaction Methods using Synergy
Functions
Daniel Lundstrom 1 Meisam Razaviyayn 1

Abstract

“explaining” a model’s workings, it can be difficult to troubleshoot issues, improve performance, guarantee accuracy,
or ensure other performance criteria such as fairness.

Deep learning has revolutionized many areas of
machine learning, from computer vision to natural
language processing, but these high-performance
models are generally “black box.” Explaining
such models would improve transparency and
trust in AI-powered decision making and is necessary for understanding other practical needs such
as robustness and fairness. A popular means of enhancing model transparency is to quantify how individual inputs contribute to model outputs (called
attributions) and the magnitude of interactions between groups of inputs. A growing number of
these methods import concepts and results from
game theory to produce attributions and interactions. This work presents a unifying framework
for game-theory-inspired attribution and k th -order
interaction methods. We show that, given modest
assumptions, a unique full account of interactions
between features, called synergies, is possible in
the continuous input setting. We identify how various methods are characterized by their policy of
distributing synergies. We establish that gradientbased methods are characterized by their actions
on monomials, a type of synergy function, and introduce unique gradient-based methods. We show
that the combination of various criteria uniquely
defines the attribution/interaction methods. Thus,
the community needs to identify goals and contexts when developing and employing attribution
and interaction methods.

A variety of approaches have been employed to address the
explainability issue of neural networks. Taking the taxonomy of (Linardatos et al., 2020), some methods are universal in application (called model agnostic) (Ribeiro et al.,
2016), while other are limited to specific types of models
(model specific) (Binder et al., 2016). Some model-specific
methods are limited to a certain data type, such as image
(Selvaraju et al., 2017) or tabular data (Ustun & Rudin,
2016). Some methods are global, i.e., they seek to explain a
model’s workings as a whole (Ibrahim et al., 2019), while
others are local, explaining how a model works for a specific
input (Zeiler & Fergus, 2014). Finally, some methods seek
to make models that are intrinsically explainable (Letham
et al., 2015), while others, called post hoc, are designed to
be applied to a black box model (Springenberg et al., 2014).
These post hoc methods may seek to ensure fairness, test
model sensitivity, or indicate which features are important
to a model’s prediction.

1
University of Southern California. Correspondence to: Daniel
Lundstrom <lundstro@usc.edu>.

This paper focuses on the concept of attributions and interactions. Attributions are local, post hoc explainbility
methods that indicate which features of an input contributed
to a model’s output (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), (Sundararajan
et al., 2017), (Sundararajan & Najmi, 2020), (Binder et al.,
2016), (Shrikumar et al., 2017). Interactions, on the other
hand, are methods that indicate which groups of features
may have interacted, producing effects beyond the sum of
their parts (Masoomi et al., 2021), (Chen & Ye, 2022), (Sundararajan et al., 2020), (Janizek et al., 2021), (Tsai et al.,
2022), (Blücher et al., 2022), (Zhang et al., 2021), (Liu et al.,
2020), (Tsang et al., 2020a), (Hamilton et al., 2021), (Tsang
et al., 2020b), (Hao et al., 2021), (Tsang et al., 2017), (Tsang
et al., 2018). A common and fruitful approach to attributions and interactions is to translate and apply results from
game theoretic cost sharing (Shapley & Shubik, 1971), (Aumann & Shapley, 1974). This has the advantages of already
having a well-developed theory and producing methods that
uniquely satisfy identified desirable qualities.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

This work utilizes a game theoretic viewpoint to analyze,
unify, and extend existing attribution and interaction methods. The contributions of this paper are as follows:

1. Introduction
Explainability has become an ever increasing topic of interest among the Machine Learning (ML) community. Various
ML methods, including deep neural networks, have unprecedented accuracy and functionality, but their models are
generally considered “black box” and unexplained. Without

1

