Taming graph kernels with random features

Krzysztof Choromanski 1 2

Abstract

X = {x1 , ..., xN } under consideration, they have time complexity at last quadratic in the size of a dataset.

We introduce in this paper the mechanism of
graph random features (GRFs). GRFs can be used
to construct unbiased randomized estimators
of several important kernels defined on graphs’
nodes, in particular the regularized Laplacian kernel. As regular RFs for non-graph kernels, they
provide means to scale up kernel methods defined on graphs to larger networks. Importantly,
they give substantial computational gains also for
smaller graphs, while applied in downstream applications. Consequently, GRFs address the notoriously difficult problem of cubic (in the number
of the nodes of the graph) time complexity of
graph kernels algorithms. We provide a detailed
theoretical analysis of GRFs and an extensive
empirical evaluation: from speed tests, through
Frobenius relative error analysis to kmeans graphclustering with graph kernels. We show that the
computation of GRFs admits an embarrassingly
simple distributed algorithm that can be applied
if the graph under consideration needs to be split
across several machines. We also introduce a (still
unbiased) quasi Monte Carlo variant of GRFs,
q-GRF s, relying on the so-called reinforced random walks that might be used to optimize the
variance of GRFs. As a byproduct, we obtain a
novel approach to solve certain classes of linear
equations with positive and symmetric matrices.

To address this limitation, a mechanism of random features
(RFs) (Liu et al., 2022; Rahimi & Recht, 2007; 2008) to
linearize kernel functions was proposed. Random features
rely on randomized functions: ϕ : Rd → Rm that map datapoints from the original to the new space, where the linear
(dot-product) kernels corresponds to the original kernel. i.e:
K(x, y) = E[ϕ(x)⊤ ϕ(y)]

(1)

The theory of random features for kernels was born with
the seminal paper (Johnson, 1984a), proposing a simple
randomized linear transformation ϕ (with Gaussian random
matrices) to approximate dot-product kernels via dimensionality reduction (m ≪ d). That mapping ϕ is often referred
to as the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform (JLT).
Interestingly, it turned out that for several nonlinear kernels,
JLT can be modified by adding a nonlinear functions acting
element-wise on the linearly transformed dimensions of the
input vectors (and potentially by replacing Gaussian sampling mechanism and altering the constant multiplicative
renormalization term), to obtain Eq. 1. For the radial basis
function kernels (RBFs) (Kégl et al., 1998) and softmax
kernels, this nonlinear functions are trigonometric transformations (Rahimi & Recht, 2007). For the Gaussian (an
instantiation of RBFs) and softmax kernels one can also
apply the so-called positive random features leveraging exponential nonlinearties (Choromanski et al., 2020). For
the angular kernel, the sign function is used (Goemans &
Williamson, 2004; Choromanski et al., 2017). Thus linearization schemes for different kernels are obtained by
applying different element-wise transformations, but the
overall structure of ϕ is the same across different kernels.

1. Introduction
Consider a positive definite kernel (similarity function)
K : Rd × Rd → R. Kernel methods (Campbell, 2002;
Kontorovich et al., 2008; Smola & Schölkopf, 2002; Canu
& Smola, 2006; Ghojogh et al., 2021; Cumby & Roth, 2003)
provide powerful mechanisms for modeling non-linear relationships between data points. However, as relying on the
so-called kernel matrices K = [K(xi , xj )]i,j for datasets

RFs provide unbiased low-rank decomposition of the kernel matrix K, effectively enabling the (approximate) computations with K to be conducted in sub-quadratic time,
by-passing explicit materialization of K. Even more importantly, they help to create nonlinear variants of the simpler
linear methods (e.g kernel-SVM (Boser et al., 1992) as opposed to regular SVM (Cortes & Vapnik, 1995) or kernel
regression (Chávez et al., 2020) as opposed to linear regression (Goldin, 2010)) via the ϕ-transformation.

*

1
Equal contribution
Google DeepMind 2 Columbia
University.
Correspondence to: Krzysztof Choromanski
<kchoro@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

So far we have considered points embedded in the regular
1

