Unveiling The Mask of Position-Information Pattern
Through the Mist of Image Features

Chieh Hubert Lin 1 Hung-Yu Tseng 2 Hsin-Ying Lee 3 Maneesh Kumar Singh 4 Ming-Hsuan Yang 1 5 6

Abstract

can cause unwanted side-effects by interfering and affecting other sources of position-sensitive cues (e.g., explicit
coordinate inputs (Lin et al., 2022; Alsallakh et al., 2021a;
Xu et al., 2021; Ntavelis et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2021),
embeddings (Ge et al., 2022), or boundary conditions of
the model (Innamorati et al., 2020; Alguacil et al., 2021;
Islam et al., 2021a)). Furthermore, padding may lead to several unintended behaviors (Lin et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2021;
Ntavelis et al., 2022; Choi et al., 2021), degrade model performance (Ge et al., 2022; Alguacil et al., 2021; Islam et al.,
2021a), or sometimes create blind spots (Alsallakh et al.,
2021a). Meanwhile, simply ignoring the padding pixels
(known as no-padding or valid-padding) leads to the foveal
effect (Alsallakh et al., 2021b; Luo et al., 2016) that causes
a model to become less attentive to the features on the image border. These observations motivate us to thoroughly
analyze the phenomenon of positional encoding including
the effect of commonly used padding schemes.

Recent studies have shown that paddings in convolutional neural networks encode absolute position information which can negatively affect the
model performance for certain tasks. However,
existing metrics for quantifying the strength of
positional information remain unreliable and frequently lead to erroneous results. To address this
issue, we propose novel metrics for measuring and
visualizing the encoded positional information.
We formally define the encoded information as
Position-information Pattern from Padding (PPP)
and conduct a series of experiments to study its
properties as well as its formation. The proposed
metrics measure the presence of positional information more reliably than the existing metrics
based on PosENet and tests in F-Conv. We also
demonstrate that for any extant (and proposed)
padding schemes, PPP is primarily a learning artifact and is less dependent on the characteristics
of the underlying padding schemes.

Conducting such a study requires reliable metrics to detect the presence of positional information introduced by
padding, and more importantly, quantify its strength consistently. We observe that the existing methods for detecting
and quantifying the strength of positional information yield
inconsistent results. In Section 3, we revisit two closely
related evaluation methods, PosENet (Islam* et al., 2020)
and F-Conv (Kayhan & Gemert, 2020). Our extensive experiments demonstrate that (a) metrics based on PosENet
are unreliable with an unacceptably high variance, and (b)
the Border Handling Variants (BHV) test in F-Conv suffers
from unaware confounding variables in its design, leading
to unreliable test results.

1. Introduction
Padding, one of the most fundamental components in neural network architectures, has received much less attention
than other modules in the literature. In convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), zero padding is frequently used perhaps
due to its simplicity and low computational costs. This
design preference remains almost unchanged in the past
decade. Recent studies (Islam* et al., 2020; Islam et al.,
2021b; Kayhan & Gemert, 2020; Innamorati et al., 2020)
show that padding can implicitly provide a network model
with positional information. Such positional information

In addition, we observe all commonly-used padding
schemes actually encode consistent patterns underneath the
highly dynamic model features. However, such a pattern is
rather obscure, noisy, and visually imperceptible for most
paddings (except zeros-padding), which makes recognizing
and analyzing it difficult. Fortunately, we show that such
patterns can be consistently revealed with a sufficient number of samples by defining an optimal padding scheme (see
Section 2.1 and Figure 1). We accordingly propose a new

*
Equal contribution 1 University of California, Merced, USA
Meta Platforms, USA 3 Snap Inc., USA 4 Comcast, USA 5 Google
Research, USA 6 Yonsei University, Korea. Correspondence to:
Ming-Hsuan Yang <myang37@ucmerced.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The source codes and data collection scripts will be made
publicly available: https://github.com/hubert0527/PPP.

1

