Statistical Foundations of Prior-Data Fitted Networks
Thomas Nagler 1 2

Abstract

trained offline through meta-learning. After simulating several training data sets from a variety of tasks, a transformer
network imitating the PPD on these sets is trained. After
this pre-training phase, the network is treated as fixed. In
the inference phase, a fresh training set and some test features are passed to the pre-trained network, which computes
predictions for the test labels in a single forward pass.

Prior-data fitted networks (PFNs) were recently
proposed as a new paradigm for machine learning. Instead of training the network to an observed training set, a fixed model is pre-trained
offline on small, simulated training sets from a
variety of tasks. The pre-trained model is then
used to infer class probabilities in-context on fresh
training sets with arbitrary size and distribution.
Empirically, PFNs achieve state-of-the-art performance on tasks with similar size to the ones used
in pre-training. Surprisingly, their accuracy further improves when passed larger data sets during
inference. This article establishes a theoretical
foundation for PFNs and illuminates the statistical mechanisms governing their behavior. While
PFNs are motivated by Bayesian ideas, a purely
frequentistic interpretation of PFNs as pre-tuned,
but untrained predictors explains their behavior.
A predictor’s variance vanishes if its sensitivity to
individual training samples does and the bias vanishes only if it is appropriately localized around
the test feature. The transformer architecture used
in current PFN implementations ensures only the
former. These findings shall prove useful for designing architectures with favorable empirical behavior.

This approach is different from usual machine learning methods. Here, one would set up a model for the relationship
between label and feature, and train the model parameters
on a specific data set. The main benefit of PFNs is that no
training or tuning is necessary at the inference stage, and
predictions are delivered in split seconds.
1.2. Empirical Findings
Empirically, Müller et al. (2022) found that PFNs can indeed approximate a given PPD and perform well on real
prediction tasks. While this pilot study was limited to tiny
data sets, the TabPFN model of Hollmann et al. (2022) made
a leap forward to classification tasks on moderately large
tabular data sets. In particular, they pre-train a network
with simulated data sets of size up to n ≈ 1000 and report
state-of-the-art performance on several benchmarks. And
surprisingly, the network’s predictions continue to improve
at the inference stage when fed data sets with more than
1000 samples. This is an example of in-context learning
(ICL): a pre-trained network learns from the context provided in the prompt (here: the fresh training data) without
updating its parameters.

1. Introduction
1.1. PFNs in a Nutshell

1.3. Summary

Prior-data fitted networks (PFNs) were proposed by Müller
et al. (2022) as a new approach to machine learning, motivated by ideas from Bayesian nonparametrics and metalearning. The goal is to compute a posterior predictive
distribution (PPD) for a test feature given observed training
data. To approximate the PPD, a transformer network is

The main contribution of this work is establishing the theoretical foundation for PFNs and identifying statistical mechanisms explaining their empirical behavior.
• Theoretical framework (Section 2): As a preliminary step, we give precise definitions of the PPD, the
statistical model behind it, and its PFN approximation.

1

Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany. Correspondence to: Thomas Nagler <t.nagler@lmu.de>.
2

• When PPDs can learn (Section 3): Since PPDs are
the main motivation behind PFNs, we first ask when
a PPD can learn from training data. This can be approached from the perspective of Bayesian nonparametrics (Ghosal & van der Vaart, 2017). If the prior

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

