Personalized Subgraph Federated Learning

Jinheon Baek * 1 Wonyong Jeong * 1 Jiongdao Jin 1 Jaehong Yoon 1 Sung Ju Hwang 1

Abstract

lected from multiple sources are stored in a central server.
For instance, in a social network platform, every user, with
his/her social networks, contributes to creating a giant network consisting of all users and their connections. However,
in some practical scenarios, each user/institution collects
its own private graph, which is only locally accessible due
to privacy restrictions. For instance, as described in Zhang
et al. (2021), each hospital may have its own patient interaction network to track their physical contacts or co-diagnosis
of disease; however, this graph may not be shared with
others. How can we then collaboratively train, without sharing actual data, GNNs, when the subgraphs are distributed
across multiple participants (i.e., clients)? The most straightforward way is to perform Federated Learning (FL) with
GNNs, where each client individually trains a local GNN
on the local data, while a central server aggregates locally
updated GNN weights from multiple clients into one.

Subgraphs of a larger global graph may be distributed across multiple devices, and only locally
accessible due to privacy restrictions, although
there may be links between subgraphs. Recently
proposed subgraph Federated Learning (FL) methods deal with those missing links across local subgraphs while distributively training Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) on them. However, they have
overlooked the inevitable heterogeneity between
subgraphs comprising different communities of a
global graph, consequently collapsing the incompatible knowledge from local GNN models. To
this end, we introduce a new subgraph FL problem, personalized subgraph FL, which focuses
on the joint improvement of the interrelated local GNNs rather than learning a single global
model, and propose a novel framework, FEDerated Personalized sUBgraph learning (FEDPUB), to tackle it. Since the server cannot access the subgraph in each client, FED-PUB utilizes functional embeddings of the local GNNs
using random graphs as inputs to compute similarities between them, and use the similarities
to perform weighted averaging for server-side
aggregation. Further, it learns a personalized
sparse mask at each client to select and update
only the subgraph-relevant subset of the aggregated parameters. We validate our FED-PUB
for its subgraph FL performance on six datasets,
considering both non-overlapping and overlapping subgraphs, on which it significantly outperforms relevant baselines. Our code is available at
https://github.com/JinheonBaek/FED-PUB.

However, an important challenge on it is how to deal with
potentially missing edges between subgraphs that are not
captured by individual data owners, but may carry important
information (See Figure 1 (A)). Recent subgraph FL methods (Wu et al., 2021a; Zhang et al., 2021) tackle this problem
by expanding the local subgraph from other subgraphs, as illustrated in Figure 1 (B). Specifically, they expand the local
subgraph either by exactly augmenting the relevant nodes
from the other subgraphs at the other clients (Wu et al.,
2021a), or by estimating the nodes using the node information in the other subgraphs (Zhang et al., 2021). However,
such sharing of node information may compromise data
privacy and can incur high communication costs.
Also, there exists a more important challenge that has been
overlooked by the existing subgraph FL methods. We observe that they suffer from large performance degeneration
(See Figure 1 right), due to the heterogeneity among subgraphs, which is natural since subgraphs comprise different
parts of a global graph. Specifically, two individual subgraphs – for example, User 1 and 3 subgraphs in Communities A and B, respectively, in Figure 1 (A) – are sometimes
completely disjoint, having opposite properties. Meanwhile,
two densely connected subgraphs form a community (e.g.,
User 1 and 2 subgraphs within the Community A of Figure 1
(A)), in which they share similar characteristics. However,
it is challenging to consider such heterogeneity arising from
the community structures of a graph in subgraph FL.

1. Introduction
Most existing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Hamilton,
2020) focus on a single graph, whose nodes and edges col*
Equal contribution 1 KAIST. Correspondence to: Jinheon Baek,
and Sung Ju Hwang <{jinheon.baek, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

