Revisiting Simple Regret: Fast Rates for Returning a Good Arm

Yao Zhao 1 Connor James Stephens 2 Csaba Szepesvári 2 Kwang-Sung Jun 1

Abstract

After T time steps, the learner is required to output an arm
JT that is estimated to have the largest mean reward. The
budget T may or may not be given to the algorithm as input.
Such a problem was formalized by Even-Dar et al. (2006)
and Bubeck et al. (2009), but similar problems were considered much earlier (Bechhofer, 1958; Chernoff, 1959).
Recently, pure exploration has found many applications
such as efficient crowdsourcing for cartoon caption contests (Tanczos et al., 2017), hyperparameter optimization (Li
et al., 2018; 2020), and improving the time complexity of
clustering algorithms (Baharav and Tse, 2019). Hereafter,
we take σ 2 = 1 for ease of exposition, but all our results can
easily be extended to σ 2 -sub-Gaussian noise.

Simple regret is a natural and parameter-free performance criterion for pure exploration in multiarmed bandits. However, possibly due to the challenge of characterizing it, in the theory community, it has been largely overlooked in favor of
studying the probability of selecting the best, or
an ϵ-good arm. In this paper, we make significant
progress on minimizing simple regret in both datarich (T ≥ n) and data-poor regime (T ≤ n) where
n is the number of arms, and T is the number of
samples. At its heart is our improved instancedependent analysis of the well-known Sequential Halving (SH) algorithm, where we bound the
probability of returning an arm whose mean reward is not within ϵ from the best (i.e., not ϵ-good)
for any choice of ϵ > 0, despite ϵ not being input
to SH. Our bound not only leads to√an optimal
worst-case simple regret bound of n/T up to
logarithmic factors but also essentially matches
the instance-dependent lower bound for returning an ϵ-good arm reported by Katz-Samuels and
Jamieson (2020). For the more challenging datapoor regime, we propose Bracketing SH (BSH)
that enjoys the same improvement even without
sampling each arm at least once. Our empirical
study shows that BSH outperforms existing methods on real-world tasks.

Among many performance criteria, simple regret proposed
by Bubeck et al. (2009) is a natural measure of the quality
of the estimated best arm JT :
SRegT ∶= E [µ1 − µJT ] .

(1)

Simple regret is an unverifiable performance measure, meaning that the algorithm need not verify its performance to a
prescribed level. This is in stark contrast to the fixed confidence setting (Even-Dar et al., 2006) such as (ϵ,δ)-PAC that
requires the algorithm to verify the quality of the estimated
best arm to the prescribed target accuracy ϵ and confidence
level δ. While certain applications do need such verification,
there are many applications where the sampling budget is
too limited to show meaningful guarantees, such as cartoon
caption contests (Jain et al., 2020) and biological experiments (Jun et al., 2016). In these cases, algorithms with
verifiable guarantees may not be meaningful. Furthermore,
existing algorithms with verifiable guarantees are vacuous
in the data-poor regime of T ≤ n as it requires each arm to
be pulled at least once (Katz-Samuels and Jamieson, 2020,
Section C.1). The fixed budget setting considers an unverifiable measure of P(µJT ≠ µ1 ) (Audibert et al., 2010),
but this quantity inevitably depends on the smallest gap
µ1 − µ2 (Carpentier and Locatelli, 2016), which is usually
not meaningful until the sample size is very large.

1. Introduction
We consider the pure exploration problem in multi-armed
bandits. In this problem, given n arms, the learner sequentially chooses an arm It ∈ [n] ∶= {1, . . . , n} at time t to
observe a reward rt = µIt + ηt where µi is the mean reward
of arm i and ηt is stochastic σ 2 -sub-Gaussian noise. Without loss of generality, we assume that 1 ≥ µ1 ≥ ⋯ ≥ µn ≥ 0.
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Arizona, Tucson, USA 2 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. Correspondence to: Kwang-Sung Jun
<kjun@cs.arizona.edu>.

Despite being attractive, the analysis of simple regret has
been elusive. Existing studies focus on either achieving minimax simple regret bound (Lattimore et al., 2016) or characterization of how simple regret is different from the cumulative regret (Bubeck et al., 2009). It is not known whether
simple algorithms like Sequential Halving (SH) (Karnin

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

