Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects:
Mutual Information Bounds and Learning Algorithms

Xingzhuo Guo * 1 2 Yuchen Zhang * 1 Jianmin Wang 1 Mingsheng Long 1

Abstract

Unit

Outcome

Selection
Bias

Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (HTE)
from observational studies is rising in importance
due to the widespread accumulation of data in
many fields. Due to the selection bias behind the
inaccessibility of counterfactual data, the problem
differs fundamentally from supervised learning in
a challenging way. However, existing works on
modeling selection bias and corresponding algorithms do not naturally generalize to non-binary
treatment spaces. To address this limitation, we
propose to use mutual information to describe selection bias in estimating HTE and derive a novel
error bound using the mutual information between
the covariates and the treatments, which is the first
error bound to cover general treatment schemes including multinoulli or continuous spaces. We then
bring forth theoretically justified algorithms, the
Mutual Information Treatment Network (MitNet),
using adversarial optimization to reduce selection
bias and obtain more accurate HTE estimations.
Our algorithm reaches remarkable performance
in both simulation study and empirical evaluation.

?

?
Discrete or Continuous

Figure 1. We study the learning bounds and algorithms for estimating heterogeneous treatment effect on general treatment spaces.

Wager & Athey, 2018), Gaussian processes (Alaa & Van
Der Schaar, 2017; 2018) and neural networks (Johansson
et al., 2016; Shalit et al., 2017).
Following the Neyman-Rubin causal model (Rubin, 2005),
the treatment effect for any individual is defined as the difference between the potential outcomes of receiving and
not receiving a particular treatment (referred to as the intervention of being treated and controlled). In contrast to the
standard supervised learning setups, for any individual only
the factual outcome is observed while the counterfactual is
not obtained. This is close to “learning from logged bandit
feedback” (Strehl et al., 2010; Swaminathan & Joachims,
2015) in machine learning literature, with the distinction
that we do not have access to the model generating the actions (or interventions in causal contexts). One simple way
to overcome this barrier is to model the response surfaces of
potential outcomes for both treated and control groups by
some machine learning methods to enable causal estimation.

1. Introduction
Estimating heterogeneous treatment effects from observational data is a central problem in a broad variety of fields,
including drug development in medical studies (Foster et al.,
2011), policy analysis in economics (Heckman, 2000) and
pollution assessment in ecology (Wang et al., 2016). A
plethora of machine learning methods have been designed
for inferring treatment effects with the increasing availability of observational data in these fields, which involve the
use of tree models (Hill, 2011; Athey & Imbens, 2016;
*

Treatment

Different from randomized controlled trials (RCT) where
interventions are randomly assigned to each individual, observational studies are usually subject to the sample selection bias, which is the main focus in this article. Sample
selection bias is when the distributions differ as a result of
an unknown sample rejection process (Quionero-Candela
et al., 2009), causing confounding where the covariates affect both the factual treatment and the potential outcomes.

1

Equal contribution School of Software, Tsinghua University.
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University. Xingzhuo Guo <gxz19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>. Correspondence to: Mingsheng Long <mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

