Counterfactual Identifiability of Bijective Causal Models

Arash Nasr-Esfahany 1 Mohammad Alizadeh 1 Devavrat Shah 1

Abstract

formation (Bareinboim et al., 2022, Thm. 27). In particular,
although we can determine L2 information by conducting
experiments and actively intervening in the world, we cannot answer L3 questions in general, even with experiments.
In other words, they may be non-identifiable (Ibeling &
Icard, 2020), or underspecified (D’Amour et al., 2020).

We study counterfactual identifiability in causal
models with bijective generation mechanisms
(BGM), a class that generalizes several widelyused causal models in the literature. We establish
their counterfactual identifiability for three common causal structures with unobserved confounding, and propose a practical learning method that
casts learning a BGM as structured generative
modeling. Learned BGMs enable efficient counterfactual estimation and can be obtained using
a variety of deep conditional generative models.
We evaluate our techniques in a visual task and
demonstrate its application in a real-world video
streaming simulation task.

Nevertheless, counterfactual queries of the form “why–?”
and “what if–?” are useful in defining fundamental concepts
such as harm (Richens et al., 2022), fairness (Kusner et al.,
2017; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018), credit (Mesnard et al.,
2021), regret, and blame. They also have applications in
engineering, e.g., root cause analysis (Gan et al., 2022; Budhathoki et al., 2022), trace-driven simulation (Alomar et al.,
2023; Bothra et al., 2022), and sample efficient reinforcement learning (Lu et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021).
In this paper, we introduce a new class of causal models
called Bijective Generation Mechanisms (BGM). BGMs subsume several model classes studied in the literature, e.g.,
Nonlinear Additive Noise Models (ANM) (Hoyer et al.,
2008), Location Scale Noise Models (LSNM) (Immer et al.,
2022), and post-nonlinear causal models (PNL) (Zhang &
Hyvärinen, 2009) (§4). We establish counterfactual identifiability of BGMs for three meaningful causal structures (§5),
assuming a coarse knowledge of the underlying system in
the form of a causal diagram.

1. Introduction
Had Cleopatra’s nose been shorter, the whole face of
the world would have changed.2 (Blaise Pascal, 1669)
The ladder of causation presented by Pearl (2018) consists of three distinct layers encoding different types of
concepts: associational (L1 ), interventional (L2 ), and counterfactual (L3 ), roughly corresponding to seeing, doing, and
imagining, respectively. L1 deals with passively observed
factual information, for instance, the probability of recovery
in patients who take Aspirin. L2 deals with active interventions or the effect of actions, for example, what percentage
of patients would recover if we give them Aspirin? L3 deals
with alternative ways the world could have been including
ways that might conflict with how the world currently is,
e.g., if the patient took Aspirin and was cured, would the
headache still be gone had they not taken Aspirin? The three
levels are distinct in the sense that it is generally not possible
to uniquely answer higher level queries from lower level in-

Our identifiability results specify tractable criteria for finding the underlying BGM (up to equivalence, see Definition 6.1), enabling counterfactual estimation. We cast
the search for a BGM that satisfies the specified criteria
as density estimation with structured generative networks
(§6), which has been widely studied in the learning literature (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014;
Dinh et al., 2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017; Song & Ermon,
2019; Ho et al., 2020).
Once the underlying BGM is learned, we use it for efficient
counterfactual estimation with guarantees (§7). This is in
contrast to symbolic counterfactual identification methods
(Shpitser & Pearl, 2007; Correa et al., 2021) which express
identifiable counterfactual queries in terms of interventional
and observational distributions, statements that may not be
computationally tractable. Furthermore, our work advances
the growing literature on applying machine learning methods for counterfactual estimation. Unlike most prior work in

1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA 02139. Correspondence to: Arash Nasr-Esfahany
<arashne@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
2
Taken from Pearl & Mackenzie (2018, Ch. 8)

1

