Effective and Efficient Structural Inference with Reservoir Computing

Aoran Wang 1 Tsz Pan Tong 1 2 Jun Pang 1 2

Abstract

the prediction and control of these systems.

In this paper, we present an effective and efficient structural inference approach by integrating a Reservoir Computing (RC) network into
a Variational Auto-encoder-based (VAE-based)
structural inference framework. With the help of
Bi-level Optimization, the backbone VAE-based
method follows the Information Bottleneck principle and infers a general adjacency matrix in its
latent space; the RC net substitutes the partial role
of the decoder and encourages the whole approach
to perform further steps of gradient descent based
on limited available data. The experimental results on various datasets including biological networks, simulated fMRI data, and physical simulations show the effectiveness and efficiency of our
proposed method for structural inference, either
with much fewer trajectories or with much shorter
trajectories compared with previous works.

However, in many cases, only the observable features of
agents are available within a given time period, leaving the
underlying structure partially or fully concealed beneath the
intricate dynamics. Therefore, it is imperative to develop an
approach that can unveil the hidden structure of dynamical
systems using the observable features of the agents. We call
the collection of observed features of all agents in a dynamical system in a time period a trajectory. Thus, the trajectory
contains rich information about the evolution of the features
of agents as a result of their previous features and interactions with other agents (Katok & Hasselblatt, 1995). Many
data-driven approaches have been proposed, aiming at inferring the underlying structure of the dynamical systems
based on the obtained trajectories (Kipf et al., 2018; Webb
et al., 2019; Alet et al., 2019; Graber & Schwing, 2020;
Chen et al., 2021; Löwe et al., 2022; Wang & Pang, 2022).
These approaches are VAE-based, infer the adjacency matrix
of the dynamical systems following the Information Bottleneck (IB) principle, and require thousands of trajectories
for training. But in many real-world scenarios, the acquisition of trajectories is either expensive or time-consuming,
which consequently becomes a remarkable challenge for
these VAE-based methods.

1. Introduction
As widely observed in the real world, many dynamical systems can be modeled as agents interacting with each other
and can be viewed as a graph whose nodes represent the
agents, edges represent the interactions between the agents,
and adjacency matrix represents the underlying structure.
The examples include the underlying interacting graphs of
physical systems (Kwapień & Drożdż, 2012; Ha & Jeong,
2021), multi-agent systems (Brasó & Leal-Taixé, 2020; Li
et al., 2021) and biological systems (Tsubaki et al., 2019;
Pratapa et al., 2020). As there emerges a call of understanding dynamical systems, it is fundamental to reveal the
underlying structure. The acknowledgment of underlying
structure evidently benefits the understanding of the intrinsic
mechanisms of dynamical systems, and can further facilitate

In this work, we propose an approach to integrate an RC network into a VAE-based structural inference framework. RC
is well-known for its low parameter and low data demand
while high accuracy in dynamics prediction (Gallicchio &
Micheli, 2011; Gauthier et al., 2021), but since its internal
weights are fixed after initialization, the IB principle fails in
this case. As a result, the direct substitution of the decoder in
the VAE-based structural inference framework with an RC
is impracticable. Therefore, we integrate the RC network as
a branch diverging from the decoder of the backbone framework and take advantage of Bi-level Optimization (BO) to
bridge the nested optimization of both branches. Thanks
to the easy-to-train RC network and the proper integration
with BO, the new framework requires much less training
data compared with previous methods (Kipf et al., 2018;
Webb et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021; Löwe et al., 2022;
Wang & Pang, 2022) while maintaining high accuracy. The
experimental results show the integration of an RC network promotes the performance of the structural inference
method and outperforms previous methods on datasets with

1

Faculty of Science, Technology and Medicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg 2 Institute for Advanced Studies, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg. Correspondence
to: Aoran Wang <aoran.wang@uni.lu>, Tsz Pan Tong <tszpan.tong@uni.lu>, Jun Pang <jun.pang@uni.lu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

