Learning Lightweight Object Detectors via
Multi-Teacher Progressive Distillation

Shengcao Cao 1 Mengtian Li 2 3 James Hays 4 Deva Ramanan 2 Yu-Xiong Wang 1 Liang-Yan Gui 1

Abstract

44
Student AP on MS COCO

Resource-constrained perception systems such as
edge computing and vision-for-robotics require
vision models to be both accurate and lightweight
in computation and memory usage. While knowledge distillation is a proven strategy to enhance
the performance of lightweight classification models, its application to structured outputs like object detection and instance segmentation remains
a complicated task, due to the variability in outputs and complex internal network modules involved in the distillation process. In this paper,
we propose a simple yet surprisingly effective sequential approach to knowledge distillation that
progressively transfers the knowledge of a set of
teacher detectors to a given lightweight student.
To distill knowledge from a highly accurate but
complex teacher model, we construct a sequence
of teachers to help the student gradually adapt.
Our progressive strategy can be easily combined
with existing detection distillation mechanisms
to consistently maximize student performance
in various settings. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to successfully distill knowledge from Transformer-based teacher detectors
to convolution-based students, and unprecedentedly boost the performance of ResNet-50 based
RetinaNet from 36.5% to 42.0% AP and Mask
R-CNN from 38.2% to 42.5% AP on the MS
COCO benchmark. Code available at https:
//github.com/Shengcao-Cao/MTPD.

42

Original student
Directly distilled by convolutional teacher
Directly distilled by Transformer teacher
Progressively distilled by Transformer teachers

40
38
36
RetinaNet/ResNet-50

Mask R-CNN/ResNet-50

Figure 1. Our proposed Multi-Teacher Progressive Distillation
(MTPD) leads to state-of-the-art student detection performance. When switching the teacher model from a convolutionbased detector to a Transformer-based one with stronger detection
performance, the student does not become more accurate, due to
the architectural difference between the teacher-student pair. Progressively distilling knowledge from multiple teacher detectors can
mitigate the capacity gap and result in the best student detection
performance.

ited resources such as self-driving cars or virtual/augmented
reality headsets. This is mainly due to the huge computational complexity and massive memory/storage demands.
One effective strategy is to train lightweight architectures
that have already been carefully engineered for efficient
memory access, via knowledge distillation (Buciluǎ et al.,
2006; Hinton et al., 2014) which is able to compress learned
information from a large model into a small one.
Implementing knowledge distillation in the realm of object
detection, despite existing efforts, presents its unique challenges stemming from the complex task outputs (Chen et al.,
2017): Detectors operate with multi-task heads (for classification and box/mask regression) producing variable-length
outputs, which differentiates detection from the singleoutput classification task. Therefore, distillation methods
developed for classification are often not directly applicable to detection, and dedicated methods (Chen et al., 2017)
need to be developed for detection in the literature (detailed
discussion in Appendix E, Table 16).

1. Introduction
Deploying deep neural models in safety-critical real-time
applications is challenging, especially on devices with lim1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Carnegie Mellon
University 3 Now at Waymo 4 Georgia Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Shengcao Cao <cao44@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Recent work (Zhang & Ma, 2021; Shu et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2022b) on detector distillation mainly considers de1

