Blockwise Stochastic Variance-Reduced Methods with Parallel Speedup
for Multi-Block Bilevel Optimization

Quanqi Hu 1 Zi-Hao Qiu 2 3 Zhishuai Guo 1 Lijun Zhang 2 Tianbao Yang 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

This paper considers solving the following generalized
bilevel optimization problem with multi-block structure:

In this paper, we consider non-convex multi-block
bilevel optimization (MBBO) problems, which
involve m ≫ 1 lower level problems and have important applications in machine learning. Designing a stochastic gradient and controlling its variance is more intricate due to the hierarchical sampling of blocks and data and the unique challenge
of estimating hyper-gradient. We aim to achieve
three nice properties for our algorithm: (a) matching the state-of-the-art complexity of standard BO
problems with a single block; (b) achieving parallel speedup by sampling I blocks and sampling
B samples for each sampled block per-iteration;
(c) avoiding the computation of the inverse of a
high-dimensional Hessian matrix estimator. However, it is non-trivial to achieve all of these by
observing that existing works only achieve one or
two of these properties. To address the involved
challenges for achieving (a, b, c), we propose two
stochastic algorithms by using advanced blockwise variance-reduction techniques for tracking
the Hessian matrices (for low-dimensional problems) or the Hessian-vector products (for highdimensional problems), and prove an iteration
−3
−3
√
√ ) for finding
complexity of O( mϵ I I(I<m)
+ mϵ
I
I B
an ϵ-stationary point under appropriate conditions.
We also conduct experiments to verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms comparing
with existing MBBO algorithms.

m

min F (x) =

x∈Rdx

1 X
fi (x, yi (x)),
{z
}
m i=1 |
Fi (x)

(1)

yi (x) = arg min gi (x, yi ), i = 1, . . . , m.
yi ∈Rdy,i

where fi , gi are continuously differentiable functions in
expectation forms and gi (x, yi ) is strongly convex with
respect to yi . To be specific, fi , gi are defined as
fi (x, yi (x)) := Eξ∼Pi [fi (x, yi (x); ξ)] and gi (x, yi ) =
Eζ∼Qi [gi (x, yi ; ζ)]. The number of blocks m is considered
to be greatly larger than 1. We refer to the above problem as
multi-block bilevel optimization (MBBO). When m = 1,
the MBBO problem reduces to the standard BO problem.
The MBBO problem has found many interesting applications in machine learning and AI, e.g., multi-task compositional AUC maximization (Hu et al., 2022), top-K normalized discounted cumulative gain (NDCG) optimization for
learning to rank (Qiu et al., 2022), and meta-learning (Rajeswaran et al., 2019). Recently, Yang (2022) uses MBBO
to formulate a family of risk functions for optimizing performance at the top.
The theoretical study of MBBO was initiated by (Guo et al.,
2021). In their paper, the authors proposed a randomized
stochastic variance-reduced method (RSVRB) for solving
MBBO aiming to achieve a state-of-the-art (SOTA) iteration complexity in the order of O(1/ϵ3 ) for finding an
ϵ-stationary solution. However, RSVRB and its analysis
suffer from several drawbacks: (i) RSVRB requires computing the inverse of the Hessian matrix estimator, which is
prohibited for high-dimensional lower-level problems; (ii)
the Jacobian estimators maintained for each block could be
memory consuming and slow down the algorithm in practice
for problems with high-dimensional x; (iii) RSVRB does
not achieve a parallel speed-up when using a mini-batch
of samples to estimate the gradients, Jacobians and Hessians. While these issues have been tackled for the standard
BO problems, e.g., the Hessian matrix can be estimated by
the Neumann series and there are works achieving SOTA

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA 2 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 3 Most work of Z.H. Qiu was done when visiting the
OptMAI lab at TAMU. Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang, Quanqi
Hu <tianbao-yang, quanqi-hu@tamu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

