ProtST: Multi-Modality Learning of Protein Sequences
and Biomedical Texts
Minghao Xu * † 1 2 Xinyu Yuan * 1 2 Santiago Miret 3 Jian Tang 1 4 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Proteins serve as the mainstay governing diverse biological
processes and life itself, inducing important applications in
drug discovery (Teague, 2003) and healthcare (Organization
& University, 2007). Recent studies have proven the great
promise of machine learning methods in predicting protein structures (Jumper et al., 2021; Baek et al., 2021) and
functionality (Meier et al., 2021; Gligorijević et al., 2021).
Among these methods, protein language models (PLMs) (Elnaggar et al., 2020; Rives et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022)
pre-trained on large-scale protein sequence corpus succeed
in acquiring powerful protein representations, which boost
protein structure and function prediction (Xu et al., 2022b).

Current protein language models (PLMs) learn
protein representations mainly based on their sequences, thereby well capturing co-evolutionary
information, but they are unable to explicitly acquire protein functions, which is the end goal
of protein representation learning. Fortunately,
for many proteins, their textual property descriptions are available, where their various functions
are also described. Motivated by this fact, we
first build the ProtDescribe dataset to augment
protein sequences with text descriptions of their
functions and other important properties. Based
on this dataset, we propose the ProtST framework to enhance Protein Sequence pre-training
and understanding by biomedical Texts. During pre-training, we design three types of tasks,
i.e., unimodal mask prediction, multimodal representation alignment and multimodal mask prediction, to enhance a PLM with protein property information with different granularities and,
at the same time, preserve the PLM’s original
representation power. On downstream tasks,
ProtST enables both supervised learning and zeroshot prediction. We verify the superiority of
ProtST-induced PLMs over previous ones on diverse representation learning benchmarks. Under the zero-shot setting, we show the effectiveness of ProtST on zero-shot protein classification,
and ProtST also enables functional protein retrieval from a large-scale database without any
function annotation. Source code and model
weights are available at https://github.
com/DeepGraphLearning/ProtST.

Most existing PLMs (Elnaggar et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2020;
Rives et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022) learn protein representations based only on their sequences, which can well capture
co-evolutionary information but cannot explicitly acquire
protein functions and other important properties like their
subcellular locations. Acquiring such function and property
information is actually the end goal of protein representation
learning. Fortunately, for many proteins, we can get access
to their textual property descriptions in which their diverse
functions are also described. This fact motivates us to study
protein sequence representation learning enriched with diverse protein properties described by biomedical texts.
To our best knowledge, OntoProtein (Zhang et al., 2022a) is
the only existing PLM that explicitly captures protein properties. However, it learns a closed set of properties over a
fixed biological knowledge graph and thus can hardly generalize to unknown properties of new proteins. In comparison,
by modeling textual protein property descriptions, we can
flexibly model the generalization from known properties to
unknown ones based on the semantic correlation of their
text descriptions, as shown by our zero-shot experiments
(Secs. 4.3 and 4.4).

†
1
Equal technical contribution.
Project lead.
Mila 2
3
Québec AI Institute Université de Montréal Intel Labs 4 HEC
Montréal 5 CIFAR AI Research Chair. Correspondence to: Minghao Xu <minghao.xu@mila.quebec>, Santiago Miret <santiago.miret@intel.com>, Jian Tang <jian.tang@hec.ca>.
*

To attain biomedical-text-enhanced protein sequence representation learning, we first build the ProtDescribe dataset,
a paired dataset of protein sequences and textual property
descriptions. We resort to the Swiss-Prot database (Bairoch
& Apweiler, 2000) for high-quality protein annotations and
construct each protein’s property description with the se-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

