Deep Perturbation Learning: Enhancing the Network Performance via Image
Perturbations
Weight Stage

Zifan Song

12

Xiao Gong

3

Perturbation Stage

Guosheng Hu

4

Cairong Zhao

Weight Stage

12

Original Training Set

Abstract
Image perturbation technique is widely used to
generate adversarial examples to attack networks,
greatly decreasing the performance of networks.
Unlike the existing works, in this paper, we introduce a novel framework Deep Perturbation
Learning (DPL), the new insights into understanding image perturbations, to enhance the performance of networks rather than decrease the performance. Specifically, we learn image perturbations
to amend the data distribution of training set to
improve the performance of networks. This optimization w.r.t data distribution is non-trivial. To
approach this, we tactfully construct a differentiable optimization target w.r.t. image perturbations via minimizing the empirical risk. Then
we propose an alternating optimization of the network weights and perturbations. DPL can easily
be adapted to a wide spectrum of downstream
tasks and backbone networks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our DPL
on 6 datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet,
MS-COCO, PASCAL VOC, and SBD) over 3 popular vision tasks (image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation) with different
backbone architectures (e.g., ResNet, MobileNet,
and ViT).

Well-trained Model

Amended Training Set

DPL Optimizer

Perturbations

Enhanced Model

Figure 1. Deep Perturbation Learning (DPL). Given a well-trained
model, DPL can optimize image perturbations and generate perDeep
Learning
(DPL)
turbed samples to amend
thePost-hoc
training set.
Then, the
network retrained on the amended training set can enhance the performance.

to fool DNNs, revealing the vulnerability of networks. Motivated by this, the existing works of image perturbations
mainly focus on designing adversarial perturbations to attack or defense networks, i.e., adversarial learning (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Tsipras et al.,
2019; Zhao et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020;
Dong et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). Can image perturbations only be used to attack networks to decrease the
performance of networks? Can we learn perturbations to
enhance the performance instead? Intuitively, it is feasible
if we re-design the optimization targets. If it works well,
we can introduce new insights into understanding image
perturbations.
Inspired by this, in this paper, we introduce a novel framework, Deep Perturbation Learning (DPL), shown in Fig.
1, to improve the performance of networks via optimizing model-dependent image perturbations. Given any welltrained networks, DPL can learn the image perturbations
and add them to the training data to generate an amended
training set. We then re-train the network with the new
training set to improve the performance. Unlike previous
adversarial learning approaches (Xie et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022; Mei et al., 2022), we do not play a
min-max optimization but minimize the empirical risk to improve the network performance. However, the optimization
w.r.t. perturbations is not trivial. One intuitive optimization
is brute-force search: re-training a large number of the networks with different perturbations and choosing the optimal
one. Clearly, this is extremely computationally heavy. To

1. Introduction
Image perturbation learning can greatly change the image
distribution, effectively influencing the performance of deep
models. In particular, Szegedy et al. (Szegedy et al., 2013)
generate perturbed samples with adversarial distributions
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China 2 State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China 3 Department
of Mathematics, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 4 Oosto,
38330 Belfast, U.K.. Correspondence to: Cairong Zhao <zhaocairong@tongji.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Perturbation Stage

