The Implicit Regularization of Dynamical Stability in Stochastic
Gradient Descent
Lei Wu 1 2 Weijie J. Su 3

Abstract

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning, models are often overparameterized in the sense that they can easily interpolate
all training data. Therefore, one may be concerned that algorithms may pick up solutions that generalize badly on test
data (Wu et al., 2017). Fortunately, it has been found that
simple SGD and its variants always converge to solutions
that generalize well, even without empolying any explicit
regularizations (Zhang et al., 2017). Furthermore, SGD often generalizes better than GD (Keskar et al., 2017). Hence,
there must exist certain “implicit regularization” mechanisms at work (Neyshabur et al., 2014). As practitioners
increasingly rely on implicit regularization to mitigate overfitting, it becomes imperative to understand the underlying
mechanisms.

In this paper, we study the implicit regularization of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) through
the lens of dynamical stability (Wu et al., 2018).
We start by revising existing stability analyses of
SGD, showing how the Frobenius norm and trace
of Hessian relate to different notions of stability.
Notably, if a global minimum is linearly stable for
SGD, then the trace of Hessian must be less than
or equal to 2/η, where η denotes the learning rate.
By contrast, for gradient descent (GD), the stability imposes a similar constraint but only on the
largest eigenvalue of Hessian. We then turn to analyze the generalization properties of these stable
minima, focusing specifically on two-layer ReLU
networks and diagonal linear networks. Notably,
we establish the equivalence between these metrics of sharpness and certain parameter norms for
the two models, which allows us to show that the
stable minima of SGD provably generalize well.
By contrast, the stability-induced regularization
of GD is provably too weak to ensure satisfactory
generalization. This discrepancy provides an explanation of why SGD often generalizes better
than GD. Note that the learning rate (LR) plays
a pivotal role in the strength of stability-induced
regularization. As the LR increases, the regularization effect becomes more pronounced, elucidating why SGD with a larger LR consistently
demonstrates superior generalization capabilities.
Additionally, numerical experiments are provided
to support our theoretical findings.

The most popular explanation is the flat-minima hypothesis:
SGD tends to select flat minima (Keskar et al., 2017) and
flat minima generalize well (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1994; 1997). This hypothesis has been widely adopted in
practice to tune the hyperparameters of SGD (Keskar et al.,
2017; Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2020b) and to
design new optimizers (Izmailov et al., 2018; Foret et al.,
2020; Wu et al., 2020a) for better generalization. Despite its
widespread use, the theoretical understanding is still largely
lacking: 1) Why does SGD favor flat minima? 2) Why do
flat minima generalize?
In this paper, we aim to address these questions by adopting the perspective of dynamical stability (Wu et al., 2018;
2022). For over-parameterized models, all global minima
are fixed points of SGD but their stability can be different.
Notably, when confronted with a small perturbation, SGD
steers away from unstable minima, while stable minima tend
to be more resilient, allowing SGD to persist and even reconverge after initial perturbations. This intriguing behavior
suggests that SGD exhibits a preference for stable minima.
The remaining puzzle lies in understanding the relationship
between the stability of a minimum, its sharpness, and its
generalization properties.

1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University, Beijing, China 3 Wharton Statistics and Data Science Department, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. Correspondence to: Lei Wu <leiwu@math.pku.edu.cn>, Weijie J. Su
<suw@wharton.upenn.edu>.

It is well-known that the stability condition for GD is
kH(θ)k2 ⩽ 2/η (Wu et al., 2018), where H(·) denotes
the Hessian matrix. This implies that GD tends to select

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

