Analysis of Error Feedback in Federated Non-Convex Optimization with
Biased Compression: Fast Convergence and Partial Participation
Xiaoyun Li, Ping Li
LinkedIn Ads
700 Bellevue Way NE, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{xiaoyli, pinli}@linkedin.com

Abstract

et al., 2020b; Rieke et al., 2020; Kairouz et al., 2021; Khan
et al., 2021), etc. A centralized FL system includes multiple
clients each with local data, and one central server that coordinates the training process. The goal of FL is for n clients
to collaboratively learn a global model, parameterized by θ,
such that

In practical federated learning (FL) systems, the
communication cost between the clients and the
central server can often be a bottleneck. In this
paper, we focus on biased gradient compression
in non-convex FL problems. In the classical distributed learning, the method of error feedback
(EF) is a common technique to remedy the downsides of biased gradient compression, but the performance of EF in FL still lacks systematic investigation. In this work, we study a compressed FL
scheme with error feedback, named Fed-EF, with
two variants depending on the global model optimizer. While directly applying biased compression in FL leads to poor convergence, we show
that Fed-EF is able to match the convergence rate
of the full-precision FL counterpart with a linear
speedup w.r.t. the number of clients. Experiments
verify that Fed-EF achieves the same performance
as the full-precision FL approach, at the substantially reduced communication cost.

n

1X
fi (θ),
(1)
d
d
θ∈R
θ∈R n
i=1


where fi (θ) := ED∼Di Fi (θ; D) is an (in general) nonconvex loss function for the i-th client w.r.t. the local data
distribution Di . In a typical FL system design, in each
training round, the server first broadcasts the model to the
clients. Then, each client trains the model based on the local
data, after which the updated local models are transmitted
back to the server and aggregated (McMahan et al., 2017;
Stich, 2019; Chen et al., 2020). The number of clients
n can be tens/hundreds in some applications, e.g., crosssilo FL (Marfoq et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021) where
clients are companies/organizations. In other scenarios, n
can be as large as millions or even billions, e.g., crossdevice FL (Karimireddy et al., 2021; Khan et al., 2021),
where clients can be personal/IoT devices.
θ∗ = arg min f (θ) := arg min

Moreover, we develop a new analysis of the EF
under partial participation (PP), an important scenario in FL. Under PP, the convergence rate of
Fed-EF exhibits an extra slow-down factor due
to a so-called “stale error compensation” effect,
which is also justified in our experiments. Our
results provide insights on a theoretical limitation
of EF, and possible directions for improvements.

There are three key features/challenges of FL:
• Communication cost: The model transmission cost
can be a major challenge in FL systems with limited
bandwidth (e.g., portable wireless devices), especially
when training modern ML models with millions or billions of model parameters. Developing efficient methods for transmitting the model/gradient information
in FL has gained growing research interest in wireless/satellite communication (Amiri and Gündüz, 2020;
Niknam et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Khan et al.,
2021; Yang et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2022a).

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has seen numerous applications in,
e.g., wireless communications, Internet of Things (IoT), sensor networks, financial fraud detection, input method editor
(IME), advertising, online visual object detection, public
health records (Hard et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019a;b; Liu

• Data heterogeneity: Unlike in the classic distributed
training, the local data distribution in FL (Di in (1)) can
be different (non-iid), reflecting the practical scenarios
where local data held by clients (e.g., app/website users)
are highly personalized (Zhao et al., 2018; Kairouz et al.,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

