Pareto Regret Analyses in Multi-objective Multi-armed Bandit

Mengfan Xu 1 Diego Klabjan 1
PT
The goal is to optimize the total reward vector t=1 rat ,t
by minimizing some regret metric measuring how far the
player is away from optimality.

Abstract
We study Pareto optimality in multi-objective
multi-armed bandit by providing a formulation
of adversarial multi-objective multi-armed bandit
and defining its Pareto regrets that can be applied
to both stochastic and adversarial settings. The
regrets do not rely on any scalarization functions
and reflect Pareto optimality compared to scalarized regrets. We also present new algorithms assuming both with and without prior information
of the multi-objective multi-armed bandit setting.
The algorithms are shown optimal in adversarial
settings and nearly optimal up to a logarithmic
factor in stochastic settings simultaneously by our
established upper bounds and lower bounds on
Pareto regrets. Moreover, the lower bound analyses show that the new regrets are consistent with
the existing Pareto regret for stochastic settings
and extend an adversarial attack mechanism from
bandit to the multi-objective one.

There are two ways to define optimality: Pareto optimality
in the reward vector space and Scalarized optimality by
scalarizing reward vectors. Pareto optimality admits a Pareto
optimal front defined as the set of rewards of optimal arms
determined by the Pareto order relationship. With limited
information based on the definition of MO-MAB, it is a great
challenge to directly estimate the Pareto optimal front while
crucial for an optimal strategy. Scalarization is often used
to transform reward vectors to scalars and thereby reducing
MO-MAB to MAB depending on scalarization functions,
which, however, has the following several limitations. First,
how to properly choose such scalarization functions may
be troublesome. Linear and Chebyshev options have been
discussed in (Drugan and Nowe, 2013), despite of the fact
that they may not fully explore non-convex Pareto optimal
fronts. Secondly, algorithms can be less robust since their
performance highly depends on the specific scalarization
functions. In other words, what is optimal for a scalarization
function, can result in large scalarized regrets for other
functions. Therefore, Pareto optimality in the reward vector
space makes more sense and thereby being the main focus
herein.

1. Introduction
Multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a sequential paradigm where
players choose arms and receive reward values from an environment at each time step. It usually aims at maximizing the
cumulative reward of the player, or equivalently minimizing
the regret formulated as the difference between the rewards
of the best arm and the obtained rewards of the player. Multiobjective Multi-armed bandit (MO-MAB) extends reward
values of arms to multi-dimensional reward vectors and
thereby changing the nature of the MAB problem significantly as a result of the complicated order relationships of
vectors. Rewards can be optimal in one dimension but suboptimal in other dimensions, leading to multiple optimal
arms. Formally, given time horizon T , at time step t ≤ T
the player chooses one arm at among K arms and receives
the D-dimensional vector rat ,t among rewards (ri,t )K
i=1 .

MAB usually falls into the category of either stochastic
MAB or adversarial MAB depending on how rewards are
generated. Following similar assumptions on the reward
process, we consider MO-MAB as stochastic MO-MAB
and adversarial MO-MAB, respectively. In stochastic MOMAB, the rewards of each arm at different time steps are
assumed to be i.i.d., following a multi-dimensional distribution of which the mean vector is time-invariant. Henceforth,
the Pareto optimal set is the set of arms with mean vectors that are Pareto optimal and the Pareto optimal reward
set (front) is the set of corresponding mean vectors, which
are constant over time. A regret metric concerning Pareto
optimality, namely Pareto regret, is then defined as the cumulative distance between the expected reward received at each
time step and the Pareto optimal front (Drugan and Nowe,
2013). However, this regret measure cannot generalize to
adversarial MO-MAB by noting that the Pareto optimal
front is ill-defined. Precisely, for adversarial MO-MAB, the
rewards are arbitrarily specified by adversaries at each time

1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Mengfan Xu <MengfanXu2023@u.northwestern.edu>,
Diego Klabjan <dklabjan@northwestern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

