Faster Rates of Convergence to Stationary Points in
Differentially Private Optimization

Raman Arora * 1 Raef Bassily * 2 3 Tomás González * 4 Cristóbal Guzmán * 4 Michael Menart * 2 Enayat Ullah * 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Protecting users’ data in machine learning models has become a central concern in multiple contexts, e.g. those involving financial or health data. In this respect, differential
privacy (DP) is the gold standard for rigorous privacy protection (Dwork & Roth, 2014). Therefore, recent research
has focused on the limits and possibilities of solving some
of the most well-established machine learning problems under the constraint of DP. Despite intensive research, some
fundamental problems remain not completely understood.
One example is nonconvex optimization; namely, the task
of approximating stationary points, which has been heavily
studied in recent years in the non-private setting (Fang et al.,
2018; Ma et al., 2018; Carmon et al., 2017; Nesterov &
Polyak, 2006; Ghadimi & Lan, 2013; Arjevani et al., 2019;
Foster et al., 2019). This problem is motivated by the intractability of nonconvex (global) optimization, as well as
by a number of settings where stationary points have been
shown to be global minima (Ge et al., 2016; Sun et al.,
2016).

We study the problem of approximating stationary
points of Lipschitz and smooth functions under
(ε, δ)-differential privacy (DP) in both the finitesum and stochastic settings. A point w
b is called
an α-stationary point of a function F : Rd → R if
∥∇F ( b
w)∥ ≤ α. We give a new construction that
improves over the existing rates in the stochastic optimization setting, where the goal is to find
approximate stationary points of the population
risk given n√samples. Our construction finds a
 1/2 
1
+ nεd
Õ n1/3
-stationary point of the population risk in time linear in n. We also√provide
 2/3 
an efficient algorithm that finds an Õ nεd
stationary point in the finite-sum setting. √This im 1/2 
proves on the previous best rate of Õ nεd
.
Furthermore, under the additional assumption of
convexity, we completely characterize the sample complexity of finding stationary points of the
population risk (up to polylog factors) and show
that the optimal
rate on population stationarity is
√ 
Θ̃ √1n + nεd . Finally, we show that our methods
can be used to provide √
dimension-independent

 rank 2/3
rates of O √1n + min
, (nε)12/5 on
nε
population stationarity for Generalized Linear
Models (GLM), where rank is the rank of the
design matrix, which improves upon the previous
best known rate.

1.1. Contributions
In this work, we make progress towards resolving the complexity of approximating stationary points in optimization
under the constraint of differential privacy, for both empirical and population risks. A summary of our new results
is available in Table 1. In what follows, d is the problem
dimension, n is the dataset size, and ε, δ are the approximate
DP parameters.
Our first set of results pertains to the task of approximating
stationary points of the population risk. Results for this
problem are scarce. We provide the fastest rate
up to date
 √d 1/2 
1
for this problem under DP, of Õ n1/3 + nε
, with
an algorithm that moreover has oracle complexity n (i.e.,
is single-pass). This algorithm is a noisy version of the
SPIDER algorithm (Fang et al., 2018), whose gradient estimators are built using a tree-aggregation data structure for
prefix-sums (Asi et al., 2021).

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, The
Johns Hopkins University 2 Department of Computer Science &
Engineering, The Ohio State University 3 Translational Data Analytics Institute (TDAI), The Ohio State University 4 Institute for
Mathematical and Computational Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. Correspondence to: Michael Menart
<menart.2@osu.edu>, Enayat Ullah <enayat@jhu.edu>.

Next, we focus on the task of approximating stationary points in empirical nonconvex optimization
(a.k.a. finite-sum case). In this context, we provide al-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

