O DS: Test-Time Adaptation in the Presence of Open-World Data Shift

Zhi Zhou 1 Lan-Zhe Guo 1 Lin-Han Jia 1 Ding-Chu Zhang 1 Yu-Feng Li 1

Abstract
Training Phase

Test-time adaptation (TTA) adapts a source
model to the distribution shift in testing data
without using any source data. There have been
plenty of algorithms concentrated on covariate
shift in the last decade, i.e., Dt (X), the distribution of the test data is different from the source
data. Nonetheless, in real application scenarios,
it is necessary to consider the influence of label
distribution shift, i.e., both Dt (X) and Dt (Y )
are shifted, which has not been sufficiently explored yet. To remedy this, we study a new problem setup, namely, TTA with Open-world Data
Shift (AODS). The goal of AODS is simultaneously adapting a model to covariate and label
distribution shifts in the test phase. In this paper,
we first analyze the relationship between classification error and distribution shifts. Motivated
by this, we hence propose a new framework,
namely O DS, which decouples the mixed distribution shift and then addresses covariate and label distribution shifts accordingly. We conduct
experiments on multiple benchmarks with different types of shifts, and the results demonstrate
the superior performance of our method against
the state of the arts. Moreover, O DS is suitable
for many TTA algorithms.

Training Data
𝒟! (𝑋, 𝑌)

Model

Adapt to shifted 𝒟(𝑋) and 𝒟(𝑌)
Snowy day

Downtown

𝒟! 𝑋, 𝑌 … 𝒟"! (𝑋, 𝑌)

𝒟#"#! $! 𝑋, 𝑌 … 𝒟#" (𝑋, 𝑌)

……
Testing Phase

Figure 1. A demonstration of the AODS setup. The pre-trained
model will continually adapt to the changing covariate and label
distributions in the testing phase.

e.g., change of weather, scenes and sensor devices will
cause distribution shifts (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019).
Therefore, the distribution shift has a severe impact on the
performance of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which has
become a critical issue.
When dealing with distribution shifts in the testing phase,
plenty of test-time adaptation (TTA) algorithms have been
proposed to improve the performance of DNNs (Nado
et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Shin et al.,
2022; Kim et al., 2022). Existing algorithms mainly work
by adapting the model parameters (Wang et al., 2021; Niu
et al., 2022) or optimizing the predictions (Wang et al.,
2022a; Boudiaf et al., 2022) with only unlabeled testing
data. Note that these methods are particularly designed to
deal with covariate shifts but ignore that label distribution
Dt (Y ) also accordingly shifts. Some other works, such as
the robust TTA method (Gong et al., 2022), also consider
the variation of Dt (Y ) during the test period. However,
they only try to reduce the adverse effect caused by Dt (Y ),
but do not adapt to it.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in many application scenarios, such as computer vision (He
et al., 2016; Krizhevsky et al., 2012), speech recognition (Amodei et al., 2016), and natural language processing (Chowdhury, 2003). These successes typically rely on
the independent identically distribution (i.i.d.) assumption
that training and testing data are drawn from the same distribution. In practice, this assumption is difficult to hold,
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to:
Yu-Feng Li <liyf@nju.edu.cn>.

Although existing TTA methods significantly improve performance, they still ignore the adaptation to the changing
label distribution during the testing phase, which is crucial
for practical machine learning systems (des Combes et al.,
2020; Zhao et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2022).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

