RACE: Improve Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Representation
Asymmetry and Collaborative Evolution

Pengyi Li 1 Jianye Hao 1 Hongyao Tang 1 Yan Zheng 1 Xian Fu 1

Abstract

hannink et al., 2019; Yuan et al., 2023), game AI (Vinyals
et al., 2019; HAO et al., 2023b), and transportation (Li et al.,
2019; Ni et al., 2021). In MARL, individual agents interact
with the environment and with each other, collecting samples and receiving reward signals to evaluate their decisions.
By leveraging value function approximation, MARL optimizes policies through gradient updates. However, the reward signals are often of low quality (e.g., deceptive, sparse,
delayed, and team-level), making it challenging to obtain accurate value estimates (Yang et al., 2020a;b). Consequently,
the gradient-based optimization approach may struggle to
efficiently explore the multi-agent policy space and facilitate collaboration (Christianos et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022).
Furthermore, MARL algorithms suffer from the problem
of non-stationarity (Papoudakis et al., 2019), as the agents
learn concurrently and continuously influence each other,
breaking the Markov assumption on which most singleagent RL algorithms are based (Majid et al., 2021). To
address this, the Centralized Training with Decentralized
Execution (CTDE) (Lowe et al., 2017) paradigm has been
proposed. During centralized training, agents can access to
other agents’ information and the global state, while during
decentralized execution, agents execute decisions independently based on their individual policies. However, the
non-stationarity problem persists, especially when agents
only have partial observations of their environment, making
policy optimization even more challenging. These issues
pose significant hurdles to MARL in effectively learning
collaboration (Majid et al., 2021; Papoudakis et al., 2019).

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
has demonstrated its effectiveness in learning collaboration, but it often struggles with low-quality
reward signals and high non-stationarity. In contrast, Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) has shown better convergence, robustness, and signal quality insensitivity. This paper introduces a hybrid framework, Representation Asymmetry and Collaboration Evolution (RACE), which combines EA and
MARL for efficient collaboration. RACE maintains a MARL team and a population of EA teams.
To enable efficient knowledge sharing and policy
exploration, RACE decomposes the policies of
different teams controlling the same agent into a
shared nonlinear observation representation encoder and individual linear policy representations.
To address the partial observation issue, we introduce Value-Aware Mutual Information Maximization to enhance the shared representation with useful information about superior global states. To
facilitate coordination, EA evolves the population
using novel agent-level crossover and mutation
operators, offering diverse experiences for MARL.
Concurrently, MARL optimizes its policies and
injects them into the population for evolution. The
experiments on challenging continuous and discrete tasks demonstrate that RACE significantly
improves the basic algorithms, consistently outperforming other algorithms. Our code is available at https://github.com/yeshenpy/RACE.

Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) (Bäck & Schwefel, 1993;
Gomez et al., 2006) simulates the natural process of genetic evolution and does not rely on gradient information
for policy optimization, which has been demonstrated to
be competitive with RL (Salimans et al., 2017) in singleagent settings. Unlike RL which typically maintains only
one policy, EA maintains a population of individuals and
performs iterative evolution according to policy fitness. EA
possesses several key strengths: 1) EA does not require
RL value function approximation and directly evolves individuals within the population according to fitness, i.e., the
cumulative rewards. This makes EA more robust to reward
signals (Sigaud, 2022; Khadka & Tumer, 2018). 2) EA is
not reliant on the Markov property in problem formulation

1. Introduction
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has emerged
as a powerful approach for tackling complex real-world
problems across various domains, such as robot control (Jo1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
China. Correspondence to: Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

