Off-Policy Evaluation for Large Action Spaces
via Conjunct Effect Modeling

Yuta Saito 1 Qingyang Ren 1 Thorsten Joachims 1

Abstract

terfactual question in this setting is that of off-policy evaluation (OPE): how well would a new policy have performed, if
it had been deployed instead of a logging policy? The ability
to accurately answer this question using previously logged
feedback data is of great practical importance, as it avoids
costly and time-consuming online experiments (Dudı́k et al.,
2014; Su et al., 2020a).

We study off-policy evaluation (OPE) of contextual bandit policies for large discrete action
spaces where conventional importance-weighting
approaches suffer from excessive variance. To
circumvent this variance issue, we propose a new
estimator, called OffCEM, that is based on the
conjunct effect model (CEM), a novel decomposition of the causal effect into a cluster effect and
a residual effect. OffCEM applies importance
weighting only to action clusters and addresses
the residual causal effect through model-based
reward estimation. We show that the proposed estimator is unbiased under a new condition, called
local correctness, which only requires that the
residual-effect model preserves the relative expected reward differences of the actions within
each cluster. To best leverage the CEM and local correctness, we also propose a new two-step
procedure for performing model-based estimation
that minimizes bias in the first step and variance
in the second step. We find that the resulting OffCEM estimator substantially improves bias and
variance compared to a range of conventional estimators. Experiments demonstrate that OffCEM
provides substantial improvements in OPE especially in the presence of many actions.

While we already have practical OPE estimators for small
action spaces (Dudı́k et al., 2014; Swaminathan & Joachims,
2015a; Wang et al., 2017; Farajtabar et al., 2018; Su et al.,
2019; 2020a; Metelli et al., 2021), the effectiveness of these
estimators degrades for large action spaces, which are common in many potential applications of OPE with thousands
or millions of actions (e.g., movies, songs, products). In
particular, when the number of actions is large, existing
estimators – most of which are based on importance weighting – can collapse due to extreme variance caused by large
importance weights (Saito & Joachims, 2022).
To alleviate the variance problem caused by large action
spaces, this paper introduces the Conjunct Effect Model
(CEM), which decomposes the expected reward into a cluster effect and a residual effect. The cluster effect considers
the realistic situation where some clustering of the actions
already accounts for much of the reward variation (e.g.,
movie genres). The residual effect only needs to model what
causal effects remain from individual actions (e.g. movies)
that are not already modeled by the cluster effect. This is
a substantially more general formulation compared to the
Marginalized Inverse Propensity Score (MIPS) estimator
of Saito & Joachims (2022), which completely ignores the
residual effect and assumes no direct effect for individual
actions. Based on our new model of the reward function,
we propose a novel estimator, called Off-policy evaluation
estimator based on the Conjunct Effect Model (OffCEM),
which applies importance weighting over the action clusters to unbiasedly estimate the cluster effect while dealing
with the residual effect via model-based estimation to avoid
extreme variance. We first show that OffCEM is unbiased
under a new condition called local correctness, which only
requires that the model-based residual-effect estimation preserves the relative value difference of the actions within
each action cluster. To best leverage the structure of the

1. Introduction
Logged feedback is widely available in intelligent systems
for a growing range of applications from media streaming
to precision medicine. Many of these systems interact with
their users through the contextual bandit process, where a
policy repeatedly observes a context, takes an action, and
observes the reward for the chosen action. A common coun1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA. Correspondence to: Yuta Saito <ys552@cornell.edu>,
Thorsten Joachims <tj@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

