Sketching for First Order Method: Efficient Algorithm for Low-Bandwidth
Channel and Vulnerability

Zhao Song 1 Yitan Wang 2 Zheng Yu 3 Lichen Zhang 4

Abstract

changing training data. This has become particularly important in areas of artificial intelligence where users care
about data privacy, security, and access rights, including
healthcare (Li et al., 2020b; 2019), internet of things (Chen
et al., 2020), and fraud detection (Zheng et al., 2020).

Sketching is one of the most fundamental tools
in large-scale machine learning. It enables runtime and memory saving via randomly compressing the original large problem into lower dimensions. In this paper, we propose a novel sketching
scheme for the first order method in large-scale
distributed learning setting, such that the communication costs between distributed agents are
saved while the convergence of the algorithms
is still guaranteed. Given gradient information
in a high dimension d, the agent passes the compressed information processed by a sketching matrix R ∈ Rs×d with s ≪ d, and the receiver
de-compressed via the de-sketching matrix R⊤ to
“recover” the information in original dimension.
Using such a framework, we develop algorithms
for federated learning with lower communication
costs. However, such random sketching does not
protect the privacy of local data directly. We show
that the gradient leakage problem still exists after
applying the sketching technique by presenting
a specific gradient attack method. As a remedy,
we prove rigorously that the algorithm will be differentially private by adding additional random
noises in gradient information, which results in
a both communication-efficient and differentially
private first order approach for federated learning
tasks. Our sketching scheme can be further generalized to other learning settings and might be of
independent interest itself.

Given the importance and popularity of federated learning,
two central aspects of this subject have been particularly
studied: privacy and communication cost. The fundamental
purpose of federated learning is to protect the data privacy
of clients by only communicating the gradient information
of a user. Unfortunately, recent studies (Geiping et al., 2020;
Zhu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019) have demonstrated
that attackers can recover the input data from the communicated gradients. The reason why these attacks work is
the gradients carry important information about the training data (Ateniese et al., 2015; Fredrikson et al., 2015). A
very recent work (Wang et al., 2023) demonstrates that via
computationally intense approach based on tensor decomposition, one can recover the training data from a single
gradient and model parameters for over-parametrized networks.
Communication efficiency is also one of the core concerns.
In a typical federated learning setting, the model is trained
through gathering individual information from many clients
who operate under a low bandwidth network. On the other
hand, the size of the gradient is usually large due to the sheer
parameter count of many modern machine learning models. This becomes even more problematic when conducting
federated learning on mobile and edge devices, where the
bandwidth of the network is further limited. Many works try
to address this challenge through local optimization methods, such as local gradient descent (GD), local stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) (Konečnỳ et al., 2016; McMahan
et al., 2017; Stich, 2019) and using classic data structures in
streaming to compress the gradient (Rothchild et al., 2020).
Despite of significant efforts on improving the communication cost of federated learning framework, none of these
approaches, as we will show, are private enough to truly
guard against gradient leakage attack.

1. Introduction
Federated learning enables multiple parties to collaboratively train a machine learning model without directly ex1

Adobe Research 2 Yale University 3 Alibaba Inc. 4 MIT. Correspondence to: Zhao Song <zsong@adobe.com>, Lichen Zhang
<lichenz@mit.edu>.

The above two concerns allude us to ask the following question:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

