Improved Algorithms for Multi-period Multi-class Packing Problems
with Bandit Feedback
Wonyoung Kim 1 Garud Iyengar 1 Assaf Zeevi 1

Abstract

Immorlica et al., 2019). MPPs also arise in online revenue
management (Besbes & Zeevi, 2012; Ferreira et al., 2018).
MPPs in the literature assume that all arrivals belong to a
single class. However, in several application domains (e.g.,
operations, healthcare, and e-commerce), the arrivals are
heterogeneous, and personalizing decisions to each distinct
population or class is of paramount importance. In this
paper, we consider a class of linear multi-class multi-period
packing problems (LMMP). At each round, there is a single
arrival that belongs to one of J classes, and the decisionmaker observes the d-dimensional context and the cost for
K different available actions. The outcome of selecting an
action is a random sample of the reward and a consumption
vector for m resources with an expected value that is a classdependent linear function of the d-dimensional contexts.
The goal of the problem is to minimize the cumulative regret
over a time horizon T while ensuring that the total resource
consumed is at most B.

We consider the linear contextual multi-class
multi-period packing problem (LMMP) where the
goal is to pack items such that the total vector of
consumption is below a given budget vector and
the total value is as large as possible. We consider
the setting where the reward and the consumption vector associated with each action is a classdependent linear function of the context, and the
decision-maker receives bandit feedback. LMMP
includes linear contextual bandits with knapsacks
and online revenue management as special cases.
We establish a new estimator which guarantees a
faster convergence rate, and consequently, a lower
regret in LMMP. We propose a bandit policy that
is a closed-form function of said estimated parameters. When the contexts are non-degenerate, the
regret of the proposed policy is sublinear in the
context dimension, the number of classes, and the
time
√ horizon T when the budget grows at least
as T . We also resolve an open problem posed
in Agrawal & Devanur (2016), and extend the result to a multi-class setting. Our numerical experiments clearly demonstrate that the performance
of our policy is superior to other benchmarks in
the literature.

The LMMP problem is a generalization of several problems including linear contextual bandits with knapsacks
(LinCBwK) introduced by Agrawal & Devanur (2016).
They proposed an online mirror
√ descent-based algorithm
that achieves Õ(OP T /B · d T ) regret
when the budget
√
B for each of the m resources is Ω( dT 3/4 ), where OP T
is the reward obtained by the oracle policy.
√ Although the
regret bound is meaningful for B = Ω(d T ), establishing
the regret bound for smaller budget values was left as an
open problem. Chu et al. (2011) established a regret bound
sublinear in d for the linear contextual bandit setting, which
is a special case of LinCBwK with no budget constraints.
Thus, the following question remained open: “Is there an
algorithm for LinCBwK that
√ achieves sublinear dependence
on d with budget B = Ω( T )?”

1. Introduction
In the multi-period packing problem (MPP) the decisionmaker “packs” the arrivals so that the total consumption
across a set of resources is below a given budget vector
and the reward is maximized. A variant of the packing
problem, where items consume multiple resources and the
decisions must be made sequentially with bandit feedback
for a fixed time horizon, is known as bandits with knapsacks
(Agrawal & Devanur, 2014a; Badanidiyuru et al., 2018;

We propose a novel algorithm and an improved estimation
strategy that settles this open problem and generalizes the
result to the more general class√of LMMP. The proposed
algorithm
√ achieves Õ(OP T /B JdT ) regret with budget
B = Ω( JdT ) under non-degenerate contexts. While regret of the existing algorithms grows linearly in the number
of classes J, our estimator is able to pool data from different classes and avoids linear dependence on J. To reiterate,
the improved regret bound results from the novel estimator
which has faster convergence rates.

1
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence
to: Wonyoung Kim <wk2389@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

