What Can Be Learnt With Wide Convolutional Neural Networks?
Francesco Cagnetta * 1 Alessandro Favero * 1 2 Matthieu Wyart 1

Abstract

Such tasks generally entail the approximation of functions
of a large number of variables, for instance, the number
of pixels which determine the content of an image. Learning a generic high-dimensional function is plagued by the
curse of dimensionality: the rate at which the generalisation error ϵ decays with the number of training samples n
vanishes as the dimensionality d of the input space grows,
i.e., ϵ(n) ∼ n−β with β = O(1/d) (Wainwright, 2019).
Therefore, the success of CNNs in classifying data whose
dimension can be in the hundreds or more (Hestness et al.,
2017; Spigler et al., 2020) points to the existence of some
underlying structure in the task that CNNs can leverage. Understanding the structure of learnable tasks is arguably one
of the most fundamental problems in deep learning, and also
one of central practical importance—as it determines how
many examples are required to learn up to a certain error.
A popular hypothesis is that learnable tasks are local and
hierarchical: features at any scale are made of sub-features
of smaller scales. Although many works have investigated
this hypothesis (Biederman, 1987; Poggio et al., 2017; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Zhou et al., 2018; Deza et al., 2020;
Kohler et al., 2020; Poggio et al., 2020; Schmidt-Hieber,
2020; Finocchio & Schmidt-Hieber, 2021; Giordano et al.,
2022), there are no available predictions for the exponent
β for deep CNNs trained on tasks with a varying degree of
locality or a truly hierarchical structure.

Understanding how convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) can efficiently learn highdimensional functions remains a fundamental
challenge. A popular belief is that these models
harness the local and hierarchical structure of
natural data such as images. Yet, we lack a
quantitative understanding of how such structure
affects performance, e.g., the rate of decay of the
generalisation error with the number of training
samples. In this paper, we study infinitely-wide
deep CNNs in the kernel regime. First, we show
that the spectrum of the corresponding kernel
inherits the hierarchical structure of the network,
and we characterise its asymptotics. Then, we use
this result together with generalisation bounds to
prove that deep CNNs adapt to the spatial scale
of the target function. In particular, we find that
if the target function depends on low-dimensional
subsets of adjacent input variables, then the
decay of the error is controlled by the effective
dimensionality of these subsets. Conversely, if
the target function depends on the full set of input
variables, then the error decay is controlled by
the input dimension. We conclude by computing
the generalisation error of a deep CNN trained on
the output of another deep CNN with randomlyinitialised parameters. Interestingly, we find that,
despite their hierarchical structure, the functions
generated by infinitely-wide deep CNNs are too
rich to be efficiently learnable in high dimension.

In this paper, we perform such a computation in the overparameterised regime, where the width of the hidden layer
of the neural networks diverges and the network output is
rescaled so as to converge to that of a kernel method (Jacot
et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019). Although the deep networks
deployed in real scenarios do not generally operate in such
regime, the connection with the theory of kernel regression
provides a recipe for computing the decay of the generalisation error with the number of training examples. Namely,
given an infinitely wide neural network, its generalisation
abilities depend on the spectrum of the corresponding kernel (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007; Bordelon et al., 2020):
the main challenge is then to characterise this spectrum,
especially for deep CNNs whose kernels are rather cumbersome and defined recursively (Arora et al., 2019). This
characterisation is the main result of our paper, together
with the ensuing study of generalisation in deep CNNs.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are particularly successful in certain tasks such as image classification.
*

Equal contribution 1 Institute of Physics, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Institute of Electrical Engineering, École polytechnique fédérale
de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
<name.surname@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

