Expected Gradients of Maxout Networks
and Consequences to Parameter Initialization

Hanna Tseran 1 Guido Montúfar 1 2

Abstract

networks depending on the parameter distribution and the
network architecture. The analysis is based on the inputoutput Jacobian. We discover that, in contrast to ReLU
networks, when initialized with a zero-mean Gaussian distribution, the distribution of the input-output Jacobian of a
maxout network depends on the network input, which may
lead to unstable gradients and training difficulties. Nonetheless, we can obtain a rigorous parameter initialization recommendation for wide networks. The analysis of gradients
also allows us to refine previous bounds on the expected
number of linear regions of maxout networks at initialization and derive new results on the length distortion and the
NTK.

We study the gradients of a maxout network
with respect to inputs and parameters and obtain bounds for the moments depending on the
architecture and the parameter distribution. We
observe that the distribution of the input-output
Jacobian depends on the input, which complicates
a stable parameter initialization. Based on the
moments of the gradients, we formulate parameter initialization strategies that avoid vanishing
and exploding gradients in wide networks. Experiments with deep fully-connected and convolutional networks show that this strategy improves
SGD and Adam training of deep maxout networks.
In addition, we obtain refined bounds on the expected number of linear regions, results on the
expected curve length distortion, and results on
the NTK.3

Maxout networks A rank-K maxout unit, introduced
by Goodfellow et al. (2013), computes the maximum of
K real-valued parametric affine functions. Concretely, a
rank-K maxout unit with n inputs implements a function
Rn → R; x 7→ maxk∈[K] {⟨Wk , x⟩ + bk }, where Wk ∈ Rn
and bk ∈ R, k ∈ [K] := {1, . . . , K}, are trainable weights
and biases. The K arguments of the maximum are called the
pre-activation features of the maxout unit. This may be regarded as a multi-argument generalization of a ReLU, which
computes the maximum of a real-valued affine function and
zero. Goodfellow et al. (2013) demonstrated that maxout
networks could perform better than ReLU networks under
similar circumstances. Additionally, maxout networks have
been shown to be useful for combating catastrophic forgetting in neural networks (Goodfellow et al., 2015). On the
other hand, Castaneda et al. (2019) evaluated the performance of maxout networks in a big data setting and observed that increasing the width of ReLU networks is more
effective in improving performance than replacing ReLUs
with maxout units and that ReLU networks converge faster
than maxout networks. We observe that proper initialization
strategies for maxout networks have not been studied in
the same level of detail as for ReLU networks and that this
might resolve some of the problems encountered in previous
maxout network applications.

1. Introduction
We study the gradients of maxout networks and derive a
rigorous parameter initialization strategy as well as several
implications for stability and expressivity. Maxout networks
were proposed by Goodfellow et al. (2013) as an alternative
to ReLU networks with the potential to improve issues with
dying neurons and attain better model averaging when used
with Dropout (Hinton et al., 2012). Dropout is used in transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017), and maximum
aggregation functions are used in Graph Neural Networks
(Hamilton, 2020). Therefore, we believe that developing the
theory and implementation aspects of maxout networks can
serve as an interesting platform for architecture design. We
compute bounds on the moments of the gradients of maxout
1
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, 04103
Leipzig, Germany 2 Department of Mathematics and Department of
Statistics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence
to: Hanna Tseran <hanna.tseran@mis.mpg.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
3
The code is available at https://github.com/
hanna-tseran/maxout_expected_gradients.

Parameter initialization The vanishing and exploding
gradient problem has been known since the work of Hochreiter (1991). It makes choosing an appropriate learning rate
1

