Recovery Bounds on Class-Based Optimal Transport: A Sum-of-Norms
Regularization Framework

Arman Rahbar 1 Ashkan Panahi 1 Morteza Haghir Chehreghani 1 Devdatt Dubhashi 1 Hamid Krim 2

Abstract

class structure is present in both domains. Examples are
abundant, such as (Long et al., 2022) and (Ott et al., 2022),
where respecting the class structure can significantly improve the performance. In our setup, classes are associated
with well separated regions of the data space, called components, on which the source and target distributions are
supported. Each component is associated with a class and
hence there is a correspondence between the components of
the source and target domains. Such a model may become
relevant after a suitable re-representation (embedding) of
the data in a latent space.

We develop a novel theoretical framework for understating Optimal Transport (OT) schemes respecting a class structure. For this purpose, we
propose a convex OT program with a sum-ofnorms regularization term, which provably recovers the underlying class structure under geometric
assumptions. Furthermore, we derive an accelerated proximal algorithm with a closed-form projection and proximal operator scheme, thereby affording a more scalable algorithm for computing
optimal transport plans. We provide a novel argument for the uniqueness of the optimum even in
the absence of strong convexity. Our experiments
show that the new regularizer not only results in
a better preservation of the class structure in the
data but also yields additional robustness to the
data geometry, compared to previous regularizers.

Our central question is to identify conditions on the geometry of the components, under which OT can be performed
in a polynomial time, with an additional property that each
source sample is mapped to its corresponding component in
the target domain. For this purpose, we introduce and study
a two-stage procedure, where in the first stage the components and their association is recovered and in the second
one, OT is exclusively performed over the corresponding
component pairs. Any off-the-shelf OT method can be used
in the second stage, and hence our results mainly pertain
to the recovery condition in the first stage. For this, we
introduce a novel convex optimization framework, combining two popular procedures: the celebrated Kantorovich
relaxation scheme of OT and the well-known sum-of-norms
(SON) formulation for vector clustering (Lindsten et al.,
2011a; Hocking et al., 2011), used as a regularization. Accordingly, we show for the first time that sufficiently wellseparated and associated components in the two domains
can be recovered by a regularized OT scheme, which naturally enjoys a polynomial algorithm due to convexity. No
such results, to the best of our knowledge, are known for
other regularizers. We also experimentally show that our
regularizer does not only yield a better class structure preservation, but also provides additional robustness compared to
other class-based regularizers

1. Introduction
Optimal transport (OT) is a classical mathematical discipline
for discovering a transport map from a source distribution
to a target distribution with a minimum cost of the transport. It has recently been successfully used in various applications in computer vision, texture analysis, tomographic
reconstruction and clustering, as documented in the recent
surveys (Kolouri et al., 2017) and (Solomon, 2018). In many
of these applications, OT exploits the geometry of the underlying spaces to effectively yield improved performance
over the alternative of obviating it.
The main purpose of this paper is to provide a theoretical
foundation for OT in such geometrically-aware conditions.
We focus on a scenario where a common, potentially hidden
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers
University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
2
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA. Correspondence
to: Arman Rahbar <armanr@chalmers.se>.

Computational benefits: Despite a convex nature, the improvements of OT often come at a significant computational
cost. We further argue that the SON regularization of OT
also enjoys practical computational benefits by proposing a
novel stochastic incremental algorithm. First, we construct
an abstract stochastic framework that is based on a combina-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

