RLEG: Vision-Language Representation Learning
with Diffusion-based Embedding Generation

Liming Zhao 1 Kecheng Zheng 2 Yun Zheng 1 Deli Zhao 1 Jingren Zhou 1
Embedding Space

Abstract
encoding

Vision-language representation learning models
(e.g., CLIP) have achieved state-of-the-art performance on various downstream tasks, which
usually need large-scale training data to learn discriminative representation. Recent progress on
generative diffusion models (e.g., DALL-E 2) has
demonstrated that diverse high-quality samples
can be synthesized by randomly sampling from
generative distribution. By virtue of generative
capability in this paper, we propose a novel visionlanguage Representation Learning method with
diffusion-based Embedding Generation (RLEG),
which exploits diffusion models to generate feature embedding online for learning effective
vision-language representation. Specifically, we
first adopt image and text encoders to extract the
corresponding embeddings. Secondly, pretrained
diffusion-based embedding generators are harnessed to transfer the embedding modality online
between vision and language domains. The embeddings generated from the generators are then
served as augmented embedding-level samples,
which are applied to contrastive learning with the
variant of the CLIP framework. Experimental results show that the proposed method could learn
effective representation and achieve state-of-theart performance on various tasks including image
classification, image-text retrieval, object detection, semantic segmentation, and text-conditional
image generation.

generation

Image

Text
generation

encoding

Figure 1. Input samples of image and text are encoded into a semantic embedding space (squares). More generated embeddings
(circles) are utilized by sampling from pretrained diffusion-based
embedding generators. The input and generated embedding samples are simultaneously applied to a contrastive learning scheme.

Wang et al., 2022a; Yu et al., 2022) has received increasing
attention and achieved remarkable success in pretraining for
many computer vision tasks. Large-scale training data make
it possible to transfer pretraining models to various downstream tasks. However, collecting a high-quality dataset
for image-text pairs is non-trivial (Li et al., 2022b; Schuhmann et al., 2021; Byeon et al., 2022). Furthermore, the
collected image-text pairs can only cover part of semantic
contents from all possible real-world data, thus resulting
in a sparse distribution of learned representation in the embedding space. In this paper, we attempt to learn robust
representation by generating training samples of rich diversity online with generative models.
Recent advances in deep generative models (Brock et al.,
2019; Karras et al., 2020; van den Oord et al., 2017; Ho
et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Saharia et al., 2022) make it possible to produce various
high-quality realistic samples with different content under a
semantic condition. Traditional image-level or feature-level
data augmentation usually make fake modifications of input
data (e.g., adding noise, interpolating, random cropping),
while sampling data from a learnt generative space could
generate totally new and diverse realistic samples. Some
methods (Bowles et al., 2018; Frid-Adar et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022) successfully augment training
data from generative models to acquire synthetic medical
images, foggy images, and images in different poses or
viewpoints. These works show that the pretrained generative

1. Introduction
Vision-language representation learning (Radford et al.,
2021; Jia et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2022;
1
Alibaba Group 2 Ant Group. Correspondence to: Liming Zhao
<lingchen.zlm@alibaba-inc.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

