Horizon-Free Learning for Markov Decision Processes and Games:
Stochastically Bounded Rewards and Improved Bounds

Shengshi Li 1 Lin F. Yang 2

Abstract

uates a policy based on its long-term performance, which
sums up a sequence of rewards received after each decision. In stark contrast, bandit learning problems evaluate
a policy based on its single-shot performance. However,
does the horizon-dependence makes RL considerably more
difficult? Jiang & Agarwal (2018) ask this question formally and proposes to study the problem under the so-called
“total boundedness” assumption, where the rewards have
a bounded sum almost surely for any trajectory collected
by a policy – given a relatively fair comparison between,
e.g., bandit problems and RL. Recently, a line of research
(Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2022) settles this question by showing the existence
of algorithms, which only take Õ(1)1 trajectories to learn a
good policy – eliminating the dependence on the horizon in
the learning sample complexity under the total boundedness
assumption with deterministic rewards.

Horizon dependence is an important difference between reinforcement learning and other machine
learning paradigms. Yet, existing results tackling
the (exact) horizon dependence either assume that
the reward is bounded per step, introducing unfair
comparison, or assume strict total boundedness
that requires the sum of rewards to be bounded almost surely – allowing only restricted noise on the
reward observation. This paper addresses these
limitations by introducing a new relaxation – expected boundedness on rewards, where we allow
the reward to be stochastic with only boundedness on the expected sum – opening the door to
study horizon-dependence with a much broader
set of reward functions with noises. We establish a novel generic algorithm that achieves nohorizon dependence in terms of sample complexity for both Markov Decision Processes (MDP)
and Games, via reduction to a good-conditioned
auxiliary Markovian environment, in which only
“important” state-action pairs are preserved. The
2
algorithm takes only Õ( Sϵ2A ) episodes interacting
with such an environment to achieve an ϵ-optimal
policy/strategy (with high probability), improving
(Zhang et al., 2022) (which only applies to MDPs
with deterministic rewards). Here S is the number
of states and A is the number of actions, and the
bound is independent of the horizon H.

While being profound, the above works leave a slackness in
the understanding of the horizon effect – the total boundedness and deterministicity of the rewards can be infeasible
in systems with noise, which, however, are the standard
assumptions of multi-arm bandit systems. Moreover, it is
also unclear whether horizon-free learning can be achieved
in multi-agent systems, e.g., two-player zero-sum games.
In particular, Zhang et al. (2022) rely on the almost-sureboundedness of reward sums to establish a high probability
bound for regret. Such an approach fails when there is
stochastic noise; on the other hand, Li et al. (2022) require
an ϵ-net on the reward space, requiring which to possess
special properties provided by the total boundedness. Both
works only apply to single player MDP and do not extend
to Markov games, where the multi-player nature makes the
problem more challenging.

1. Introduction
One of the most prominent differences between reinforcement learning (RL) and other learning paradigms is its dependence on the decision horizon. For instance, one eval-

In this paper, we address the limitations introduced by the
total boundedness. In particular, we study the RL problem
under a relaxed expected boundedness assumption, which
only imposes boundedness on the expectation of the sum of
rewards – a standard assumption that only requires the value
function to be bounded. Our proposed algorithm consists of
two phases, where in the first phase, it applies a reward-free

1
School of Mathematics and Sciences, Peking University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Shengshi Li
<shengshi li@pku.edu.cn>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
We ignore the |S||A|-dependence, where S is the number of
states and A is the number of actions.

1

