Large Language Models Struggle to Learn Long-Tail Knowledge

Nikhil Kandpal 1 Haikang Deng 1 Adam Roberts 2 Eric Wallace 3 Colin Raffel 1

Abstract

0.6

The Internet contains a wealth of knowledge—
from the birthdays of historical figures to tutorials
on how to code—all of which may be learned by
language models. However, while certain pieces
of information are ubiquitous on the web, others appear extremely rarely. In this paper, we
study the relationship between the knowledge
memorized by large language models and the information in pre-training datasets scraped from
the web. In particular, we show that a language
model’s ability to answer a fact-based question
relates to how many documents associated with
that question were seen during pre-training. We
identify these relevant documents by entity linking pre-training datasets and counting documents
that contain the same entities as a given questionanswer pair. Our results demonstrate strong correlational and causal relationships between accuracy and relevant document count for numerous
question answering datasets (e.g., TriviaQA), pretraining corpora (e.g., ROOTS), and model sizes
(e.g., 176B parameters). Moreover, while larger
models are better at learning long-tail knowledge,
we estimate that today’s models must be scaled by
many orders of magnitude to reach competitive
QA performance on questions with little support
in the pre-training data. Finally, we show that
retrieval-augmentation can reduce the dependence
on relevant pre-training information, presenting a
promising approach for capturing the long-tail.

0.5

QA Accuracy

0.4

BLOOM Model
176B
7.1B
3B
1.7B
1.1B
560M

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

100

101

102

103

104

105

Number of Relevant Pre-training Documents

106

Figure 1. Language models struggle to capture the long-tail of
information on the web. Above, we plot accuracy for the BLOOM
model family on TriviaQA as a function of how many documents
in the model’s pre-training data are relevant to each question.

(Petroni et al., 2019; Roberts et al., 2020), and given the
scale of today’s pre-training datasets and LLMs, one would
hope that they can learn a huge amount of information from
web-sourced text. However, not all of the knowledge on
the Internet appears equally often—there is a long-tail of
information that appears rarely or only once.
In this work, we explore the relationship between the knowledge learned by an LLM and the information in its pretraining dataset. Specifically, we study how an LLM’s
ability to answer a question relates to how many documents associated with that question were seen during pretraining. We focus on factoid QA datasets (Joshi et al., 2017;
Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), which lets us ground questionanswer pairs into concrete subject-object co-occurrences.
As an example, for the QA pair (In what city was the poet
Dante born?, Florence), we consider documents where the
entities Dante and Florence co-occur as highly relevant.
To identify these entity co-occurrences we apply a highlyparallelized entity linking pipeline to trillions of tokens
from datasets such as C4 (Raffel et al., 2020), The Pile (Gao
et al., 2020), ROOTS (Laurençon et al., 2022), OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019), and Wikipedia.

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) trained on text from the
Internet capture many facts about the world, ranging from
well-known factoids to esoteric domain-specific information.
These models implicitly store knowledge in their parameters
1
UNC Chapel Hill 2 Google Research 3 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Nikhil Kandpal <nkandpa2@cs.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We observe a strong correlation between an LM’s ability to
answer a question and the number of pre-training documents
1

