Beyond Exponentially Fast Mixing in Average-Reward
Reinforcement Learning via Multi-Level Monte Carlo Actor-Critic

Wesley A. Suttle * 1 Amrit Singh Bedi * 2 Bhrij Patel 2 Brian M. Sadler 1 Alec Koppel 3 Dinesh Manocha 2

Abstract

sets (McAfee et al., 2012), complex event simulators (Silver
et al., 2016), and deep feature extraction (Krizhevsky et al.,
2017), among other innovations. However, a crucial underlying aspect of these developments is whether training data
is sufficiently informative. To put this in quantitative terms,
most ML training mechanisms hinge upon training samples
being independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), which
is often violated in real-world problems, such as natural
language (Liu et al., 2021), financial markets (Heaton et al.,
2016), and robotics (Gu et al., 2016), where data exhibits
temporal dependence. Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, in particular, are limited by this constraint, as the
data is inherently Markovian, owing to the fact that the RL
problem is most commonly represented mathematically as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Sutton, 1988). For this
reason, as well as the numerous applications of RL in recent
years (Li, 2019), we focus on algorithms for RL methods
when data exhibits Markovian dependence.

Many existing reinforcement learning (RL) methods employ stochastic gradient iteration on the
back end, whose stability hinges upon a hypothesis that the data-generating process mixes exponentially fast with a rate parameter that appears
in the step-size selection. Unfortunately, this assumption is violated for large state spaces or settings with sparse rewards, and the mixing time is
unknown, making the step size inoperable. In this
work, we propose an RL methodology attuned
to the mixing time by employing a multi-level
Monte Carlo estimator for the critic, the actor,
and the average reward embedded within an actorcritic (AC) algorithm. This method, which we
call Multi-level Actor-Critic (MAC), is developed
specifically for infinite-horizon average-reward
settings and neither relies on oracle knowledge
of the mixing time in its parameter selection nor
assumes its exponential decay; it is therefore readily applicable to applications with slower mixing
times. Nonetheless, it achieves a convergence
rate comparable to SOTA actor-critic algorithms.
We experimentally show that these alleviated restrictions on the technical conditions required for
stability translate to superior performance in practice for RL problems with sparse rewards.

Under Markovian sampling, many convergence analyses of
iterative methods for RL exist (Qiu et al., 2021b; Xu et al.,
2020b) and typically consider a critical assumption about
the rate at which the MDP’s transition dynamics converge
to the stationary distribution for a fixed policy. To establish
rigorous analyses, restrictions are typically placed on the
mixing times encountered during training: (1) prior oracle
knowledge of mixing times is employed to determine an
optimal step-size selection, as in (Duchi et al., 2012; Nagaraj
et al., 2020); or (2) mixing times decay exponentially fast
(Xu et al., 2020b; Wu et al., 2020; Qiu et al., 2021a; Chen &
Zhao, 2022). In this work, we are interested in developing
RL algorithms with performance certificates without the
aforementioned conditions.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning (ML) techniques have enabled analyzing and making predictions from large-scale data. This
is achieved through backpropagation in neural networks
(Hinton et al., 2006), cloud processing of industrial data

For instance, consider an RL problem where the agent must
navigate through a continuous state space, such as a robot
reaching a target location or a self-driving car traversing
a complex road network. In these cases, the transition dynamics can be highly non-linear with sparse rewards, and
the agent may have to explore many states before locating
any rewards. In addition, if the environment’s dynamics are
highly random or there are many obstacles and the agent
can get stuck in certain states for a long time, the total variation distance to the steady state decreases slowly, i.e., the

*

Equal contribution 1 U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA. 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. 3 JP Morgan Chase AI
Research, USA. Correspondence to: Wesley A. Suttle <wesley.a.suttle.ctr@army.mil>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

