Bayesian Progressive Deep Topic Model
with Knowledge Informed Textual Data Coarsening Process

Zhibin Duan * 1 Xinyang Liu * 1 Yudi Su 1 Yishi Xu 1 Bo Chen 1 Mingyuan Zhou 2

Abstract

(Zhou et al., 2012), are built on the assumption that each
document is represented by a mixture of topics, where each
topic defines a probability distribution over words and describes an interpretable semantic concept. Besides, these
models can also derive low-dimensional representations of
the documents, which have proven useful in a series of natural language processing tasks (Rubin et al., 2012; Wang
et al., 2007; Mimno et al., 2009).

Deep topic models have shown an impressive ability to extract multi-layer document latent representations and discover hierarchical semantically
meaningful topics. However, most deep topic
models are limited to the single-step generative
process, despite the fact that the progressive generative process has achieved impressive performance in modeling image data. To this end, in this
paper, we propose a novel progressive deep topic
model that consists of a knowledge-informed textural data coarsening process and a corresponding progressive generative model. The former
is used to build multi-level observations ranging
from concrete to abstract, while the latter is used
to generate more concrete observations gradually.
Additionally, we incorporate a graph-enhanced decoder to capture the semantic relationships among
words at different levels of observation. Furthermore, we perform a theoretical analysis of the
proposed model based on the principle of information theory and show how it can alleviate the wellknown “latent variable collapse” problem. Finally,
extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed model effectively improves the ability of
deep topic models, resulting in higher-quality latent document representations and topics.

While these shallow topic models are widely used, their
modeling ability is still limited by the single-layer structure,
which makes it difficult to explore the hierarchical semantic
structure (Marius & Burkhardt). To this end, there has been
an emerging research interest in building deep topic models
(DTMs) (Blei et al., 2010; Paisley et al., 2014; Gan et al.,
2015; Zhou et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2018) that aims to
mine multi-layer document representations and discover
meaningful topic taxonomies. Recently, the success of deep
generative models such as variational autoencoder (VAE)
(Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014) has shown
the potential of deep neural networks in posterior inference,
motivating the proposal of a range of neural topic models
(NTMs) ranging from shallow structure (Srivastava et al.,
2017; Miao et al., 2017) to deep structure (Zhang et al.,
2018). Compared with Bayesian PTMs, NTMs usually
enjoy better flexibility and scalability, which are essential
for applications on large-scale data and downstream tasks.
Despite considerable effort has been put into developing
more effective DTMs, most of them rely on a single-step
generative process. The counterpart to this is the progressive
generative models that synthesize images in a coarse-to-fine
manner, which have attracted wide attention due to their
impressive performance (Karras et al., 2017; Razavi et al.,
2019; Ho et al., 2020; Austin et al., 2021; Bansal et al.,
2022; Shu & Ermon, 2022; Lee et al., 2022; Gu et al., 2022).
Meanwhile, some works (Shen et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2020)
have attempted to build progressive language models for
long sequence generation, which show that progressive generative models have the potential to model more complex
data distribution (longer sequences). Further, it should be
emphasized that the majority of language models use an
autoregressive technique for generating sequences (Radford
et al., 2019), which can be regarded as a progressive genera-

1. Introduction
Topic modeling has developed into one of the most widelyused techniques for text analysis. Bayesian probabilistic
topic models (PTMs), such as latent Dirichlet allocation
(LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) and Poisson factor analysis (PFA)
*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory of Radar
Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, China.
2
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. Correspondence to: Bo Chen
<bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

