Improving Bi-level Optimization Based Methods with Inspiration from Humans’
Classroom Study Techniques

Pengtao Xie 1

Abstract

Feurer et al., 2015; Finn et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019; Shu
et al., 2019). These methods consist of two nested levels of
optimization problems. At the lower level, model weights
are learned by minimizing a training loss. At the upper level,
meta parameters such as neural architectures (Liu et al.,
2019), importance weights of data examples (Shu et al.,
2019), hyperparameters (Feurer et al., 2015) are learned
by minimizing a validation loss. BLO-based methods have
been widely applied for differentiable neural architecture
search (Liu et al., 2019), data reweighting (Shu et al., 2019),
few-shot learning (Finn et al., 2017), etc. Existing BLObased methods suffer from problems such as performance
collapse (Zela et al., 2019; Chen & Hsieh, 2020a; Chu
et al., 2021; 2020): the learned meta parameters and model
weights perform well on validation and training data, but
generalize poorly on test data. We aim to address these
problems by developing novel training strategies drawing
inspiration from humans’ classroom study techniques.

In humans’ classroom learning, many effective
study techniques, e.g., the Feynman technique,
peer questioning, have been developed to improve
learning outcomes. We are interested in investigating whether these techniques can inspire the
development of ML training strategies to improve
bi-level optimization (BLO) based methods. Towards this goal, we develop a general framework,
Skillearn, which consists of basic elements such
as learners, interaction functions, learning stages,
etc. These elements can be flexibly configured
to create various training strategies, each emulating a study technique of humans. In case studies,
we apply Skillearn to create new training strategies, by emulating the Feynman technique and
peer questioning, which are two broadly adopted
techniques in humans’ classroom learning. These
training strategies are used for improving two
BLO based applications including neural architecture search and data weighting. Experiments on
various datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our methods.

Towards this goal, we propose a novel framework, Skillearn,
which can create various ML training strategies by emulating humans’ study techniques. In Skillearn, there are a set
of learner models, each with a collection of weight parameters and meta parameters. Different learners interact with
each other through interaction functions. The learning of all
learners is organized into multiple stages, each involving a
subset of learners. These stages have an order, but they are
performed end-to-end in a multi-level optimization framework (Dempe, 2002) where latter stages influence earlier
stages and vice versa.

1. Introduction
In classroom learning (Van Lier, 1991; Blumenfeld, 1992;
Carpenter et al., 2018), humans have developed a lot of effective study techniques, such as the Feynman learning technique (Ambion et al., 2020), peer questioning (King, 1990),
interleaving learning (Birnbaum et al., 2013), learning via
self-explaining (Ainsworth & Th Loizou, 2003), etc. These
techniques enable humans to learn faster and better (Dunlosky et al., 2013; Rovers et al., 2018; Biwer et al., 2020).
We are interested in investigating whether humans’ classroom study techniques can provide insights for improving
bi-level optimization (BLO) based methods (Dempe, 2002;

The major contributions of this work are as follows.
• We propose a general framework, Skillearn, which can
create training strategies to improve BLO-based methods
by drawing inspirations from humans’ classroom study
techniques.
• We apply Skillearn to emulate two classroom learning techniques of humans including the Feynman technique (Ambion et al., 2020) and peer questioning (King,
1990) and create corresponding training strategies to improve BLO-based applications including neural architecture search and data reweighting.

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, USA. Correspondence to:
Pengtao Xie <p1xie@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods in various experiments.
1

