Training Normalizing Flows from Dependent Data

Matthias Kirchler 1 2 Christoph Lippert 1 3 Marius Kloft 2

Abstract

sampled independently from the underlying distribution.
However, this modelling assumption is oftentimes heavily
violated in practice. Figure 1 illustrates why this can be
problematic. A standard normalizing flow trained on dependent data will misinterpret the sampling distortions in
the training data as true signal (Figure 1c). Our proposed
method, on the other hand, can correct for the data dependencies and reconstruct the original density more faithfully
(Figure 1d).

Normalizing flows are powerful non-parametric
statistical models that function as a hybrid between density estimators and generative models.
Current learning algorithms for normalizing flows
assume that data points are sampled independently, an assumption that is frequently violated
in practice, which may lead to erroneous density
estimation and data generation. We propose a
likelihood objective of normalizing flows incorporating dependencies between the data points,
for which we derive a flexible and efficient learning algorithm suitable for different dependency
structures. We show that respecting dependencies
between observations can improve empirical results on both synthetic and real-world data, and
leads to higher statistical power in a downstream
application to genome-wide association studies.

The problem of correlated data is very common and occurs
in many applications. Consider the ubiquitous task of image
modeling. The Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW, (Huang
et al., 2008)) data set consists of facial images of celebrities,
but some individuals in the data set are grossly overrepresented. For example, George W. Bush is depicted on 530
images, while around 70% of the individuals in the data
set only appear once. A generative model trained naively
on these data will put considerably more probability mass
on images similar to George W. Bush, compared to the
less represented individuals. Arguably, most downstream
tasks, such as image generation and outlier detection, would
benefit from a model that is less biased towards these overrepresented individuals.

1. Introduction
Density estimation and generative modeling of complex
distributions are fundamental problems in statistics and machine learning and significant in various application domains. Remarkably, normalizing flows (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios et al., 2021) can solve both of
these tasks at the same time. Furthermore, their neural architecture allows them to capture even very high-dimensional
and complex structured data (such as images and time series). In contrast to other deep generative models such as
variational autoencoders (VAEs), which only optimize a
lower bound on the likelihood objective, normalizing flows
optimize the likelihood directly.

In the biomedical domain, large cohort studies involve participants that oftentimes are directly related (such as parents and children) or indirectly related (by sharing genetic
material due to a shared ancestry)—a phenomenon called
population stratification (Cardon & Palmer, 2003). These
dependencies between individuals play a major role in the
traditional analyses of these data and require sophisticated
statistical treatment (Lippert et al., 2011), but current deeplearning based non-parametric models lack the required
methodology to do so. This can have considerable negative impact on downstream tasks, as we will show in our
experiments.

Previous work on both generative models and density estimation with deep learning assumes that data points are

In finance, accurate density estimation and modeling of
assets (e.g., stock market data) is essential for risk management and modern trading strategies. Data points are often
heavily correlated with one another, due to time, sector, or
other relations. Traditionally, financial analysts often use
copulas for the modeling of non-parametric data, which
themselves can be interpreted as a simplified version of
normalizing flows (Papamakarios et al., 2021). Copulas

1

Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Engineering, University
of Potsdam, Germany 2 University of Kaiserslautern-Landau, Germany 3 Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Health at the Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York. Correspondence
to: Matthias Kirchler <matthias.kirchler@hpi.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

