Fairness in Matching under Uncertainty

Siddartha Devic 1 David Kempe 1 Vatsal Sharan 1 Aleksandra Korolova 2

Abstract

Johnson et al., 2018) vs. those that try to be fair to each
individual (Dwork et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2018; 2020). In
our work, we focus on the latter notion. The most widely
studied notion of individual fairness is due to the seminal
work of Dwork et al. (2012): it assumes that a metric space
on observable features of individuals captures similarity,
and requires that outcomes of a resource allocation mechanism satisfy a certain Lipschitz continuity condition with
respect to the given metric. Intuitively, this ensures that
individuals who are similar according to the metric will be
treated similarly by the mechanism.

The prevalence and importance of algorithmic
two-sided marketplaces has drawn attention to
the issue of fairness in such settings. Algorithmic decisions are used in assigning students to
schools, users to advertisers, and applicants to job
interviews. These decisions should heed the preferences of individuals, and simultaneously be fair
with respect to their merits (synonymous with fit,
future performance, or need). Merits conditioned
on observable features are always uncertain, a
fact that is exacerbated by the widespread use of
machine learning algorithms to infer merit from
the observables. As our key contribution, we carefully axiomatize a notion of individual fairness in
the two-sided marketplace setting which respects
the uncertainty in the merits; indeed, it simultaneously recognizes uncertainty as the primary
potential cause of unfairness and an approach to
address it. We design a linear programming framework to find fair utility-maximizing distributions
over allocations, and we show that the linear program is robust to perturbations in the estimated
parameters of the uncertain merit distributions,
a key property in combining the approach with
machine learning techniques.

We consider a setting in which individuals have preferences
over the outcomes of the resource allocation mechanism, focusing on the important setting of two-sided markets. Applications of this setting abound: matching students to schools,
job fair participants to interviews, doctors to hospitals, patients to treatments, drivers to passengers in ride hailing,
or advertisers to ad slots/users in online advertising (Roth,
1986; Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez, 2003; Roth et al., 2007;
Bronfman et al., 2015; Mehta et al., 2013), to name a few.
In all these settings, the individuals (students, doctors) can
communicate preferences over the resources (schools, hospitals), and also have observable features which may (partially) reveal their qualifications or merit for the different
resources. Merit is broadly construed and can be defined as
a myriad of things: the true capabilities of a job candidate,
the potential relevance of a doctor’s interests when matching
with a residency program, a patient’s need for treatment, or
the fit of a student applying for public high schools. The
goal of our work is to develop a framework for reasoning
about fairness in such settings, as well as an algorithm which
assigns individuals to resources in a way that is fair with
respect to their merit, but also takes individual preferences
into account. In addition, the algorithm should attempt to
maximize the overall utility of the system (according to
problem-dependent notions of overall utility, e.g., social
welfare/revenue), while respecting fairness constraints.

1. Introduction
Systems based on algorithms and machine learning are increasingly used to guide or outright make decisions which
strongly impact human lives; thus it is imperative to take
fairness into account when designing such systems. Notions
of fairness in computer science can be classified into those
that try to capture fairness towards a group (Hardt et al.,
2016; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Kearns et al., 2018; Hébert1

Department of Computer Science, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089. 2 Department of Computer
Science and School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ 08544. Correspondence to: Siddartha
Devic <devic@usc.edu>.

Reconciling individual preferences with the traditional notion of individual fairness (IF) has proven to be difficult.
The most relevant approach is that of Kim et al. (2020),
who propose preference-informed individual fairness (PIIF),
which requires that allocations be individually fair but also
allows for deviations aligned with preferences of the users.
However, there is a key difference between allowing for

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

