On the Complexity of Bayesian Generalization
Yu-Zhe Shi * 1 Manjie Xu * 1 2 John E. Hopcroft 3 Kun He 4 Joshua B. Tenenbaum 5
Song-Chun Zhu 1 2 Ying Nian Wu 6 Wenjuan Han 7 8 Yixin Zhu 1

Abstract

Similarity-based

We examine concept generalization at a large
scale in the natural visual spectrum. Established computational modes (i.e., rule-based or
similarity-based) are primarily studied isolated,
focusing on confined and abstract problem spaces.
In this work, we study these two modes when the
problem space scales up and when the complexity
of concepts becomes diverse. At the representational level, we investigate how the complexity
varies when a visual concept is mapped to the
representation space. Prior literature has shown
that two types of complexities (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2003) build an inverted-U relation (Donderi, 2006; Sun & Firestone, 2021). Leveraging
Representativeness of Attribute (RoA), we computationally confirm: Models use attributes with
high RoA to describe visual concepts, and the
description length falls in an inverted-U relation
with the increment in visual complexity. At the
computational level, we examine how the complexity of representation affects the shift between
the rule- and similarity-based generalization. We
hypothesize that category-conditioned visual modeling estimates the co-occurrence frequency between visual and categorical attributes, thus potentially serving as the prior for the natural visual
world. Experimental results show that representations with relatively high subjective complexity
outperform those with low subjective complexity
in rule-based generalization, while the trend is the
opposite in similarity-based generalization.

Ball is generated by this rule.

Canteen looks like these examples.

Canteen is generated by these rules.

Dog looks like these examples.

Dog is generated by these rules.

looks like this is a cucumber. Given either answer as prior
knowledge, you can easily identify cucumbers; you may
check whether a candidate meets the rules described or judge
whether it is visually similar to the known example. Such capability is concept generalization, and the approaches used
to identify cucumber are rule- and similarity-based generalization (Sloman & Rips, 1998; Shepard, 1987), respectively.
Can both approaches always be applied to all concepts we
see? Hardly. Let us consider how people learn to identify
dog, canteen, and ball. We can easily capture the main feature of a dog given very few examples, yet we may get
confused with the complex rules to identify a dog. Conversely, people may easily tell the limited rules that shape
the concept of canteens, such as serving windows, tables,
and chairs; and the concept of the ball is such a simple concept that can be easily captured by examples or a single rule.
We refer the readers to Fig. 1 for an illustration. This observation naturally leads to a hypothesis that whether people
generalize through rules or similarity has something to do
with how complex the concept instances look like. “Look
like,” complexity, and generalization—these three elements
shape the hypothesis. In this work, we systematically look
into these dimensions of concept generalization.

What is a cucumber? One may respond by a deep green
colored slim-long cylinder with trichomes on the surface is
a cucumber, or directly pick a cucumber—see, something
1

Ball looks like these examples.

Figure 1. Concepts can be described either directly by similar
examples or indirectly by a set of related rules. Here, we demonstrate this intuition through the concepts of ball, canteen, and dog.

1. Introduction

*

Rule-based

We contextualize the problem in the literature of concept
generalization—the framework of Bayesian inference unifies rule- and similarity-based generalization (Tenenbaum,
1999; 1998; Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001a; Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007). Based on perception (Kersten et al., 2004), this
paradigm reconstructs human’s hypothesis space consisting
of abstract features and incubates modern concept learning
algorithms (Tenenbaum et al., 2011; Lake et al., 2015; Ellis et al., 2020). However, as most concept learners have

2

Equal contribution Peking University National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI 3 Cornell University
4
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 5 MIT 6 UCLA
7
Beijing Jiaotong University 8 CUPK. Correspondence to: Yu-Zhe
Shi <syz@perslab.co>, Yixin Zhu <yixin.zhu@pku.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

