Improved Online Learning Algorithms for CTR Prediction in Ad Auctions

Zhe Feng 1 Christopher Liaw 1 Zixin Zhou 2

Abstract

pay-per-click ad auctions is the click-through rate (CTR),
which is the probability that an ad which is shown is actually
clicked. The canonical Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) auction assigns a score equal to the product of an ad’s bid and
their CTR. The winning ad is the ad with the highest score
and their payment, in the event of a click, is equal to the
second-highest score divided by their own CTR (Aggarwal
et al., 2006).

In this work, we investigate the online learning
problem of revenue maximization in ad auctions,
where the seller needs to learn the click-through
rates (CTRs) of each ad candidate and charge the
price of the winner through a pay-per-click manner. We focus on two models of the advertisers’
strategic behaviors. First, we assume that the advertiser is completely myopic; i.e. in each round,
they aim to maximize their utility only for the current round. In this setting, we develop an online
mechanism based on upper-confidence
bounds
√
that achieves a tight O( T ) regret in the worstcase and negative regret when the values are static
across all the auctions and there is a gap between
the highest expected value (i.e. value multiplied
by their CTR) and second highest expected value
ad. Next, we assume that the advertiser is nonmyopic and cares about their long term utility.
This setting is much more complex since an advertiser is incentivized to influence the mechanism
by bidding strategically in earlier rounds. In this
setting, we provide an algorithm to achieve negative regret for the static valuation setting (with a
positive gap), which is in sharp contrast with the
prior work that shows O(T 2/3 ) regret when the
valuation is generated by adversary.

In this paper, we consider the problem where the CTR is not
known to the seller and must be estimated from data. We
model this as an online learning problem where at each time
t, each advertiser i has a private vi,t for their ad to be clicked
at time t and places a bid bi,t . The CTR for ad i is ρi and
we assume this remains static over time. For presentation
simplicity, we call ρi · vi,t the expected cost-per-impression
(eCPM). The auctioneer must then run an auction at time t
(that may depend on all information up to time t − 1) which
receives the bids and outputs a winner and the price in the
event of a click. Our goal is to minimize the auctioneer’s
regret of not knowing the CTR beforehand; this is equal
to the difference of revenue that they could have achieved
using a VCG auction if they knew the CTR and the revenue
they obtained using an online mechanism.
1.1. Our Results
Our results revolve around two models of advertiser utility:
the myopic setting and the non-myopic setting.
Myopic setting. We first assume that the advertisers are
myopic in the sense that, at a particular round t, each advertiser bids to maximize their utility at round t. In particular,
the advertiser does not try to use their bid at a particular
round to influence future auctions. In this setting, we design a “stage-wise incentive compatible (stage-IC)” auction
which combines the upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithm for bandits (Auer et al., 2002) with the canonical
VCG auction described above. By stage-IC, we mean that
a myopic bidder is incentived to bid truthfully at each time
(a formal definition can be found in Definition 2.1). This
UCB-style auction computes an upper confidence bound on
the CTR of each ad and uses the product of this estimate
of the CTR with the advertiser’s bid as the advertiser score.
As a warmup
√ result, we prove that this simple algorithm
achieves e
O( T ) regret in the worst case where the values

1. Introduction
Pay-per-click auctions are widely used in internet advertising auctions to allocate advertising space to advertisers (Edelman et al., 2007; Varian, 2007). As a concrete
example, major search engines, such as Bing and Google,
run an auction for every search query to decide which ads
to show. An important aspect of these auctions is that ads
are only charged in the event of a click.
A crucial piece of information that is required to run these
1
Google, Mountain View, USA 2 Stanford University, Stanford,
USA. Correspondence to: Zixin Zhou <jackzhou@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

