Provably Learning Diverse Features in Multi-View Data with Midpoint Mixup

Muthu Chidambaram 1 Xiang Wang 1 Chenwei Wu 1 Rong Ge 1

Abstract

compared to standard training over different model architectures, tasks, and domains (Liang et al., 2018; He et al.,
2019; Thulasidasan et al., 2019; Lamb et al., 2019; Arazo
et al., 2019; Guo, 2020; Verma et al., 2021b; Wang et al.,
2021). It has also found applications to distributed private learning (Huang et al., 2021), learning fair models
(Chuang & Mroueh, 2021), semi-supervised learning (Berthelot et al., 2019b; Sohn et al., 2020; Berthelot et al., 2019a),
self-supervised (specifically contrastive) learning (Verma
et al., 2021a; Lee et al., 2020; Kalantidis et al., 2020), and
multi-modal learning (So et al., 2022).

Mixup is a data augmentation technique that relies
on training using random convex combinations
of data points and their labels. In recent years,
Mixup has become a standard primitive used in
the training of state-of-the-art image classification models due to its demonstrated benefits over
empirical risk minimization with regards to generalization and robustness. In this work, we try
to explain some of this success from a feature
learning perspective. We focus our attention on
classification problems in which each class may
have multiple associated features (or views) that
can be used to predict the class correctly. Our
main theoretical results demonstrate that, for a
non-trivial class of data distributions with two features per class, training a 2-layer convolutional
network using empirical risk minimization can
lead to learning only one feature for almost all
classes while training with a specific instantiation
of Mixup succeeds in learning both features for
every class. We also show empirically that these
theoretical insights extend to the practical settings
of image benchmarks modified to have multiple
features.

The success of Mixup has instigated several works attempting to theoretically characterize its potential benefits and
drawbacks (Guo et al., 2019; Carratino et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2020; 2021; Chidambaram et al., 2021). These works
have focused mainly on analyzing, at a high-level, the beneficial (or detrimental) behaviors encouraged by the Mixupversion of the original empirical loss for a given task.
As such, none of these previous works (to the best of our
knowledge) have provided an algorithmic analysis of Mixup
training in the context of non-linear models (i.e. neural networks), which is the main use case of Mixup. In this paper,
we begin this line of work by theoretically separating the
full training dynamics of Mixup (with a specific set of hyperparameters) from empirical risk minimization (ERM) for a
2-layer convolutional network (CNN) architecture on a class
of data distributions exhibiting a multi-view nature. This
multi-view property essentially requires (assuming classification data) that each class in the data is well-correlated
with multiple features present in the data.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation techniques have been a mainstay in the
training of state-of-the-art models for a wide array of tasks
- particularly in the field of computer vision - due to their
ability to artificially inflate dataset size and encourage model
robustness to various transformations of the data.

Our analysis is heavily motivated by the recent work of
Allen-Zhu & Li (2021), which showed that this kind of
multi-view data can provide a fruitful setting for theoretically understanding the benefits of ensembles and knowledge distillation in the training of deep learning models. We
show that Mixup can, perhaps surprisingly, capture some of
the key benefits of ensembles explained by Allen-Zhu & Li
(2021) despite only being used to train a single model.

One such technique that has achieved widespread use is
Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018), which constructs new data
points as convex combinations of pairs of data points and
their labels from the original dataset. Mixup has been shown
to empirically improve generalization and robustness when
1
Department of Computer Science, Duke University. Correspondence to: Muthu Chidambaram <muthu@cs.duke.edu>.

1.1. Main Contributions
Our main results (Theorem 4.6 and Theorem 4.7) give a
clear separation between Mixup training and regular training.
They show that for data with two different features (or views)

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

