Compressing Tabular Data via Latent Variable Estimation

Andrea Montanari 1 Eric Weiner 1

Abstract

is to investigate this fact mathematically in the context of
tabular data, characterize the gap to optimality of classical
schemes, and describe an asymptotically optimal algorithm
that overcomes their limitations.

Data used for analytics and machine learning often take the form of tables with categorical entries.
We introduce a family of lossless compression algorithms for such data that proceed in four steps:
(i) Estimate latent variables associated to rows
and columns; (ii) Partition the table in blocks
according to the row/column latents; (iii) Apply
a sequential (e.g. Lempel-Ziv) coder to each of
the blocks; (iv) Append a compressed encoding
of the latents. We evaluate this approach on several benchmark datasets, and study optimal compression in a probabilistic model for tabular data,
whereby latent values are independent and table
entries are conditionally independent given the
latent values. We prove that the model has a well
defined entropy rate and satisfies an asymptotic
equipartition property. We also prove that classical compression schemes such as Lempel-Ziv
and finite-state encoders do not achieve this rate.
On the other hand, the latent estimation strategy
outlined above achieves the optimal rate.

We consider a data table with m rows and n columns and
entries in X , X m,n ∈ X m×n X m,n := (Xij )i≤m,j≤n .
The standard approach to such data is: (i) Serialize, e.g.
in row-first order, to form a vector of length N = mn,
X N = (X11 , X12 , . . . , X1n , X21 , . . . , Xmn ); (ii) Apply a
standard compressor (e.g., Lempel-Ziv) to this vector.
We will show, both empirically and mathematically, that
this standard approach can be suboptimal in the sense of not
achieving the optimal compression rate. This happens even
in the limit of large tables, as long as the number of columns
and rows are polynomially related (i.e. nε ≤ m ≤ nM for
some small constant ε and large constant M ).
We advocate an alternative approach:
1. Estimate row/column latents um = (u1 , . . . , um ) ∈
Lm , v n = (v1 , . . . , vn ) ∈ Ln , with L a finite alphabet.
2. Partition the table in blocks according to the
row/column latents, Namely, for u, v ∈ L, define

X(u, v) = vec Xij : ui = u, vj = v .
(1.1)

1. Introduction
Classical theory of lossless compression (Cover & Thomas,
2006; Salomon, 2004) assumes that data take the form of
a random vector X N = (X1 , X2 , . . . , XN ) of length N
with entries in a finite alphabet X . Under suitable ergodicity assumptions, the entropy per letter converges to a limit
h := limN →∞ H(X N )/N (Shannon-McMillan-Breiman
theorem). Universal coding schemes (e.g. Lempel-Ziv coding) do not requite knowledge of the distribution of X N ,
and can encode such a sequence without information loss
using (asymptotically) h bits per symbol.

where vec(M ) denote the serialization of matrix M
(either row-wise or column-wise).
3. Apply a base compressor (generically denoted by ZX :
X ∗ → {0, 1}∗ ) to each block X(u, v)
z(u, v) = ZX (X(u, v)) ,

∀u, v ∈ L .

(1.2)

4. Encode the row latents and column latents using a
possibly different compressor ZL : X ∗ → {0, 1}∗ , to
get z row = ZL (u), z col = ZL (v). Finally output the
concatenation (denoted by ⊕)
M
Enc(X m,n ) = header ⊕ z row ⊕ z col ⊕
z(u, v) .

While this theory is mathematically satisfying, its modeling assumptions (stationarity, ergodicity) are unlikely to be
satisfied in many applications. This has long been recognized by practitioners. The main objective of this paper
1
Project N, Mountain View, CA, United States. Correspondence
to: Andrea Montanari <am@projectn.co>.

u,v∈L

(1.3)

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Here header is a header that contains encodings of the
lengths of subsequent segments.
1

