Towards Robust and Safe Reinforcement Learning with Benign Off-policy Data

Zuxin Liu * 1 Zijian Guo * 1 Zhepeng Cen 1 Huan Zhang 1 Yihang Yao 1 Hanjiang Hu 1 Ding Zhao 1

Abstract

However, recent studies find that the learned safe RL policies are vulnerable to adversarial attacks: a small perturbation in the observation space could induce dangerous behaviors of the agent and cause a dramatic drop in the safety
performance (Liu et al., 2022c). Therefore, even a welltrained safe RL policy in the noise-free simulation environment may not be truly safe for real-world applications due
to the commonly existing sensing noises. Thus, improving
its robustness against observational perturbations is equally
important to learning a constraint satisfaction policy.

Previous work demonstrates that the optimal
safe reinforcement learning policy in a noisefree environment is vulnerable and could be unsafe under observational attacks. While adversarial training effectively improves robustness and safety, collecting samples by attacking the behavior agent online could be expensive or prohibitively dangerous in many applications. We propose the robuSt vAriational
ofF-policy lEaRning (SAFER) approach, which
only requires benign training data without attacking the agent. SAFER obtains an optimal
non-parametric variational policy distribution via
convex optimization and then uses it to improve
the parameterized policy robustly via supervised
learning. The two-stage policy optimization facilitates robust training, and extensive experiments on multiple robot platforms show the efficiency of SAFER in learning a robust and safe
policy: achieving the same reward with much
fewer constraint violations during training than
on-policy baselines.

Adversarial training is a commonly-used technique in improving policy robustness and task performance in standard
RL setting (Pinto et al., 2017; Gleave et al., 2019). Recent work extends adversarial training to the safe RL domain and suggests that it can also greatly strengthen the
safety performance under properly selected attackers (Liu
et al., 2022c), where the proposed ADV-PPOL method collects corrupted interaction data for model training in an
on-policy fashion. This type of method effectively evaluates the safety performance under strong adversarial attacks to improve the robustness. However, it is expensive
to perform adversarial training and collect corrupted interaction data online in many applications since the dangerous behaviors induced by attacks could be dangerous or
prohibitively unethical (Ibarz et al., 2021). For example,
attacking a self-driving vehicle in the physical world by
corrupting the vision system can lead to catastrophic accidents (Eykholt et al., 2018; Kong et al., 2020), while benign
datasets are much easier to obtain for training. Therefore,
investigating a more efficient and safer robust training algorithm for safe RL is an important but challenging problem.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has witnessed great success in solving challenging problems (Mnih et al., 2013;
Liu et al., 2020a; Jumper et al., 2021). Meanwhile, the potential risks of safety and robustness (Dulac-Arnold et al.,
2021; Moos et al., 2022) arise when deploying deep RL in
real-world applications. Safe RL has been gaining increasing attention recently, which aims to tackle the safety issue by learning a constraint-satisfaction policy (Garcıa and
Fernández, 2015). Safe RL approaches explicitly separate
the constraint violation signals and the rewards of task performance, showing advantages to satisfy the safety requirement (Ray et al., 2019; Brunke et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2022).

This paper aims to develop a robust safe RL directly from
benign data, i.e. the natural training samples without attacks. Conversely, corrupted data is defined as the rollout
trajectories under attacks. Motivated by the ExpectationMaximization (EM) style approaches in RL (Abdolmaleki
et al., 2018b; Levine, 2018; Liu et al., 2022b), we convert
the robust safe RL problem to a convex optimization phase
(E-step) and a supervised learning phase (M-step). Particularly, we propose the robuSt vAriational ofF-policy lEaRning (SAFER) method to improve the robustness against adversarial state perturbations. SAFER robustifies the policy in the M-step since it is a supervised learning problem,
and thus adversarial training techniques can be effectively

*
Equal contribution 1 Carnegie Mellon University, PA, USA.
Correspondence to: Zuxin Liu <zuxinl@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

