Optimizing the Collaboration Structure in Cross-Silo Federated Learning

Wenxuan Bao 1 Haohan Wang 1 Jun Wu 1 Jingrui He 1

Abstract
accuracy

In federated learning (FL), multiple clients collaborate to train machine learning models together
while keeping their data decentralized. Through
utilizing more training data, FL suffers from the
potential negative transfer problem: the global FL
model may even perform worse than the models
trained with local data only. In this paper, we
propose F ED C OLLAB, a novel FL framework that
alleviates negative transfer by clustering clients
into non-overlapping coalitions based on their distribution distances and data quantities. As a result,
each client only collaborates with the clients having similar data distributions, and tends to collaborate with more clients when it has less data. We
evaluate our framework with a variety of datasets,
models, and types of non-IIDness. Our results
demonstrate that F ED C OLLAB effectively mitigates negative transfer across a wide range of
FL algorithms and consistently outperforms other
clustered FL algorithms.

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

(a) Effect of distance
(quantity=10)
collab
global
local

0.2

0.4
distance

0.6

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

(b) Effect of quantity
(distance=0.2)

10

100
quantity

1000

Figure 1. Effects of distribution distance and data quantity. When
two clients have large distribution distance or large quantities, the
local model performs better than global model.

model for all clients that minimizes a weighted average of
local losses. It is a natural solution when clients have independent and identically distributed (IID) data. However,
when clients have non-IID data, GFL may suffer from the
negative transfer problem: the global model performs even
worse than the local models (Zhang et al., 2021). The negative transfer problem also plagues many personalized FL
(PFL) algorithms (Fallah et al., 2020; Dinh et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2021). Although these algorithms allow each client to
train a personalized model with parameters different from
the global model, the regularization of the global model
still prevents personalized models from achieving better
performance than local models.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed learning system
where multiple clients collaborate to train a machine learning model under the orchestration of the central server, while
keeping their data decentralized (McMahan et al., 2017). We
focus on cross-silo FL, where clients are organizations with
data that differ in their distributions and quantities (Caldas
et al., 2018). For example, the clients can be hospitals with
varying patient types and numbers (e.g., children’s hospitals,
trauma centers). Although cross-silo FL clients can train
local models with their own data locally (local training),
they participate in FL for a model trained with more data,
which potentially performs better than local models.

One way to avoid negative transfer is clustered FL (CFL)
(Sattler et al., 2021; Long et al., 2022; Ghosh et al., 2019).
CFL groups clients with similar data distribution into coalitions, and trains FL models within each coalition. As a
result, each client only collaborates with other clients in
the same coalition. By changing the collaboration structure, CFL can alleviate negative transfer with almost no
additional computation and communication costs.
A natural follow-up question would be what determines
the best collaboration structure. We summarize two key
factors for characterizing client collaboration: distribution
distance and data quantity. We start with a simple 2-client
scenario, studying whether the global model or the local
model has higher accuracy. As shown in Figure 1, when
two clients have small distribution distance and small quantity, the global model has higher accuracy, which is a scenario suitable for GFLs. When the distribution distance
between two clients increases (Figure 1(a)), the local model

Traditionally, global FL (GFL) (McMahan et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2020b; Li et al., 2020a) trains a single global
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL,
USA. Correspondence to: Jingrui He <jingrui@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

