Generative Graph Dictionary Learning

Zhichen Zeng 1 Ruike Zhu 1 Yinglong Xia 2 Hanqing Zeng 2 Hanghang Tong 1

Abstract

sentations for data samples based on a set of shared patterns,
namely atoms, has achieved great success in vectorial data.
However, graph dictionary learning (GDL) is much more
challenging as graphs lie in disparate spaces (Peyré et al.,
2016; Xu, 2020). Thanks to the recent advancement of optimal transport (OT), together with powerful graph distance
measures based on the Wasserstein-like distances (Mémoli,
2011; Sturm, 2012; Titouan et al., 2019), a few GDL methods (Xu, 2020; Vincent-Cuaz et al., 2022; 2021; Liu et al.,
2023) have been recently proposed. Most of the existing
GDL methods follow a reconstructive formulation by minimizing the Wasserstein-like distances between the original
and reconstructed graphs, but may suffer from several fundamental limitations. First (linear embedding), graphs are
approximated by the linear combination of atoms, which in
turn leads to linear embeddings with limited representation
power. Second (single-level embedding), the rich information in the OT coupling is rarely exploited by existing GDL
methods to generate embeddings at other levels (e.g., node
or subgraph level) with quantitatively identified cross-level
relationships. Third (computation), although stochastic gradient descent (SGD) provides a scalable approach for large
graphs, other accompanied optimization steps along SGD
still bear intensive computation.

Dictionary learning, which approximates data
samples by a set of shared atoms, is a fundamental
task in representation learning. However, dictionary learning over graphs, namely graph dictionary learning (GDL), is much more challenging
than vectorial data as graphs lie in disparate metric
spaces. The sparse literature on GDL formulates
the problem from the reconstructive view and often learns linear graph embeddings with a high
computational cost. In this paper, we propose
a Fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) Mixture
Model named F RA M E to address the GDL problem from the generative view. Equipped with the
graph generation function based on the radial basis function kernel and FGW distance, F RA M E
generates nonlinear embedding spaces, which, as
we theoretically proved, provide a good approximation of the original graph spaces. A fast solution is further proposed on top of the expectationmaximization algorithm with guaranteed convergence. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the obtained node and graph embeddings, and our algorithm achieves significant
improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.

Contributions. In this paper, we propose a novel GDL
method named F RA M E to address the aforementioned limitations. Using the graph generation function based on the
Fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) distance and the radius
basis function (RBF) kernel, the GDL problem is formulated
from the generative perspective by maximizing the likelihood of generating graphs from atoms, through which the
nonlinear graph-atom relationship can be captured. Besides,
by utilizing the accompanied node correspondence information, the proposed method can jointly generate graph,
subgraph and node embeddings. A fast solution based
on the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm is further proposed achieving quadratic time complexity with
guaranteed convergence. Theoretical analysis shows that
F RA M E generates a low-dimensional embedding space that
well-approximates the original graph space with little information loss. Extensive experiments show that F RA M E
achieves significant improvement on graph-level and nodelevel tasks, outperforming the state-of-the-art by 8.0% on
graph classification, 0.5% on graph clustering, and 2.5% on

1. Introduction
In the era of big data and AI, graphs originate from various domains carrying rich information. Finding lowdimensional representations encoding graph structural information, i.e., graph representation learning, is the key
stepping stone behind various graph-based applications in
bioinformatics (Ktena et al., 2017), chemistry (Jin et al.,
2017), social networks (Yanardag & Vishwanathan, 2015),
and many more.
Dictionary learning, which seeks for low-dimensional repre1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA 2 Meta, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Hanghang Tong <htong@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

