Improved Policy Evaluation for Randomized Trials of Algorithmic Resource
Allocation
Aditya Mate 1 2 Bryan Wilder 3 Aparna Taneja 2 Milind Tambe 1 2

Abstract

2004; Tesauro et al., 2006), variations of the multi-armed
bandit framework (Jamieson et al., 2014), network optimization (Wilder et al., 2021; Vaswani et al., 2015), etc. As
machine learning becomes increasingly widely applied in
socially critical settings, such policies have been used to
allocate limited resources in a variety of domains, including
campaign optimization (Leskovec et al., 2007; Eagle et al.,
2010), improving maternal healthcare (Verma et al., 2023),
screening for hepatocellular carcinoma (Lee et al., 2019),
monitoring tuberculosis patients (Mate et al., 2021), etc.
Such a policy may rank all individuals within a group, and
offer a scarce resource, such as a home visit by a health
worker, to the highest-ranked individuals within the group.

We consider the task of evaluating policies of
algorithmic resource allocation through randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Such policies are
tasked with optimizing the utilization of limited
intervention resources, with the goal of maximizing the benefits derived. Evaluation of such allocation policies through RCTs proves difficult,
notwithstanding the scale of the trial, because the
individuals’ outcomes are inextricably interlinked
through resource constraints controlling the policy decisions. Our key contribution is to present
a new estimator leveraging our proposed novel
concept, that involves retrospective reshuffling of
participants across experimental arms at the end
of an RCT. We identify conditions under which
such reassignments are permissible and can be
leveraged to construct counterfactual trials, whose
outcomes can be accurately ascertained, for free.
We prove theoretically that such an estimator is
more accurate than common estimators based on
sample means — we show that it returns an unbiased estimate and simultaneously reduces variance. We demonstrate the value of our approach
through empirical experiments on synthetic, semisynthetic as well as real case study data and show
improved estimation accuracy across the board.

RCTs evaluating these resource allocation policies consist
of M experimental arms labeled {1, . . . , M }, with each arm
consisting of N unique, randomly assigned individuals. The
policy in each experimental arm prescribes an allocation of
resources while respecting some resource constraints. This
process may be either single-shot (allocations made once) or
sequential (new allocation decisions made adaptively over
a series of rounds). Each policy, dictating its own resource
allocation strategy, is evaluated at the end of the trial by
analyzing the outcomes data from its corresponding experimental arm. The group-level decision making of resource
allocation policies creates new challenges for their experimental analysis. In a standard RCT, the aim is to evaluate
the treatment effect – there is no resource constraint, so
all participants receive treatment – for the average participant (Angrist & Pischke, 2009). As the outcomes of all
participants are independent, analysts can simply compare
outcomes in the treatment versus control groups. However,
trials of resource allocation policies aim to evaluate the
group outcome of a set of individuals to whom the policy
is applied (some of whom receive the resource, and some
who do not). Even when the number of individuals in the
trial is large by the standards of a normal RCT, randomized
trials of allocation policies can suffer from high variance,
leading to noisy and potentially erroneous estimates of the
treatment effect.

1. Introduction
We consider a subclass of randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) wherein the goal of the trial is to evaluate the efficacy of an algorithmic resource allocation policy. Such
policies recommend an allocation (action), commonly utilizing tools such as reinforcement learning (Galstyan et al.,
1
School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard
University, USA 2 Google Research, India 3 Carnegie Mellon University, USA. Correspondence to: Aditya Mate
<aditya mate@g.harvard.edu>.

This high variance stems from two sources. First, the outcomes of individuals within a given arm are correlated because allocation policies typically consider all individuals
jointly in making an allocation decision (e.g., to respect

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

