Polyhedral Complex Extraction from ReLU Networks using Edge Subdivision

Arturs Berzins 1 2

Abstract
A neural network consisting of piecewise affine
building blocks, such as fully-connected layers
and ReLU activations, is itself a piecewise affine
function supported on a polyhedral complex. This
complex has been previously studied to characterize theoretical properties of neural networks, but,
in practice, extracting it remains a challenge due
to its high combinatorial complexity. A natural
idea described in previous works is to subdivide
the regions via intersections with hyperplanes induced by each neuron. However, we argue that
this view leads to computational redundancy. Instead of regions, we propose to subdivide edges,
leading to a novel method for polyhedral complex
extraction. A key to this are sign-vectors, which
encode the combinatorial structure of the complex. Our approach allows to use standard tensor
operations on a GPU, taking seconds for millions
of cells on a consumer grade machine. Motivated
by the growing interest in neural shape representation, we use the speed and differentiablility of
our method to optimize geometric properties of
the complex. The code is available on GitHub1 .

Figure 1. Example of the polyhedral complex extracted from a
ReLU NN trained on the signed distance field of a D = 3 Stanford
bunny.

of folded hyperplanes representing decision boundaries of
neurons (Grigsby & Lindsey, 2022). This complex has been
linked to max-affine spline operators, which possess intriguing geometric properties and allow for joint optimization of
the domain partition and spline coefficients (Balestriero &
Baraniuk, 2021). CPWA NNs have also been used in neural
implicit shape representations for boundary mesh extraction
(Lei & Jia, 2020) and visualization (Humayun et al., 2022;
2023).

1. Introduction
A NN is a CPWA function if it is a composition of CPWA
operators, most notably fully-connected layers and rectified
linear unit (ReLU) activations. The CPWA nature induces a
discrete partitioning of the input domain, which provides an
additional avenue to study NNs in terms of their expressivity,
robustness, training techniques, and unique geometry.

The diverse range of applications motivates a computational
method to extract the complex. A trivial approach is to
evaluate neuron states at sampled points. While this suffices to visualize an estimated domain partition or compute
a lower bound on the number of regions, it does not provide the exact complex. Proposed exact approaches include
formulating this as a mixed-integer linear program (Serra
et al., 2018) or employing state-flipping (Lei & Jia, 2020).
However, the most natural and widely discussed approach is
region subdivision, where the complex’s regions are successively subdivided from neuron to neuron and layer to layer
(Raghu et al., 2017; Hanin & Rolnick, 2019a; Wang, 2022;
Humayun et al., 2022; 2023).

It is known that each affine piece is supported on a convex
polyhedral set. The collection of these polyhedral sets forms
a polyhedral complex, which is induced by an arrangement
1
SINTEF, Oslo, Norway 2 Department of Mathematics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Correspondence to: Arturs Berzins
<arturs.berzins@sintef.no>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
github.com/arturs-berzins/relu_edge_subdivision

Our method is motivated by the observation of redundancy
in region subdivision. The continuity of the activation function ensures that a folded hyperplane remains continuous
1

