Fisher Information Embedding for Node and Graph Learning

Dexiong Chen * 1 2 Paolo Pellizzoni * 1 2 Karsten Borgwardt 1 2

Abstract

have been widely used and have been shown to be powerful
tools. They have been successfully applied to broad classes
of application domains, such as drug discovery (Gaudelet
et al., 2021), protein design (Ingraham et al., 2019) and
social network analysis (Fan et al., 2019).

Attention-based graph neural networks (GNNs),
such as graph attention networks (GATs),
have become popular neural architectures for
processing graph-structured data and learning
node embeddings.
Despite their empirical
success, these models rely on labeled data and
the theoretical properties of these models have
yet to be fully understood. In this work, we
propose a novel attention-based node embedding
framework for graphs. Our framework builds
upon a hierarchical kernel for multisets of subgraphs around nodes (e.g., neighborhoods) and
each kernel leverages the geometry of a smooth
statistical manifold to compare pairs of multisets,
by “projecting” the multisets onto the manifold.
By explicitly computing node embeddings with a
manifold of Gaussian mixtures, our method leads
to a new attention mechanism for neighborhood
aggregation. We provide theoretical insights
into generalizability and expressivity of our
embeddings, contributing to a deeper understanding of attention-based GNNs. We propose
both efficient unsupervised and supervised
methods for learning the embeddings. Through
experiments on several node classification
benchmarks, we demonstrate that our proposed
method outperforms existing attention-based
graph models like GATs. Our code is available at
https://github.com/BorgwardtLab/
fisher_information_embedding.

GNNs construct multilayer models and iteratively perform
neighborhood aggregation on previous layers to generate new node representations (Xu et al., 2018). A popular variant of GNNs, known as graph attention networks
(GATs) (Veličković et al., 2018), utilizes an attention mechanism for neighborhood aggregation. The attention mechanism of GATs generalizes traditional average and max
pooling of the representations of neighbors by performing
a data-dependent weighted average of neighbors. Despite
the empirical success of GATs, their theoretical properties
have not been fully explored. A deeper understanding of the
generalizability and expressivity of attention-based GNNs
is crucial for identifying limitations and developing more
advanced models. Additionally, GATs rely on labeled data,
making them less flexible than unsupervised node embedding methods, e.g., these derived from trainable kernel methods (Chen et al., 2020).
Another important class of methods for dealing with the
complexity of graph-structured data is node and graph kernels. Node kernels (Kondor & Vert, 2004; Smola & Kondor, 2003) have demonstrated success in capturing the similarity between two nodes in a graph by leveraging the
graph Laplacian. However, this class of kernels are known
to possess limitations, including high computational complexity (Smola & Kondor, 2003) and challenges in generalizing across multiple graphs. In contrast, graph kernels (Borgwardt et al., 2020; Kriege et al., 2020) rely on
the R-convolution framework, which computes local similarities among substructures and aggregates these similarities. Recent work has also identified limitations of this
framework and proposed approaches to overcome them. For
example, Togninalli et al. (2019) leverage optimal transport
to aggregate node embeddings obtained by the WeisfeilerLehman (WL) process, in order to improve their ability to
capture complex characteristics of the graph. This kernel
was later extended to obtain graph embeddings that can
handle large-scale datasets (Kolouri et al., 2020). However,
these kernels or embeddings are based on unparameterized
node embeddings obtained by averaging the node represen-

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data has gained significant attention in
various domains in recent years. To analyze this type of data
with graph relationships, graph neural networks (GNNs)
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Biosystems Science and
Engineering, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 SIB Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Dexiong Chen
<dechen@ethz.ch>, Paolo Pellizzoni <ppellizzoni@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

