Contextual Conservative Interleaving Bandits

Kei Takemura 1

Abstract

an action from given actions and then obtains a reward
for the chosen action. The learner aims to maximize the
sum of rewards. The central challenge of this problem
is the exploration-exploitation trade-off due to the lack of
prior knowledge about the rewards. The MAB problem has
been generalized to many directions to model more realistic situations of real-world applications. For example, the
combinatorial semi-bandit (CS) problem (Gai et al., 2012;
Kveton et al., 2014; 2015; Wang & Chen, 2018) enables
the learner to choose multiple actions at once and observe
corresponding rewards, the contextual linear bandit (CLB)
problem (Abe & Long, 1999; Auer, 2002; Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011; Chu et al., 2011) introduces time-dependent
actions associated with feature vectors, and the contextual
combinatorial semi-bandit (CCS) problem (Qin et al., 2014;
Takemura & Ito, 2019; Takemura et al., 2021) generalizes
both the CS and the CLB problems.

The performance of a bandit algorithm is usually
measured by the cumulative rewards of the actions chosen by the algorithm. However, in many
real-world applications, the rewards in each round
should be good enough for reasons such as safety
and fairness. In this paper, we investigate the contextual conservative interleaving bandit problem,
which has a performance constraint that requires
the chosen actions to be not much worse than
given baseline actions in each round. This work
is the first to simultaneously consider the following practical situations: (1) multiple actions are
chosen in a round, (2) the feature vectors associated with given actions depend on the round,
and (3) the performance constraints in each round
that depend only on the actions chosen in that
round. We propose a meta-algorithm, Greedy on
Confidence Widths (GCW), that satisfies the performance constraints with high probability. GCW
uses a standard bandit algorithm and achieves
minimax optimal regret up to logarithmic factors
if the algorithm used is also minimax optimal. We
improve the existing analyses for the C2 UCB algorithm and the Thompson sampling to combine
with GCW. We show that these algorithms achieve
near-optimal regret when the feasible sets of given
actions are the bases of a matroid. Our numerical
experiments on a real-world dataset demonstrate
that GCW with the standard bandit algorithms
efficiently improves performance while satisfying
the performance constraints.

In recent years, the conservative bandit problems (Wu et al.,
2016; Kazerouni et al., 2017; Garcelon et al., 2020; Khezeli
& Bitar, 2020; Moradipari et al., 2020; Katariya et al., 2019)
have been studied, where constraints on the learner’s performance are introduced. Specifically, the learner additionally
observes baseline actions for given actions and has to satisfy performance constraints that require that the learner’s
performance is not much worse than the performance by
the baseline actions. The performance constraints mitigate
a drawback that the standard bandit algorithms perform
poorly in early rounds.
Unfortunately, these studies are not yet suitable for many
real-world applications. In real-world applications such as
recommendations, the following properties summarized in
Table 1 should often be satisfied simultaneously: (1) the
learner chooses multiple actions at once, (2) the feasible
and the baseline actions depend on the round, and (3) the
performance constraints guarantee the performance of each
round. However, none of the existing studies addresses
all of these properties. In Section 2, we will compare this
work with the existing studies on the conservative bandit
problems in detail.

1. Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem and its
extensions have been studied as sequential decision-making
problems under uncertainty. In the MAB problem, a learner
iterates the following process T times: The learner chooses
1
NEC Corporation, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Kei
Takemura <kei takemura@nec.com>.

This paper investigates the contextual conservative interleaving bandit (CCIB) problem, which satisfies the three
properties above. Specifically, the CCIB problem is the
CCS problem with stage-wise performance constraints. As

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

