Hyperbolic Diffusion Embedding and Distance for
Hierarchical Representation Learning

Ya-Wei Eileen Lin 1 Ronald R. Coifman 2 Gal Mishne 3 Ronen Talmon 1

Abstract

processing (Tifrea et al., 2018), social networks (Verbeek &
Suri, 2014), computer vision (Khrulkov et al., 2020), information retrieval (Tay et al., 2018), bioinformatics (Ding &
Regev, 2021; Lin et al., 2021), and reinforcement learning
(Cetin et al., 2022).

Finding meaningful representations and distances
of hierarchical data is important in many fields.
This paper presents a new method for hierarchical data embedding and distance. Our method
relies on combining diffusion geometry, a central
approach to manifold learning, and hyperbolic
geometry. Specifically, using diffusion geometry,
we build multi-scale densities on the data, aimed
to reveal their hierarchical structure, and then embed them into a product of hyperbolic spaces. We
show theoretically that our embedding and distance recover the underlying hierarchical structure. In addition, we demonstrate the efficacy
of the proposed method and its advantages compared to existing methods on graph embedding
benchmarks and hierarchical datasets.

Despite their growing utility, existing methods for hyperbolic representation learning suffer from several notable
shortcomings. For example, methods based on optimization of some objective function do not necessarily guarantee
optimal representation in terms of standard definitive quality metrics of tree-like geometries (Sonthalia & Gilbert,
2020) and could suffer from numerical instabilities (Mishne
et al., 2022). In the context of this work, perhaps the most
restrictive disadvantage of many methods for hyperbolic
representation learning is that they require the tree graph
or tree distance to be known in advance. However, often in
practice, we are only given observational data without any
prior information, and the underlying hierarchical structures
need to be recovered from the ground up.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we present a new method for hierarchical data
embedding and distance recovery that provably reveals the
underlying tree-like structure. In contrast to existing methods, our approach can also be applied to observational data
without any prior knowledge of the underlying hierarchical
structure. Our method builds on diffusion geometry (Coifman & Lafon, 2006), which is a mathematical framework
that facilitates the analysis of high-dimensional data points
by capturing their underlying geometric structures. The
basic idea behind diffusion geometry is to analyze the similarity between the data points through diffusion propagation.
It is based on the construction of a diffusion operator from
observations, which is tightly related to the heat kernel and
the Laplacian of the underlying manifold. Diffusion geometry has been mainly used for manifold learning, giving rise
to multi-scale low-dimensional representations and informative distances. In the past two decades, it has been shown
useful in a large number of applications from a broad range
of fields, for example, spectral clustering (Nadler et al.,
2005), signal processing (Talmon et al., 2013), multi-view
dimensionality reduction (Lindenbaum et al., 2020), dynamical systems (Talmon & Coifman, 2013), anomaly detection
(Mishne & Cohen, 2012), datasets alignment (Shnitzer et al.,

Hierarchical data is prevalent in many fields of applied science and engineering. Therefore, finding meaningful representations and distances of hierarchical data is an important
scientific task. Hyperbolic geometry provides a powerful
tool for this purpose; due to their exponential growth, hyperbolic spaces can naturally represent data with tree-like
structures (Sarkar, 2011). Indeed, an abundance of methods
that involve hyperbolic geometry have been developed in
recent years. Notable examples include optimization-based
methods (Chamberlain et al., 2017; Nickel & Kiela, 2017;
2018; Chami et al., 2020) and combinatorial methods (Sala
et al., 2018; Sonthalia & Gilbert, 2020), to mention just a
few. Such hyperbolic geometry-based methods have been
successfully applied to central scientific tasks involving hierarchical data in a broad range of fields, e.g., natural language
1

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Department of Mathematics, Yale University,
New Haven, CT, USA 3 Halicioǧlu Data Science Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Ya-Wei Eileen Lin <lin.ya-wei@campus.technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

