Benign Overfitting in Two-layer ReLU Convolutional Neural Networks

Yiwen Kou * 1 Zixiang Chen * 1 Yuanzhou Chen 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

There has been a line of work in recent years studying
benign overfitting from the theoretical perspective. Despite
their contributions and insights into the benign overfitting
phenomenon, most of these works focus on linear models
(Belkin et al., 2020; Bartlett et al., 2020; Hastie et al., 2022;
Wu & Xu, 2020; Chatterji & Long, 2021; Zou et al., 2021b;
Cao et al., 2021) or kernel/random features models (Belkin
et al., 2018; Liang & Rakhlin, 2020; Montanari & Zhong,
2022). Adlam & Pennington (2020) and Li et al. (2021)
focused on benign overfitting in neural network models,
yet their results are limited to the neural tangent kernel
(NTK) regime (Jacot et al., 2018), where the neural network
learning is essentially equivalent to kernel regression.

Modern deep learning models with great expressive power can be trained to overfit the training
data but still generalize well. This phenomenon
is referred to as benign overfitting. Recently, a
few studies have attempted to theoretically understand benign overfitting in neural networks.
However, these works are either limited to neural
networks with smooth activation functions or to
the neural tangent kernel regime. How and when
benign overfitting can occur in ReLU neural networks remains an open problem. In this work,
we seek to answer this question by establishing
algorithm-dependent risk bounds for learning twolayer ReLU convolutional neural networks with
label-flipping noise. We show that, under mild
conditions, the neural network trained by gradient
descent can achieve near-zero training loss and
Bayes optimal test risk. Our result also reveals
a sharp transition between benign and harmful
overfitting under different conditions on data distribution in terms of test risk. Experiments on
synthetic data back up our theory.

Understanding benign overfitting in neural networks beyond the NTK regime is much more challenging because
of the non-convexity of the problem. Recently, Frei et al.
(2022) studied the problem of learning log-concave mixture
data with label-flipping noise, using fully-connected twolayer neural networks with smoothed leaky ReLU activation.
They proved the risk upper bound under certain regularity
conditions, which matches the lower bound given in Cao
et al. (2021) when the label-flipping noise is zero. Cao et al.
(2022) provided an analysis for learning two-layer convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with polynomial ReLU
activation function (ReLUq , q > 2). Their analysis also
identifies a condition that controls the phase transition between benign and harmful overfitting. The analyses in both
Frei et al. (2022) and Cao et al. (2021) highly rely on smooth
activation functions and cannot deal with the most widely
used ReLU activation function. Thus, there remains an open
question:

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning models have a large number of parameters, often exceeding the number of training data points.
Despite being over-parameterized and overfitting the training data, these models can still make accurate predictions
on the unseen test data (Zhang et al., 2017; Neyshabur
et al., 2018b). This phenomenon, often referred to as benign overfitting (Bartlett et al., 2020), has revolutionized
traditional theories of statistical learning and attracted great
attention from the statistics and machine learning communities (Belkin et al., 2018; 2019; 2020; Hastie et al., 2022).

How and when does benign overfitting occur in ReLU
neural networks?
In this paper, we seek to answer the above question by
establishing risk bounds for learning two-layer CNNs with
ReLU activation function.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.

1.1. Problem Setup

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We consider a similar data distribution that was explored in
Cao et al. (2022). In this particular distribution, the input
1

