Exploring the Benefits of Training Expert Language Models
over Instruction Tuning

Joel Jang 1 Seungone Kim 1 Seonghyeon Ye 1 Doyoung Kim 1 Lajanugen Logeswaran 2 Moontae Lee 2 3
Kyungjae Lee 2 Minjoon Seo 1

Abstract

cosmos_qa

Recently, Language Models (LMs) instructiontuned on multiple tasks, also known as multitaskprompted fine-tuning (MT), have shown the capability to generalize to unseen tasks. Previous work
has shown that scaling the number of training
tasks is the key component in making stronger MT
LMs. In this work, we report an unexpected finding that an expert LM fine-tuned on just a single
task can outperform an MT LM trained with 300+
different tasks on 11 different unseen datasets and
on 13 datasets of the BIG-bench benchmark by
a mean accuracy of 3.20% and 1.29%, respectively. This finding casts doubt on the previously
held belief that simply scaling the number of tasks
makes stronger MT LMs. Leveraging this finding,
we further show that this distributed approach of
training a separate expert LM per training task instead of a single MT LM for zero-shot inference
possesses many benefits including (1) avoiding
negative task transfer that often occurs during
instruction tuning, (2) being able to continually
learn new tasks without having to re-train on previous tasks to avoid catastrophic forgetting, and (3)
showing compositional capabilities when merging
individual experts together. The code is available
at https://github.com/joeljang/ELM.

social_i_qa
dream

Figure 1. Mean accuracy performance of Expert LMs (each trained
on a single task) on 11 unseen datasets compared to an instructiontuned LM, T0-3B. Results show some Expert LMs surpassing T03B, challenging the commonly held belief that simply scaling the
total number of training tasks is the key component to enhancing
the capability of MT LMs.

1. Introduction

Work done while JJ and SY were interns at LG AI Research.
KAIST 2 LG AI Research 3 University of Illinois Chicago. Correspondence to: Joel Jang <joeljang@kaist.ac.kr>.

tuning (Wei et al., 2021; Sanh et al., 2021; Chung et al.,
2022; Ye et al., 2022b; Ouyang et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022a; Muennighoff et al., 2022). This paper raises some
questions regarding the current paradigm of training MT
LMs and is mainly divided into two parts. In Part 1, we
report an unexpected finding regarding expert LMs (trained
only on a single task) compared to MT LMs. In Part 2, we
leverage the finding to highlight some of the benefits of
expert LMs over MT LMs.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Part 1 (Section 5) Previously, the key component to enhancing the unseen task generalization performance of MT

Recent works show pretrained Language Models (LMs) that
have been fine-tuned on multiple tasks with instructions
(prompted instances), also known as multitask-prompted
fine-tuned LMs and referred to as MT LMs in this work,
can generalize to unseen tasks without task-specific fine1

1

