CircuitNet: A Generic Neural Network to Realize
Universal Circuit Motif Modeling

Yansen Wang 1 Xinyang Jiang 1 Kan Ren 1 Caihua Shan 1 Xufang Luo 1 Dongqi Han 1 Kaitao Song 1
Yifei Shen 1 Dongsheng Li 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In the past decades, artificial neural networks (ANN) (McCulloch & Pitts, 1943) have been widely used as function
estimators to solve regression and classification problems,
which massively push deep learning forward in vastly different fields such as computer vision (He et al., 2016), natural
language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), deep reinforcement learning (Mnih et al., 2015), etc. The successes of
ANN are largely attributed to mimicking the simplified human brain structures. For example, the original multi-layer
perceptrons (MLP) are collections of neurons organized as
layers (Minsky & Papert, 1969; Rosenblatt, 1958), and signals are controlled and transmitted between layers via linear
transformations and non-linear activation functions, just like
the synapses in a biological brain. Recently, the network
architectures become rather complex, but their basic units
such as convolutional layers and recurrent layers are still different abstractions of human nervous systems (Fukushima
& Miyake, 1982; Hubel & Wiesel, 1968; Lindsay, 2021;
Kietzmann et al., 2019; van Bergen & Kriegeskorte, 2020).

The successes of artificial neural networks
(ANNs) are largely attributed to mimicking the
human brain structures. Recent advances in neuroscience revealed that neurons interact with each
other through various kinds of connectivity patterns to process information, in which the common connectivity patterns are also called circuit
motifs. However, many existing ANNs can only
model one or two circuit motifs in their architectures, so that their performance may drastically vary among different types of machine learning tasks. In this paper, we propose a new type
of neural network inspired by the architectures
of neuronal circuits, namely Circuit Neural Network (CircuitNet). In CircuitNet, a group of
densely connected neurons, namely circuit motif unit (CMU), form the basic unit of the network,
which is capable of modeling universal circuit
motifs by adjusting the weights within the CMUs.
Compared with traditional feed-forward networks,
CircuitNet has the ability to model more types of
neuron connections such as feed-back and lateral motifs. Inspired by the locally dense and
globally sparse structure of the human brain, several iterations of signal transmission among different CMUs are achieved by sparse connections
through the input ports and output ports of different CMUs. Experiments have demonstrated
that CircuitNet can outperform popular neural
network architectures in function approximation,
reinforcement learning, image classification, and
time series forecasting tasks.

In recent years, understanding on both deep learning and
neuroscience has made great advances, and it is time to
rethink how artificial neural network designs can be further
inspired by neuroscience. Following previous ANNs, we
simplify the signal from a neuron as a real number and
focus more on how to model the signal transmission and
connectivity patterns among neurons. Recent findings in
neuroscience (Luo, 2021; Peters, 1991; Standring, 2021;
Swanson, 2012) emphasized the role of specific patterns
of synaptic connectivity in neuron communication across
different brain regions. These patterns are analogous to
the connection of neurons in ANNs, and in the rest of this
section, we will introduce how these findings can inspire
the ANN design.
One line of advances in neuroscience revealed that neurons
interact with each other through various kinds of connectivity patterns, namely the circuit motifs (Luo, 2021). There
are four types of most common circuit motifs, including
feed-forward excitation and inhibition, feed-back inhibition, lateral inhibition, and mutual inhibition, as shown in
Figure 1. However, neurons in most existing ANNs (includ-

1

Microsoft Research Asia, No.701 Yunjin Rd., Xuhui District,
Shanghai, China. Correspondence to: Yansen Wang <yansenwang@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

