Constrained Monotonic Neural Networks
Davor Runje 1 2 Sharath M Shankaranarayana 1

Abstract

smaller datasets (Veličković, 2019). Apart from the requirements of having models with high accuracy, there is also a
need for transparency and interpretability, and monotonicity
helps in partially achieving the above requirements (Gupta
et al., 2016). Due to legal, ethical and/or safety concerns,
monotonicity of predictive models with respect to some input or all the inputs is required in numerous domains such
as financial (house pricing, credit scoring, insurance risk),
healthcare (medical diagnosis, patient medication) and legal
(criminal sentencing) to list just a few. For example, when
using machine learning to predict admission decisions, it
may seem unfair to select student X over student Y, if Y has
a higher score than X, while all other aspects of the two are
identical (Liu et al., 2020). In another example, one would
expect an individual with a higher salary to have a higher
loan amount approved, all else being equal (Sivaraman et al.,
2020). A model without such a monotonic property would
not, and certainly should not, be trusted by society to provide a basis for such important decisions.

Wider adoption of neural networks in many critical domains such as finance and healthcare is
being hindered by the need to explain their predictions and to impose additional constraints on
them. Monotonicity constraint is one of the most
requested properties in real-world scenarios and
is the focus of this paper. One of the oldest ways
to construct a monotonic fully connected neural
network is to constrain signs on its weights. Unfortunately, this construction does not work with
popular non-saturated activation functions as it
can only approximate convex functions. We show
this shortcoming can be fixed by constructing two
additional activation functions from a typical unsaturated monotonic activation function and employing each of them on the part of neurons. Our
experiments show this approach of building monotonic neural networks has better accuracy when
compared to other state-of-the-art methods, while
being the simplest one in the sense of having the
least number of parameters, and not requiring
any modifications to the learning procedure or
post-learning steps. Finally, we prove it can approximate any continuous monotone function on
a compact subset of Rn .

Monotonicity has been an active area of research and the
existing methods on the subject can be broadly categorized
into two types:
1. Monotonic architectures by construction: neural architectures guaranteeing monotonicity by construction
(Archer & Wang, 1993; Sill, 1997; Daniels & Velikova,
2010; Milani Fard et al., 2016; You et al., 2017).
2. Monotonicity by regularization: enforcing monotonicity in neural networks during training by employing
a modified loss function or a heuristic regularization
term (Sill & Abu-Mostafa, 1996; Gupta et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Deep Learning has witnessed widespread adoption in many
critical real-world domains such as finance, healthcare, etc
(LeCun et al., 2015). Incorporating prior knowledge such
as monotonicity in trained models helps in improving the
performance and generalization ability of the trained models
(Mitchell, 1980; Dugas et al., 2000). The introduction of
structural biases such as monotonicity makes models also
more data-efficient, enabling a leap in predictive power on

The simplest method to achieve monotonicity by construction is to constrain the weights of the fully connected neural
network to have only non-negative (for non-decreasing variables) or only non-positive values (for non-ascending) variables when used in conjunction with a monotonic activation
function, a technique known for 30 years (Archer & Wang,
1993). When used in conjunction with saturated (bounded)
activation functions such as the sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent, these models are difficult to train, i.e. they do not
converge to a good solution. On the other hand, when used
with non-saturated (unbounded) convex activation functions
such as ReLU (Nair & Hinton, 2010), the resulting models

1
Airt Research, Zagreb, Croatia 2 Algebra University
College, Zagreb, Croatia.
Correspondence to: Davor
Runje <davor@airt.ai>, Sharath M Shankaranarayana
<sharathms@alumni.iitm.ac.in>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

