Run-Off Election: Improved Provable Defense against Data Poisoning Attacks

Keivan Rezaei * 1 Kiarash Banihashem * 1 Atoosa Chegini 1 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract

ing (Chen, 2015) and have become the standard method of
choice in many applications. Despite this success, these
methods are vulnerable to poisoning attacks where the adversary manipulates the training data in order to change the
classifications of specific inputs at the test time (Chen et al.,
2017; Shafahi et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2021). Since large
datasets are obtained using methods such as crawling the
web, this issue has become increasingly important as deep
models are adopted in safety-critical applications.

In data poisoning attacks, an adversary tries to
change a model’s prediction by adding, modifying, or removing samples in the training data. Recently, ensemble-based approaches for obtaining
provable defenses against data poisoning have
been proposed where predictions are done by taking a majority vote across multiple base models.
In this work, we show that merely considering the
majority vote in ensemble defenses is wasteful as
it does not effectively utilize available information
in the logits layers of the base models. Instead, we
propose Run-Off Election (ROE), a novel aggregation method based on a two-round election across
the base models: In the first round, models vote
for their preferred class and then a second, RunOff election is held between the top two classes
in the first round. Based on this approach, we
propose DPA+ROE and FA+ROE defense methods based on Deep Partition Aggregation (DPA)
and Finite Aggregation (FA) approaches from
prior work. We evaluate our methods on MNIST,
CIFAR-10, and GTSRB and obtain improvements
in certified accuracy by up to 3%-4%. Also, by
applying ROE on a boosted version of DPA 1 , we
gain improvements around 12%-27% comparing
to the current state-of-the-art, establishing a new
state-of-the-art in (pointwise) certified robustness against data poisoning. In many cases, our
approach outperforms the state-of-the-art, even
when using 32 times less computational power.

While empirical defense methods have been proposed to
combat this problem using approaches such as data augmentation and data sanitization (Hodge & Austin, 2004; Paudice
et al., 2018; Gong et al., 2020; Borgnia et al., 2021; Ni
et al., 2021), the literature around poisoning has followed
something of a “cat and mouse” game as in the broader
literature on adversarial robustness, where defense methods
are quickly broken using adaptive and stronger attack techniques (Carlini et al., 2019). To combat this, several works
have focused on obtaining certifiable defenses that are provably robust against the adversary, regardless of the attack
method. These works provide a certificate for each sample
that is a guaranteed lower bound on the amount of distortion
on the training set required to change the model’s prediction.
The most scalable provable defenses against data poisoning have been considered the use of ensemble methods that
are composed of multiple base classifiers (Levine & Feizi,
2020; Chen et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022b;
Chen et al., 2022). At the test time, the prediction of these
models is aggregated by taking a majority vote across them.
Depending on the exact method, the certificates may be
deterministic or stochastic. For instance, Deep Partition
Aggregation (DPA) method of (Levine & Feizi, 2020) trains
multiple models on disjoint subsets of the training data.
Since each poisoned sample can affect at most one model,
this leads to a deterministic certificate based on the gap
between the predicted and the runner-up class. This can
be wasteful, however as the models predicting other than
the top two classes are ignored. While the choice of the
partitioning scheme used for training the models has been
extensively considered in the literature, for both deterministic (Levine & Feizi, 2020; Wang et al., 2022b) and stochastic
(Chen et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2021) partitioning schemes,
all of these approaches share the problem as they take a
majority vote at test time.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have
achieved great success in many research areas, such as computer vision (He et al., 2016) and natural language process*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Keivan Rezaei
<krezaei@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
We thank anonymous reviewer for proposing this method.

1

