Abstracting Imperfect Information Away from Two-Player Zero-Sum Games

Samuel Sokota 1 † Ryan D’Orazio 2 Chun Kai Ling 1 David J. Wu 3 J. Zico Kolter 1 4 Noam Brown 3

Abstract

in two-player zero-sum (2p0s) games, and team correlated
equilibria in two-team zero-sum (2t0s) games. Unfortunately, this is not straightforwardly the case when there is
imperfect information—a term that we use to refer to games
in which one player has knowledge that another does not
or two players act simultaneously. This difficulty arises
from two causes, which we call the backward dependence
problem and the non-correspondence problem.

In their seminal work, Nayyar et al. (2013)
showed that imperfect information can be abstracted away from common-payoff games by
having players publicly announce their policies
as they play. This insight underpins sound
solvers and decision-time planning algorithms for
common-payoff games. Unfortunately, a naive
application of the same insight to two-player zerosum games fails because Nash equilibria of the
game with public policy announcements may not
correspond to Nash equilibria of the original game.
As a consequence, existing sound decision-time
planning algorithms require complicated additional mechanisms that have unappealing properties. The main contribution of this work is
showing that certain regularized equilibria do not
possess the aforementioned non-correspondence
problem—thus, computing them can be treated as
perfect-information problems. Because these regularized equilibria can be made arbitrarily close to
Nash equilibria, our result opens the door to a new
perspective to solving two-player zero-sum games
and yields a simplified framework for decisiontime planning in two-player zero-sum games, void
of the unappealing properties that plague existing
decision-time planning approaches.

The backward dependence problem is that computing the
expected return starting from a decision point generally requires knowledge about policies that were played up until
now, in addition to the policies that will be played going
forward. This is in stark contrast to perfect information settings, in which the expected return starting from a decision
point is independent of the policy played before arriving at
the decision point. As a result of this bidirectional temporal
dependence, backward induction arguments that work in
perfect information settings fail in imperfect information
settings.
In their seminal work, Nayyar et al. (2013) showed that
the backward dependence problem can be resolved by having players publicly announce their policies as they play.
Using this insight, a common-payoff game can be transformed into a Markov decision process (MDP) that we call
the public belief Markov decision processes (PuB-MDP).
Importantly, deterministic optimal policies in the PuB-MDP
can be mapped back to optimal joint policies of the original
common-payoff game.

1. Introduction

Having players publicly announce their policies can also
be used to transform 2p0s games into alternating Markov
games (AMGs) with public belief states (Wiggers et al.,
2016; Nayyar & Gupta, 2017; Brown et al., 2020; Buffet
et al., 2020; Delage et al., 2021; Kartik & Nayyar, 2021),
which we call public belief alternating Markov games (PuBAMGs). AMGs are fully-observable turn-based games (like
Go and chess)1 and, therefore, are amenable to dynamic
programming-based approaches (Littman, 1996). Unfortunately, computing Nash equilibria of PuB-AMGs carries
little value because these Nash equilibria may not corre-

In single-agent settings, dynamic programming (Bertsekas,
2000) is the bedrock for reinforcement learning (Sutton &
Barto, 2018), justifying approximating optimal policies by
backward induction and facilitating a simple framework for
decision-time planning. One might hope that dynamic programming could provide similar grounding in multi-agent
settings for well-defined notions of optimality, like optimal
joint policies in common-payoff games, Nash equilibria
†

Work done while at Meta AI 1 Carnegie Mellon University
Mila, Université de Montréal 3 Meta AI 4 Bosch Center for AI.
Correspondence to: Samuel Sokota <ssokota@andrew.cmu.edu>.
2

1
Formally, the board states of Go and chess are technically not
actually Markov because of rules like the threefold repetition rule.
Nevertheless, they capture the spirit of fully-observable turn-based
games.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

