Efficient and Degree-Guided Graph Generation via Discrete Diffusion Modeling

Xiaohui Chen 1 Jiaxing He 1 Xu Han 1 Li-Ping Liu 1

There are only a few deep generative models designed for
generating large graphs: NetGAN (Bojchevski et al., 2018)
and CELL (Rendsburg et al., 2020) are two examples. However, recent research (Chanpuriya et al., 2021) shows that
these two models are edge-independent models and have
a theoretical limitation: they cannot reproduce several important statistics (e.g. triangle counts and clustering coefficient) in their generated graphs unless they memorize the
training graph. A list of other models (Chanpuriya et al.,
2021) including Variational Graph Autoencoders (VGAE)
(Kipf & Welling, 2016b) and GraphVAE (Simonovsky &
Komodakis, 2018) are also edge-independent models and
share the same limitation.

Abstract
Diffusion-based graph generative models are effective
in generating high-quality small graphs. However, it
is hard to scale them to large graphs that contain thousands of nodes. In this work, we propose EDGE, a
new diffusion-based graph generative model that addresses generative tasks for large graphs. The model
is developed by reversing a discrete diffusion process
that randomly removes edges until obtaining an empty
graph. It leverages graph sparsity in the diffusion process to improve computational efficiency. In particular,
EDGE only focuses on a small portion of graph nodes
and only adds edges between these nodes. Without
compromising modeling ability, it makes much fewer
edge predictions than previous diffusion-based generative models. Furthermore, EDGE can explicitly model
the node degrees of training graphs and then gain performance improvement in capturing graph statistics.
The empirical study shows that EDGE is much more efficient than competing methods and can generate large
graphs with thousands of nodes. It also outperforms
baseline models in generation quality: graphs generated by the proposed model have graph statistics more
similar to those of training graphs.

Diffusion-based generative models (Liu et al., 2019; Niu
et al., 2020; Jo et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022b) have gained
success in modeling small graphs. These models generate
a graph in multiple steps and are NOT edge-independent
because edges generated in later steps depend on previously
generated edges. They are more flexible than one-shot models (Kipf & Welling, 2016b; Madhawa et al., 2019; Lippe
& Gavves, 2020), which directly predict an adjacency matrix in one step. They also have an advantage over autoregressive graph models (You et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2019),
as diffusion-based models are invariant to node permutations and do not have long-term memory issues. However,
diffusion-based models are only designed for tasks with
small graphs (usually with less than one hundred nodes).

1. Introduction
There is a long history of using random graph models (Newman et al., 2002) to model large graphs. Traditional models such as Erdős-Rényi (ER) model (Erdos et al., 1960),
Stochastic-Block Model (SBM) (Holland et al., 1983), and
Exponential-family Random Graph Models (Lusher et al.,
2013) are often used to model existing graph data and focus
on prescribed graph structures. Besides modeling existing
data, one interesting problem is to generate new graphs
to simulate existing ones (Ying & Wu, 2009), which has
applications such as network data sharing. In generative
tasks (Chakrabarti & Faloutsos, 2006), traditional models
often fall short in describing complex structures. A promising direction is to use deep neural models to generate large
graphs.

This work aims to scale diffusion-based generative models
to large graphs. The major issue of a diffusion-based model
is that it must compute a latent vector or a probability for
each node pair in a graph at each diffusion step (Niu et al.,
2020; Jo et al., 2022) – the computation cost is O(T N 2 ) if
the model generates a graph with N nodes using T steps.
The learning task becomes challenging when N is large. At
the same time, large graphs increase the difficulties for a
model to capture global graph statistics such as clustering
coefficients. As a result, the model performance degrades
when the training graphs’ sizes scale up.

1

Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Xiaohui Chen <xiaohui.chen@tufts.edu>, Li-Ping Liu <liping.liu@tufts.edu>.

We propose Efficient and Degree-guided graph GEnerative
model (EDGE) based on a discrete diffusion process. The
development of EDGE has three innovations. First, we encourage the sparsity of graphs in the diffusion process by
setting the empty graph as the convergent “distribution”.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

