Competitive Gradient Optimization

Abhijeet Vyas 1 Brian Bullins 1 Kamyar Azizzadenesheli 2

Abstract

et al., 1999).

We study the problem of convergence to a stationary point in zero-sum games. We propose competitive gradient optimization (CGO ), a gradientbased method that incorporates the interactions
between two players in zero-sum games for its
iterative updates. We provide a continuous-time
analysis of CGO and its convergence properties
while showing that in the continuous limit, previous methods degenerate to their gradient descent
ascent (GDA ) variants. We further provide a rate
of convergence to stationary points in the discretetime setting. We propose a generalized class of
α-coherent functions and show that for strictly αcoherent functions, CGO ensures convergence to
a saddle point. Moreover, we propose optimistic
CGO (oCGO ), an optimistic variant, for which
we show a convergence rate of O( n1 ) to saddle
points for α-coherent functions.

Gradient descent ascent (GDA ) is the standard first-order approach to the minimax optimization problem in Eq. (1) and
is known to converge for strictly-coherent functions (Mertikopoulos et al., 2019) which subsumes the strictly convexconcave function class (Facchinei and Pang, 2003). Yet,
GDA cycles or diverges on simple functions with interactive terms between the players, e.g., a function like
f (x, y) = y ⊤ x (Mertikopoulos et al., 2019) which are not
strictly-coherent. To tackle this issue, Schäfer and Anandkumar (2019) propose competitive gradient descent (CGD )
which includes the bilinear approximation of the function as
opposed to only the linear approximation used in GDA to
formulate the local update. In this approach, despite being
bilinear, the game approximation per player is linear. With
this update, CGD is able to utilize the interaction terms to
guarantee convergence in some non-convex non-concave
problems rather than be impeded by them. Schäfer and
Anandkumar (2019) further asks the question whether a
local optimality result analogous to (Lee et al., 2016) for
the minimization problem can be obtained for minimax optimization. Letcher (2020) answers this to the negative by
constructing an example with a local-Nash equilibrium to
which no ’reasonable’ algorithm can converge. Yet, the constructed function is one with discontinuous ∇xy f the continuity of which is a key assumption in CGD . Diakonikolas
et al. (2021) proposes a generalized version of the extragradient method that solves the problem in Eq. (1) for the
weak-MVI condition which extends the MVI condition in
(Mertikopoulos et al., 2019). This is achieved by decoupling the learning rates in the two steps of the extragradient
method.

1. Introduction
We study the zero-sum simultaneous two-player optimization problem of the following form,
min f (x, y),

x∈X

max f (x, y)
y∈Y

(1)

where x and y are players’ moves with X ⊆ Rm , Y ⊆ Rn
and f is a scalar value map from X × Y → R. Such an
optimization problem, also known as minimax optimization
problems, has numerous applications in machine learning
and decision theory, some examples including competitive
Markov decision processes (Filar and Vrieze, 1996), e.g.,
game of StarCraft, Go, soccer, and car racing (Vinyals et al.,
2019; Silver et al., 2016; Prajapat et al., 2021), adversarial
and robust learning (Sinha et al., 2017; Namkoong and
Duchi, 2016; Madry et al., 2017), generative adversarial
networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Radford et al.,
2015; Arjovsky et al., 2017), and risk assessment (Artzner

Daskalakis et al. (2018) extend the online learning algorithm optimistic mirror descent ascent (OMDA ) (Rakhlin
and Sridharan, 2013) to two player games and shows
convergence of the method for all bilinear games of the
form f (x, y) = y ⊤ Ax (thereby for y ⊤ x). Mertikopoulos et al. (2019) use the extragradient version of OMDA
to show convergence for all coherent saddle points which
includes the saddle points in bilinear-games of the form
f (x, y) = y ⊤ Ax. However, we show, CGD and OMDA (as
defined in (Mertikopoulos et al., 2019)) reduce to GDA and
mirror descent ascent (MDA ) respectively in the continuoustime limit (gradient-flow). The continuous-time regime has

1

Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907 2 Nvidia, Santa Clara, CA 95050. Correspondence to: Abhijeet Vyas <vyas26@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

