Semi-Parametric Contextual Pricing Algorithm using Cox Proportional
Hazards Model
Young-Geun Choi 1 Gi-Soo Kim 2 Yunseo Choi 3 Wooseong Cho 4 Myunghee Cho Paik 5 6 Min-hwan Oh 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
The contextual dynamic pricing problem involves setting
real-time prices for products or services based on contextual
factors such as product details and customer characteristics.
There is a significant body of literature on this topic due to
its importance and practical applications. We refer to den
Boer (2015), Wei & Zhang (2018) and Mišić & Perakis
(2020) for comprehensive review and Chen & Chen (2015),
Hu et al. (2015), Dutta & Mitra (2017) and Saharan et al.
(2020) for applications. A common goal of dynamic pricing
algorithms is to maximize the seller’s revenue. To achieve
this, a good pricing policy should balance both learning
about customer demand through exploration and setting
prices based on current knowledge through exploitation.

Contextual dynamic pricing is a problem of setting prices based on current contextual information and previous sales history to maximize revenue. A popular approach is to postulate a distribution of customer valuation as a function of contextual information and the baseline valuation. A
semi-parametric setting, where the context effect
is parametric and the baseline is nonparametric,
is of growing interest due to its flexibility. A challenge is that customer valuation is almost never
observable in practice and is instead type-I interval censored by the offered price. To address this
challenge, we propose a novel semi-parametric
contextual pricing algorithm for stochastic contexts, called the epoch-based Cox proportional
hazards Contextual Pricing (CoxCP) algorithm.
To our best knowledge, our work is the first to
employ the Cox model for customer valuation.
The CoxCP algorithm has a high-probability re2
gret upper bound of Õ(T 3 d), where T is the
length of horizon and d is the dimension of context. In addition, if the baseline is known, the
regret bound can improve to O(d log T ) under
certain assumptions. We demonstrate empirically
the proposed algorithm performs better than existing semi-parametric contextual pricing algorithms
when the model assumptions of all algorithms are
correct.

A popular setting for contextual pricing is the customer
valuation model, also known as the binary choice model,
over a specific time horizon. Specifically, in each sales round
t ∈ [T ] = {1, . . . , T }, a feature xt ∈ Rd is provided to
describe the characteristics of the product and customer.
The customer’s valuation of the product, or market price, is
represented by a random variable vt , which is unknown to
the seller. The seller proposes a price pt based on previous
sales records and the current context xt , and then observes
feedback yt ∈ {0, 1} on whether the customer purchases
the product. The customer valuation model assumes that
yt = 1vt >pt , meaning that a purchase occurs if and only if
the selling price is less than the customer’s valuation. As
a result, the revenue at round t is pt yt , and the seller aims
to maximize the expected revenue. Note that the customer
valuation vt is only partially observed, in that it is right- or
left-censored by pt . This type of data is referred to as Type-I
interval censored data in the statistical literature.

1
Department of Mathematics Education, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea 2 Department of Industrial Engineering
and Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, Ulsan National
Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan, South Korea 3 Department of Statistics, Sookmyung Women’s University,
Seoul, South Korea 4 Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea 5 Department of Statistics, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea 6 Shepherd23
Inc., Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Min-hwan Oh <minoh@snu.ac.kr>.

Contextual pricing algorithms under the customer valuation
model postulate a probabilistic model family for the conditional distribution of vt given xt . Let F (p|xt ) = P(vt ≤
p|xt ) be the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of vt
given xt . The linear model (Javanmard & Nazerzadeh, 2019;
Xu & Wang, 2021; Luo et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022) assumes a location family F (p|xt ) = F0 (p − xTt β), and
the log-linear model (e.g., Shah et al., 2019) assumes a
scale family F (p|xt ) = F0 (p exp(−xTt β)), where F0 (p) =
P(vt ≤ p|xt = 0) is the baseline CDF and β ∈ Rd is

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

