Cut your Losses with Squentropy

Like Hui 1 2 Mikhail Belkin 2 1 Stephen Wright 3

Abstract

training for multi-class classification with modern neural
architectures. There is surprisingly little theoretical or empirical evidence in support of this choice. To the contrary,
an extensive set of experiments with neural architectures
conducted in (Hui & Belkin, 2020) indicated that training
with the (rescaled) square loss produces similar or better
classification accuracy than cross entropy on most classification tasks. Still, the rescaled square loss proposed in
that work requires additional parameters (which must be
tuned) when the number of classes is large. Further, the
optimization learning rate for the square loss is typically
different from that of cross entropy, which precludes the use
of square loss as an out-of-the-box replacement.

Nearly all practical neural models for classification are trained using cross-entropy loss. Yet this
ubiquitous choice is supported by little theoretical or empirical evidence. Recent work (Hui
& Belkin, 2020) suggests that training using the
(rescaled) square loss is often superior in terms of
the classification accuracy. In this paper we propose the “squentropy” loss, which is the sum of
two terms: the cross-entropy loss and the average
square loss over the incorrect classes. We provide
an extensive set of experiments on multi-class
classification problems showing that the squentropy loss outperforms both the pure cross entropy
and rescaled square losses in terms of the classification accuracy. We also demonstrate that it provides significantly better model calibration than
either of these alternative losses and, furthermore,
has less variance with respect to the random initialization. Additionally, in contrast to the square
loss, squentropy loss can typically be trained using exactly the same optimization parameters, including the learning rate, as the standard crossentropy loss, making it a true “plug-and-play” replacement. Finally, unlike the rescaled square
loss, multiclass squentropy contains no parameters that need to be adjusted.

In this work we propose the “squentropy” loss function
for multi-class classification. Squentropy is the sum of
two terms: the standard cross-entropy loss and the average
square loss over the incorrect classes. Unlike the rescaled
square loss, squentropy has no adjustable parameters. Moreover, in most cases, we can simply use the optimal hyperparameters for cross-entropy loss without any additional
tuning, making it a true “plug-and-play” replacement for
cross-entropy loss.
To show the effectiveness of squentropy, we provide comprehensive experimental results over a broad range of benchmarks with different neural architectures and data from NLP,
speech, and computer vision. In 24 out of 34 tasks, squentropy has the best (or tied for best) classification accuracy, in
comparison with cross entropy and the rescaled square loss.
Furthermore, squentropy has consistently improved calibration, an important measure of how the output values of
the neural network match the underlying probability of the
labels (Guo et al., 2017). Specifically, in 26 out of 32 tasks
for which calibration results can be computed, squentropy
is better calibrated than either alternative. We also show
results on 121 tabular datasets from (Fernández-Delgado
et al., 2014). Compared with cross entropy, squentropy has
better test accuracy on 86 out of 121 tasks, and better calibration on 65 datasets. Finally, we show that squentropy
is less sensitive to the randomness of the initialization than
either of the two alternative losses.

1. Introduction
As with the choice of an optimization algorithm, the choice
of loss function is an indispensable ingredient in training
neural network models. Yet, while there is extensive theoretical and empirical research into optimization and regularization methods for training deep neural networks (Sun, 2019),
far less is known about the selection of loss functions. In
recent years, cross-entropy loss has been predominant in
1
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San Diego 2 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of
California, San Diego 3 Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, UWMadison. Correspondence to: Like Hui <lhui@ucsd.edu>.

Our empirical evidence suggests that in most settings, squentropy should be the first choice of loss function for multiclass classification via neural networks.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

