Subset Selection Based On Multiple Rankings in the Presence of Bias:
Effectiveness of Fairness Constraints for Multiwinner Voting Score Functions

Niclas Boehmer 1 L. Elisa Celis 2 Lingxiao Huang 3 Anay Mehrotra 2 Nisheeth K. Vishnoi 2

Abstract

with applications arising in recommender systems (McSherry, 2002; El-Arini et al., 2009), feature selection (Guyon &
Elisseeff, 2003), search engines (Agrawal et al., 2009), data
summarization (Elhamifar & Kaluza, 2017; Angelidakis
et al., 2022), and algorithmic hiring (Schumann et al., 2019;
Raghavan et al., 2020; Deczynski, 2021). The simplest formulation of this problem assumes that every item has some
reported utility, which leads to the selection of k items with
the highest utility. In several applications, however, items
are evaluated from multiple points of view, e.g., different
users evaluating items in a group recommendation or shortlisting setting (Jameson & Smyth, 2007; Raghavan et al.,
2020; Streviniotis & Chalkiadakis, 2022a), or a single user
evaluating items from different perspectives (e.g., in personalized recommendations, a user might be interested in being
recommended items from different categories, and separate
orderings for categories are produced (El-Arini et al., 2009;
Streviniotis & Chalkiadakis, 2022b; Gawron & Faliszewski,
2022)). Moreover, these different evaluations oftentimes
come in the form of rankings of the m items instead of
numerical scores (Chakraborty et al., 2019; Streviniotis &
Chalkiadakis, 2022b;a). Asking for rankings instead of
numerical scores for items is a popular approach (e.g., as
witnessed by its usage to train large language models, like
ChatGPT with human feedback (Ramponi, 2022), and in
reinforcement learning (Christiano et al., 2017)) because
numerical scores have a higher elicitation cost and can lead
to aggregation and calibration issues (Griffin & Brenner,
2004; Mitliagkas et al., 2011; Wang & Shah, 2019).

We consider the problem of subset selection
where one is given multiple rankings of items and
the goal is to select the highest “quality” subset.
Score functions from the multiwinner voting literature have been used to aggregate rankings into
quality scores for subsets. We study this setting
of subset selection problems when, in addition,
rankings may contain systemic or unconscious
biases toward a group of items. For a general
model of input rankings and biases, we show that
requiring the selected subset to satisfy group fairness constraints can improve the quality of the
selection with respect to unbiased rankings. Importantly, we show that for fairness constraints
to be effective, different multiwinner score functions may require a drastically different number
of rankings: While for some functions, fairness
constraints need an exponential number of rankings to recover a close-to-optimal solution, for
others, this dependency is only polynomial. This
result relies on a novel notion of “smoothness” of
submodular functions in this setting that quantifies how well a function can “correctly” assess the
quality of items in the presence of bias. The results in this paper can be used to guide the choice
of multiwinner score functions for the subset selection setting considered here; we additionally
provide a tool to empirically enable this.

A principled method to aggregate n rankings of m items into
a single quality score function for subsets of {1, . . . , m}
is the usage of “score functions” studied in the multiwinner voting literature within social choice theory (Faliszewski et al., 2017; Chakraborty et al., 2019; Mondal
et al., 2021; Streviniotis & Chalkiadakis, 2022b; Gawron
& Faliszewski, 2022; Streviniotis & Chalkiadakis, 2022a;
Lackner & Skowron, 2023). Here, many score functions
have been proposed and their properties and merits have
been extensively discussed (Elkind et al., 2017b;a; Lackner
& Skowron, 2019). These functions, for instance, allow for
specifying which part of each ranking to take into account,
and how many of the selected items are relevant from the
perspective of each ranking. For instance, a score function

1. Introduction
The task of selecting a size-k subset from a set of m items is
a basic problem in machine learning and computer science
1

TU Berlin 2 Yale University 3 State Key Laboratory of Novel
Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: L. Elisa Celis <ecelis21@gmail.com>, Lingxiao
Huang <huanglingxiao1990@126.com>, Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
<nisheeth.vishnoi@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

