Implicit Jacobian Regularization Weighted with Impurity of Probability Output

Sungyoon Lee 1 Jinseong Park 2 Jaewook Lee 2

Abstract

and appears to be correlated with the generalization capability. To be specific, the sharpness initially increases, and
after reaching a certain value, the training dynamics become
unstable and the iterate oscillates along the top eigenvector
of the Hessian (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2019; 2020; Cohen et al.,
2021). Moreover, the rapid increase in the sharpness during
the early phase significantly impacts the final generalization
performance (Achille et al., 2019; Golatkar et al., 2019;
Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2020; 2021; Lewkowycz et al., 2020; Fort
et al., 2020). However, the Hessian of a deep neural network
is high-dimensional which makes it difficult to analyze its
eigensystem and the sharpness.

The success of deep learning is greatly attributed
to stochastic gradient descent (SGD), yet it remains unclear how SGD finds well-generalized
models. We demonstrate that SGD has an implicit
regularization effect on the logit-weight Jacobian
norm of neural networks. This regularization effect is weighted with the impurity of the probability output, and thus it is active in a certain phase
of training. Moreover, based on these findings, we
propose a novel optimization method that explicitly regularizes the Jacobian norm, which leads
to similar performance as other state-of-the-art
sharpness-aware optimization methods.

In this paper, we investigate the Hessian through two lowdimensional matrices: the logit Hessian and the logit-weight
Jacobian (defined in Definition 3.1). Especially, we analyze
the top eigenvalue of the logit Hessian. By doing so, we
can provide a simple and intuitive explanation of the relation between the sharpness, the probability output of the
classification model, and the Jacobian matrix. This enables
us to understand how the sharpness of the loss landscape
influences the learning dynamics and the generalization performance. We summarize the main contributions as follows:

1. Introduction
Deep learning has shown to great promise for many learning
tasks in various areas. Numerous studies have aimed to
understand how learning algorithms lead to the successful
training of deep neural networks. In particular, it is crucial
to understand the geometric properties of the loss landscape
of neural networks and their interaction with gradient-based
optimization methods, including stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), along the training trajectory. These properties have
been studied from the perspectives of both optimization
(Gur-Ari et al., 2018; Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2019; Ghorbani
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Lewkowycz et al., 2020; Cohen
et al., 2021) and generalization (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997; Keskar et al., 2017; Dinh et al., 2017; Jastrz˛ebski et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2018; Chaudhari et al., 2019; Jiang et al.,
2020; Barrett & Dherin, 2021; Smith et al., 2021).

• We provide connections between the top eigenvalue of
the logit Hessian and the impurity of the probability
output (Theorem 4.1 in Section 4.1 and 4.2).
• We derive a relation between the sharpness, the top
eigenvalue of the logit Hessian, and the Jacobian norm
(Theorem 5.1 in Section 5.1), which we call sharpnessimpurity-Jacobian relation.
• We describe how the sharpness of the loss landscape influences the learning dynamics and the generalization
performance (Section 5.2). In particular, we demonstrate that SGD has implicit effects on penalizing the
Jacobian norm (Implicit Jacobian Regularization) during a certain phase of training (Active Regularization
Period).

We investigate the Hessian of the training loss (with respect
to the model parameters) and its top eigenvalue (also called
sharpness). The sharpness characterizes the dynamics of
neural network training along the optimization trajectory
1
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University
Department of Industrial Engineering, Seoul National University.
Correspondence to: Sungyoon Lee <sungyoonlee@hanyang.ac.kr>.
2

• We also evaluate the Explicit Jacobian Regularization,
which outperforms state-of-the-art sharpness-aware
optimization methods, SAM (Foret et al., 2021) and
ASAM (Kwon et al., 2021) (Table 1 in Section 5.3).

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

