Data-OOB: Out-of-bag Estimate as a Simple and Efficient Data Value

Yongchan Kwon 1 James Zou 2 3

Abstract

marketplaces (Tang et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2019; Tian
et al., 2022). Due to its importance, data valuation has
become a primary research topic in machine learning and
statistics. The main goal is to establish a practical and
principled notion of the influence of individual data points
on the process of training a model.

Data valuation is a powerful framework for
providing statistical insights into which data
are beneficial or detrimental to model training.
Many Shapley-based data valuation methods have
shown promising results in various downstream
tasks, however, they are well known to be computationally challenging as it requires training a
large number of models. As a result, it has been
recognized as infeasible to apply to large datasets.
To address this issue, we propose Data-OOB, a
new data valuation method for a bagging model
that utilizes the out-of-bag estimate. The proposed method is computationally efficient and
can scale to millions of data by reusing trained
weak learners. Specifically, Data-OOB takes less
than 2.25 hours on a single CPU processor when
there are 106 samples to evaluate and the input
dimension is 100. Furthermore, Data-OOB has
solid theoretical interpretations in that it identifies
the same important data point as the infinitesimal
jackknife influence function when two different
points are compared. We conduct comprehensive experiments using 12 classification datasets,
each with thousands of sample sizes. We demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art data valuation
methods in identifying mislabeled data and finding a set of helpful (or harmful) data points, highlighting the potential for applying data values in
real-world applications.

A standard approach for evaluating the impact of data is
to use the marginal contribution, which is defined as the
average change in a model’s performance when a certain
datum is removed from a set of data points. One approach
uses the leave-one-out (LOO) method, which evaluates a single marginal contribution when a certain datum is removed
from the entire training dataset (Cook & Weisberg, 1982;
Koh & Liang, 2017). Another approach is based on the
Shapley value in cooperative game theory (Shapley, 1953),
assigning a simple average of all marginal contributions by
varying the number of data points in a given subset of the
training dataset. Data Shapley (Ghorbani & Zou, 2019), Distributional Shapley (Ghorbani et al., 2020), and CS-Shapley
(Schoch et al., 2022) belong to this category.
Existing works have shown that Shapley-based methods
perform better than LOO in many downstream tasks by
leveraging every possible marginal contribution (Ghorbani
& Zou, 2019; Jia et al., 2019a). However, it often requires
training a significant number of models to accurately estimate marginal contributions. This has been recognized
as the primary limitation in practical applications of data
valuation. To address this issue, improved approximation
algorithms using stratified sampling have been developed
(Maleki et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2022), but they still require
training multiple models to achieve a small enough approximation error. As an alternative approach, data values with
a closed-form expression have been studied. It can easily
scale up to millions of data but restricts the model to be either k-Nearest Neighbors (Jia et al., 2019a) or linear models
(Kwon et al., 2021), which may not be most suitable for
high dimensional data analysis. Recently, Lin et al. (2022)
proposed an algorithm that uses the linear coefficient of a
LASSO model. Their method is shown to have improved
sample efficiency over existing methods, but it still requires
unverifiable assumptions and additional computational costs
for training LASSO models.

1. Introduction
Assessing the impact of data on a model’s performance
is important as it enhances our understanding of the data.
Moreover, it has various practical real-world applications
including medical image analysis, data curation, and data
*

Equal contribution 1 Columbia University 2 Stanford University 3 Amazon AWS. Correspondence to: James Zou
<jamesz@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In addition to the computational challenges, the Shapley

1

