Optimizing Hyperparameters with Conformal Quantile Regression

David Salinas 1 Jacek Golebiowski 1 Aaron Klein 1 Matthias Seeger 1 Cedric Archambeau 1

Abstract

tribution over the configuration space and repeatedly sample new configurations until an total budget is exhausted.
Evolutionary algorithms modify a population of hyperparameter configurations by hand-designed mutations. Finally, model-based methods, such as Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al., 2012) use the collected data points to
fit a surrogate model of the target objective, which informs
the sampling distribution so that more promising configurations are selected over time.

Many state-of-the-art hyperparameter optimization (HPO) algorithms rely on model-based optimizers that learn surrogate models of the target function to guide the search. Gaussian processes are the de facto surrogate model due to
their ability to capture uncertainty but they make
strong assumptions about the observation noise,
which might not be warranted in practice. In
this work, we propose to leverage conformalized quantile regression which makes minimal
assumptions about the observation noise and, as
a result, models the target function in a more
realistic and robust fashion which translates to
quicker HPO convergence on empirical benchmarks. To apply our method in a multi-fidelity
setting, we propose a simple, yet effective, technique that aggregates observed results across different resource levels and outperforms conventional methods across many empirical tasks.

Unfortunately, solving the HPO problem can become computationally expensive, as each function evaluation incurs
the cost of fully training and validating the underlying machine learning model. Multi-fidelity HPO (Karnin et al.,
2013; Li et al., 2017) accelerates this process by terminating the evaluation of under-performing configurations
early and only training promising configurations to the end.
Early stopping allows algorithms to explore more configurations within the total search budget. Baseline multifidelity methods can be made more efficient by relying on
model-based sampling, exploiting past observations to select more promising configurations over time.
Model-based multi-fidelity methods constitute the stateof-the-art in HPO today, but still face some limitations.
Concretely, we identify two major gaps with the current
approaches. First, Bayesian optimization usually assume
that the observation noise is homoskedastic and distributed
as a Gaussian. This allows for an analytic expression
of the likelihood for Gaussian processes, the most popular probabilistic model for Bayesian optimization (Snoek
et al., 2012). However, most HPO problems exhibit heteroskedastic noise that can span several orders of magnitude (Salinas et al., 2020; Cowen-Rivers et al., 2020). For
instance, the validation error of a model trained with SGD
can behave very sporadically for large leaning rate and not
taking this heteroskedasticity into account can severely hinder the performance of methods with Gaussian assumptions.

1. Introduction
Hyperparameters play a vital role in the machine learning
(ML) workflow. They control the speed of the optimization
process (e.g., learning rate), the capacity of the underlying statistical model (e.g., number of units) or the generalization quality through regularization (e.g., weight decay).
While virtually all ML pipelines benefit from having their
hyperparameters tuned, this can be tedious and expensive
to do, and practitioners tend to leave many of them at their
default values.
Hyperparameter optimization (Feurer & Hutter, 2018) is
a powerful framework to tune hyperparameters automatically with a large body of work to tackle this optimization problem, spanning from simple heuristics to more
complex model-based methods. Random search-based approaches (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012) define a uniform dis-

Second, it is difficult to model probabilistically the target
metric both across configurations and resources (e.g., number of epochs trained), while at the same time retaining
the simplicity of Gaussian processes. Previous work maintains separate models of the target at different resource levels (Falkner et al., 2018; Li et al., 2022), or use a single

1
Amazon Web Services. Correspondence to: David Salinas
<david.salinas.pro@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

