Reparameterized Policy Learning for Multimodal Trajectory Optimization

Zhiao Huang 1 Litian Liang 1 Zhan Ling 1 Xuanlin Li 1 Chuang Gan 2 3 Hao Su 1

Abstract
We investigate the challenge of parametrizing
policies for reinforcement learning (RL) in highdimensional continuous action spaces. Our objective is to develop a multimodal policy that
overcomes limitations inherent in the commonlyused Gaussian parameterization. To achieve this,
we propose a principled framework that models
the continuous RL policy as a generative model
of optimal trajectories. By conditioning the policy on a latent variable, we derive a novel variational bound as the optimization objective, which
promotes exploration of the environment. We
then present a practical model-based RL method,
called Reparameterized Policy Gradient (RPG),
which leverages the multimodal policy parameterization and learned world model to achieve
strong exploration capabilities and high data efficiency. Empirical results demonstrate that our
method can help agents evade local optima in
tasks with dense rewards and solve challenging
sparse-reward environments by incorporating an
object-centric intrinsic reward. Our method consistently outperforms previous approaches across
a range of tasks. Code and supplementary materials are available on the project page https:
//haosulab.github.io/RPG/

Figure 1. (A) Our method reparameterizes latent variables into
multimodal policy to facilitate exploitation and exploration in
continuous policy learning; (B) Average performance on 6 hard
exploration tasks. Our method outperforms previous methods.

(e.g., a Gaussian distribution over actions). This formulation, however, breaks the promise of RL being a global
optimizer of the return function because the single-modality
policy parameterization introduces local minima that are
hard to escape using gradients w.r.t. distribution parameters. Besides, a single-modality policy will significantly
weaken the exploration ability of RL algorithms because
the sampled actions are usually concentrated around the
modality.
Although there are other candidates beyond the Gaussian distribution for policy parameterization, they often have limitations when used for continuous policy modeling. For example, Gaussian mixture models can only accommodate a limited number of modes; normalizing flow methods (Rezende
& Mohamed, 2015) can compute density values, but they
may not be as numerically robust due to their dependency
on the determinant of the network Jacobian; furthermore,
normalizing flows must apply continuous transformations
onto a continuously connected distribution, making it difficult to model disconnected modes (Rasul et al., 2021).
Option-critic (Bacon et al., 2017) represents policies with
options and temporal structure, but it often requires specially
designed option spaces for efficient learning, which motivates research on hierarchical imitation learning that uses
demonstrations to avoid exploration problems (Peng et al.,
2022; Fang et al., 2019). Skill discovery methods learn a
population of skills without demonstrations or rewards by
optimizing for diversity (Eysenbach et al., 2018). However,
the separation of optimization and skill learning can be nonefficient as it expends effort on learning task-irrelevant skills
and may ignore more important ones that would benefit a

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) with high-dimensional continuous action space is notoriously hard despite its fundamental importance for many application problems such
as robotic manipulation (OpenAI et al., 2019; Mu et al.,
2021). In practice, popular frameworks (Silver et al., 2014;
Haarnoja et al., 2018; Schulman et al., 2017) of deep RL
formulate the continuous policy as a neural network that outputs a single-modal density function over the action space
1
UC San Diego 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 UMass Amherst.
Correspondence to: Zhiao Huang <z2huang@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

