VIMA: Robot Manipulation with Multimodal Prompts

Yunfan Jiang 1 Agrim Gupta 1 † Zichen Zhang 2 † Guanzhi Wang 3 4 † Yongqiang Dou 5 Yanjun Chen 1
Li Fei-Fei 1 Anima Anandkumar 3 4 Yuke Zhu 3 6 ‡ Linxi Fan 3 ‡

Abstract

language prompt to GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), allowing
the same model to perform question answering, machine
translation, text summarization, etc. Prompt-based learning
provides an accessible and flexible interface to communicate
a natural language understanding task to a general-purpose
model.

Prompt-based learning has emerged as a successful paradigm in natural language processing,
where a single general-purpose language model
can be instructed to perform any task specified by
input prompts. Yet task specification in robotics
comes in various forms, such as imitating oneshot demonstrations, following language instructions, and reaching visual goals. They are often
considered different tasks and tackled by specialized models. We show that a wide spectrum of
robot manipulation tasks can be expressed with
multimodal prompts, interleaving textual and visual tokens. Accordingly, we develop a new simulation benchmark that consists of thousands of
procedurally-generated tabletop tasks with multimodal prompts, 600K+ expert trajectories for
imitation learning, and a four-level evaluation
protocol for systematic generalization. We design a transformer-based robot agent, VIMA, that
processes these prompts and outputs motor actions autoregressively. VIMA features a recipe
that achieves strong model scalability and data
efficiency. It outperforms alternative designs in
the hardest zero-shot generalization setting by up
to 2.9× task success rate given the same training data. With 10× less training data, VIMA
still performs 2.7× better than the best competing
variant. Code and video demos are available at
vimalabs.github.io.

We envision that a generalist robot should have a similarly intuitive and expressive interface for task specification. What
does such an interface for robot learning look like? As a
motivating example, consider a personal robot tasked with
household activities. We can ask the robot to bring us a cup
of water by a simple natural language instruction. If we
require more specificity, we can instead instruct the robot to
“bring me <image of the cup>”. For tasks requiring
new skills, the robot should be able to adapt, preferably
from a few video demonstrations (Duan et al., 2017). Tasks
that need interaction with unfamiliar objects can be easily explained via a few image examples for novel concept
grounding (Hermann et al., 2017). Finally, to ensure safe
deployment, we can further specify visual constraints like
“do not enter <image> room”.
To enable a single agent with all these capabilities, we make
three key contributions in this work: 1) a novel multimodal
prompting formulation that converts a wide spectrum of
robot manipulation tasks into one sequence modeling problem; 2) a large-scale benchmark with diverse tasks to
systematically evaluate an agent’s scalability and generalization; and 3) a multimodal-prompted robot agent capable
of multi-task and zero-shot generalization.
We start with the observation that many robot manipulation tasks can be formulated by multimodal prompts
that interleave language and images or video frames
(Fig. 1). For example, Rearrangement (Batra et al., 2020),
a type of Visual Goal, can be formulated as “Please rearrange objects to match this {scene image}”; Fewshot Imitation can embed video snippet in the prompt
“Follow this motion trajectory for the wooden cube:
{frame1 }, {frame2 }, {frame3 }, {frame4 }”. Multimodal prompts not only have more expressive power than
individual modalities but also enable a uniform sequence
IO interface for training generalist robots. Previously, different robot manipulation tasks required distinct policy ar-

1. Introduction
Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017) have given rise
to remarkable multi-task consolidation across many AI domains. For example, users can describe a task using natural
1
Stanford University; 2 Macalester College, now at Allen Institute for AI; 3 NVIDIA; 4 Caltech; 5 Tsinghua; 6 UT Austin. Work
done during the first author’s internship at NVIDIA. †: Equal
contribution. ‡: Equal advising.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

