Differentiable Simulations for Enhanced Sampling of Rare Events

Martin Šı́pka 1 2 3 Johannes C. B. Dietschreit 1 Lukáš Grajciar 3 Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli 1

Abstract

that can easily be spanned by thousands of degrees of freedom (DoF). Extensive sampling of configurations along
candidate transition paths, characterized by comparatively
high free energies(Chipot & Pohorille, 2007; Chipot, 2014)
is needed, but standard unbiased sampling algorithms, e.g.,
molecular dynamics (MD) or Monte-Carlo (MC), often remain trapped in (meta)stable regions. Therefore, it is extremely inefficient to explore candidate paths in an unbiased
way, and it is necessary to adopt heuristics to bias the exploration, which are often based on expert chemical intuition.

Simulating rare events, such as the transformation
of a reactant into a product in a chemical reaction
typically requires enhanced sampling techniques
that rely on heuristically chosen collective variables (CVs). We propose using differentiable simulations (DiffSim) for the discovery and enhanced
sampling of chemical transformations without a
need to resort to preselected CVs, using only a
distance metric. Reaction path discovery and estimation of the biasing potential that enhances
the sampling are merged into a single end-to-end
problem that is solved by path-integral optimization. This is achieved by introducing multiple improvements over standard DiffSim such as partial
backpropagation and graph mini-batching making
DiffSim training stable and efficient. The potential of DiffSim is demonstrated in the successful
discovery of transition paths for the Muller-Brown
model potential as well as a benchmark chemical
system - alanine dipeptide.

The problem has been commonly split into two seemingly
easier sub-tasks. First, a dimensionality reduction from all
DoFs down to the so-called collective variables (CVs) and
second, enhanced sampling along those CVs (Torrie et al.,
1977; Darve & Pohorille, 2001; Laio & Parrinello, 2002;
Abrams & Bussi, 2013; Spiwok et al., 2015; Valsson et al.,
2016). Even though widely used methods exist to solve the
second problem, the first part - identifying collective variables - is still largely a manual task based on expert chemical intuition, with the commonly used CVs being not much
more complex than simple linear combinations of manually
chosen internal DoFs of the molecular systems in question.
Recently, the task of identifying CVs has been partially automatized by multiple machine learning based tools.(Sultan
& Pande, 2018; Mendels et al., 2018; Wehmeyer & Noé,
2018; Wang et al., 2019; Bonati et al., 2020; Wang & Tiwary, 2021; Sun et al., 2022; Šı́pka et al., 2022) The number
of the CVs is typically limited to one to three due to the
exponential growth of computational cost, known as the
curse of dimensionality (Bellman, 1967; Köppen, 2000).
The CVs should be based on those DoFs, which fully describe the rare transition event, and are thereby associated
with the slowest motions. However, identification of the
important DoFs a priori typically requires knowledge of the
transition path that one is trying to discover in the first place,
i.e., one still ends up with the proverbial ”chicken-and-egg
problem” (Rohrdanz et al., 2013). This is a problem that
previously proposed machine learning based tools cannot
directly tackle. Additionally, once the CVs are chosen it is
very difficult to correct them on-the-fly. Thus, one must be
certain that the chosen CV function is properly defined and
well behaved in all regions (i.e., the CV values for reactant
and product basins do not overlap or it shows undefined
behavior for unseen configurations). A hard task for tools

1. Introduction
A chemical reaction can be viewed as a transition from one
depression (reactant) on the potential energy surface (PES)
to another (product). The most likely transition path(s) connecting the two basins define the reaction mechanism(s).
The potential energy of a saddle point, through which the
system has to pass, defines the reaction barrier and is the
fundamental quantity when investigating reaction rates. The
major obstacle in determining the reaction path lies in the
high dimensionality of the molecular configuration space
1
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, USA 2 Mathematical Institute, Faculty of Mathematics and
Physics, Charles University, Sokolovská 83, 186 75 Prague, Czech
Republic 3 Department of Physical and Macromolecular 853 Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, Charles University, 128 43 854 Prague
2, Czech Republic. Correspondence to: Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli
<rafagb@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

