Second-Order Optimization with Lazy Hessians

Nikita Doikov * 1 El Mahdi Chayti * 1 Martin Jaggi 1

Abstract

trust-region methods (Conn et al., 2000), self-concordant
analysis (Nesterov & Nemirovski, 1994; Bach, 2010; Sun &
Tran-Dinh, 2019; Dvurechensky & Nesterov, 2018) or the
notion of Hessian stability (Karimireddy et al., 2018), cubic
regularization (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006), contracting-point
steps (Doikov & Nesterov, 2020; 2022), or gradient regularization techniques (Mishchenko, 2021; Doikov & Nesterov,
2021a)). In all of these approaches, the arithmetic complexity of each step remains costly, since it requires computing
both the gradient and Hessian of the objective function, and
then perform some factorization of the matrix. Hessian
computations are prohibitively expensive in any large-scale
setting.

We analyze Newton’s method with lazy Hessian
updates for solving general possibly non-convex
optimization problems. We propose to reuse a
previously seen Hessian for several iterations
while computing new gradients at each step of
the method. This significantly reduces the overall
arithmetic complexity of second-order optimization schemes. By using the cubic regularization
technique, we establish fast global convergence
of our method to a second-order stationary point,
while the Hessian does not need to be updated
each iteration. For convex problems, we justify
global and local superlinear rates for lazy Newton steps with quadratic regularization, which is
easier to compute. The optimal frequency for
updating the Hessian is once every d iterations,
where d is the dimension of the problem. This
provably improves the total arithmetic √
complexity
of second-order algorithms by a factor d.

In this work, we explore a simple possibility for a significant acceleration of second-order schemes in terms of their
total arithmetic complexity. The idea is to keep a previously computed Hessian (a stale version of the Hessian)
for several iterations, while using fresh gradients in each
step of the method. Therefore, we can save a lot of computational resources by reusing the old Hessians. We call
this lazy Hessian updates. We justify that this idea can
be successfully employed in most established second-order
schemes, resulting in a provable improvement of the overall
performance.

1. Introduction
Motivation. Second-order optimization algorithms are
being widely used for solving difficult ill-conditioned problems. The classical Newton method approximates the objective function by its second-order Taylor approximation at the
current point. A minimizer of this model serves as one step
of the algorithm. Locally, Newton’s method achieves very
fast quadratic rate (Kantorovich, 1948), when the iterates
are in a neighborhood of the solution. However, it may not
converge if the initial point is far away from the optimum.
For the global convergence of Newton’s method, we need to
use some of the various regularization techniques, that have
been intensively developed during recent decades (including damped Newton steps with line search (Kantorovich,
1948; Ortega & Rheinboldt, 2000; Hanzely et al., 2022),

∇2 f (x0 )
∇f (x0 )

reuse Hessian

−→

∇2 f (xm )

∇f (x1 ) . . . ∇f (xm−1 )

∇f (xm )

Lazy Hessian Updates: compute a new Hessian once per m
iterations.
For general problems1 , the optimal schedule is m := d
(update the Hessian every d iterations), where d is the dimension of the problem. In these cases, we gain a provable computational acceleration of our methods by a factor
√
d. The key to our analysis is an increased value of the
regularization constant. In a general case, this should be
proportional to mL, where L is the Lipschitz constant of
the Hessian. Thus, for the lazy Newton steps, we should
regularize our model stronger to balance the possible errors

*
Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning and Optimization Laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland.
Correspondence to:
El Mahdi Chayti <el-mahdi.chayti@epfl.ch>, Nikita Doikov
<nikita.doikov@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Assuming that the cost of computing one Hessian and its
appropriate factorization is d times the cost of one gradient step.
See Examples 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4.

1

