Fundamental Limits of Two-layer Autoencoders,
and Achieving Them with Gradient Methods
.
Aleksandr Shevchenko * 1 Kevin Kögler * 1 Hamed Hassani 2 Marco Mondelli 1

Abstract

succinct representations, neural autoencoding techniques
have achieved remarkable success in lossy data compression, even outperforming classical methods, such as jpeg
(Ballé et al., 2017; Theis et al., 2017; Agustsson et al., 2017).
However, despite the large body of empirical work on neural
autoencoders and compressors, basic theoretical questions
remain poorly understood even in the shallow case:

Autoencoders are a popular model in many
branches of machine learning and lossy data compression. However, their fundamental limits, the
performance of gradient methods and the features
learnt during optimization remain poorly understood, even in the two-layer setting. In fact, earlier
work has considered either linear autoencoders
or specific training regimes (leading to vanishing or diverging compression rates). Our paper
addresses this gap by focusing on non-linear twolayer autoencoders trained in the challenging proportional regime in which the input dimension
scales linearly with the size of the representation.
Our results characterize the minimizers of the population risk, and show that such minimizers are
achieved by gradient methods; their structure is
also unveiled, thus leading to a concise description of the features obtained via training. For
the special case of a sign activation function, our
analysis establishes the fundamental limits for the
lossy compression of Gaussian sources via (shallow) autoencoders. Finally, while the results are
proved for Gaussian data, numerical simulations
on standard datasets display the universality of
the theoretical predictions.

What are the fundamental performance limits of autoencoders? Can we achieve such limits with gradient methods?
What features does the optimization procedure learn?
Prior work has focused either on linear autoencoders (Baldi
& Hornik, 1989; Kunin et al., 2019; Gidel et al., 2019),
on the severely under-parameterized setting in which the
input dimension is much larger than the number of neurons
(Refinetti & Goldt, 2022), or on specific training regimes
(lazy training (Nguyen et al., 2021) and mean-field regime
with a polynomial number of neurons (Nguyen, 2021)), see
Section 2. In contrast, in this paper we consider non-linear
autoencoders trained in the challenging proportional regime,
in which the number of inputs to compress scales linearly
with the size of the representation. More specifically, we
consider the prototypical model of a two-layer autoencoder
x̂(x) := x̂(x, A, B) = Aσ(Bx).

(1)

Here, x ∈ Rd is the input to compress, x̂ ∈ Rn the reconstruction, B ∈ Rn×d the encoding matrix, and A ∈ Rd×n
the decoding matrix; the activation σ : R → R is applied
element-wise. We aim at minimizing the population risk

1. Introduction
Autoencoders represent a key building block in many
branches of machine learning (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014), including generative modeling (Bengio et al., 2013) and representation learning (Tschannen
et al., 2018). Prompted by the fact that autoencoders learn

2

R(A, B) := d−1 Ex ∥x − x̂(x)∥2 ,

(2)

where the expectation is taken over the distribution of
the input x. Our focus is on Gaussian input data, i.e.,
x ∼ N (0, Σ). When σ is the sign function, the encoder
σ(Bx) can be interpreted as a compressor, namely, it compresses the d-dimensional input signal into n bits. The problem (2) of compressing a Gaussian source with quadratic
distortion has been studied in exquisite detail in the information theory literature (Cover & Thomas, 2006), and the
optimal performance for general encoder/decoder pairs is
known via the rate-distortion formalism which characterizes
the lowest achievable distortion in terms of the rate r = n/d.

*

1
Equal contribution
ISTA, Klosterneuburg, Austria
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence to: Aleksandr
Shevchenko <alex.shevchenko@ist.ac.at>, Kevin Kögler
<kevin.koegler@ist.ac.at>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

