The Edge of Orthogonality: A Simple View of What Makes BYOL Tick

Pierre H. Richemond 1 Allison Tam 1 Yunhao Tang 1 Florian Strub 1 Bilal Piot 1 Felix Hill 1

Abstract

of algorithms coexist. First, contrastive methods iteratively
push the representations of positive pairs of examples closer
together, and pull negative pairs of examples further apart.
They optimize a lower bound on the mutual information between representations and data (van den Oord et al., 2018).

Self-predictive unsupervised learning methods such as BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) or
SimSiam (Chen and He, 2020) have shown impressive results, and counter-intuitively, do not
collapse to trivial representations. In this work, we
aim at exploring the simplest possible mathematical arguments towards explaining the underlying
mechanisms behind self-predictive unsupervised
learning. We start with the observation that those
methods crucially rely on the presence of a predictor network (and stop-gradient). With simple
linear algebra, we show that when using a linear predictor, the optimal predictor is close to
an orthogonal projection, and propose a general
framework based on orthonormalization that enables to interpret and give intuition on why BYOL
works. In addition, this framework demonstrates
the crucial role of the exponential moving average and stop-gradient operator in BYOL as an efficient orthonormalization mechanism. We use
these insights to propose four new closed-form (or
thereafter fixed-form) predictor variants of BYOL
to support our analysis. Our fixed-form predictors outperform standard linear trainable predictor
BYOL at 100 and 300 epochs (top-1 linear accuracy on ImageNet).

Second, self-predictive methods rely on minimizing a leastsquares objective between two network outputs with two
different augmented views of the same inputs. This may
involve two related or Siamese (Bromley et al., 1993) neural
network streams with or without the same architecture (Grill
et al., 2020; Chen and He, 2020; Ermolov et al., 2021). For
instance, BYOL features both an online network, composed
of an encoder and a predictor and a target network, composed of a similar encoder but not sharing weights. The
target encoder is updated through an exponential moving
average of the online encoder, whereas the online network
(encoder and predictor) is updated through gradient descent
by minimizing a BYOL loss between the stop-gradiented
target encoder outputs and online predictor outputs. Both
outputs are computed from the same inputs with different
augmentations. Self-predictive learning is more memoryefficient than contrastive learning as it does not rely on
extremely large batch sizes (due to negative examples) to
reach good performance. However, it was initially surprising
and opaque why those algorithms learn anything at all rather
than collapsing to a single all-attracting constant value. Yet,
several works started unveiling the underlying mechanisms
behind self-predictive unsupervised learning (Tian et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022; Halvagal et al., 2022) (see Sec. 7).
Here we propose simple explanations for this phenomenon
through linear algebra, and use those to derive new, fixedform (closed-form or iterations) predictors for BYOL.

1. Introduction
Modern Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) methods (Grill
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020) have all but closed the performance gap with supervised methods in computer vision.
Famously, these methods also form the basis for multimodal
representation algorithms that power useful downstream applications such as generative modelling at scale (Radford
et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022; Alayrac
et al., 2022). Amongst SSL methods broadly two families

The crucial starting point is to notice that BYOL can be seen
as matrix trace maximization, and we here refine this argument. Several fundamental algorithms in machine learning
such as PCA (Pearson, 1901), spectral clustering (Cheeger,
1969; Shi and Malik, 1997), or non-negative matrix factorization (Paatero and Tapper, 1994; Lee and Seung, 1999), share
this property and are also readily written as least-squares
minimization objectives. Crucially they do not collapse
thanks to optimization constraints (Kokiopoulou et al., 2011).
For instance, the variational characterization of PCA implies
maximization over orthogonal matrices (Horn and Johnson,
2013). In this work and as core contribution, we argue that a

*
Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Pierre Harvey Richemond <richemond@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

