Interventional Causal Representation Learning

Kartik Ahuja 1 Divyat Mahajan 2 Yixin Wang 3 Yoshua Bengio 2 4

Abstract
Support

Causal representation learning seeks to extract
high-level latent factors from low-level sensory
data. Most existing methods rely on observational
data and structural assumptions (e.g., conditional
independence) to identify the latent factors. However, interventional data is prevalent across applications. Can interventional data facilitate causal
representation learning? We explore this question
in this paper. The key observation is that interventional data often carries geometric signatures
of the latent factors’ support (i.e. what values
each latent can possibly take). For example, when
the latent factors are causally connected, interventions can break the dependency between the intervened latents’ support and their ancestors’. Leveraging this fact, we prove that the latent causal
factors can be identified up to permutation and
scaling given data from perfect do interventions.
Moreover, we can achieve block affine identification, namely the estimated latent factors are only
entangled with a few other latents if we have access to data from imperfect interventions. These
results highlight the unique power of interventional data in causal representation learning; they
can enable provable identification of latent factors
without any assumptions about their distributions
or dependency structure.

Z1

Z2

Z1

z*
2

Z2

Z2

Z2

Z1

Observational data
(a)

Z1

Z2

Z1

Do interventional data
(b)

Z2

Z1

Z2

Z2

Z1
Z1
Imperfect intervention
Imperfect intervention
that induces independent support without independent support
(c)
(d)

Figure 1. Figure 1a) Observational data: the support of child (Z2 )
conditional on parent (Z1 ) varies with the value of parent. Figure
1b), 1c): the support of child conditional on parent under do intervention, perfect intervention and many imperfect interventions
is independent of the parent. Figure 1d): intervention on child
reduces the impact of the parent on it which causes the support of
the child conditional on parent to take a larger set of values.

Yamada et al., 2022). Humans encapsulate their causal
knowledge of the world in a highly reusable and recomposable way (Goyal & Bengio, 2020), enabling them to adapt
to new tasks in an ever-distribution-shifting world. How
can we empower modern deep learning models with this
type of causal understanding? This question is central to the
emerging field of causal representation learning (Schölkopf
et al., 2021).
A core task in causal representation learning is provable
representation identification, i.e., developing representation
learning algorithms that can provably identify natural latent
factors (e.g., location, shape and color of different objects
in a scene). While provable representation identification is
known to be impossible for arbitrary data-generating process (DGP) (Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999; Locatello et al.,
2019), real data often exhibits additional structures. For
example, Hyvarinen et al. (2019); Khemakhem et al. (2022)
consider the conditional independence between the latents
given auxiliary information; Lachapelle et al. (2022) leverage the sparsity of the causal connections among the latents;
Locatello et al. (2020); Klindt et al. (2020); Ahuja et al.
(2022a) rely on the sparse variation in the latents over time.

1. Introduction
Modern deep learning models like GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020) and CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) are remarkable representation learners (Bengio et al., 2013). Despite the successes, these models continue to be far from the human ability to adapt to new situations (distribution shifts) or carry
out new tasks (Geirhos et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021;
1
FAIR (Meta AI) 2 Mila-Quebec AI Institute, Université de
Montréal 3 University of Michigan 4 CIFAR Senior Fellow and
CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Kartik Ahuja <kartikahuja@meta.com>.

Most existing works rely on observational data and make
assumptions on the dependency structure of the latents to
achieve provable representation identification. However, in
many applications, such as robotics and genomics, there

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

