Not all Strongly Rayleigh Distributions
Have Small Probabilistic Generating Circuits

Markus Bläser 1

Abstract

Friedman, 2009), the well-known determininantal point processes (Borodin & Rains, 2005; Kulesza & Taskar, 2012),
or probabilistic circuits like for instance sum-product networks (Darwiche, 2009; Kisa et al., 2014; Poon & Domingos, 2012). These models represent probability distributions
by computing probability mass functions: the input is an
assignment to the random variables and the output is the
corresponding probability of the event.

Probabilistic modeling is a central task in machine
learning. Probabilistic models should be tractable,
i.e., allowing tractable probabilistic inference,
but also efficient, i.e., being able to represent a
large set of probability distributions. Zhang et
al. (ICML 2021) recently proposed a new model,
probabilistic generating circuits. They raised the
question whether every strongly Rayleigh distribution can be efficiently represented by such circuits.
We prove that this question has a negative answer.
There are strongly Rayleigh distributions that cannot be represented by polynomial-sized probabilistic generating circuits, assuming a widely accepted complexity theoretic conjecture.

Zhang et al. (2021) recently proposed a new model, probabilistic generating circuits (PCGs). Unlike probablistic
circuits, they represent probability distributions by probability generating functions. Probability generating functions
represent the joint distribution of a set of binary random
variables as the coefficients of a multilinear polynomial.
This new model is still tractable as it supports marginal inference. Furthermore it is very efficient, it subsumes all the
probablistic models mentioned above in this regard.

1. Introduction

What makes PGCs particularly attractive is the fact that
many interesting probability distributions are defined via
generating polynomials. Strongly Rayleigh (SR) distributions (Borcea et al., 2009) are a prominent example here.
Zhang et al. (2021) leave it as a question for further research
which classes of interesting distributions can we represented
efficiently by PGCs. In particular, they ask the question
whether all SR distributions can be expressed by a polynomial size PGC.

Probabilistic modeling is a central task in machine learning. However, probabilistic inference easily becomes intractable when the underlying models become large and
complicated, see (Roth, 1996) for a theoretical explanation.
Therefore, it is important to develop probabilistic models
that are tractable (TPMs for short), that is, they allow for
probabilistic inference that is tractable in the size of the
model. On the other hand, the probabilistic models should
be as expressive efficient as possible (in the sense of Martens
& Medabalimi (2014)), which means that they can represent
as many classes of distributions as possible while staying
small in size. The more classes we can represent, the broader
the spectrum of applications of the model. However, there is
typically a tradeoff between expressiveness and tractability.
The more expressive the model, the harder will be probabilistic inference.

1.1. Our work
As our main result, we prove that this question has a negative
answer, as has already been conjectured by Zhang et al.
We prove that there is a family of SR distributions that
does not have polynomial size PGCs assuming a widely
believed complexity theoretic assumption, namely, that the
polynomial time hierarchy is infinite.

Examples of tractable models are for instance bounded
treewidth graphical models (Meila & Jordan, 2000; Koller &

1.2. Previous work

1

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus,
Saarbrücken, Germany. Correspondence to: Markus Bläser
<mblaeser@cs.uni-saarland.de>.

A distribution is strongly Rayleigh, if the corresponding
generating polynomial is real stable. There is a natural
candidate for a counter example to the question by Zhang
et al., namely, matching polynomials. However, it turns out
that they are not directly suited as a counter example, as we

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

