Explaining the effects of non-convergent MCMC in the training of Energy-Based
Models
Elisabeth Agoritsas 1 Giovanni Catania 2 Aurélien Decelle 2 3 Beatriz Seoane 2 3

Abstract

nowadays due to their amazing ability to generate photorealistic images (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021).

In this paper, we quantify the impact of using nonconvergent Markov chains to train Energy-Based
models (EBMs). In particular, we show analytically that EBMs trained with non-persistent short
runs to estimate the gradient can perfectly reproduce a set of empirical statistics of the data, not at
the level of the equilibrium measure, but through
a precise dynamical process. Our results provide a
first-principles explanation for the observations of
recent works proposing the strategy of using short
runs starting from random initial conditions as an
efficient way to generate high-quality samples in
EBMs, and lay the groundwork for using EBMs
as diffusion models. After explaining this effect in
generic EBMs, we analyze two solvable models in
which the effect of the non-convergent sampling
in the trained parameters can be described in detail. Finally, we test these predictions numerically
on a ConvNet EBM and a Boltzmann machine.

EBMs offer several fundamental advantages over their competitors due to their simplicity: A single neural network is
involved in training, which means that fewer parameters
need to be learned and training is less costly. They are also
particularly appealing for interpretive applications: Once
trained, the energy function can be analyzed with statistical
mechanics tools (Decelle & Furtlehner, 2021b), or shallow
EBMs can serve as an effective model to “learn” something
from the data. EBMs have been exploited for instance to
infer the three dimensional structure (Morcos et al., 2011)
or building blocks (Tubiana et al., 2019) of proteins, to generate artificial pieces of genome (Yelmen et al., 2021), for
neuroimaging (Hjelm et al., 2014), simulation of complex
wavefunctions in quantum many-body physics (Carleo &
Troyer, 2017; Melko et al., 2019), or to impute missing
input (Fissore et al., 2019). Furthermore, EBMs naturally
implement compositionability, i.e. the possibility of combining information from different trained models to generate
new composite data (Hinton, 1999; Du et al., 2020).
EBMs have been around for a very long time, starting with
the well-known single-layer (Ackley et al., 1985), Restricted
(Smolensky, 1987) or the Deep (Salakhutdinov & Hinton,
2009) Boltzmann machines, to modern applications where
EBMs are encoded in Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
(ConvNets) (Nijkamp et al., 2019; 2020; Du & Mordatch,
2019; Du et al., 2020), which show very similar performance
in image generation as state-of-the-art GAN methods (Du &
Mordatch, 2019). Despite their many advantages, the direct
training of EBMs is hard and unstable in practice, a problem
directly related to the approximations made to estimate the
negative term of the gradient (Decelle et al., 2021). As it is
intractable, it must be approximated by sampling methods,
typically Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) or Langevin
dynamics, and such sampling is required each time parameters are updated. However, practical applications use a
number of iterations far shorter than the mixing time of
the algorithm, required to ensure an ergodic exploration
of the model phase space and a reliable estimation of the
log-likelihood gradient. To circumvent this “equilibration”
problem, several strategies have been proposed, mainly relying either on good initializations of the MCMC chains to

1. Introduction
Encoding the statistics of a given dataset and generating data
points that match those statistics are crucial issues in machine learning. Many different strategies have been devised.
Among the most popular solutions are Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2020),
Energy Based Models (EBMs) (Zhu et al., 1998; LeCun
et al., 2006; Lu et al., 2016; Xie et al., 2016) or their close
relatives, Diffusion Models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020). The latter are becoming increasingly popular
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Quantum Matter Physics,
University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland 2 Departamento
de Fı́sica Teórica, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 28040
Madrid, Spain 3 Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, INRIA Tau
team, LISN, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Correspondence
to: Aurélien Decelle <adecelle@ucm.es>, Beatriz Seoane <beseoane@ucm.es>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

