Mitigating Spurious Correlations in Multi-modal Models during Fine-tuning

Yu Yang 1 Besmira Nushi 2 Hamid Palangi 2 Baharan Mirzasoleiman 1

Spurious attribute
present

Abstract

Spurious attribute
absent

Spurious correlations that degrade model generalization or lead the model to be right for the
wrong reasons are one of the main robustness
concerns for real-world deployments. However,
mitigating these correlations during pre-training
for large-scale models can be costly and impractical, particularly for those without access to highperformance computing resources. This paper
proposes a novel approach to address spurious
correlations during fine-tuning for a given domain
of interest. With a focus on multi-modal models
(e.g., CLIP), the proposed method leverages different modalities in these models to detect and
explicitly set apart spurious attributes from the
affected class, achieved through a multi-modal
contrastive loss function that expresses spurious
relationships through language. Our experimental results and in-depth visualizations on CLIP
show that such an intervention can effectively i)
improve the model’s accuracy when spurious attributes are not present, and ii) directs the model’s
activation maps towards the actual class rather
than the spurious attribute when present. In particular, on the Waterbirds dataset, our algorithm
achieved a worst-group accuracy 23% higher than
ERM on CLIP with a ResNet-50 backbone, and
32% higher on CLIP with a ViT backbone, while
maintaining the same average accuracy as ERM1 .

Before mitigation

After mitigation

Photo of pacifier with
baby with gradcam
Before mitigation
The model is correct
but focuses on the
baby face

Photo of pacifier with
baby with gradcam
After mitigation
The model is still
correct but focuses on
the pacifier

prediction = pacifier

prediction = pacifier

Photo of pacifier
without baby with
gradcam
Before mitigation
The model is wrong
(not sure where it
focuses)

Photo of pacifier
without baby with
gradcam
After mitigation
The model is correct
and focuses on the
pacifier.

prediction = bottle

prediction = pacifier

Figure 1. The baby pacifier class in ImageNet is spuriously correlated with the presence of babies, which leads the pre-trained
model to be less accurate for cases when babies are absent in the
image (bottom row) and also be right for the wrong reasons when
babies are present (top row). Our approach mitigates both concerns by conveniently expressing and decorrelating the spurious
relationships in the loss function via language.

architectures are trained and used in different applications.
Their multi-modal nature has not only enabled a large variety of tasks (e.g. text-to-image generation, visual question
answering, image captioning) but is also facilitating better
learning techniques that take advantage of data in several
modalities to jointly learn embeddings that can then be
reused in downstream tasks (Radford et al., 2021; Kamath
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2020).

1. Introduction

While the multi-modal alignment increases the expectations
about model reliability due to better grounding and larger
availability of data in general, these models are still not
immune to fundamental learning problems such as dealing
with spurious correlations (Bommasani et al., 2021; Moayeri et al., 2022; Petryk et al., 2022; Agarwal et al., 2021).
Therefore, when such models are used as a backbone to
solve application-oriented tasks on a given domain, existing
spurious correlations specific to that domain or the finetuning data that comes with it, may resurface in ways that
are harmful to end users. At the same time, retraining large
models from scratch to address such issues has become a
less realistic avenue for two main reasons. First, stakehold-

Vision-Language models (e.g., CLIP, DALL-E, Stable Diffusion, Imagen) are becoming pervasive in real-world deployments and have transformed the way large-scale model
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond, USA. Correspondence to: Yu Yang <yuyang@cs.ucla.edu>, Besmira Nushi
<besmira.nushi@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code can be found at https://github.com/bigml-cs-ucla/clipspurious-finetune

1

