On excess mass behavior in Gaussian mixture models
with Orlicz-Wasserstein distances
Aritra Guha * 1 Nhat Ho 2 XuanLong Nguyen 3

Abstract

just a few. The heterogeneity in data populations and associated quantities of interest has inspired the use of a variety
of kernels, each with its own advantages and characteristics. Gaussian kernels are particularly popular in various
inferential problems, especially those related to density estimation and clustering analysis (Kotz et al., 2001; Bailey
et al., 1994.; Roeder & Wasserman, 1997; Robert, 1996;
Banfield & Raftery, 1993). In addition to the choice of
kernels, the Bayesian mixture modelers are also guided by
the selection of prior distributions for the quantities of interest. In particular, Bayesian nonparametric priors (BNP) for
mixture models are increasingly embraced, thanks to computational ease and the modeling flexibility that these rich
priors entail (Escobar & West, 1995; MacEachern, 1999).

Dirichlet Process mixture models (DPMM) in
combination with Gaussian kernels have been
an important modeling tool for numerous data
domains arising from biological, physical, and
social sciences. However, this versatility in applications does not extend to strong theoretical guarantees for the underlying parameter estimates, for
which only a logarithmic rate is achieved. In this
work, we (re)introduce and investigate a metric,
named Orlicz-Wasserstein distance, in the study
of the Bayesian contraction behavior for the parameters. We show that despite the overall slow
convergence guarantees for all the parameters,
posterior contraction for parameters happens at
almost polynomial rates in outlier regions of the
parameter space. Our theoretical results provide
new insight in understanding the convergence behavior of parameters arising from various settings
of hierarchical Bayesian nonparametric models.
In addition, we provide an algorithm to compute
the metric by leveraging Sinkhorn divergences
and validate our findings through a simulation
study.

On the theoretical front, convergence rates for (Gaussian) mixture models received extensive treatments in the
Bayesian paradigm (Ghosal et al., 2000; Barron et al., 1999;
Ghosal & van der Vaart, 2007). There have been enormous
recent progress on both density estimation and parameter
estimation problems. The density estimation problem under
Gaussian mixture models with BNP priors was extensively
studied by (Ghosal & van der Vaart, 2001) who obtained
attractive polynomial rates of contraction relative to the
Hellinger distance metric. In the parameter estimation problem, the metric of choice is Wasserstein distance, which
proved to be a natural tool to analyze the convergence of
mixture parameters (Nguyen, 2013). Moreover, (Nguyen,
2013) showed that the fast rates for density estimation with
BNP Gaussian mixtures do not extend themselves to parameter estimation scenarios. Meanwhile, practitioners have
employed successfully BNP mixture models, which yield
useful estimates for model parameters that provide meaningful information about the data population’s heterogeneity.
This state of affairs leaves a gap in the theoretical understanding and the practical usage of Bayesian mixture models.
In this paper, we aim to bridge this gap by capturing more
accurately the heterogenenous behavior in the rates of parameter estimation. We proceed to describe this in further
detail.

1. Introduction
From their origin in the work of Pearson (Pearson,
1894), mixture models have been widely used by statisticians (McLachlan & Basford, 1988; Lindsay, 1995;
Mengersen et al., 2011) in variety of modern interdisciplinary domains such as medical science (Schlattmann,
2009), bioinformatics (Ji et al., 2005), survival analysis (Tsodikov et al., 2003), psychometry (Gu et al., 2018)
and image classification (Permuter et al., 2006), to name
1

Data Science & AI Research, AT&T Chief Data Office
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas,
Austin 3 Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor. Correspondence to: Aritra Guha <aguha0109@gmail.com,
aritra@umich.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

