A Fast Optimistic Method for Monotone Variational Inequalities

Michael Sedlmayer 1 Dang-Khoa Nguyen 2 Radu Ioan Boţ 1 2

Abstract

1.1. Problem Setting
In the following we consider Rd with its standard inner
product denoted by h · , · i and induced norm k · k. Let F :
Rd → Rd be a monotone operator, i.e.,

We study monotone variational inequalities that
can arise as optimality conditions for constrained
convex optimisation or convex-concave minimax
problems and propose a novel algorithm that uses
only one gradient/operator evaluation and one projection onto the constraint set per iteration. The
algorithm, which we call fOGDA-VI, achieves
a o(1/k) rate of convergence in terms of the restricted gap function as well as the natural residual for the last iterate. Moreover, we provide
a convergence guarantee for the sequence of iterates to a solution of the variational inequality.
These are the best theoretical convergence results
for numerical methods for (only) monotone variational inequalities reported in the literature. To
empirically validate our algorithm we investigate
a two-player matrix game with mixed strategies of
the two players. Concluding, we show promising
results regarding the application of fOGDA-VI to
the training of generative adversarial nets.

∀w, z ∈ Rd ,

hF (w) − F (z), w − zi ≥ 0

which is also L-Lipschitz continuous, i.e.,
kF (w) − F (z)k ≤ L kw − zk

∀w, z ∈ Rd .

Furthermore, let C be a nonempty closed convex subset
of Rd . Then the (strong) classical variational inequality
problem consists of finding z ∗ ∈ C such that
hF (z ∗ ), z − z ∗ i ≥ 0

∀z ∈ C.

(1)

For the following considerations we assume that the solution set of (1) is nonempty, i.e., Ω := {z ∗ ∈ C |
hF (z ∗ ), z − z ∗ i ≥ 0 ∀z ∈ C} 6= ∅.
Note that in the case of F being monotone and continuous,
the above strong formulation is equivalent to the following
problem,
hF (z), z − z ∗ i ≥ 0 ∀z ∈ C,
(2)
which is known as the weak version of the variational inequality. Writing NC (z) := {w ∈ Rd | hv − z, wi ≤
0 ∀v ∈ C}, for z ∈ C, and NC (z) := ∅, for z ∈
/ C, to
denote the normal cone of C, condition (1) is equivalent
to the following monotone inclusion, where want to find
z ∗ ∈ Rd such that

1. Introduction
Variational inequalities are fundamental models in various
fields such as optimisation, e.g., when determining primaldual pairs of optimal solutions of constrained convex optimisation problems (Bauschke & Combettes, 2011), economics,
game theory (Morgenstern & Von Neumann, 1953), or partial differential equations. Recently, they have attracted particularly significant attention in the area of machine learning
due to the fundamental role they play, for instance, in multi
agent reinforcement learning (Omidshafiei et al., 2017), robust adversarial learning (Madry et al., 2018) and the training of generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Goodfellow, 2016).

0 ∈ F (z ∗ ) + NC (z ∗ ).

(3)

1.2. Contribution
We introduce an accelerated first order method for solving
the constrained variational inequality problem (1) that uses
a single operator evaluation and a single projection in each
iteration. Our proposed algorithm, called fOGDA-VI, exhibits a o(1/k) rate of convergence for the last iterate which
is better than the O(1/k) results for other accelerated algorithms. Moreover, fOGDA-VI exhibits convergence of the
generated sequence to a solution of the variational inequality
under investigation, which is not necessarily the case for
other accelerated methods (Cai et al., 2022a; Cai & Zheng,
2022) that have been proposed for (1).

1
Research Network Data Science, University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria 2 Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Correspondence to: Michael Sedlmayer
<michael.sedlmayer@univie.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

