Concept-based Explanations for Out-of-Distribution Detectors

Jihye Choi 1 Jayaram Raghuram 1 Ryan Feng 2 Jiefeng Chen 1 Somesh Jha 1 Atul Prakash 2

Abstract

such inputs (Tax & Duin, 2008; Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2019).
In many application domains (e.g., medical imaging), it is
important to understand both the model’s prediction as well
the reason for abstaining from prediction on certain inputs
(i.e., the OOD detector’s decisions). Moreover, abstaining
from prediction can often have a practical cost, e.g., due to
service denial or the need for manual intervention (Markoff,
2016; Mozannar & Sontag, 2020).

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection plays a crucial role in ensuring the safe deployment of deep
neural network (DNN) classifiers. While a myriad
of methods have focused on improving the performance of OOD detectors, a critical gap remains
in interpreting their decisions. We help bridge
this gap by providing explanations for OOD detectors based on learned high-level concepts. We
first propose two new metrics for assessing the
effectiveness of a particular set of concepts for
explaining OOD detectors: 1) detection completeness – which quantifies the sufficiency of concepts for explaining an OOD detector’s decisions,
and 2) concept separability – which captures the
distributional separation between in-distribution
and OOD data in the concept space. Based on
these metrics, we propose an unsupervised framework for learning a set of concepts that satisfy
the desired properties of high detection completeness and concept separability, and demonstrate its
effectiveness in providing concept-based explanations for diverse off-the-shelf OOD detectors.
We also show how to identify prominent concepts
contributing to the detection results, and provide
further reasoning about their decisions.

Detecting OOD inputs has received significant attention
in the literature, and a number of methods exist that
achieve strong detection performance on semantic distribution shifts (Yang et al., 2021; 2022). Much of the focus in
learning OOD detectors has been on improving their detection performance (Hendrycks et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020;
Mohseni et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021;
Sun et al., 2021; Cao & Zhang, 2022). However, the problem of explaining the decisions of an OOD detector and
the related problem of designing inherently-interpretable
detectors remain largely unexplored (we focus on the former
problem). A potential approach could be to run an existing
explanation method for DNN classifiers with in-distribution
(ID) and OOD data separately, and then inspect the difference between the generated explanations. However, it is
unclear whether an explanation method that is effective for
ID class predictions will also be effective for OOD detection. For instance, feature attributions, the most popular
type of explanation (Sundararajan et al., 2017; Ribeiro et al.,
2016), may not capture visual differences in the generated
explanations between ID and OOD inputs (Adebayo et al.,
2020). Moreover, their explanations based on pixel-level
activations may not provide the most intuitive form of explanations for humans.

1. Introduction
It is well known that machine learning (ML) models
can yield uncertain and unreliable predictions on out-ofdistribution (OOD) inputs, i.e., inputs from outside the training distribution (Amodei et al., 2016; Goodfellow et al.,
2015; Hendrycks et al., 2021). A common line of defense in
this situation is to augment the ML model (e.g., a DNN classifier) with a detector that can identify and flag such inputs
as OOD (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Liang et al., 2018).
The ML model can then abstain from making predictions on

This paper addresses the above research gap by proposing
the first method (to our knowledge) for interpreting the decisions of an OOD detector in a human-understandable way.
We build upon recent advances in concept-based explanations for DNN classifiers (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Zhou et al.,
2018a; Bouchacourt & Denoyer, 2019; Yeh et al., 2020),
which offer the benefit of providing explanations in terms of
high-level concepts for classification tasks. We focus on extending this explanation framework to the problem of OOD
detection. As a concrete example, consider Fig. 1 which illustrates our concept-based explanations given inputs which
are all classified as the class “Dolphin” by a DNN classifier,

1
University of Wisconsin - Madison 2 University of Michigan.
Correspondence to: Jihye Choi <jihye@cs.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

