A Simple Zero-shot Prompt Weighting Technique to Improve Prompt
Ensembling in Text-Image Models

James Urquhart Allingham * 1 Jie Ren * 2 Michael W. Dusenberry 2
Xiuye Gu 2 Yin Cui 2 Dustin Tran 2 Jeremiah Zhe Liu 2 Balaji Lakshminarayanan 2

Abstract

2022), and BASIC (Pham et al., 2021) have the remarkable
ability to perform zero-shot1 classification. That is, such
models can be used to classify previously unseen images
into categories for which the model has never been explicitly trained to identify. Such zero-shot classifiers can match
the performance of standard classification models which
have access to training examples. For example, a CLIP
zero-shot classifier with a ViT-L/14 vision tower matches
the ImageNet accuracy of a ResNet-101 (Radford et al.,
2021). However, achieving strong zero-shot classification
performance requires prompt engineering (Radford et al.,
2021; Zhai et al., 2022; Pham et al., 2021). Zero-shot CLIP
ViT-B/16 performance on ImageNet increases from 64.18%
to 66.92% and 68.57% when using the prompt ‘A photo of
{}.’, and a selection of 80 hand-crafted prompts, rather than
class name only. To use a set of hand-crafted prompts for
zero-shot classification, the text embeddings of the prompts
composed with class names are averaged into a single vector to represent the class. This is called a prompt ensemble
in (Radford et al., 2021). Prompt engineering can be seen
as reducing the ‘distribution shift’ between the zero-shot
setting and the training data in which the captions seldom
consist of a single word.

Contrastively trained text-image models have the
remarkable ability to perform zero-shot classification, that is, classifying previously unseen
images into categories that the model has never
been explicitly trained to identify. However, these
zero-shot classifiers need prompt engineering to
achieve high accuracy. Prompt engineering typically requires hand-crafting a set of prompts for
individual downstream tasks. In this work, we
aim to automate this prompt engineering and improve zero-shot accuracy through prompt ensembling. In particular, we ask “Given a large pool of
prompts, can we automatically score the prompts
and ensemble those that are most suitable for a
particular downstream dataset, without needing
access to labeled validation data?”. We demonstrate that this is possible. In doing so, we identify several pathologies in a naive prompt scoring
method where the score can be easily overconfident due to biases in pre-training and test data, and
we propose a novel prompt scoring method that
corrects for the biases. Using our proposed scoring method to create a weighted average prompt
ensemble, our method outperforms an equal average ensemble, as well as hand-crafted prompts,
on ImageNet, 4 of its variants, and 11 fine-grained
classification benchmarks, all while being fully
automatic, optimization-free, and not requiring
access to labeled validation data.

Unfortunately, the need for a set of hand-crafted prompts
to achieve good zero-shot performance greatly reduces the
promised general applicability of such zero-shot classifiers.
Different sets of prompts were manually designed and tuned
for different downstream tasks for CLIP. For example, the
prompts ‘a photo of a {} texture.’, ‘a photo of a {} pattern.’,
and ‘i love my {}!’, ‘a photo of my clean {}.’ were designed
for the Describable Textures Dataset (DTD) (Cimpoi et al.,
2014) and the Cars196 dataset (Krause et al., 2013) , respectively. Designing different sets of hand-crafted prompts can
be be labor-intensive, and the common prompt design processes require access to a labeled validation dataset, which
may not be available in practice. In this paper, we ask the

1. Introduction
Contrastively trained text-image models such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), LiT (Zhai et al.,
*
Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge, work done
while at Google Research 2 Google Research. Correspondence
to: James Urquhart Allingham <jua23@cam.ac.uk>, Jie Ren
<jjren@google.com>.

1

Here, zero-shot refers to the fact that the classifier has not
been trained in a supervised manner using any examples of the
class. However, due to the large-scale pre-training of the models, it
is possible that relevant examples were observed. For this reason,
this setting is often referred to as zero-shot transfer rather than
zero-shot learning (Zhai et al., 2022).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

