Sliced-Wasserstein on Symmetric Positive Definite Matrices for M/EEG Signals

Clément Bonet * 1 Benoı̂t Malézieux * 2 Alain Rakotomamonjy 3 4 Lucas Drumetz 5 Thomas Moreau 2
Matthieu Kowalski 6 Nicolas Courty 7

Abstract

from band-passed filtered signals in several frequency bands
(Blankertz et al., 2007). The main difficulty that arises
when processing such covariance matrices is that the set of
symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices is not a linear
space, but a Riemannian manifold (Bhatia, 2009; Bridson &
Haefliger, 2013). Therefore, specific algorithms have to be
designed to take into account the non Euclidean structure
of the data. The usage of Riemannian geometry on SPD
matrices has become increasingly popular in the ML community (Huang & Van Gool, 2017; Chevallier et al., 2017;
Ilea et al., 2018; Brooks et al., 2019). In particular, these
tools have proven to be very effective on prediction tasks
with M/EEG data in Brain Computer Interface (BCI) applications (Barachant et al., 2011; 2013; Gaur et al., 2018) or
more recently in brain-age prediction (Sabbagh et al., 2019;
2020; Engemann et al., 2022). As covariance matrices sets
from M/EEG data are often modeled as samples from a
probability distribution – for instance in domain adaptation
for BCI (Yair et al., 2019) – it is of great interest to develop
efficient tools that work directly on those distributions.

When dealing with electro or magnetoencephalography records, many supervised prediction tasks
are solved by working with covariance matrices to
summarize the signals. Learning with these matrices requires using Riemanian geometry to account
for their structure. In this paper, we propose a new
method to deal with distributions of covariance
matrices and demonstrate its computational efficiency on M/EEG multivariate time series. More
specifically, we define a Sliced-Wasserstein distance between measures of symmetric positive
definite matrices that comes with strong theoretical guarantees. Then, we take advantage of its
properties and kernel methods to apply this distance to brain-age prediction from MEG data and
compare it to state-of-the-art algorithms based on
Riemannian geometry. Finally, we show that it
is an efficient surrogate to the Wasserstein distance in domain adaptation for Brain Computer
Interface applications.

Optimal transport (OT) (Villani, 2009; Peyré et al., 2019)
provides a powerful theoretical framework and computational toolbox to compare probability distributions while
respecting the geometry of the underlying space. It is well
defined on Riemannian manifolds (McCann, 2001; Cui et al.,
2019; Alvarez-Melis et al., 2020) and in particular on the
space of SPD matrices that is considered in M/EEG learning tasks (Brigant & Puechmorel, 2018; Yair et al., 2019;
Ju & Guan, 2022). The original OT problem defines the
Wasserstein distance which has a super cubic complexity
w.r.t samples. To alleviate the computational burden, different alternatives were proposed such as adding an entropic
regularization (Cuturi, 2013) or computing the distance between mini-batches (Fatras et al., 2020). Another popular
alternative is the Sliced-Wasserstein distance (SW) (Rabin
et al., 2011) which computes the average of the Wasserstein distance between one-dimensional projections. SW
has recently received a lot of attention as it significantly reduces the computational burden while preserving topological properties of Wasserstein (Bonnotte, 2013; Nadjahi et al.,
2020; Bayraktar & Guo, 2021). Moreover, Kolouri et al.
(2016); Meunier et al. (2022) have shown that, as opposed to
Wasserstein, SW allows to properly extend kernel methods

1. Introduction
Magnetoencephalography and electroencephalography
(M/EEG) are non-invasive techniques for recording the electrical activity of the brain (Hämäläinen et al., 1993). The
data consist of multivariate time series output by sensors
placed around the head, which capture the intensity of the
magnetic or electric field with high temporal resolution.
Those measurements provide information on cognitive processes as well as the biological state of a subject.
Successful machine learning (ML) techniques that deal with
M/EEG data often rely on covariance matrices estimated
*
Equal contribution 1 Université Bretagne Sud, LMBA
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA 3 Criteo AI Lab 4 Université
de Rouen, LITIS 5 IMT Atlantique, Lab-STICC 6 Université ParisSaclay, CNRS, LISN 7 Université Bretagne Sud, IRISA. Correspondence to: Clément Bonet <clement.bonet@univ-ubs.fr>, Benoı̂t
Malézieux <benoit.malezieux@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

