Online Nonstochastic Control with Adversarial and Static Constraints
Xin Liu 1 Zixian Yang 2 Lei Ying 2

Abstract

and disturbances). Practical control systems often operate
under various constraints (e.g., safety, demand-supply, or
energy constraints), which could be unpredictable and adversarial as well. For example, robots need to navigate along a
collision-free path by maintaining a minimum distance from
each other with complicated surroundings (e.g., pedestrians or other robots) (Brunke et al., 2022); cloud computing
platforms should guarantee low-latency service for users
with time-varying traffic workload (Tirmazi et al., 2020).
Motivated by these applications, we focus on online nonstochastic control problems with adversarial constraints and
propose online nonstochastic control algorithms to achieve
the minimum cost and the best constraint satisfaction.

This paper studies online nonstochastic control
problems with adversarial and static constraints.
We propose online nonstochastic control algorithms that achieve both sublinear regret and sublinear adversarial constraint violation while keeping static constraint violation minimal against the
optimal constrained linear control policy in hindsight. To establish the results, we introduce an online convex optimization with memory framework
under adversarial and static constraints, which
serves as a subroutine for the constrained online
nonstochastic control algorithms. This subroutine also achieves the state-of-the-art regret and
constraint violation bounds for constrained online convex optimization problems, which is of
independent interest. Our experiments demonstrate the proposed control algorithms are adaptive to adversarial constraints and achieve smaller
cumulative costs and violations. Moreover, our
algorithms are less conservative and achieve significantly smaller cumulative costs than the stateof-the-art algorithm.

It is a challenging task to synthesize a safe (online) controller because of the conflicting objectives, i.e. minimizing
the cumulative costs while satisfying all constraints. The
traditional way to guarantee constraint satisfaction is to
incorporate the constraints into Model Predictive Control
(constrained MPC) (Mayne et al., 2005; Rawlings et al.,
2017). However, constrained MPC often introduces overlyconservative, even infeasible, actions in the presence of system disturbances. To address the issue, a sequence of works
have relaxed or softened the constraints in MPC (Zeilinger
et al., 2010; Wabersich et al., 2022; Raković et al., 2023).
For online nonstochatic control problems where cost functions or disturbance could be arbitrary and time-varying, it
is impossible to predict the model so the constrained MPC
method is not applicable. Only a few works (Nonhoff &
Müller, 2021; Li et al., 2021) have considered online nonstochastic control with constraints, and they only studied
“static” affine constraints on the state xt and input ut , i.e.,
Dx xt ≤ 0 and Du ut ≤ 0. The work by (Nonhoff & Müller,
2021) studied an online nonstochatic control problem with
state and input constraints, but the system dynamics are
noise/disturbance-free. The work most related to ours is
(Li et al., 2021), which considers adversarial cost functions and adversarial disturbance but static affine constraints.
The paper proposed a gradient descent-based control algorithm (called online gradient
descent with buffer zones
√
(OGD-BZ)) to achieve Õ( T ) regret while the static affine
constraints are satisfied. However, the work assumed the
affine constraints and the knowledge of slackness of the
constraints so that robust optimization methods can be used
to construct safe/feasible regions for the affine constraints.
The method also has the issue of being over-conservative as

1. Introduction
Online nonstochastic control paradigm has been widely applied in practice (Hazan & Singh, 2022; Suo et al., 2021;
O’Connell et al., 2022). It is a topic of great interest in both
the learning and control communities because online nonstochastic control algorithms are robust to time-varying and
even adversarial environments (Agarwal et al., 2019a;b; Cohen et al., 2018; Dean et al., 2019). In an online nonstochastic control problem, the learner aims to learn a controller that
minimizes the cumulative costs in a time-varying or even
adversarial environment (e.g., the adversarial cost functions
1

The School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China. 2 The Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science Department, The University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor, USA. Correspondence to: Xin Liu <liuxin7@shanghaiteh.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

