Neural Diffusion Processes
Vincent Dutordoir 1 2 Alan Saul 2 Zoubin Ghahramani 1 3 Fergus Simpson 2
cessful methods include the meta-learning approaches of
Neural Processes (NPs) (Garnelo et al., 2018b;a), and VAEbased models (Mishra et al., 2020; Fortuin et al., 2020). By
leveraging a large number of small datasets during training,
they are able to transfer knowledge across datasets at prediction time. Using Neural Networks (NNs) is appealing since
most of the computational effort is expended during the
training process, while the task of prediction becomes more
straightforward. A further major advantage of a NN-based
approach is that they are not restricted by the Gaussianity.

Abstract
Neural network approaches for meta-learning distributions over functions have desirable properties
such as increased flexibility and a reduced complexity of inference. Building on the successes of
denoising diffusion models for generative modelling, we propose Neural Diffusion Processes
(NDPs), a novel approach that learns to sample
from a rich distribution over functions through
its finite marginals. By introducing a custom attention block we are able to incorporate properties of stochastic processes, such as exchangeability, directly into the NDP’s architecture. We empirically show that NDPs can capture functional
distributions close to the true Bayesian posterior,
demonstrating that they can successfully emulate
the behaviour of Gaussian processes and surpass
the performance of neural processes. NDPs enable a variety of downstream tasks, including regression, implicit hyperparameter marginalisation,
non-Gaussian posterior prediction and global optimisation.

In this work, we strive to enhance the capabilities of NNbased generative models for meta-learning function by
extending probabilistic denoising diffusion models (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2020; Ho et al., 2020).
Diffusion models have demonstrated superior performance
over existing methods in generating images (Nichol et al.,
2021; Ramesh et al., 2022), molecular structures (Xu et al.,
2022; Hoogeboom et al., 2022), point clouds (Luo & Hu,
2021), and audio signal data (Kong et al., 2020). The central
challenge we address is the Bayesian inference of functions,
a fundamentally different task not previously approached
by diffusion models. Although we acknowledge that several recent works have emerged since our initial preprint,
providing complementary insights on extending diffusion
models to function spaces (Phillips et al., 2022; Kerrigan
et al., 2022; Lim et al., 2023; Bond-Taylor & Willcocks,
2023; Pidstrigach et al., 2023; Franzese et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) offer a powerful framework
for defining distributions over functions (Rasmussen &
Williams, 2006). It is an appealing framework because
Bayes rule allows one to reason consistently about the predictive distribution, allowing the model to be data efficient.
However, for many problems, GPs are not an appropriate
prior. Consider, for example, a function that has a single
discontinuity at some unknown location. This is one classic example of a distribution of functions that cannot be
expressed in terms of a GP (Neal, 1998).

Contributions We propose a novel generative model, the
Neural Diffusion Process (NDP), which defines a probabilistic model over functions via their finite marginals. NDPs
generalise diffusion models to stochastic processes by allowing the indexing of the function’s marginals onto which the
model diffuses. We take particular care to enforce properties
of stochastic processes, including exchangeability, facilitating the training process. These properties are enforced using
a novel bi-dimensional attention block, which guarantees
equivariance over the ordering of the input dimensionality
and the sequence (i.e., datapoints). From the experiments,
we conclude: firstly, NDPs are an improvement over existing
NN-based generative models for functions such as Neural
Processes (NPs). Secondly, NDPs are an attractive alternative to GPs for specifying appropriate (i.e., non-Gaussian)
priors over functions. Finally, we present a novel global
optimisation method using NDPs.

One popular approach to these problems is to abandon GPs,
in favour of Neural Network-based generative models. Suc1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2 Secondmind, Cambridge, UK 3 Google DeepMind.
Correspondence to: Vincent Dutordoir <vd309@cam.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

