K-SHAP: Policy Clustering Algorithm for
Anonymous Multi-Agent State-Action Pairs

Andrea Coletta 1 Svitlana Vyetrenko 2 Tucker Balch 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Insect colonies, animal swarms, and human societies
are examples of the complex multi-agent systems in
nature. Each agent in these systems develops a behavioral strategy to take suitable actions in response
to environmental changes. Animals learn different behaviors to survive and exploit available resources (e.g.,
food), while humans may develop complex behaviors to
efficiently interact and pursue their own goals.

Learning agent behaviors from observational data
has shown to improve our understanding of their
decision-making processes, advancing our ability
to explain their interactions with the environment
and other agents. While multiple learning techniques have been proposed in the literature, there
is one particular setting that has not been explored
yet: multi agent systems where agent identities
remain anonymous. For instance, in financial markets labeled data that identifies market participant strategies is typically proprietary, and only
the anonymous state-action pairs that result from
the interaction of multiple market participants
are publicly available. As a result, sequences
of agent actions are not observable, restricting
the applicability of existing work. In this paper,
we propose a Policy Clustering algorithm, called
K-SHAP, that learns to group anonymous stateaction pairs according to the agent policies. We
frame the problem as an Imitation Learning (IL)
task, and we learn a world-policy able to mimic
all the agent behaviors upon different environmental states. We leverage the world-policy to explain
each anonymous observation through an additive
feature attribution method called SHAP (SHapley
Additive exPlanations). Finally, by clustering the
explanations we show that we are able to identify
different agent policies and group observations accordingly. We evaluate our approach on simulated
synthetic market data and a real-world financial
dataset. We show that our proposal significantly
and consistently outperforms the existing methods, identifying different agent strategies.

The study and understanding of human and animal behaviors has been a fundamental problem in both computer and
behavioral sciences (Cichos et al., 2020). In particular,
understanding agent behaviors from observational data is
essential to study, predict and simulate their behaviors (Li
et al., 2020; Suo et al., 2021).
Existing work borrows tools from the reinforcement learning literature to learn agent strategies (Hussein et al., 2017;
Ho and Ermon, 2016; Song et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2021)
using Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) as an efficient
mathematical framework to formulate the problem. In particular, Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) (Ng et al.,
2000) has been widely studied to characterize the decisionmaking behavior of animals and humans. IRL aims at recovering a reward function that explains the agent goal. It has
been used to study worm behavioral strategies (Yamaguchi
et al., 2018); to model the behaviors of mice exploring a
labyrinth (Ashwood et al.); to identify and capture the behavior of troll accounts in social networks (Luceri et al., 2020).
Imitation Learning (IL) (Hussein et al., 2017) is another
technique that has demonstrated great success in modeling
agent behaviors, learning directly from their trajectories
(state-action pairs). Recently, IL has shown to learn realistic
driving behaviors from human demonstrations (Suo et al.,
2021). Finally, Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) have been
extensively used to analyze temporal dynamics and model
agent behaviors from observed sequential data. HMMs have
been used to study different animal behaviors, including
honey bees (Feldman and Balch, 2004) and mice (Jiang et
al., 2018).

1

J.P. Morgan AI Research, London, UK. 2 J.P. Morgan AI Research, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Andrea Coletta <andrea.coletta@jpmchase.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

While all these techniques assume that clear observation sequences for each agent are given, some critical domains with
1

