DSGD-CECA: Decentralized SGD with Communication-Optimal Exact
Consensus Algorithm

Lisang Ding 1 Kexin Jin 2 Bicheng Ying 3 Kun Yuan 4 5 6 Wotao Yin 7

1. Introduction

Abstract
Decentralized Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
is an emerging neural network training approach
that enables multiple agents to train a model collaboratively and simultaneously. Rather than
using a central parameter server to collect gradients from all the agents, each agent keeps a
copy of the model parameters and communicates with a small number of other agents to exchange model updates. Their communication,
governed by the communication topology and
gossip weight matrices, facilitates the exchange
of model updates. The state-of-the-art approach
uses the dynamic one-peer exponential-2 topology, achieving faster training times and improved
scalability than the ring, grid, torus, and hypercube topologies. However, this approach requires a power-of-2 number of agents, which is
impractical at scale. In this paper, we remove
this restriction and propose Decentralized SGD
with Communication-optimal Exact Consensus
Algorithm (DSGD-CECA), which works for any
number of agents while still achieving state-ofthe-art properties. In particular, DSGD-CECA
incurs a unit per-iteration communication overhead and an Õ(n3 ) transient iteration complexity.
Our proof is based on newly discovered properties
of gossip weight matrices and a novel approach
to combine them with DSGD’s convergence analysis. Numerical experiments show the efficiency
of DSGD-CECA.

Decentralized computing (Tsitsiklis et al., 1986; Lopes &
Sayed, 2008; Nedic & Ozdaglar, 2009; Dimakis et al., 2010)
is an essential subclass of distributed computing with no
data fusion center. In scenarios where data and computational resources are distributed, decentralized computing
enables each agent to process its local data and communicate with a selected group of other agents. This approach
helps avoid the formation of central-agent-induced communication bottlenecks. Without a central agent, however,
the decentralized algorithm must achieve a global result
through peer-to-peer interactions of the agents. Hence, the
algorithm performance heavily depends on how effectively
and efficiently the agents exchange their information.
In scenarios where the global goal is to compute an average
across all agents, this challenge is identified as average consensus or allreduce averaging. Various optimal methods are
established for a range of prevalent communication settings
to address this problem. The goal of this paper, however, is
to accelerate decentralized SGD (DSGD) (Chen & Sayed,
2012; Lian et al., 2017; Koloskova et al., 2020), which is
widely used in large-scale deep neural network training, by
applying average consensus methods judiciously.
When a distributed SGD algorithm relies on a parameter
server, the distributed agents have the same model parameters. However, when the scale of training requires us to
use a large number of distributed agents, the parameter
server becomes the bottleneck. Without a parameter server,
the agents in decentralized SGD algorithms maintain the
similarity among their copies of model parameters through
message passing. The cost to make them the same among
n agents is at least ⌈log2 (n)⌉ rounds of message passing
with each agent sending and receiving one message at each
round, but this cost is unnecessary.

1
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA 2 Department of Mathematics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Google Inc., Los Angeles, CA,
USA 4 Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University, Beijing, P. R. China. 5 AI for Science Institute, Beijing, P.
R. China 6 National Engineering Labratory for Big Data Analytics and Applications, Beijing, P. R. China 7 Decision Intelligence
Lab, Alibaba US, Bellevue, WA, USA. Correspondence to: Lisang
Ding <lsding@math.ucla.edu>, Wotao Yin <wotao.yin@alibabainc.com>.

Performing only one round of message passing after each
mini-batch SGD step saves time though it causes the convergence of SGD to take more steps. It is shown in (Lian et al.,
2017; Pu et al., 2019; Koloskova et al., 2020; Ying et al.,
2021a) that, for distributed smooth nonconvex objectives,
a decentralized approach with one communication round
per SGD step is slower than centralized SGD only during

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

