The Saddle-Point Method in Differential Privacy

Wael Alghamdi 1 Juan Felipe Gomez 1 Shahab Asoodeh 2 Flavio P. Calmon 1 Oliver Kosut 3 Lalitha Sankar 3

Abstract

ple, when training neural networks using stochastic gradient
descent, DP can be ensured by clipping and adding Gaussian noise to each gradient update (Abadi et al., 2016). Here,
a DP mechanism (gradient clipping plus noise) is applied
hundreds or thousands of times to the training data.

We characterize the differential privacy guarantees of privacy mechanisms in the largecomposition regime, i.e., when a privacy mechanism is sequentially applied a large number of
times to sensitive data. Via exponentially tilting the privacy loss random variable, we derive
a new formula for the privacy curve expressing
it as a contour integral over an integration path
that runs parallel to the imaginary axis with a free
real-axis intercept. Then, using the method of
steepest descent from mathematical physics, we
demonstrate that the choice of saddle-point as the
real-axis intercept yields closed-form accurate approximations of the desired contour integral. This
procedure—dubbed the saddle-point accountant
(SPA)—yields a constant-time accurate approximation of the privacy curve. Theoretically, our
results can be viewed as a refinement of both
Gaussian Differential Privacy and the moments
accountant method found in Rényi Differential
Privacy. In practice, we demonstrate through numerical experiments that the SPA provides a precise approximation of privacy guarantees competitive with purely numerical-based methods (such
as FFT-based accountants), while enjoying closedform mathematical expressions.

Quantifying the privacy loss after a large number of compositions of DP mechanisms is a central challenge in privacypreserving ML. A key result by Murtagh & Vadhan (2016,
Theorem 1.5) states that computing exact privacy parameters
under composition is in general #P-complete, hence infeasible. This challenge has spurred several follow-up works
on privacy accounting, e.g., (Dong et al., 2022; Koskela
et al., 2020; Koskela & Honkela, 2021; Koskela et al., 2021;
Gopi et al., 2021; Ghazi et al., 2022; Doroshenko et al.,
2022), which compute upper bounds on the privacy budget
parameters (ε, δ) in DP (see (6) for a formal definition).
The currently available accountants have several limitations. The accountants that have closed-form formulas—
thereby attaining constant (in composition) runtimes—such
as the moments accountant (Abadi et al., 2016; Mironov,
2017) and the CLT-based Gaussian-DP accountant (Bu et al.,
2020), suffer from either overestimating or underestimating, respectively, the privacy parameters. On the other
hand, convolution-based accountants, such as FFT-based
approaches (Koskela et al., 2020; Gopi et al., 2021), while
working well in practice, do not have constant runtimes,
cannot generate the full privacy curve, and are limited by
machine precision due to their purely numerical nature.1
For example, existing implementations of the FFT-based
approaches fail to estimate values of δ below 10−10 (Gopi
et al., 2021, Appendix B) or 10−12 (Doroshenko et al., 2022,
Appendix C).

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) is a widely adopted standard for
privacy-preserving machine learning (ML). Differentially
private mechanisms used in ML tasks typically operate in
the large-composition regime, where mechanisms are sequentially applied many times to sensitive data. For exam-

We overcome these challenges by introducing a new approach for estimating DP parameters using complex analysis. Our approach is based on the method of steepest descent
for integral approximation—a well-known method in mathematical physics (Jeffreys & Jeffreys, 1999). We derive the
saddle-point accountant (SPA),2 which:

1
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 2 Department of Computing
and Software, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
3
School of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering, Arizona
State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA. Correspondence to: Wael
Alghamdi <alghamdi@g.harvard.edu>.

1
Of course, this limitation can be alleviated by using custom
implementations and arbitrary float-point precision libraries. Our
point is that closed-form formulas do not have this limitation.
2
We provide a Python implementation of the proposed SPA at
https://github.com/Felipe-Gomez/saddlepoint accountant

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

