Learning Control-Oriented Dynamical Structure from Data

Spencer M. Richards 1 Jean-Jacques Slotine 2 Navid Azizan 3 Marco Pavone 1

Abstract

complex environments. In particular, model-based algorithms equip an autonomous agent with the ability to learn
how it and the system it is part of evolve over time. However, for general nonlinear systems including those learned
from data, it is not always clear how to synthesize a stabilizing tracking controller. Effective control design often
leverages specific system structure; some classic examples
of this are the linear quadratic regulator (LQR) for linear
dynamics, and the computed torque method and its variants for Lagrangian dynamics (Slotine & Li, 1987; Murray
et al., 1994). A central goal of control-oriented learning
(Richards et al., 2021; 2023) and this paper is to jointly
learn a dynamics model and additional control-oriented
structure that naturally encodes or reveals a stabilizing controller design.

Even for known nonlinear dynamical systems,
feedback controller synthesis is a difficult problem that often requires leveraging the particular structure of the dynamics to induce a stable
closed-loop system. For general nonlinear models, including those fit to data, there may not be
enough known structure to reliably synthesize a
stabilizing feedback controller. In this paper, we
discuss a state-dependent nonlinear tracking controller formulation based on a state-dependent
Riccati equation for general nonlinear controlaffine systems. This formulation depends on
a nonlinear factorization of the system of vector fields defining the control-affine dynamics,
which always exists under mild smoothness assumptions. We propose a method for learning
this factorization from a finite set of data. On
a variety of simulated nonlinear dynamical systems, we empirically demonstrate the efficacy of
learned versions of this controller in stable trajectory tracking. Alongside our learning method,
we evaluate recent ideas in jointly learning a controller and stabilizability certificate for known
dynamical systems; we show experimentally that
such methods can be frail in comparison.1

Related Work An approach favoured by recent works
has been to learn stabilizing controllers for nonlinear system models by simultaneously learning a parametric controller and a parametric control-theoretic certificate, such
as a control Lyapunov function (CLF) or control contraction metric (CCM). This paradigm originates in works that
learn stability certificates for nonlinear systems of the form
ẋ = f (x) or xt+1 = f (xt ). Convergence of the state
to x = 0 is guaranteed if a Lyapunov certificate function V can be found such that ∇V (x)T f (x) < 0 or
V (f (x)) − V (x) < 0, respectively, for each x ̸= 0. Such
functional inequalities serve as the cornerstone for methods that learn parametric certificates from data either via
gradient descent on a loss function comprising sampled
point violations (Richards et al., 2018; Boffi et al., 2020),
or formal synthesis and verification (Abate et al., 2021).
Similar functional inequalities appear in contraction theory
(Lohmiller & Slotine, 1998) to describe the convergence
of system trajectories to each other over time, and have
been used in imitation learning to regularize fitted dynamics models towards stability (Sindhwani et al., 2018) or intrinsic stabilizability (Singh et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Data-driven system identification and control algorithms
are imperative to the operation of autonomous systems in
1
Autonomous Systems Laboratory (ASL), Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 2 Nonlinear Systems Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA 3 Laboratory for Information & Decision Systems
(LIDS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA. Correspondence to: Spencer M. Richards <spenrich@stanford.edu>.

For controlled nonlinear systems like ẋ = f (x) + B(x)u,
one can try jointly learning a parametric CLF V and parametric controller u = k(x) by penalizing violations of the
inequality ∇V (x)T (f (x) + B(x)k(x)) < 0 at sampled
states. This concept underlies most prior work on learning certified stabilizing nonlinear controllers (Chang et al.,
2019; Chang & Gao, 2021; Dawson et al., 2021; 2022). For

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
We provide code to reproduce all of our results at:
https://github.com/StanfordASL/
Learning-Control-Oriented-Structure.

1

