Curiosity in Hindsight:
Intrinsic Exploration in Stochastic Environments

Daniel Jarrett 1 Corentin Tallec 1 Florent Altché 1 Thomas Mesnard 1 Rémi Munos 1 Michal Valko 1

Abstract

given by the curiosity-driven paradigm [3], in which an
agent’s ability to predict the future is used as a proxy for
their “understanding” of the world. Maintaining a learned
model of the environment, at each step the agent receives
an intrinsic reward proportional to how much the realized
outcome differs from their predicted outcome—which naturally directs them towards new areas that have not been seen.

Consider the problem of exploration in sparsereward or reward-free environments, such as in
Montezuma’s Revenge. In the curiosity-driven
paradigm, the agent is rewarded for how much
each realized outcome differs from their predicted
outcome. But using predictive error as intrinsic
motivation is fragile in stochastic environments, as
the agent may become trapped by high-entropy areas of the state-action space, such as a “noisy TV”.
In this work, we study a natural solution derived
from structural causal models of the world: Our
key idea is to learn representations of the future
that capture precisely the unpredictable aspects of
each outcome—which we use as additional input
for predictions, such that intrinsic rewards only
reflect the predictable aspects of world dynamics.
First, we propose incorporating such hindsight
representations into models to disentangle “noise”
from “novelty”, yielding Curiosity in Hindsight:
a simple and scalable generalization of curiosity
that is robust to stochasticity. Second, we instantiate this framework for the recently introduced
BYOL-Explore algorithm as our prime example,
resulting in the noise-robust BYOL-Hindsight.
Third, we illustrate its behavior under a variety
of different stochasticities in a grid world, and
find improvements over BYOL-Explore in hardexploration Atari games with sticky actions. Notably, we show state-of-the-art results in exploring
Montezuma’s Revenge with sticky actions, while
preserving performance in the non-sticky setting.

There are two major hurdles. The first concerns dimensionality: While outcomes can be predicted directly at the level
of observations [4–8], pixel-based losses have generally not
worked well in higher dimensions [9]. Popular solutions
thus operate on lower-dimensional latent representations,
such as frame-predictive features [10], inverse dynamics features [11], random features [12], or features that maximize
information across time [13]. Most recently, bootstrapped
features are employed in BYOL-Explore [14]—achieving
superhuman performance on hard-exploration games in
Atari with a much simpler design than comparable agents.
The second concerns stochasticity, which is our focus here:
Curiosity-driven agents are often susceptible to bad behavior in environments with stochastic transitions, since they
are often hopelessly attracted to high-entropy elements in
the state-action space [9]. A classic example is the problem
of a “noisy TV”, which generates a stream of intrinsic rewards around which predictive error-based agents become
stuck indefinitely [15]. More generally, this problem manifests with respect to any aspect of environment dynamics
that is inherently unpredictable, including noise specific to
certain states, as well as noise actively induced by the agent.
Novelty vs. Noise In the presence of stochasticity, predictive error per se is no longer a good measure for an agent’s
lack of “understanding” of the world. Intuitively, we wish to
measure their understanding by how much epistemic knowledge they have acquired (viz. necessary truths about how
the world works in general), which is entirely orthogonal
to how much aleatoric variation each outcome can display
(viz. contingent facts about how the world happens to be).
Precisely, we want to distinguish between aspects of world
dynamics that are inherently predictable—for which (reducible) errors stem from “novelty”—and aspects that are inherently unpredictable—for which (irreducible) errors stem
from “noise”. Crucially, while the former should contribute
to intrinsic rewards for exploration, the latter should not.

1. Introduction
Learning to understand the world without supervision is a
hallmark of intelligent behavior [1], and exploration is a key
pillar of research in reinforcement learning agents [2]. How
might an agent learn meaningful behaviors when external
rewards are sparse or absent? A predominant approach is
1

DeepMind. Correspondence: Dan Jarrett <jarrettd@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

