Future-conditioned Unsupervised Pretraining for Decision Transformer

Zhihui Xie 1 Zichuan Lin 2 Deheng Ye 2 Qiang Fu 2 Wei Yang 2 Shuai Li 1

Abstract

stream tasks can be achieved with a unified model trained
on a diverse corpus of data. This trend has spurred interest in applying similar paradigms to reinforcement learning
(RL), resulting in the prevalence of offline RL (Levine et al.,
2020; Kumar et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2020). Offline
RL aims to learn a task-solving policy exclusively from
a static dataset of reward-labeled trajectories. Given the
resemblance between offline RL and supervised learning,
recent research has further explored the direction of converting offline RL (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021)
or offline-to-online RL (Zheng et al., 2022) to a sequence
modeling problem and using the expressive Transformer
architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) for decision making.

Recent research in offline reinforcement learning
(RL) has demonstrated that return-conditioned
supervised learning is a powerful paradigm for
decision-making problems. While promising, return conditioning is limited to training data labeled with rewards and therefore faces challenges
in learning from unsupervised data. In this work,
we aim to utilize generalized future conditioning
to enable efficient unsupervised pretraining from
reward-free and sub-optimal offline data. We propose Pretrained Decision Transformer (PDT), a
conceptually simple approach for unsupervised
RL pretraining. PDT leverages future trajectory
information as a privileged context to predict actions during training. The ability to make decisions based on both present and future factors
enhances PDT’s capability for generalization. Besides, this feature can be easily incorporated into a
return-conditioned framework for online finetuning, by assigning return values to possible futures
and sampling future embeddings based on their
respective values. Empirically, PDT outperforms
or performs on par with its supervised pretraining
counterpart, especially when dealing with suboptimal data. Further analysis reveals that PDT
can extract diverse behaviors from offline data
and controllably sample high-return behaviors by
online finetuning. Code is available at here.

At the heart of these Transformer-based approaches is the
idea of conditioning policies on a desired outcome. For example, Decision Transformer (DT, Chen et al. 2020) learns
a model to predict actions based on historical context and
a target future return. By associating decisions with future returns, DT can perform credit assignment across long
time spans, showing strong performance on various offline
tasks. While promising, DT presents an incomplete picture as reward-labeled datasets are required to train returnconditioned policies. In practice, task rewards are usually
hard to access and poorly scalable to large-scale pretraining.
Besides, eschewing rewards during pretraining also allows
the model to acquire generic behaviors that can be easily
adapted for use in different downstream tasks.
In this work, we aim to equip DT with the ability to learn
from reward-free and sub-optimal data. Specifically, we
consider the pretrain-then-finetune scenario, in which the
model is first trained on offline reward-free trajectories and
then finetuned on the target task via online interactions.
To effectively pretrain a model, it must be able to extract
reusable and versatile learning signals in the absence of
rewards. During finetuning, the model is required to quickly
adapt to task rewards, which presents another challenge as
to what learning signals can be aligned with rewards.

1. Introduction
Large-scale pretraining has achieved phenomenal success
in the fields of computer vision (Chen et al., 2020; He et al.,
2022) and natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019;
Radford et al., 2018), where fast adaptation to various downWork done during the first author’s internship at Tencent AI Lab.
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China.
Correspondence to: Deheng Ye <dericye@tencent.com>, Shuai
Li <shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn>.

1

To address the above challenges, we propose an unsupervised RL pretraining method called Pretrained Decision
Transformer (PDT). Inspired by recent study of futureconditioned supervised learning (Furuta et al., 2022; Venuto
et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2023), we enable PDT to condition
on the more generalized future trajectory information for

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

