From Robustness to Privacy and Back

Hilal Asi 1 Jonathan Ullman 2 Lydia Zakynthinou 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Both differential privacy and robustness are desirable properties for machine learning or statistical algorithms, and
there are extensive, mostly separate bodies of research on
each of these properties.

We study the relationship between two desiderata of algorithms in statistical inference and machine learning—differential privacy and robustness to adversarial data corruptions. Their conceptual similarity was first observed by Dwork
and Lei (STOC 2009), who observed that private
algorithms satisfy robustness, and gave a general
method for converting robust algorithms to private
ones. However, all general methods for transforming robust algorithms into private ones lead to
suboptimal error rates. Our work gives the first
black-box transformation that converts any adversarially robust algorithm into one that satisfies
pure differential privacy. Moreover, we show that
for any low-dimensional estimation task, applying
our transformation to an optimal robust estimator results in an optimal private estimator. Thus,
we conclude that for any low-dimensional task,
the optimal error rate for ε-differentially private
estimators is essentially the same as the optimal
error rate for estimators that are robust to adversarially corrupting 1/ε training samples. We apply
our transformation to obtain new optimal private
estimators for several high-dimensional tasks, including Gaussian (sparse) linear regression and
PCA. Finally, we present an extension of our transformation that leads to approximate differentially
private algorithms whose error does not depend
on the range of the output space, which is impossible under pure differential privacy.

Differential privacy (DP) was proposed by Dwork, McSherry, Nissim, and Smith (Dwork et al., 2006) as a rigorous
formalization of what it means for an algorithm to guarantee
individual privacy, and has been widely deployed in both
industry (Erlingsson et al., 2014; Bittau et al., 2017; Apple
Differential Privacy Team, 2017; Tastuggine and Mironov,
2020; Wilson et al., 2020; Rogers et al., 2020) and government (Haney et al., 2017; Abowd, 2018; Abowd et al., 2022)
applications. Informally, a DP algorithm ensures that no adversary who observes the algorithm’s output can learn much
more about an individual in the dataset than they could if
that individual’s data had been excluded. Formally, a randomized algorithm A satisfies ε-DP if for every dataset S,
and every dataset S ′ that differs on one, or a small number
of entries, the distributions A(S) and A(S ′ ) are ε-close
in a precise sense (see Definition 2.1), where the privacy
guarantee becomes stronger as ε becomes smaller.
Robustness, which was first systematically studied by Tukey
and Huber in the 1960s (Tukey, 1960; Huber, 1965), formalizes algorithms that perform well under data corruptions or
model misspecifications. Specifically, we consider a dataset
S that is drawn iid from some well behaved distribution P ,
and allow an adversary to produce a dataset S ′ that differs
from S in a τ fraction of its entries. An algorithm A is τ robust if the distance ∥A(S) − A(S ′ )∥ is typically small in
some particular error norm, where the robustness guarantee
becomes stronger as τ becomes larger.
Although these two conditions have entirely different motivations, they are both notions of what it means for an
algorithm to be insensitive to small changes in its input,
which was first observed in the influential work of Dwork
and Lei (2009). But even once we recognize their similarity,
there are substantial technical differences. While differentially private algorithms are robust, DP is a more stringent
requirement in a few ways: First, DP is worst case, meaning the algorithm A must be insensitive in a neighborhood
around every dataset S, whereas a robust algorithm only
needs to be insensitive in the average case around datasets

Authors ordered alphabetically.
Apple 2 Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to:
Hilal Asi <hilal.asi94@gmail.com>, Lydia Zakynthinou <zakynthinou.l@northeastern.edu>.
1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

