Multiplier Bootstrap-based Exploration

Runzhe Wan * 1 Haoyu Wei * 2 3 Branislav Kveton 1 Rui Song 1

Abstract

Motivated by the real needs, we are concerned with the
following question:

Despite the great interest in the bandit problem,
designing efficient algorithms for complex models
remains challenging, as there is typically no analytical way to quantify uncertainty. We propose
Multiplier Bootstrap-based Exploration (MBE), a
novel exploration strategy that is applicable to
any reward model amenable to weighted loss minimization. We prove both instance-dependent and
instance-independent rate-optimal regret bounds
for MBE in sub-Gaussian multi-armed bandits.
With extensive simulation and real-data experiments, we show the generality and adaptivity of
MBE.

Can we design a practical bandit algorithm framework that
is general, adaptive, and computationally tractable, with
certain theoretical guarantee?
A straightforward idea is to apply the bootstrap method
(Efron, 1992), a widely applicable data-driven approach for
measuring uncertainty. However, as discussed in Section 2,
most existing bootstrap-based bandit algorithms are either
heuristic without a theoretical guarantee, computationally
intensive, or only applicable in limited scenarios.
Contribution. Our contributions are three-fold. First,
to address the aforementioned limitations, we propose a
general-purpose bandit algorithm framework, Multiplier
Bootstrap-based Exploration (MBE). MBE is based on multiplier bootstrap (Van Der Vaart & Wellner, 1996), an easyto-adapt bootstrap framework that only requires randomly
weighted data points. We further show that a naive application of multiplier bootstrap may result in linear regret, and
we introduce a suitable way to add additional perturbations
for sufficient exploration. The main advantage of MBE is that
it is general: it is applicable to any reward model amenable
to weighted loss minimization, without need of analyticalform uncertainty quantification or case-by-case algorithm
design. As a data-driven exploration strategy, MBE is also
adaptive to different environments.

1. Introduction
The bandit problem has found wide applications in various
areas such as clinical trials (Durand et al., 2018), finance
(Shen et al., 2015), recommendation systems (Zhou et al.,
2017), among others. Accurate uncertainty quantification
is the key to address the exploration-exploitation trade-off.
Most existing bandit algorithms critically rely on certain analytical property of the imposed model (e.g., linear bandits)
to quantify the uncertainty and derive the exploration strategy. Thompson Sampling (TS, Thompson, 1933) and Upper
Confidence Bound (UCB, Auer et al., 2002) are two prominent examples, which are typically based on explicit-form
posterior distributions or confidence sets, respectively.

Second, theoretically, we prove near-optimal regret bounds
for MBE under sub-Gaussian multi-armed bandits (MAB), in
both the instance-dependent and the instance-independent
sense. Compared with all existing results for bootstrapbased bandit algorithms, our result is strictly more general
(see Table 1), since existing results only apply to some
special cases of sub-Gaussian distributions. To overcome
the technical challenges, we proved a novel concentration
inequality for some function of sub-exponential variables,
and also developed the first finite-sample concentration and
anti-concentration analysis for multiplier bootstrap, to the
best of our knowledge. Given the broad applications of
multiplier bootstrap in statistics and machine learning, our
theoretical analysis is of independent interest.

However, in many real problems, the reward model is
fairly complex: e.g., a general graphical model (Chapelle &
Zhang, 2009) or a pipeline with multiple prediction modules
and manual rules. In these cases, it is typically impossible
to quantify the uncertainty in an analytical way, and frameworks such as TS or UCB are either methodologically not
applicable or computationally infeasible.
*
Equal contribution 1 Amazon 2 Department of Economics, University of California San Diego 3 Department of Statistics, North
Carolina State University. Correspondence to: Runzhe Wan <runzhe.wan@gmail.com>, Rui Song <songray@gmail.com>.

This work does not relate to the positions of Runzhe Wan,
Branislav Kveton and Rui Song at Amazon.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

