Minimalistic Predictions to Schedule Jobs with Online Precedence Constraints

Alexandra Lassota * 1 Alexander Lindermayr * 2 Nicole Megow * 2 Jens Schlöter * 2

Abstract

their results can be evaluated. From a more abstract perspective, we face online precedence constraint scheduling:
new jobs arrive only if certain jobs have been completed but
the set of jobs and their dependencies are unknown to the
scheduler. As tasks might have different priorities, it is a
natural objective to minimize the total (average) weighted
completion time of the jobs. We focus on non-clairvoyant
schedulers that do not know a job’s processing requirement
in advance (Motwani et al., 1994), and we allow preemptive
schedules, i.e., jobs can be interrupted and resumed later.
We present and analyze (non-)clairvoyant algorithms and
prove impossibility results for this problem.

We consider non-clairvoyant scheduling with online precedence constraints, where an algorithm
is oblivious to any job dependencies and learns
about a job only if all of its predecessors have
been completed. Given strong impossibility results in classical competitive analysis, we investigate the problem in a learning-augmented setting, where an algorithm has access to predictions
without any quality guarantee. We discuss different prediction models: novel problem-specific
models as well as general ones, which have been
proposed in previous works. We present lower
bounds and algorithmic upper bounds for different
precedence topologies, and thereby give a structured overview on which and how additional (possibly erroneous) information helps for designing
better algorithms. Along the way, we also improve bounds on traditional competitive ratios for
existing algorithms.

Competitive analysis is a widely used technique to assess
the performance of online algorithms (Borodin & El-Yaniv,
1998). The competitive ratio of an algorithm is the maximum ratio over all instances between its objective value
and the objective value of an offline optimal solution. In our
setting, an offline optimal solution is the best schedule that
can be computed with complete information and unbounded
running time on the instance. We say that an algorithm
is ρ-competitive if its competitive ratio is at most ρ.
It is not hard to see that for our problem, we cannot hope for
good worst-case guarantees: consider an instance of n − 1
initially visible jobs with zero weight such that exactly one
of these jobs triggers at its completion the arrival of a job
with positive weight. Since the initial jobs are indistinguishable, in the worst-case, any algorithm completes the
positive-weight job last. An offline optimal solution can
distinguish the initially visible jobs and immediately processes the one which triggers the positive-weight job. This
already shows that no deterministic algorithm can have a
better competitive ratio than Ω(n) for n jobs. Notice that
this strong impossibility result holds even for (seemingly)
simple precedence graphs that consist of a collection of
chains. In practice, such topology is highly relevant as, e.g.,
a sequential computer program executes a path (chain) of
instructions that upon execution depends on the evaluation
of control flow structures (cf. (Allen, 1970)).

1. Introduction
Cloud computing is a popular approach to outsource heavy
computations to specialized providers (Hayes, 2008). Concepts like Function-as-a-Service (FaaS) offer users on demand the execution of complex computations in a specific
domain (Lynn et al., 2017; Shahrad et al., 2019). Such tasks
are often decomposed into smaller jobs, which then depend
on each other by passing intermediate results. The structure
of such tasks heavily relies on the users input and internal dependencies within the users system. It might require
diverse jobs to solve different problems with distinct inputs.
From the providers perspective, the goal is thus to schedule
jobs with different priorities and interdependencies which
become known only when certain jobs are completed and
*
Equal contribution 1 Institute of Mathematics, EPFL, Lausanne,
Switzerland 2 Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany. Correspondence to: Jens
Schlöter <jschloet@uni-bremen.de>.

To overcome such daunting lower bounds, we consider
closer-to-real-world approaches to go beyond worst-case
analysis. In particular, we study augmenting algorithms with
predictions (Mitzenmacher & Vassilvitskii, 2020; 2022).
The intuition is that in many applications, we can learn cer-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

