Shiftable Context: Addressing Training-Inference Context Mismatch in
Simultaneous Speech Translation

Matthew Raffel 1 Drew Penney 1 Lizhong Chen 1

Abstract

be generated with partial input sentences, and computation
must be done in a real-time fashion during inference. Given
the broad potential applications of automated simultaneous translation, there is a pressing need to develop highly
accurate and highly efficient SimulST models.

Transformer models using segment-based processing have been an effective architecture for simultaneous speech translation. However, such models
create a context mismatch between training and
inference environments, hindering potential translation accuracy. We solve this issue by proposing
Shiftable Context, a simple yet effective scheme to
ensure that consistent segment and context sizes
are maintained throughout training and inference,
even with the presence of partially filled segments
due to the streaming nature of simultaneous translation. Shiftable Context is also broadly applicable to segment-based transformers for streaming
tasks. Our experiments on the English-German,
English-French, and English-Spanish language
pairs from the MUST-C dataset demonstrate that
when applied to the Augmented Memory Transformer, a state-of-the-art model for simultaneous
speech translation, the proposed scheme achieves
an average increase of 2.09, 1.83, and 1.95 BLEU
scores across each wait-k value for the three language pairs, respectively, with a minimal impact
on computation-aware Average Lagging.

While earlier transformer-based SimulST models take the
received speech directly as the input, recent models based on
segments have demonstrated better performance with less
computation (Dong et al., 2019; Dai et al., 2019; Ma et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2021). These segmentbased transformers break an input sequence into segments
and sequentially process each segment individually before
concatenating them together in the encoder. To retain some
of the information in prior segments, additional left context
or summarization tokens can be provided to the current segment that is being processed. As self-attention is calculated
only within the segment (including the additional context),
complexity is greatly reduced. The latest work along this
line is the Augmented Memory Transformer (AMT) (Wu
et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2021), where each segment overlaps
with previous and subsequent segments with a left and a
right context, respectively, which also alleviates the issue of
word boundaries.
Even though Augmented Memory Transformer has state-ofthe-art performance for SimulST, we found that it suffers
from a context mismatch issue between its training and inference environments. Specifically, during inference, each
of the left, center, and right contexts of a segment can be partially filled under different scenarios, which deviates from
the fixed segment size assumed in training. This mismatch
issue occurs frequently and exists in other segment-based
transformers (such as Transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019),
Emformer (Shi et al., 2021), and Implicit Memory Transformer (Raffel & Chen, 2023)) for streaming tasks in general.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous speech-to-text translation (SimulST) aims to
produce an output text translation concurrently with an oncoming speech input. Performing accurate simultaneous
translation over long periods for humans is extremely difficult due to the immense strain placed on the brain. Machine
learning is promising to help fill the role but also faces
significant challenges, primarily because translation must
1

College of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, United States. Correspondence to: Matthew Raffel <raffelm@oregonstate.edu>, Drew
Penney <penneyd@oregonstate.edu>, Lizhong Chen <chenliz@oregonstate.edu>.

To address this issue, we propose Shiftable Context, which
includes multiple techniques to produce consistent segment
sizes for better alignment of training and inference in streaming tasks for segment-based transformers. This is achieved
by proposing a shiftable left, center, and right context. In
the case of the shiftable center and right context, when a
segment does not reach the assumed size of tokens, they are

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

