Memory-Based Dual Gaussian Processes for Sequential Learning

Paul E. Chang * 1 Prakhar Verma * 1 S.T. John 1 2 Arno Solin 1 2 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan 3

Abstract

Task #1

Task #3

Task #4

Inference

Sequential learning with Gaussian processes
(GPs) is challenging when access to past data
is limited, for example, in continual and active
learning. In such cases, errors can accumulate
over time due to inaccuracies in the posterior,
hyperparameters, and inducing points, making
accurate learning challenging. Here, we present
a method to keep all such errors in check using
the recently proposed dual sparse variational
GP. Our method enables accurate inference for
generic likelihoods and improves learning by
actively building and updating a memory of past
data. We demonstrate its effectiveness in several
applications involving Bayesian optimization,
active learning, and continual learning.

Task #2

Representation

Learning

Scale (offline solution)
Sequentially learnt hyperparameters
Lengthscale (offline solution)
Inducing inputs (+)
cover the input space

Examples in memory ( )
represent past data

Figure 1. Our sequential learning method provides an accurate
posterior (top), kernel hyperparameters (middle), and sparse representation (bottom). A key contribution is to add memory of
relevant past data (shown in the bottom row with ) in addition to
inducing inputs (shown with +).

1. Introduction
Sequential decision-making requires uncertainty estimates that can be used to plan for the future. For this
reason, Gaussian process (GP) models are popular for
sequential problems in applications such as model-based
reinforcement learning (Deisenroth & Rasmussen, 2011)
and Bayesian optimization (Garnett, 2023). However,
exact online inference in GPs requires access to all past
data, which becomes infeasible over time as the amount
of data grows (Csató & Opper, 2002). Sparse GP methods
can reduce this cost, but they too assume access to all
past data. For example, the popular sparse variational GP
(SVGP) and variational free energy (VFE, Titsias, 2009)
methods require multiple passes through the data during the
stochastic training (Hensman et al., 2013). This can lead to
inaccuracies for continual or active learning, where access
to past data is limited and errors can accumulate over time.

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Aalto
University, Finland 2 Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence
(FCAI) 3 RIKEN Center for AI Project, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Paul Chang <paul.chang@aalto.fi>.

wrong hyperparameter values, or poor sparse representations. Various techniques can be used to control such errors,
but past attempts struggled to find a coherent solution to the
problem. Initially, Csató & Opper (2002) used expectation
propagation (EP) for inference and a projection method
for sparsity but did not estimate hyperparameters. More
recently, Bui et al. (2017) did estimate hyperparameters
but found EP to perform worse than variational inference.
Maddox et al. (2021) did not optimize hyperparameters or
use the evidence lower bound (ELBO) objective but instead
resorted to a Laplace approximation for non-Gaussian
likelihoods. Their method to obtain sparse representation
uses a gradient method combined with pivoted Cholesky.
Kapoor et al. (2021) attempt to improve performance by
using a structured covariance during inference, but the cost
grows with tasks which is due to the increasing size of the
sparse representation. These attempts use a mix of methods
to control various errors, which all lead to complications.
We aim to build a single coherent method by tackling
various errors simultaneously; see Fig. 1 for an overview.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We adapt the dual-SVGP method of Adam et al. (2021) to
perform sequential learning with generic likelihoods. A
key contribution of our work is to improve performance by

Errors can arise from multiple sources: inaccurate posteriors,

1

