Langevin Thompson Sampling with Logarithmic Communication: Bandits and
Reinforcement Learning

Amin Karbasi 1 2 3 Nikki Lijing Kuang * 4 5 Yi-An Ma 5 Siddharth Mitra * 2

Abstract

the problems (Tian et al., 2020), less is known about their
computation and communication aspects. In particular, regret minimization in multi-armed bandits (MABs) and reinforcement learning (RL) (Jaksch et al., 2010; Wu et al.,
2022; Jung et al., 2019) is often studied under the common
assumptions that computation can be performed perfectly
in time, and that communication always happens in realtime (Li et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018).

Thompson sampling (TS) is widely used in sequential decision making due to its ease of use
and appealing empirical performance. However,
many existing analytical and empirical results
for TS rely on restrictive assumptions on reward distributions, such as belonging to conjugate families, which limits their applicability in
realistic scenarios. Moreover, sequential decision making problems are often carried out in a
batched manner, either due to the inherent nature
of the problem or to serve the purpose of reducing communication and computation costs. In
this work, we jointly study these problems in two
popular settings, namely, stochastic multi-armed
bandits (MABs) and infinite-horizon reinforcement learning (RL), where TS is used to learn
the unknown reward distributions and transition
dynamics, respectively. We propose batched
Langevin Thompson Sampling algorithms that
leverage MCMC methods to sample from approximate posteriors with only logarithmic communication costs in terms of batches. Our algorithms are computationally efficient and maintain the same order-optimal regret guarantees
of
√
O(log T ) for stochastic MABs, and O( T ) for
RL. We complement our theoretical findings with
experimental results.

A question of particular importance is whether optimal
decisions can still be made under reasonable computation and communication budgets. In this work, we study
the exploration-exploitation problem with low computation
and communication costs using Thompson Sampling (TS)
(Thompson, 1933) (a.k.a. posterior sampling). To allow
sampling from distributions that deviate from the standard
restrictive assumptions, and to enable its deployment in settings where computing the exact posterior is challenging,
we employ Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods.
TS operates by maintaining a posterior distribution over
the unknown and is widely used owing to its strong empirical performance (Chapelle and Li, 2011). However, the
theoretical understanding of TS in bandits typically relied
on the restrictive conjugacy assumptions between priors
and reward distributions. Recently, approximate TS methods for general posterior distributions start to be studied
(Mazumdar et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2022), where MCMC algorithms are used in conjunction with TS to expand its applicability in fully-sequential settings. On the other hand,
to the best of our knowledge, how to provably incorporate
MCMC with posterior sampling in RL domains remains to
be untackled.

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning often needs to balance computation and communication budgets with statistical guarantees. Existing analyses of sequential decision making
have been primarily focused on the statistical aspects of

Moreover, previous analyses of TS have been restricted to
the fully-sequential settings, where feedback or reward is
assumed to be immediately observable upon taking actions
(i.e. before making the next decision). Nevertheless, it
fails to account for the practical settings when delays take
place in communication, or when feedback is only available in an aggregate or batched manner. Examples include
clinical trials where feedback about the efficacy of medication is only available after a nontrivial amount of time,
recommender systems where feedback from multiple users
comes all at once and marketing campaigns (Schwartz

*
Major contribution credited equally to Kuang and Mitra 1 Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, USA 3 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University, New
Haven, USA 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, USA 5 Halıcıoǧlu Data Science Institute, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, USA. Correspondence to: Nikki Lijing Kuang <l1kuang@ucsd.edu>, Siddharth Mitra <siddharth.mitra@yale.edu>, Amin Karbasi <amin.karbasi@yale.edu>, Yi-An
Ma <yianma@ucsd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii,
USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright 2023 by the author(s).

1

