Gradient Descent Converges Linearly
for Logistic Regression on Separable Data

Kyriakos Axiotis 1 Maxim Sviridenko 2

Abstract

In fact, it was shown in (Telgarsky & Singer, 2012) that the
poly(1/T ) bound on function value convergence is tight for
gradient descent on general (non-linearly separable) data.
The significance of the separability of the data for convergence has also been observed in (Telgarsky, 2013; Ji & Telgarsky, 2018; Freund et al., 2018), who present convergence
results based on quantitative measures of separability.

We show that running gradient descent with variable learning rate guarantees loss f (x ) ≤ 1.1 ·
f (x ∗ ) + ε for the logistic regression objective,
where the error ε decays exponentially with the
number of iterations and polynomially with the
magnitude of the entries of an arbitrary fixed solution x ∗ . This is in contrast to the common intuition that the absence of strong convexity precludes linear convergence of first-order methods,
and highlights the importance of variable learning
rates for gradient descent. We also apply our ideas
to sparse logistic regression, where they lead to
an exponential improvement of the sparsity-error
tradeoff.

A deeper study into the structure of both the exponential
and logistic losses for separable data was initiated by (Telgarsky & Singer, 2012), who showed that greedy coordinate
descent achieves linear convergence with a rate that depends
on the maximum linear classification margin (i.e. hard SVM
margin). Unfortunately, for logistic regression, it also has
a 2m dependence on the number of examples, making it
inefficient for real-world tasks. (Telgarsky, 2013) refines
the results of (Telgarsky & Singer, 2012) for the exponential
loss, but for logistic regression still suffers from an exponential overhead originating from the multiplicative discrepancy
between the exponential and logistic losses. Interestingly,
however, the authors note ((Telgarsky, 2013), Section 5) that
logistic regression experiments paint a much more favorable
picture than the theory predicts.

1. Introduction
Logistic regression is one of the most widely used classification methods because of its simplicity, interpretability, and
good practical performance. Yet, the convergence behavior
of first-order methods on this task is not well understood: In
practice gradient descent performs much better than what
the theory predicts. In particular, a general analysis of gradient descent for smooth functions implies convergence with
the error in function value decaying as O(1/T ). Analyses
with stronger, linear convergence guarantees generally require the function to satisfy the strong convexity property,
which, in contrast to other losses such as the ℓ2 loss, the logistic loss only satisfies in a bounded set of solutions around
zero. As a result, this introduces an exponential runtime
dependency on the magnitude of the target solution (Rätsch
et al., 2001; Freund et al., 2018), which is undesirable in
practice. This poses a serious obstacle to obtaining highprecision solutions for logistic regression.

A related line of work deals with convergence to the
maximum-margin classifier on linearly separable classification instances using gradient descent. (Soudry et al., 2018;
Ji & Telgarsky, 2018) showed that the estimator obtained by
optimizing the logistic or the exponential loss with gradient
descent converges to the maximum-margin linear classifier at a rate of O(log log T / log T ) (in ℓ2 norm). For the
exponential loss, (Nacson et al., 2019) showed that the convergence bound to the maximum margin
√ estimator can be
exponentially improved to O(log T / T ), by using gradient descent with variable (increasing) learning rate. The
authors’ experiments indicate that variable step sizes could
lead to a similar exponential improvements for the case of
logistic regression and shallow neural networks. Recently,
(Ji & Telgarsky, 2021) presented a novel primal-dual approach that proves that the latter claim indeed holds for the
logistic regression and exponential objectives, obtaining a
maximum-margin error decaying as O(1/T ), using a variable learning rate. This exponentially improved upon the
results of (Soudry et al., 2018; Ji & Telgarsky, 2018).

This work was performed while the first author was at MIT.
Google Research, New York, NY, USA 2 Yahoo! Research, New
York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Kyriakos Axiotis <axiotis@google.com>, Maxim Sviridenko <sviri@yahooinc.com>.
1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

