SurCo: Learning Linear SURrogates
for COmbinatorial Nonlinear Optimization Problems

Aaron Ferber 1 Taoan Huang 1 Daochen Zha 2
Martin Schubert 3 Benoit Steiner 4 Bistra Dilkina 1 Yuandong Tian 3

Abstract

ming (LP) (Chvatal et al., 1983), have been extensively
studied in operations research (OR). The resulting highperformance solvers like Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization,
LLC, 2022) can solve industrial-scale optimization problems with tens of thousands of variables in a few minutes.

Optimization problems with nonlinear cost functions and combinatorial constraints appear in
many real-world applications but remain challenging to solve efficiently compared to their linear counterparts. To bridge this gap, we propose
SurCo that learns linear Surrogate costs which
can be used in existing Combinatorial solvers to
output good solutions to the original nonlinear
combinatorial optimization problem. The surrogate costs are learned end-to-end with nonlinear
loss by differentiating through the linear surrogate
solver, combining the flexibility of gradient-based
methods with the structure of linear combinatorial optimization. We propose three SurCo variants: SurCo − zero for individual nonlinear
problems, SurCo − prior for problem distributions, and SurCo−hybrid to combine both distribution and problem-specific information. We
give theoretical intuition motivating SurCo, and
evaluate it empirically. Experiments show that
SurCo finds better solutions faster than stateof-the-art and domain expert approaches in realworld optimization problems such as embedding
table sharding, inverse photonic design, and nonlinear route planning.

However, even with perfect solvers, one issue remains: the
cost functions f (x) in many practical problems are nonlinear, and the highly-optimized solvers mainly handle linear
or convex formulations while real-world problems have less
constrained objectives. For example, in embedding table
sharding (Zha et al., 2022a) one needs to distribute embedding tables to multiple GPUs for the deployment of recommendation systems. Due to the batching behaviors within a
single GPU and communication cost among different GPUs,
the overall latency (cost function) in this application depends on interactions of multiple tables and thus can be
highly nonlinear (Zha et al., 2022a).
To obtain useful solutions to real-world problems, one may
choose to directly optimize the nonlinear cost, which can
be the black-box output of a simulator (Gosavi et al., 2015;
Ye et al., 2019), or the output of a cost estimator learned
by machine learning techniques (e.g., deep models) from
offline data (Steiner et al., 2021; Koziel et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2021b; Cozad et al., 2014). However, many of these
direct optimization approaches either rely on human-defined
heuristics (e.g., greedy (Korte & Hausmann, 1978; Reingold
& Tarjan, 1981; Wolsey, 1982), local improvement (Voß
et al., 2012; Li et al., 2021)), or resort to general nonlinear optimization techniques like gradient descent (Ruder,
2016), reinforcement learning (Mazyavkina et al., 2021),
or evolutionary algorithms (Simon, 2013). While these approaches can work in certain settings, they may lead to
a slow optimization process, in particular when the cost
function is expensive to evaluate, and they often ignore the
combinatorial nature of most real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization problems with linear objective functions such as mixed integer linear programming
(MILP) (Wolsey, 2007), and occasionally linear programWork done during Aaron and Taoan’s internship in Meta AI.
Project page at https://sites.google.com/usc.edu/
surco/ 1 Center for AI in Society, University of Southern California 2 Rice University 3 Meta AI, FAIR 4 Anthropic. Correspondence
to: Aaron Ferber <aferber@usc.edu>, Yuandong Tian <yuandong@meta.com>.

In this work, we propose a systematic framework SurCo
that leverages existing efficient combinatorial solvers to find
solutions to nonlinear combinatorial optimization problems
arising in real-world scenarios. When only one nonlinear
differentiable cost f (x) needs to be minimized, we propose
SurCo-zero that optimizes a linear surrogate cost ĉ so

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

