Q-learning Decision Transformer: Leveraging Dynamic Programming for
Conditional Sequence Modelling in Offline RL

Taku Yamagata 1 Ahmed Khalil 1 Raúl Santos-Rodrı́guez 1

Abstract

Devlin et al., 2018) or computer vision (Ramesh et al.,
2021). Its translation to the RL domain, the Decision transformer (DT) (Chen et al., 2021), successfully applies the
transformer architecture to offline reinforcement learning
tasks with good performance when shifting their focus on
the sequential modelling. It employs a goal conditioned policy which converts offline RL into a supervised learning task,
and it avoids the stability issues related to bootstrapping for
the long term credit assignment (Srivastava et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019b; Ghosh et al., 2019). More specifically, DT
considers a sum of the future rewards – return-to-go (RTG),
as the goal and learns a policy conditioned on the RTG and
the state. It is categorised as a reward conditioning approach.
Although DT shows very competitive performance in the
offline reinforcement learning (RL) tasks, it fails to achieve
one of the desired properties of offline RL agents, stitching.
This property is an ability to combine parts of sub-optimal
trajectories and produce an optimal one (Fu et al., 2020).
We show a simple example of how DT (reward conditioning approaches) would fail to find the optimal path. To
demonstrate the limitation of the reward conditioning approaches (DT), consider a task to find the shortest path from
the left-most state to the rightmost state without going down
to the fail state in Fig. 1. We set the reward as −1 at every
time step and −10 for the action going down to the fail state.
The training data covers the optimal path, but none of the
training data trajectories has the entire optimal path. The
agent needs to combine these two trajectories and come up
with the optimal path. The reward conditioning approach
essentially finds a trajectory from the training data that gives
the ideal reward and takes the same action as the trajectory.
In this simple example, trajectory 2 has a meagre reward.
Hence, it always follows the path of trajectory 1 despite
trajectory 2 giving the optimal path for the first action.

Recent works have shown that tackling offline
reinforcement learning (RL) with a conditional
policy produces promising results. The Decision Transformer (DT) combines the conditional
policy approach and a transformer architecture,
showing competitive performance against several
benchmarks. However, DT lacks stitching ability
– one of the critical abilities for offline RL to learn
the optimal policy from sub-optimal trajectories.
This issue becomes particularly significant when
the offline dataset only contains sub-optimal trajectories. On the other hand, the conventional
RL approaches based on Dynamic Programming
(such as Q-learning) do not have the same limitation; however, they suffer from unstable learning
behaviours, especially when they rely on function
approximation in an off-policy learning setting.
In this paper, we propose the Q-learning Decision
Transformer (QDT) to address the shortcomings
of DT by leveraging the benefits of Dynamic Programming (Q-learning). It utilises the Dynamic
Programming results to relabel the return-to-go
in the training data to then train the DT with the
relabelled data. Our approach efficiently exploits
the benefits of these two approaches and compensates for each other’s shortcomings to achieve
better performance.

1. Introduction
The transformer architecture employs a self-attention mechanism to extract relevant information from high-dimensional
data. It achieves state-of-the-art performance in a variety of applications, including natural language processing (NLP) (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2018;

In contrast to the reward conditioning approaches (DT),
Q-learning1 does not suffer from the issue and finds the optimal path quickly in this simple example. Q-learning takes
each time step separately and propagates the best future rewards backwards. Hence it can learn from the first optimal

1

Intelligent System Laboratory, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. Correspondence to: Taku Yamagata
<taku.yamagata@bristol.ac.uk>.

1
th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

In this paper, we will use the Q-learning and Dynamic Programming interchangeably to indicate any RL algorithm relying on
the Bellman-backup operation.

