Fast as CHITA: Neural Network Pruning with Combinatorial Optimization

Riade Benbaki 1 Wenyu Chen 1 Xiang Meng 1 Hussein Hazimeh 2 Natalia Ponomareva 2 Zhe Zhao 2
Rahul Mazumder 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Modern neural networks tend to use a large number of parameters (Devlin et al., 2018; He et al., 2016), which leads
to high computational costs during inference. A widely used
approach to mitigate inference costs is to prune or sparsify
pre-trained networks by removing parameters (Blalock et al.,
2020). The goal is to obtain a network with significantly
fewer parameters and minimal loss in performance. This
makes model storage and deployment cheaper and easier,
especially in resource-constrained environments.

The sheer size of modern neural networks makes
model serving a serious computational challenge.
A popular class of compression techniques overcomes this challenge by pruning or sparsifying
the weights of pretrained networks. While useful, these techniques often face serious tradeoffs
between computational requirements and compression quality. In this work, we propose a novel
optimization-based pruning framework that considers the combined effect of pruning (and updating) multiple weights subject to a sparsity constraint. Our approach, CHITA, extends the classical Optimal Brain Surgeon framework and results in significant improvements in speed, memory, and performance over existing optimizationbased approaches for network pruning. CHITA’s
main workhorse performs combinatorial optimization updates on a memory-friendly representation
of local quadratic approximation(s) of the loss
function. On a standard benchmark of pretrained
models and datasets, CHITA leads to superior
sparsity-accuracy tradeoffs than competing methods. For example, for MLPNet with only 2% of
the weights retained, our approach improves the
accuracy by 63% relative to the state of the art.
Furthermore, when used in conjunction with finetuning SGD steps, our method achieves significant
accuracy gains over state-of-the-art approaches.
Our code is publicly available at: https://
github.com/mazumder-lab/CHITA.

Generally speaking, there are two main approaches for neural net pruning: (i) magnitude-based and (ii) impact-based.
Magnitude-based heuristic methods (e.g., Hanson & Pratt,
1988; Mozer & Smolensky, 1989; Gordon et al., 2020) use
the absolute value of weight to determine its importance
and whether or not it should be pruned. Since magnitude
alone may not be a perfect proxy for weight relevance, alternatives have been proposed. To this end, impact-based
pruning methods (e.g. LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi & Stork,
1992; Singh & Alistarh, 2020) remove weights based on
how much their removal would impact the loss function,
often using second-order information on the loss function.
Both of these approaches, however, may fall short of considering the joint effect of removing (and updating) multiple
weights simultaneously. The recent method CBS (Combinatorial Brain Surgeon) (Yu et al., 2022) is an optimizationbased approach that considers the joint effect of multiple
weights. The authors show that CBS leads to a boost in the
performance of the pruned models. However, CBS can be
computationally expensive: it makes use of a local model
based on the second-order (Hessian) information of the loss
function, which can be prohibitively expensive in terms of
runtime and/or memory (e.g., CBS takes hours to prune a
network with 4.2 million parameters).
In this work, we propose CHITA (Combinatorial Hessianfree Iterative Thresholding Algorithm), an efficient
optimization-based framework for network pruning at scale.
Our approach follows earlier works that consider a local
quadratic approximation of the loss function based on the
second-order Hessian information. Different from earlier
work however, we make use of a simple yet important observation with which we can avoid computing and storing the

1
MIT 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Riade Benbaki
<rbenbaki@mit.edu>, Wenyu Chen <wenyu@mit.edu>,
Xiang Meng <mengx@mit.edu>,
Hussein Hazimeh
<hazimeh@google.com>, Natalia Ponomareva <nponomareva@google.com>, Zhe Zhao <zhezhao@google.com>,
Rahul Mazumder <rahulmaz@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

