Estimating Causal Effects using a Multi-task Deep Ensemble

Ziyang Jiang 1 Zhuoran Hou 2 Yiling Liu 3 Yiman Ren 4 Keyu Li 5 David Carlson 1 2 5 6

Abstract

with and without having the treatment, and observational
data, such as electronic health records (Jensen et al., 2012;
Zhang et al., 2019). In recent years, people have come up
with a variety of approaches that leverage machine learning
models to discover causal relationships (Guo et al., 2020;
Li & Zhu, 2022). Such methods include, for example, Targeted Maximum Likelihood Estimator (Van Der Laan &
Rubin, 2006), Bayesian Additive Regression Trees (Chipman et al., 2010), and Double/Debiased Machine Learning
methods (Chernozhukov et al., 2018). Many recent studies
focus on learning the individualized treatment effect (ITE)
or conditional average treatment effect (CATE) by using
deep learning models (see a more comprehensive review in
Section 4) or meta-learners (Künzel et al., 2019).

A number of methods have been proposed for
causal effect estimation, yet few have demonstrated efficacy in handling data with complex
structures, such as images. To fill this gap, we propose Causal Multi-task Deep Ensemble (CMDE),
a novel framework that learns both shared and
group-specific information from the study population. We provide proofs demonstrating equivalency of CDME to a multi-task Gaussian process (GP) with a coregionalization kernel a priori.
Compared to multi-task GP, CMDE efficiently
handles high-dimensional and multi-modal covariates and provides pointwise uncertainty estimates
of causal effects. We evaluate our method across
various types of datasets and tasks and find that
CMDE outperforms state-of-the-art methods on a
majority of these tasks.

As technology progresses, an increasing number of datasets
containing more complex and comprehensive infromation
have become available for causal analysis. These datasets
often include high-dimensional covariates, such as images,
posing unique challenges for causal inference. While previous methods have demonstrated promising performance
on a variety of causal inference tasks, including the Infant Health and Development (IHDP (Brooks-Gunn et al.,
1992)), Twins (Almond et al., 2005), and Jobs (LaLonde,
1986), few have been specifically evaluated on datasets with
high-dimensional and multi-modal structures. In some situations, these complex covariates play a significant role
in causal analysis. For instance, neuroimaging is essential
in studying how human brain solves problems with multisensory causal inference (Kayser & Shams, 2015), and brain
imaging has been used to forecast treatment response in
depression (Drysdale et al., 2017), showing that information about causal relationships are embedded in complex
data types. This highlights the need for further research on
methods that can effectively handle high-dimensional and
multi-modal covariates in causal analysis. In this paper, we
propose a deep learning framework to address this challenge.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

1. Introduction
Estimating the causal effect of an action is a fundamental step in determining whether it is significant enough to
change human behavior in real-world settings. This is commonly used to help us understand the potential impact of an
action and to inform decision-making. For example, governments often judge the impact of an implemented policy
by gauging public opinion regarding said policy (Page &
Shapiro, 1983). Researchers can assess the efficacy and risk
of a medical procedure through the use of both clinical trials, which examine the medical conditions of patients both
1

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC, USA 2 Department of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham,
NC, USA 3 Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC,
USA 4 Department of Economics, University of Michigan Ross
School of Business, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 5 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham,
NC, USA 6 Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. Correspondence to: David Carlson
<david.carlson@duke.edu>.

• We propose the Causal Multi-task Deep Ensemble
(CMDE) framework which estimates the CATE by
learning both shared and group-specific information
from control and treatment groups in the study population using separate neural networks.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• We demonstrate the relationship between CMDE and
1

