Simple Hardware-Efficient Long Convolutions for Sequence Modeling

Daniel Y. Fu * 1 Elliot L. Epstein * 2 Eric Nguyen 3 Armin W. Thomas 4
Michael Zhang 1 Tri Dao 1 Atri Rudra 5 Christopher Ré 1

Abstract

1

Introduction

Recently, a new class of sequence models based on state
space models (SSMs) (Gu et al., 2022a; Gupta et al., 2022;
Hasani et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022) has emerged as a
powerful general-purpose sequence modeling framework.
SSMs scale nearly linearly in sequence length and have
shown state-of-the-art performance on a range of sequence
modeling tasks, from long range modeling (Smith et al.,
2022) to language modeling (Dao et al., 2022c; Ma et al.,
2022), computer vision (Islam & Bertasius, 2022; Nguyen
et al., 2022), and medical analysis (Tang et al., 2022).

State space models (SSMs) have high performance
on long sequence modeling but require sophisticated initialization techniques and specialized
implementations for high quality and runtime performance. We study whether a simple alternative
can match SSMs in performance and efficiency:
directly learning long convolutions over the
sequence. We find that a key requirement to achieving high performance is keeping the convolution
kernels smooth. We find that simple interventions—
such as squashing the kernel weights—result in
smooth kernels and recover SSM performance
on a range of tasks including the long range arena,
image classification, language modeling, and brain
data modeling. Next, we develop F LASH B UTTER FLY, an IO-aware algorithm to improve the runtime
performance of long convolutions. F LASH B UTTERFLY appeals to classic Butterfly decompositions of the convolution to reduce GPU memory IO
and increase FLOP utilization. F LASH B UTTER FLY speeds up convolutions by 2.2×, and allows
us to train on Path256, a challenging task with
sequence length 64K, where we set state-of-the-art
by 29.1 points while training 7.2× faster than prior
work. Lastly, we introduce an extension to F LASH B UTTERFLY that learns the coefficients of the
Butterfly decomposition, increasing expressivity
without increasing runtime. Using this extension,
we outperform a Transformer on WikiText103 by
0.2 PPL with 30% fewer parameters.

However, SSMs rely on sophisticated mathematical structures to train effectively in deep networks (Gu et al., 2022a).
These structures generate a convolution kernel as long as
the input sequence by repeatedly multiplying a hidden
state matrix. This process may be unstable (Goel et al.,
2022) and requires careful hand-crafted initializations (Gu
et al., 2022c), leaving practitioners with a dizzying array of
choices and hyperparameters. This begs the question, why
not parameterize the long convolution kernel directly?
There are two challenges that long convolutions face
for sequence modeling. The first is quality: previous
attempts at directly parameterizing the convolution kernel
have underperformed SSMs (Li et al., 2022; Romero
et al., 2021b). The second is runtime performance: long
convolutions can be computed in O(N log N ) FLOPS
in sequence length N using the Fast Fourier transform
(FFT), but systems constraints often make them slower than
quadratic algorithms, such as attention. In this paper, we
show that simple regularization techniques and an IO-aware
convolution algorithm can address these challenges. The
simplicity of the long convolution formulation further allows
for connections to block-sparse matrix multiplication that
increase expressivity beyond convolutions or SSMs.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 2 Institute of Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA 3 Department of Bioengineering, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA 4 Department of Psychology,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 5 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY,
USA. Correspondence to: Daniel Y. Fu <danfu@cs.stanford.edu>,
Elliot L. Epstein <epsteine@stanford.edu>.

Closing the Quality Gap. First, to understand the quality
gap, we study the performance of long convolutions compared to SSMs on Long Range Arena (LRA) (Tay et al.,
2020), a key benchmark designed to test long sequence models. Long convolutions underperform SSMs by up to 16.6
points on average (Table 4). Visualizing the convolution kernels identifies a potential culprit: the long convolution kernels
are non-smooth, whereas SSM kernels are smooth (Figure 2).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

