DDGR: Continual Learning with Deep Diffusion-based Generative Replay

Rui Gao 1 Weiwei Liu 1

Abstract

that existing standard deep learning methods quickly forget
their previously acquired experiences when learning new
tasks (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). This phenomenon, referred
to as catastrophic forgetting (Kumaran et al., 2016), represents a significant challenge for scenarios in which tasks are
learned in sequence and previous training data cannot be
obtained.

Popular deep-learning models in the field of
image classification suffer from catastrophic
forgetting—models will forget previously acquired skills when learning new ones. Generative
replay (GR), which typically consists of a generator and a classifier, is an efficient way to mitigate
catastrophic forgetting. However, conventional
GR methods only focus on a single instruction
relationship (generator-to-classifier), where the
generator synthesizes samples for previous tasks
to instruct the training of the classifier, while ignoring the ways in which the classifier can benefit
the generator. In addition, most generative replay
methods typically reuse the generated samples to
update the generator, which causes the samples
regenerated by the generator deviating from the
distribution of previous tasks. To overcome these
two issues, we propose a novel approach, called
deep diffusion-based generative replay (DDGR),
which adopts a diffusion model as the generator
and calculates an instruction-operator through
the classifier to instruct the generation of samples.
Extensive experiments in class incremental (CI)
and class incremental with repetition (CIR) settings demonstrate the advantages of DDGR. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
xiaocangshengGR/DDGR.

Continual learning (CL)—also referred to as lifelong learning (Chen & Liu, 2018), sequential learning (Aljundi et al.,
2019), and incremental learning (Aljundi et al., 2018)—has
emerged as an efficient way to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in deep learning models. Classical CL works have
explored a range of approaches to help the model remember
previous knowledge. Among them, the generative replay
(GR) model is one of the most popular methods due to its
promising experimental results (Hayes et al., 2021). In the
field of image classification, GR methods usually consist
of two components: a generator and a classifier. The generator aims to generate or synthesize samples containing
previous task knowledge and feeds these samples to the
classifier. The classifier then trains with new data as well as
generated samples to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. For
example, Kemker & Kanan (2018) propose FearNet, which
is a generator that employs a brain-inspired dual-memory
system to instruct the classifier training; Wu et al. (2018)
propose MeRGANs, which can generate images without
forgetting; Ye & Bors (2020) propose L-VAEGAN, which
induces generative replay samples and learns informative
latent representations.

1. Introduction

However, most GR methods suffer from two disadvantages:
the adoption of instruction in a single direction (generatorto-classifier) and the reuse of generated samples. In CL,
the classifier, which is trained on new data and previous
samples, is able to help the generator adjust to the changing
tasks. In contrast, most GR methods ignore the benefit
offered by the classifier to the generator. Moreover, reusing
generated samples may produce low-quality samples for
previous tasks. For example, DGR (Shin et al., 2017) trains
a new generator on a mixed data distribution of new samples
and reused samples. Figure 1 shows that DGR generates
fuzzy samples for previous tasks. This paper proposes to use
a diffusion probabilistic model (referred to here for brevity
as a diffusion model) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020) to address these two issues.

In the digital world, the number of new tasks is increasing overwhelmingly as huge amounts of data are produced
(Liu & Tsang, 2015; Liu et al., 2017; Liu & Tsang, 2017;
Liu et al., 2019). This continuous generation of emerging
learning tasks requires learning systems to adapt quickly to
changing environments. Recently, many studies have shown
1

School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research
Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence
and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. Correspondence to: Weiwei Liu <liuweiwei863@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

