Bayesian online change point detection with Hilbert space approximate
Student-t process

Jeremy Sellier 1 Petros Dellaportas 1 2 3

Abstract

& Nayak, 2016).
Bayesian Online change point Detection (BOCPD) was introduced simultaneously by Adams & MacKay (2007) and
Fearnhead & Liu (2007). The first Bayesian approach to
CPD relied on retrospective inference mostly via segmentation to generate samples from the posterior distribution
over change point location (Barry & Hartigan, 1993; Green,
1995; Xuan & Murphy, 2007). In contrast, BOCPD allows
online inference by generating a predictive distribution of
the next datum given the data already observed.

In this paper, we introduce a variant of Bayesian
online change point detection with a reducedrank Student-t process (TP) and dependent
Student-t noise, as a nonparametric time series model. Our method builds and improves
upon the state-of-the-art Gaussian process (GP)
change point model benchmark of Saatçi et al.
(2010). The Student-t process generalizes the
concept of a GP and hence yields a more flexible
alternative. Additionally, unlike a GP, the predictive variance explicitly depends on the training observations, while the use of an entangled Student-t noise model preserves analytical
tractability. Our approach also uses a Hilbert
space reduced-rank representation of the TP kernel, derived from an eigenfunction expansion of
the Laplace operator (Solin & Särkkä, 2020), to
alleviate its computational complexity. Improvements in prediction and training time are demonstrated with real-world data sets.

In BOCPD, we assume a sequence of observations x1:T =
{xi }Ti=1 that can be partitioned into sub-groups separated
by possible change points. We are concerned with estimating recursively for every t ∈ [1, T ] the predictive distribution of the current run length rt , namely the time since
the last change point given the data observed so far i.e.
p(rt |x1:t ) for rt ∈ [1, t] . We need to define an underlying predictive model (UPM) to evaluate the posterior predictive distribution of the next datum given the possible
previous run length i.e p(xt |rt−1 , x1:t−1 ). The UPM can
be seen as a base model, the parameters of which change
for every run length. BOCPD has received considerable
recent interest. Work has addressed performance improvement (Saatçi et al., 2010), model selection (Knoblauch &
Damoulas, 2018), hyperparameter learning (Turner et al.,
2009; Wilson et al., 2010; Caron et al., 2012) and change
point prediction (Agudelo-España et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Sequential data often exhibit instances of abrupt change
in generative parameters. Failing to detect these specific
change points at which the underlying distribution changes,
significantly alters predictive performance of stationary
parametric models. Change point detection (CPD) methods have proven useful in finance (Chib, 1998; Koop &
Potter, 2004; Kummerfeld & Danks, 2013), quality control
(Aroian & Levene, 1950), climate modelling (Manogaran
& Lopez, 2018), cybersecurity (Polunchenko et al., 2012),
genetics (Caron et al., 2012) and speech recognition (Panda

The original BOCPD algorithm makes the assumptions that
observations are i.i.d. within each run length. Saatçi et al.
(2010) extend BOCPD with a more flexible nonparametric
UPM based on Gaussian processes (GPs). They propose a
non-linear auto-regressive GP-based model (GPAR) and a
time-deterministic GP model (GPTS) with change points,
both of which improve predictive performance. The use
of a GP comes at a cost of a O(T 5 ) running complexity
for naive implementation, prohibitive in most applications.
Saatçi et al. (2010) introduce filtering techniques and computational tricks to reduce computation complexity.

1

Department of Statistical Science, University College London, UK 2 Department of Statistics, Univ. of Econ. and Business,
Athens, Greece 3 The Alan Turing Institute, UK. Correspondence
to: Jeremy Sellier <jeremy.sellier.18@ucl.ac.uk>, Petros Dellaportas <p.dellaportas@ucl.ac.uk>.

In this paper, we build on the GP-based approach of Saatçi
et al. (2010), introducing an alternative UPM based on a
Student-t process (TP) with Student-t noise (Shah et al.,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

