Regularizing Towards Soft Equivariance Under Mixed Symmetries

Hyunsu Kim 1 Hyungi Lee 1 Hongseok Yang 2 1 3 Juho Lee 1 4

Abstract
Datasets often have their intrinsic symmetries, and particular deep-learning models called
equivariant or invariant models have been developed to exploit these symmetries. However, if
some or all of these symmetries are only approximate, which frequently happens in practice, these
models may be suboptimal due to the architectural restrictions imposed on them. We tackle
this issue of approximate symmetries in a setup
where symmetries are mixed, i.e., they are symmetries of not single but multiple different types
and the degree of approximation varies across
these types. Instead of proposing a new architectural restriction as in most of the previous approaches, we present a regularizer-based method
for building a model for a dataset with mixed approximate symmetries. The key component of
our method is what we call equivariance regularizer for a given type of symmetries, which measures how much a model is equivariant with respect to the symmetries of the type. Our method
is trained with these regularizers, one per each
symmetry type, and the strength of the regularizers is automatically tuned during training, leading to the discovery of the approximation levels of some candidate symmetry types without
explicit supervision. Using synthetic function
approximation and motion forecasting tasks, we
demonstrate that our method achieves better accuracy than prior approaches while discovering
the approximate symmetry levels correctly.

(a) Equivariant trajectory

(b) Soft-equivariant trajectory

Figure 1: Illustrative example of a system with mixed symmetries with soft equivariances.

1. Introduction
Exploiting symmetries in a dataset is one of the key principles for building an effective deep-learning model. A popular approach for implementing this principle is to restrict
the architecture of a neural network in the model so that
the model has desired symmetries by construction. The approach has been highly successful, leading to a range of effective so-called equivariant or invariant models (Bronstein
et al., 2021), such as CNNs (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Cohen et al., 2019; 2018) and GNNs (Kipf & Welling, 2016;
Veličković et al., 2018), that cover different types of symmetries, such as translation invariance.
In practice, however, the symmetries implied in data are
often approximate, partially due to measurement noises or
unexpected external effects. For such scenarios, models
that are equivariant or invariant by construction may be
suboptimal due to their architectural restrictions. Moreover, while most of the previous works assume a single
type of symmetry, many real-world data come with mixed
symmetries, that is, multiple types of symmetries may exist in data. Equivariant models assuming symmetries of
just a single type cannot easily be combined to model such
mixed symmetries. Even more, those mixed symmetries
may be approximate, so different types of symmetries may
exhibit different approximation levels. As an example,
imagine we want to model the trajectory of a golf ball in
3D space as in Figure 1. The trajectory is O(3) equivariant, or there are mixed symmetries w.r.t. Ox (2), Oy (2),
and Oz (2). Now assume that a wind is blowing along the
y-axis. While the trajectory is still Oy (2)-equivariant, it is
only approximately equivariant to Ox (2) and Oz (2). An
O(3)-equivariant model by design would be too restrictive
in this case, and a model equivariant only with respect to

1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, South
Korea 2 School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
3
Discrete Mathematics Group, Institute for Basic Science (IBS),
Daejeon, South Korea 4 AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Juho Lee <juholee@kaist.ac.kr>, Hongseok Yang
<hongseok.yang@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

