Measuring the Impact of Programming Language Distribution

Gabriel Orlanski 1 2 * Kefan Xiao 2 Xavier Garcia 3 Jeffrey Hui 2 Joshua Howland 2 Jonathan Malmaud 2
Jacob Austin 3 Rishabh Singh 2 * Michele Catasta 2 *

Abstract

ing in the survey taken five years prior. However, the 13th
most popular language, Go, has nearly doubled Rust’s number of StackOverflow questions in this time frame. Further,
despite their similar popularity, Go has nearly 350% more
source code available (Kocetkov et al., 2022). These disparities highlight the problem that many popular programming
languages are starkly low-resource, especially compared to
the most popular languages.

Current benchmarks for evaluating neural code
models focus on only a small subset of programming languages, excluding many popular languages such as Go or Rust. To ameliorate this
issue, we present the BabelCode framework for
execution-based evaluation of any benchmark in
any language. BabelCode enables new investigations into the qualitative performance of models’ memory, runtime, and individual test case
results. Additionally, we present a new code translation dataset called Translating Python Programming Puzzles (TP3) from the Python Programming Puzzles (Schuster et al., 2021) benchmark
that involves translating expert-level python functions to any language. With both BabelCode and
the TP3 benchmark, we investigate if balancing
the distributions of 14 languages in a training
dataset improves a large language model’s performance on low-resource languages. Training a
model on a balanced corpus results in, on average,
12.34% higher pass@k across all tasks and languages compared to the baseline. We find that this
strategy achieves 66.48% better pass@k on lowresource languages at the cost of only a 12.94%
decrease to high-resource languages. In our three
translation tasks, this strategy yields, on average,
30.77% better low-resource pass@k while having
19.58% worse high-resource pass@k.1

Despite their impressive generative capabilities, especially
in code, Large Language Models (LLM) are adversely impacted by this language resource imbalance. Thus, developers will likely find minimal utility from LLMs if they are
not using the extremely popular languages. It is therefore
imperative to investigate how to mitigate the discrepancy
between a language’s popularity and the amount of data
available for it. Prior works focusing on code generation
(Ahmad et al., 2021) and multilingual natural language processing (Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Conneau et al., 2019)
use temperature-based strategies to balance the training languages. Such a strategy duplicates extremely low-resource
languages thousands of times, which has been shown to
significantly reduce performance (Allamanis, 2019).
Beyond the the language balancing strategy, evaluating code
LLMs in a multi-lingual setting presents significant challenges. Existing datasets are either mono-lingual (Chen
et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Lai et al., 2022) or limited to
only a subset of popular programming languages (Roziere
et al., 2020). Each problem in these datasets, which we
henceforth refer to as a benchmark, contains an input, and
a canonical solution along with the test-cases for checking
correctness. Creating a new benchmark for each language of
interest would require insurmountable engineering and monetary costs. To address both of these problems, we present
the BabelCode framework for execution-based evaluation
of any benchmark in any language and use it to investigate
the impact of programming language distribution on code
generation and translation.

1. Introduction
In the 2022 StackOverflow Developer Survey, Rust was the
14th most popular programming language despite not rank*Work Done While At Google 1 Department of Computer
Science, New York University, New York, New York 2 Google
Labs 3 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Gabriel Orlanski
<go533@nyu.edu>, Kefan Xiao <kfxiao@google.com>, Xavier
Garcia <xgarcia@google.com>.

BabelCode is open-sourced, has an extensive test suite, and
supports evaluating four benchmarks in 14 languages. It is
designed specifically to enable future research directions
such as the evaluation of custom data-structures. BabelCode
allows investigation of novel research directions through

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/google-research/babelcode

1

