Beyond Reward: Offline Preference-guided Policy Optimization

Yachen Kang 1 2 Diyuan Shi 2 Jinxin Liu 2 Li He 2 Donglin Wang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

This study focuses on the topic of offline
preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL),
a variant of conventional reinforcement learning
that dispenses with the need for online interaction or specification of reward functions. Instead, the agent is provided with fixed offline trajectories and human preferences between pairs
of trajectories to extract the dynamics and task
information, respectively. Since the dynamics
and task information are orthogonal, a naive approach would involve using preference-based reward learning followed by an off-the-shelf offline
RL algorithm. However, this requires the separate learning of a scalar reward function, which
is assumed to be an information bottleneck of
the learning process. To address this issue, we
propose the offline preference-guided policy optimization (OPPO) paradigm, which models offline trajectories and preferences in a one-step process, eliminating the need for separately learning
a reward function. OPPO achieves this by introducing an offline hindsight information matching objective for optimizing a contextual policy
and a preference modeling objective for finding
the optimal context. OPPO further integrates a
well-performing decision policy by optimizing
the two objectives iteratively. Our empirical results demonstrate that OPPO effectively models
offline preferences and outperforms prior competing baselines, including offline RL algorithms
performed over either true or pseudo reward function specifications. Our code is available on the
project website: https://sites.google.
com/view/oppo-icml-2023.

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) offers a versatile framework for acquiring task-oriented behaviors, as evidenced by
a growing body of literature (Kohl & Stone, 2004; Kober &
Peters, 2008; Kober et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019). In this framework,
the ”task” is frequently expressed as maximizing the cumulative reward of trajectories produced by deploying the
learning policy in the corresponding environment. However, the above RL formulation presupposes two critical
conditions for decision policy training: 1) an interactable
environment, and 2) a pre-specified reward function. Regrettably, online interactions with the environment can be
both expensive and hazardous (Mihatsch & Neuneier, 2002;
Hans et al., 2008; Garcıa & Fernández, 2015), while developing a suitable reward function typically necessitates
considerable human effort. Additionally, the heuristic rewards often employed may be insufficient to express the
true intent (Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017).
To address these challenges, prior research has explored two
approaches. First, some works have focused on the offline
RL formulation (Fujimoto et al., 2019), where the learner
has access to fixed offline trajectories along with a reward
signal for each transition (or limited expert demonstrations).
Second, others have considered the (online) preferencebased RL formulation, where the task objective is conveyed
to the learner through preferences of a human annotator
between two trajectories rather than rewards for each transition. In pursuit of further advancements in this setting,
we propose a novel approach that relaxes both of these requirements and advocates for offline preference-based RL
(PbRL).
In the context of offline preference-based reinforcement
learning (PbRL), where access to an offline dataset and
labeled preferences between the offline trajectories is available, a common approach is to combine previous online PbRL methods with off-the-shelf offline RL algorithms (Shin & Brown, 2021). This two-step strategy, as
illustrated in Fig.1 (left), typically involves training a reward function using the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley &
Terry, 1952) in a supervised manner, followed by training
the policy with any offline RL algorithm on the transitions
relabeled via the learned reward function. However, the

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China 2 Machine Intelligence
Lab (MiLAB) of the School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. Correspondence to: Donglin
Wang <wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn>, Yachen Kang <kangyachen@westlake.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

