COLA: Orchestrating Error COding and LeArning for
Robust Neural Network Inference Against Hardware Defects

Anlan Yu 1 Ning Lyu 1 Jieming Yin 2 Zhiyuan Yan 1 Wujie Wen 1

Abstract

critical to their practical use (Chen et al., 2019; Hao et al.,
2019; Ye et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). However, DNN
hardware accelerators often suffer from hardware defects,
which result in DNN parameter deviations and hence performance degradation (Li et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018;
Long et al., 2019; Mittal, 2020; Ibrahim et al., 2020; Dash
et al., 2021). Therefore, it is essential to alleviate performance degradation due to hardware defects by improving
the robustness of DNNs against parameter deviations.

Error correcting output codes (ECOCs) have been
proposed to improve the robustness of deep neural networks (DNNs) against hardware defects of
DNN hardware accelerators. Unfortunately, existing efforts suffer from drawbacks that would
greatly impact their practicality: 1) robust accuracy (with defects) improvement at the cost of
degraded clean accuracy (without defects); 2) no
guarantee on better robust or clean accuracy using
stronger ECOCs. In this paper, we first shed light
on the connection between these drawbacks and
error correlation, and then propose a novel comprehensive error decorrelation framework, namely
COLA. Specifically, we propose to reduce inner
layer feature error correlation by 1) adopting a
separated architecture, where the last portions of
the paths to all output nodes are separated, and 2)
orthogonalizing weights in common DNN layers
so that the intermediate features are orthogonal
with each other. We also propose a regularization technique based on total correlation to mitigate overall error correlation at the outputs. The
effectiveness of COLA is first analyzed theoretically, and then evaluated experimentally, e.g., up
to 6.7% clean accuracy improvement compared
with the original DNNs and up to 40% robust
accuracy improvement compared to the state-ofthe-art ECOC-enhanced DNNs.

Inspired by error correction codes (ECCs) widely used in
digital communication and storage systems, recent works
have adopted error correcting output codes (ECOCs) to increase the robustness of DNNs (Dietterich & Bakiri, 2018;
Liu et al., 2019; Liu & Wen, 2019; Verma & Swami, 2019;
Song et al., 2021). Instead of mapping sample labels to
one-hot labels in the original DNNs, DNNs with ECOCs encode sample labels to codewords of a binary error correction
code such as Hadamard code. The Hamming distances between codewords translate into greater inter-class distances.
Additionally, DNNs with ECOCs utilize sigmoid output
layer activation, which improves DNNs’ fault tolerance capability (Verma & Swami, 2019). Consequently, DNNs
with ECOCs can correct errors without the knowledge of
the error model, thanks to their inherent error correction
capability.
Just like ECCs for digital communications, we envision
that an ideal ECOC solution dedicated to the state-of-theart DNNs should satisfy the following requirements: 1)
keeping model accuracy as high as possible regardless
of whether the hardware (e.g., memory to store weights)
is defect-free (clean accuracy) or not (robust accuracy);
2) improving robust accuracy more prominently when
adopting stronger ECOCs with increased minimum Hamming distances (dmin ). Unfortunately, there is no systematic
study on designing ECOCs for DNNs to satisfy these two
requirements. Furthermore, current solutions are far from
satisfactory in terms of both aspects (Verma & Swami, 2019;
Song et al., 2021). Without loss of generality, we experimentally compare the accuracy of models with and without
ECOCs under different levels of weight variations using an
example image classification task–AlexNet-CIFAR10 and
error model (detailed settings are presented in Section 4.1).

1. Introduction
Due to the growing computational complexities of deep
neural networks (DNNs), hardware acceleration becomes
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh
University, Bethlehem, USA 2 School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China.
Correspondence to: Zhiyuan Yan <zhy6@lehigh.edu>, Wujie
Wen <wuw219@lehigh.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

