Why Target Networks Stabilise Temporal Difference Methods

Mattie Fellows * 1 Matthew J.A. Smith * 1 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract

has characterised the convergence properties of policy evaluation using target networks (Lee & He, 2019; Fan et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2021), existing approaches focus on
asymptotic results, and usually make simplifying assumptions that neither hold in practice nor account for the true
behaviour of target network-based updates. Our work finds
that the use of target networks can guarantee that deep RL
algorithms will not diverge, even in regimes where traditional RL algorithms fail. Additionally, we establish the first
finite-time performance bounds for target networks and general function approximation—without strong simplifying
assumptions. Moreover, we prove our key stability assumption can always be satisfied by augmenting our updates with
simple `2 regularisation that does not change the TD fixed
points. In doing so, we finally provide theoretical justification for the empirical success that has been observed in
challenging, off-policy tasks.

Integral to many recent successes in deep reinforcement learning has been a class of temporal
difference methods that use infrequently updated
target values for policy evaluation in a Markov
Decision Process. At the same time, a complete
theoretical explanation for the effectiveness of target networks remains elusive. In this work, we
provide an analysis of this popular class of algorithms, to finally answer the question: “why
do target networks stabilise TD learning”? To
do so, we formalise the notion of a partially fitted policy evaluation method, which describes
the use of target networks and bridges the gap
between fitted methods and semigradient temporal difference algorithms. Using this framework
we are able to uniquely characterise the so-called
deadly triad–the use of TD updates with (nonlinear) function approximation and off-policy data–
which often leads to nonconvergent algorithms.
This insight leads us to conclude that the use of
target networks can mitigate the effects of poor
conditioning in the Jacobian of the TD update.
Furthermore, we show that under mild regularity
conditions and a well tuned target network update
frequency, convergence can be guaranteed even
in the extremely challenging off-policy sampling
and nonlinear function approximation setting.

To achieve this, we analyse the use of infrequently updated
target value functions by characterising them as a family of
methods that we refer to as partially fitted policy evaluation
(PFPE). This variant bridges the gap between fitted policy
evaluation (FPE) (Le et al., 2019)—which iteratively fit the
Bellman backups onto the class of representable function
approximators —and classic temporal difference (TD) algorithms (Sutton, 1988) by limiting the fitting phase to a fixed
number of steps, precisely reflecting the periodically updated target network algorithms as used in practice.
To characterise the performance of PFPE, we express our
algorithm–which has traditionally been viewed through the
lens of two-timescale analysis–using a single update applied
only to the target network parameters. We show that the
stability of the algorithm is determined by analysing the
eigenvalues of the Jacobian of this update. This formulation allows us to characterise both the limiting (asymptotic)
and finite-time (non-asymptotic) convergence properties of
PFPE. Furthermore, it suggests, counterintuitively, that target networks are actually the object being optimised rather
than merely a means to stabilise conventional TD updates.
This insight leads us to empirically investigate a novel target parameter update scheme that uses a momentum-style
update (Polyak, 1964), setting the stage for future research
of practical target-based algorithms.

1. Introduction
Since their introduction in deep Q-networks (DQN) a
decade ago (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015), target networks have
become a common feature of state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning algorithms (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja
et al., 2017; 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018). Theoretical analysis of target networks has been limited and there has been
no satisfactory explanation for their empirical success in stabilising policy evaluation algorithms. Whilst recent analysis
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Mattie Fellows <matthew.fellows@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our bounds on the finite-time performance of PFPE apply
to off-policy, nonlinear and partially fitted methods, which
1

