Horizon-Free and Variance-Dependent Reinforcement Learning for Latent
Markov Decision Processes
Runlong Zhou 1 Ruosong Wang 1 Simon S. Du 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
One of the most popular model for Reinforcement Learning(RL) is Markov Decision Process (MDP), in which the
transitions and rewards are dependent only on current state
and agent’s action. In standard MDPs, the agent has full
observation of the state, so the optimal policy for the agent
also only depends on states (called a history-independent
policy). There is a line of research on MDPs, and the minimax regret and sample complexity guarantees have been
derived.

We study regret minimization for reinforcement
learning (RL) in Latent Markov Decision Processes (LMDPs) with context in hindsight. We
design a novel model-based algorithmic framework which can be instantiated with both a
model-optimistic?and a value-optimistic solver.
We prove an r
Op Var‹ M ΓSAKq regret bound
r hides logarithm factors, M is the numwhere O
ber of contexts, S is the number of states, A is the
number of actions, K is the number of episodes,
Γ ď S is the maximum transition degree of any
state-action pair, and Var‹ is a variance quantity
describing the determinism of the LMDP. The regret bound only scales logarithmically with the
planning horizon, thus yielding the first (nearly)
horizon-free regret bound for LMDP. This is
also the first problem-dependent regret bound for
LMDP. Key in our proof is an analysis of the total variance of alpha vectors (a generalization of
value functions), which is handled with a truncation method. We ?
complement our positive result with a novel Ωp Var‹ M SAKq regret lower
bound with Γ “ 2, which shows our upper bound
minimax optimal when Γ is a constant for the
class of variance-bounded LMDPs. Our lower
bound relies on new constructions of hard instances and an argument inspired by the symmetrization technique from theoretical computer
science, both of which are technically different
from existing lower bound proof for MDPs, and
thus can be of independent interest.

Another popular model is Partially Observable MDPs
(POMDPs) in which the agent only has partial observations of states. Even though the underlying transition is
still Markovian, the lower bound for sample complexity
has been proven to be exponential in state and action sizes.
This is in part because the optimal policies for POMDPs
are history-dependent.
In this paper we focus on a middle ground between MDP
and POMDP, namely Latent MDP (LMDP). An LMDP can
be viewed as a collection of MDPs sharing the same state
and action spaces, but the transitions and rewards may vary
across them. Each MDP has a probability to be sampled at
the beginning of each episode, and it will not change during the episode. The agent needs to find a policy which
works well on these MDPs in an average sense. Empirically, LMDPs can be used for a wide variety of applications (Yu et al., 2020; Iakovleva et al., 2020; Finn et al.,
2018; Ramamoorthy et al., 2013; Doshi-Velez & Konidaris,
2016; Yao et al., 2018). In general, there exists no policy
that is optimally on every single MDP simultaneously, so
this task is definitely harder than MDPs. On the other hand,
LMDP is a special case of POMDP because for each MDP,
the unobserved state is static in each episode and the observable state is just the state of MDP.
Unfortunately, for generic LMDPs, there exists exponential sample complexity lower bound (Kwon et al., 2021),
so additional assumptions are needed to make the problem
tractable. In this paper, we consider the setting that after
each episode ends, the agent will get the context on which
MDP it played with. This is called context in hindsight.
Such information is often available. For example, in a maze

1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Correspondence to:
Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

