FedCR: Personalized Federated Learning Based on Across-Client Common
Representation with Conditional Mutual Information Regularization

Hao Zhang 1 Chenglin Li 1 Wenrui Dai 1 Junni Zou 1 Hongkai Xiong 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) has
emerged as a new distributed learning framework in which
a group of clients, under coordination of the central server,
train collaboratively a single global machine learning model
without sharing or exchanging the private data. These private data generated and collected at clients are usually nonindependent and identical distributed (non-iid). In such a
setting, when clients wish to fulfill their personal objectives
and tasks, direct share of the universally global model may
lead to a poor generalization performance at local clients
because of the mismatch between global and local data distributions. To address this, personalized federated learning
(PFL) (Kairouz et al., 2021) has been proposed to enable
each client to train an individual model fitted to the local
data distribution. Nevertheless, in addition to the statistical
heterogeneity, source data at local clients are usually scarce
and limited, where some labels may even have few data
points. Thus, conventional local training at clients towards
the local optimum still easily leads to a model overfitting.

In personalized federated learning (PFL), multiple clients train customized models to fulfill their
personal objectives, which, however, are prone
to overfitting to local data due to the heterogeneity and scarcity of local data. To address this,
we propose from the information-theoretic perspective a personalized federated learning framework based on the common representation learned
across clients, named FedCR. Specifically, we introduce to the local client update a regularizer that
aims at minimizing the discrepancy between local
and global conditional mutual information (CMI),
such that clients are encouraged to learn and exploit the common representation. Upon this, each
client learns individually a customized predictor
(head), while the extractor (body) remains to be
aggregated by the server. Our CMI regularizer
leads to a theoretically sound alignment between
the local and global stochastic feature distributions in terms of their Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. More importantly, by modeling the
global joint feature distribution as a product of
multiple local feature distributions, clients can
efficiently extract diverse information from the
global data but without need of the raw data from
other clients. We further show that noise injection via feature alignment and ensemble of local
predictors in FedCR would help enhance its generalization capability. Experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrate a consistent performance
gain and better generalization behavior of FedCR.

Recent advance in multi-task learning and representation
learning has already demonstrated that decoupling the learning procedure into representation and prediction would
boost the performance (Yu et al., 2020; Kang et al., 2019).
Motivated by this, a feasible solution is to decouple the PFL
objectives into global representation learning and local prediction. For the global representation learning, body of the
model (i.e., feature extractor) extracts the low-dimensional
common features across clients to avoid overfitting. While
in the local prediction, upon the learned common representation, head of the model (i.e., predictor) makes a taskoriented and personalized decision. Along this direction,
many works (Collins et al., 2021; Arivazhagan et al., 2019;
Oh et al., 2021) have attempted to simply average the body
of model parameters from heterogeneous clients to exploit
the common representation. Despite their progress, the
shared feature extraction at the model-parameter level is naturally insufficient for capturing effective common features
from heterogeneous data belonging to multiple classes.

1
The authors are all with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. Correspondence to: Chenglin Li
<LCL1985@sjtu.edu.cn>, Junni Zou <zoujunni@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Aiming to learn the common representation directly from
the feature level, a very recent work, FedPAC (Xu et al.,
2023), proposes a class-wise feature alignment, which how-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

