Difference-in-Differences Meets Tree-based Methods: Heterogeneous Treatment
Effects Estimation with Unmeasured Confounding

Caizhi Tang * 1 Huiyuan Wang * 2 3 Xinyu Li 2 Cui Qing 1 Longfei Li 1 Jun Zhou 1

Abstract

medicine, socioeconomic policies evaluation, and largescale recommender systems (Glass et al., 2013; Breslow
& Johnson, 1993; Gilotte et al., 2018). The covariates that
affect both the treatment and the outcome are referred to as
confounders. In the practical applications described above,
the collected data usually consist of repeated observations
of the same units over a certain period, referred to as longitudinal or panel data. In such cases, both the confounders and
the outcomes may vary with time. More importantly, some
influential confounders may be unmeasured, or measured
with covariate-dependent errors (Keller, 2014; Wacholder,
1995). The presence of unmeasured confounding leads to
unidentifiability issues (Greenland & Robins, 1986), posing
a significant threat to the estimation of heterogeneous causal
effects in complex panel studies.

This study considers the estimation of conditional
causal effects in the presence of unmeasured confounding for a balanced panel with treatment imposed at the last time point. To address this,
we combine Difference-in-differences (DiD) and
tree-based methods and propose a new identification assumption that allows for the violation
of the (conditional) parallel trends assumption
adopted by most existing DiD methods. Under
this new assumption, we prove partial identifiability of the conditional average treatment effect on
the treated group (CATT). Our proposed method
estimates CATT through a tree-based causal approach, guided by a novel splitting rule that avoids
model misspecification and unnecessary auxiliary
parameter estimation. The splitting rule measures
both the error of fitting observed data and the
violation of conditional parallel trends simultaneously. We also develop an ensemble of multiple
trees via gradient boosting to further enhance performance. Experimental results on both synthetic
and real-world datasets validate the effectiveness
of our proposed method.

Several methods have been proposed to adjust for unmeasured confounders in longitudinal settings, such as
instrumental-variable (IV) based methods and proximal
causal inference, under additional assumptions on measured
covariates (Tchetgen Tchetgen et al., 2018; Ying et al., 2021,
among others). However, some issues need to be addressed
in these methods. First, strong prior knowledge is required
to determine valid IVs or treatment/outcome-inducing proxies for identification. Additionally, this line of work imposes
restrictions on relationships between observable and unobservable covariates, and outcomes are only measured at the
end of follow-up. For instance, Tchetgen Tchetgen et al.
(2018) requires that time-varying IVs cannot interact with
unmeasured confounders in an additive form, while assumptions in Ying et al. (2021) essentially entail a directed acyclic
graph representation of time-varying variables. Moreover,
a semiparametric marginal structural mean model (Robin,
1986) is specified for estimation, where the target causal
parameter is essentially finite-dimensional. However, such
a model specification is likely to be insufficient when the
true relationship is complex (Ying et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The identification and estimation of treatment effects is a
fundamental and essential issue in the field of causal inference (Imbens & Rubin, 2016). In recent years, there has
been a surge of application scenarios where treatment effects
can be heterogeneous across different units based on their
respective features or covariates. For instance, personalized
*
Equal contribution 1 Ant Group, Zhejiang, China 2 School of
Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China 3 Department
of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania, 210 Blockley Hall, 423 Guardian Drive, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, U.S.A.. Correspondence to: Jun Zhou
<jun.zhoujun@antgroup.com>.

Difference-in-Differences (DiD) methods provide an alternative to instrumental-variable (IV) and proxy-based methods for adjusting unmeasured confounders in longitudinal
settings. DiD methods allow for time-varying outcomes
and impose few restrictions on relationships between observable and unobservable covariates. The core identifi-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

