VA-learning as a more efficient alternative to Q-learning

Yunhao Tang 1 Rémi Munos 1 Mark Rowland 1 Michal Valko 1

Abstract

decomposition
Q(x, a) = V (x) + A(x, a).

In reinforcement learning, the advantage function
is critical for policy improvement, but is often
extracted from a learned Q-function. A natural
question is: Why not learn the advantage function directly? In this work, we introduce VAlearning, which directly learns advantage function
and value function using bootstrapping, without
explicit reference to Q-functions. VA-learning
learns off-policy and enjoys similar theoretical
guarantees as Q-learning. Thanks to the direct
learning of advantage function and value function,
VA-learning improves the sample efficiency over
Q-learning both in tabular implementations and
deep RL agents on Atari-57 games. We also identify a close connection between VA-learning and
the dueling architecture, which partially explains
why a simple architectural change to DQN agents
tends to improve performance.

In many situations accurately approximating the advantage
function, which measures the relative performance between
actions, is the end goal of the algorithm. Instead of learning
advantage functions implicitly via Q-functions, a natural
question is whether it is possible to learn advantage functions directly. Unfortunately, unlike Q-functions, the advantage function does not obey a recursive equation (like the
Bellman equation for Q-functions) and cannot be learned as
a standalone object by bootstrapping from itself.
Our key remedy to resolving the above dilemma is learning
an extra value function at the same time. We introduce
VA-learning (Section 3), an algorithm that derives it name
from the fact that it directly learns a value function V and
an advantage function A. Importantly, the decomposition
Q = V + A does not constrain us from learning just the
target value functions. In fact, as we will explain in detail, VA-learning derives its properties by learning a value
function adapted to the data collection policy. On a high
level, VA-learning is reminiscent of the dueling architecture
for Q-learning (Wang et al., 2015), which runs a vanilla Qlearning algorithm with a parameterization that decomposes
Q-functions into value and advantage functions. While the
dueling architecture is purely empirically motivated, we
provide grounded theoretical guarantees to the performance
of VA-learning.

1. Introduction
Developed just over three decades ago, Q-learning (Watkins,
1989; Watkins and Dayan, 1992) is one of the most fundamental algorithms of reinforcement learning (RL). Qlearning progresses in an iterative fashion, updating the
current value predictions by bootstrapping from its own future value predictions. In addition to its theoretical appeal,
the incremental nature of Q-learning is also compatible with
powerful deep learning machinery, which has fueled recent
breakthroughs in Atari games (Mnih et al., 2013).

Besides theoretical guarantees, we also find that in practice VA-learning is generally more superior to vanilla Qlearning, in both tabular and deep RL settings. A high level
explanation is that through the decomposition Q = V + A,
VA-learning explicitly allows for an extra degree of freedom
such that the learning takes place at different rate across
different components of the Q-function. Concretely, we
generally expect the V to be learned more quickly than A,
as the former is shared across all actions. In the case of bootstrapped updates, this technique helps to increase the speed
at which the advantage function and target Q-function are
learned. We now highlight a few crucial detailed properties
enjoyed by VA-learning.

Q-learning learns the Q-function Q(x, a), defined as the expected return obtained starting from certain state-action pair,
and executing an optimal policy. By splitting the Q-function
into a state-dependent value function V (x) and a residual
advantage function A(x, a), we arrive at the commonly used
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yunhao Tang <robintyh@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Theoretical guarantee as Q-learning. VA-learning enjoys the same theoretical guarantee as Q-learning (Sec1

