Alternating Local Enumeration (TnALE):
Solving Tensor Network Structure Search with Fewer Evaluations

Chao Li 1 Junhua Zeng * 2 1 Chunmei Li * 3 4 Cesar Caiafa 5 1 Qibin Zhao 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

Tensor network (TN) has been widely applied to solving high-dimensional problems in both machine learning (Anandkumar et al., 2014; Novikov et al., 2015; Zhe
et al., 2015; Glasser et al., 2019; Kossaifi et al., 2020; Miller
et al., 2021; Richter et al., 2021; Malik, 2022) and quantum
physics (Orús, 2019; Felser et al., 2021). The success of
AlphaTensor (Fawzi et al., 2022) once again confirmed the
usefulness of tensors in various fields. TN practitioners, on
the other hand, have to face in practice challenging problems associated with model selection, known as TN structure search (TN-SS), for example: (1) how to determine the
TN-ranks?; (2) should we prefer tensor-train (TT, Oseledets
2011), tensor-ring (TR, Zhao et al. 2016) or other TN topology?; (3) how to relate the tensor modes to core tensors of
a TN (the permutation problem, Li et al. 2022), and so on.
Unfortunately, some of these problems have been proven to
be NP-hard (Hillar & Lim, 2013)1 , and most of them suffer
from the “combinatorial explosion”2 so that the brute force
search is not a viable option in practice.

Tensor network (TN) is a powerful framework
in machine learning, but selecting a good TN
model, known as TN structure search (TN-SS),
is a challenging and computationally intensive
task. The recent approach TNLS (Li et al., 2022)
showed promising results for this task. However,
its computational efficiency is still unaffordable,
requiring too many evaluations of the objective
function. We propose TnALE, a surprisingly simple algorithm that updates each structure-related
variable alternately by local enumeration, greatly
reducing the number of evaluations compared to
TNLS. We theoretically investigate the descent
steps for TNLS and TnALE, proving that both
the algorithms can achieve linear convergence up
to a constant if a sufficient reduction of the objective is reached in each neighborhood. We further compare the evaluation efficiency of TNLS
and TnALE, revealing that Ω(2K ) evaluations
are typically required in TNLS for reaching the
objective reduction, while ideally O(KR) evaluations are sufficient in TnALE, where K denotes the dimension of search space and R reflects
the “low-rankness” of the neighborhood. Experimental results verify that TnALE can find practically good TN structures with vastly fewer evaluations than the state-of-the-art algorithms. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
ChaoLiAtRIKEN/TnALE.

Several works have put effort into different aspects of TNSS (see Section 1.1), but many of the methods are restricted
to specific tasks or work poorly in practice, so a general and
efficient TN-SS method is needed. Recently, Li et al. (2022)
proposed an algorithm dubbed TNLS, which addressed the
rank and permutation selection problem for TNs. However,
its computational complexity is high since it requires evaluating the objective function on a large number of structure
candidates.
To address this issue, we accelerate TNLS by equipping
the algorithm with Alternating Local Enumeration — a
surprisingly simple but efficient searching method in neighborhoods. The new algorithm, named TnALE, can improve
the evaluation efficiency of TNLS greatly. To be specific,
TnALE follows the “local-searching” scheme as TNLS but
alternately updates each structure-related variable by enumerating its values within a neighborhood. The intuition

*

Equal contribution 1 RIKEN-AIP, Tokyo, Japan 2 School of
Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou,
China 3 College of Information and Communication Engineering,
Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China 4 Department of
Computer Science and Communications Engineering, WASEDA
University, Tokyo, Japan 5 Instituto Argentino de Radioastronomı́a,
CONICET CCT La Plata/CIC-PBA/UNLP, V. Elisa, ARGENTINA
. Correspondence to: Qibin Zhao <qibin.zhao@riken.jp>, Chao
Li <chao.li@riken.jp>.

1
For instance, it proves that determining the optimal ranks for
Tucker decomposition (Tucker, 1966) is NP-hard.
2
It means the rapid growth of TN structure searching space due
to the combinatorics of ranks, topologies, permutations, etc.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

