The Virtues of Laziness in Model-based RL: A Unified Objective and Algorithms

Anirudh Vemula 1 Yuda Song 2 Aarti Singh 2 J. Andrew Bagnell 1 2 Sanjiban Choudhury 3

Abstract

optimal planning in the learned model, and use it to collect
more data in the real world. This procedure is repeated until
a satisfactory policy is learned. Theoretical studies, such as
Ross & Bagnell (2012), have shown that this procedure can
find a near-optimal policy in a statistically efficient manner
under certain conditions, such as access to a good exploration distribution and a rich enough model class, and this
has been validated by its good performance in practice.

We propose a novel approach to addressing two
fundamental challenges in Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL): the computational
expense of repeatedly finding a good policy in
the learned model, and the objective mismatch between model fitting and policy computation. Our
“lazy” method leverages a novel unified objective,
Performance Difference via Advantage in Model,
to capture the performance difference between the
learned policy and expert policy under the true dynamics. This objective demonstrates that optimizing the expected policy advantage in the learned
model under an exploration distribution is sufficient for policy computation, resulting in a significant boost in computational efficiency compared
to traditional planning methods. Additionally, the
unified objective uses a value moment matching
term for model fitting, which is aligned with the
model’s usage during policy computation. We
present two no-regret algorithms to optimize the
proposed objective, and demonstrate their statistical and computational gains compared to existing
MBRL methods through simulated benchmarks.

However, there are two major challenges with the above
procedure. The policy computation step in each iteration
relies on solving the computationally expensive problem of
finding the best policy in the learned model. This can require
a number of interactions in the model that is exponential in
the task horizon (Kearns et al., 1999). Furthermore, recent
literature (Jiang, 2018; Vemula et al., 2020) has shown that
optimal planning in learned models can result in policies
that exploit inaccuracies in the learned model hindering fast
learning and statistical efficiency.
The second challenge pertains to the objective mismatch
between model fitting and policy computation that is extensively studied in recent literature (Farahmand et al., 2017;
Lambert et al., 2020). The model fitting objective of minimizing prediction error is not necessarily related to the
objective of maximizing the performance of the policy, derived from the model, in the real world. This results in a
mismatch of objectives used to fit the model, and how the
model is used when computing the policy through planning.
This is exacerbated in cases where the model class is not
realizable, i.e. no model in the model class can perfectly
explain true dynamics, which is often the case in real world
tasks (Joseph et al., 2013).

1. Introduction
Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) methods
show great promise for real world applicability as they often
require remarkably fewer number of real world interactions
compared to model-free counterparts (Schrittwieser et al.,
2020; Hafner et al., 2023). The key idea is that, in contrast
to model-free RL that computes a policy directly from real
world data, we can perform the following iterative procedure (Sutton & Barto, 2018): we fit a model that accurately
predicts the dynamics on the data collected so far using the
learned policy. Subsequently, we compute a policy through

In this work, we propose a new decomposition of the performance difference between the learned policy and expert
policy under true dynamics, which we coin as Performance
Difference via Advantage in Model. This leads to a unified
objective that informs two major changes to the existing
MBRL procedure. Instead of computing the optimal policy
in the learned model at each iteration, we optimize the expected policy advantage in the model under an exploration
distribution which only requires a number of interactions
in the model that is polynomial in the task horizon. For
model fitting, our new objective measures the similarity of
predicted and observed next states in terms of their value

1
Aurora Innovation, Pittsburgh, PA USA 2 School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA USA
3
Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca NY USA. Correspondence to: Anirudh Vemula <vvanirudh@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

