Trompt: Towards a Better Deep Neural Network for Tabular Data

Kuan-Yu Chen 1 Ping-Han Chiang 1 Hsin-Rung Chou 1 Ting-Wei Chen 1 Darby Tien-Hao Chang 1 2

Abstract
Tabular data is arguably one of the most commonly used data structures in various practical
domains, including finance, healthcare and ecommerce. However, based on a recently published tabular benchmark, we can see deep neural networks still fall behind tree-based models
on tabular datasets (Grinsztajn et al., 2022). In
this paper, we propose Trompt–which stands for
Tabular Prompt–a novel architecture inspired by
prompt learning of language models. The essence
of prompt learning is to adjust a large pre-trained
model through a set of prompts outside the model
without directly modifying the model. Based on
this idea, Trompt separates the learning strategy
of tabular data into two parts for the intrinsic information of a table and the varied information
among samples. Trompt is evaluated with the
benchmark mentioned above. The experimental
results demonstrate that Trompt outperforms stateof-the-art deep neural networks and is comparable
to tree-based models (Figure 1).

(a) Medium-sized classification task.

(b) Medium-sized regression
task.

(c) Large-sized classification
task.

(d) Large-sized regression
task.

Figure 1. Benchmark results.

Redmon et al., 2016; Gu et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018).
Besides extraordinary performance, there are numerous benefits of the end-to-end optimization nature of deep learning,
including (i) online learning with streaming data (Sahoo
et al., 2017), (ii) multi-model integration that incorporates
different types of input, e.g., image and text (Ramachandram & Taylor, 2017) and (iii) representation learning that
realizes semi-supervised learning and generative modeling
(Van Engelen & Hoos, 2020; Goodfellow et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Tabular data plays a vital role in many real world applications, such as financial statements for banks to evaluate the
credibility of a company, diagnostic reports for doctors to
identify the aetiology of a patient, and customer records for
e-commerce platforms to discover the potential interest of
a customer. In general, tabular data can be used to record
activities consisting of heterogeneous features and has many
practical usages.

Consequently, researchers have been dedicated to apply
deep learning on tabular data, either through (i) transformer
(Huang et al., 2020; Somepalli et al., 2021; Gorishniy et al.,
2021) or (ii) inductive bias investigation (Katzir et al., 2020;
Arik & Pfister, 2021).

On the other hand, deep learning has achieved a great success in various domains, including computer vision, natural
language processing (NLP) and robotics (He et al., 2016;
1

SinoPac Holdings, Taipei, Taiwan 2 Department of Electronic
Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
Correspondence to: Kuan-Yu Chen <lavamore@sinopac.com>.

Though many of the previous publications claimed that they
have achieved the state of the art, further researches pointed
that previous works were evaluated on favorable datasets and
tree-based models still show superior performances in the
realm of tabular data (Borisov et al., 2021; Gorishniy et al.,
2021; Shwartz-Ziv & Armon, 2022). For a fair comparison

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

