Near-Optimal Algorithms for Private
Online Optimization in the Realizable Regime

Hilal Asi 1 Vitaly Feldman 1 Tomer Koren 2 Kunal Talwar 1

Abstract

this problem. In differentially private online prediction
from experts (DP-OPE), we have 𝑑 experts X = [𝑑] and
the adversary chooses a loss function ℓ𝑡 : [𝑑] → [0, 1].
Our second setting is differentially private online convex
optimization (DP-OCO) where X ⊂ ℝ𝑑 is a convex set with
bounded diameter, and the adversary chooses convex and
𝐿-Lipschitz loss functions ℓ𝑡 : X → ℝ+ .

We consider online learning problems in the realizable setting, where there is a zero-loss solution,
and propose new Differentially Private (DP) algorithms that obtain near-optimal regret bounds. For
the problem of online prediction from experts, we
design new algorithms
 that obtain near-optimal
e 𝜀 −1 log1.5 𝑑 where 𝑑 is the number of
regret 𝑂
experts. This significantly improves over the best
existing regret bounds for the DP non-realizable

e 𝜀 −1 min 𝑑, 𝑇 1/3 log 𝑑 . We
setting which are 𝑂
also develop an adaptive algorithm for the smallloss setting with regret 𝑂 (𝐿★ log 𝑑 + 𝜀 −1 log1.5 𝑑)
where 𝐿★ is the total loss of the best expert. Additionally, we consider DP online convex optimization in the realizable setting and propose an
e 𝜀 −1 𝑑 1.5 , as
algorithm with near-optimal regret 𝑂
well as an algorithm for the smooth case with ree 𝜀 −2/3 (𝑑𝑇) 1/3 , both significantly improvgret 𝑂
ing over existing bounds in the non-realizable
regime.

Several papers have recently studied DP-OPE and DPOCO in the general non-realizable setting (Jain et al., 2012;
Smith & Thakurta, 2013; Jain & Thakurta, 2014; Agarwal & Singh, 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021). These papers
have resulted in different algorithms with sub-linear regret for both problems. For DP-OPE, Agarwal & Singh
(2017); Jain & Thakurta (2014) developed private versions
of follow-the-regularized-leader
(FTRL) obtaining regret
√︁

min 𝑑/𝜀, 𝑇 log 𝑑/𝜀 . More recently, Asi et al. (2022b)
developed low-switching algorithms for DP-OPE
√︁ with oblivious adversaries, obtaining regret roughly 𝑂 ( 𝑇 log(𝑑) +
𝑇 1/3 log 𝑑/𝜀). Additionally, for the problem of DP-OCO,
Kairouz et al. (2021) have recently proposed a DP-FTRL algorithm based on the binary tree mechanism which obtains
√
 1/2
regret 𝑇 𝑑/𝜀
.

1. Introduction

Despite this progress, the regret bounds of existing algorithms are still polynomially worse than existing lower
bounds. Currently, the only existing lower bounds for oblivious adversaries are the trivial bounds from the non-online
versions of the same problems: for DP-OPE, lower bounds
for private selection (Steinke & Ullman, 2017) imply a
regret lower bound of 𝑂 (log(𝑑)/𝜀), while existing lower
bounds for DP-SCO
√ (Feldman et al., 2020) give a regret
lower bound of Ω( 𝑑/𝜀) for DP-OCO.

We study the problem of private online optimization in the
realizable setting where there is a zero-loss solution. In this
problem, an online algorithm A interacts with an adversary over 𝑇 rounds. The adversary picks a (non-negative)
loss function ℓ𝑡 : X → ℝ at round 𝑡 and simultaneously
the algorithm A picks a response 𝑥 𝑡 , suffering loss ℓ𝑡 (𝑥 𝑡 ).
The algorithm aims to minimize the regret, which is the
loss compared to the best solution 𝑥★ ∈ X in hindsight,
while at the same time keeping the sequence of predictions
𝑥 1 , . . . , 𝑥𝑇 differentially private with respect to individual
loss functions.

Practical optimization problems arising from overparameterized models often lead to instances that additionally satisfy realizability, i.e. that the optimal loss is zero
or close to zero. This motivates the study of designing
algorithms that can do better under this assumption. Realizability has been studied since the early days of learning
theory and ubiquitous in the non-private online optimization
literature (Srebro et al., 2010; Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Hazan,
2016). It has proven useful for improving regret bounds in
non-private OPE and OCO (Shalev-Shwartz, 2012; Srebro
et al., 2010) and in the closely related problem of differen-

In this paper, we focus on two well-studied instances of
1 Apple 2 Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Correspondence to: Hilal Asi <hilal.asi94@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

