Patch-level Routing in Mixture-of-Experts is Provably Sample-efficient for
Convolutional Neural Networks
Mohammed Nowaz Rabbani Chowdhury 1 Shuai Zhang 1 Meng Wang 1 Sijia Liu 2 3 Pin-Yu Chen 4

Abstract
In deep learning, mixture-of-experts (MoE) activates one or few experts (sub-networks) on a
per-sample or per-token basis, resulting in significant computation reduction. The recently proposed patch-level routing in MoE (pMoE) divides
each input into n patches (or tokens) and sends l
patches (l ≪ n) to each expert through prioritized
routing. pMoE has demonstrated great empirical
success in reducing training and inference costs
while maintaining test accuracy. However, the
theoretical explanation of pMoE and the general
MoE remains elusive. Focusing on a supervised
classification task using a mixture of two-layer
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), we show
for the first time that pMoE provably reduces the
required number of training samples to achieve
desirable generalization (referred to as the sample
complexity) by a factor in the polynomial order of
n/l, and outperforms its single-expert counterpart
of the same or even larger capacity. The advantage
results from the discriminative routing property,
which is justified in both theory and practice that
pMoE routers can filter label-irrelevant patches
and route similar class-discriminative patches to
the same expert. Our experimental results on
MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CelebA support our theoretical findings on pMoE’s generalization and
show that pMoE can avoid learning spurious correlations.

Figure 1. An illustration of pMoE. The image is divided into 20
patches while the router selects 4 of them for each expert.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has demonstrated exceptional empirical success in many applications at the cost of high computational
and data requirements. To address this issue, mixture-ofexperts (MoE) only activates partial regions of a neural
network for each data point and significantly reduces the
computational complexity of deep learning without hurting
the performance in applications such as machine translation and natural image classification (Shazeer et al., 2017;
Yang et al., 2019). A conventional MoE model contains
multiple experts (subnetworks of the backbone architecture)
and one learnable router that routes each input sample to
a few but not all the experts (Ramachandran & Le, 2018).
Position-wise MoE has been introduced in language models
(Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2020; Fedus et al.,
2022), where the routing decisions are made on embeddings
of different positions of the input separately rather than routing the entire text-input. Riquelme et al. (2021) extended it
to vision models where the routing decisions are made on
image patches. Zhou et al. (2022) further extended where
the MoE layer has one router for each expert such that the
router selects partial patches for the corresponding expert
and discards the remaining patches. We termed this routing

1

Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY, USA 2 Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University,
MI, USA 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, MA, USA
4
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to:
Mohammed Nowaz Rabbani Chowdhury <chowdm2@rpi.edu>,
Meng Wang <wangm7@rpi.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

