Hyperparameters in Reinforcement Learning and How To Tune Them

Theresa Eimer 1 * Marius Lindauer 1 Roberta Raileanu 2

Abstract
In order to improve reproducibility, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been adopting better
scientific practices such as standardized evaluation metrics and reporting. However, the process
of hyperparameter optimization still varies widely
across papers, which makes it challenging to compare RL algorithms fairly. In this paper, we show
that hyperparameter choices in RL can significantly affect the agent’s final performance and
sample efficiency, and that the hyperparameter
landscape can strongly depend on the tuning seed
which may lead to overfitting. We therefore propose adopting established best practices from AutoML, such as the separation of tuning and testing
seeds, as well as principled hyperparameter optimization (HPO) across a broad search space. We
support this by comparing multiple state-of-theart HPO tools on a range of RL algorithms and
environments to their hand-tuned counterparts,
demonstrating that HPO approaches often have
higher performance and lower compute overhead.
As a result of our findings, we recommend a set
of best practices for the RL community, which
should result in stronger empirical results with
fewer computational costs, better reproducibility,
and thus faster progress. In order to encourage the
adoption of these practices, we provide plug-andplay implementations of the tuning algorithms
used in this paper at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/how-to-autorl.

Figure 1: Comparison of Hyperparameter Tuning Approaches:
state-of-the-art hyperparameter optimization packages match or
outperform hand tuning via grid search, while using less than 1/12
of the budget.

sions and implementation details have received greater attention in the last years (Henderson et al., 2018; Engstrom
et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2020; Andrychowicz et al., 2021;
Obando-Ceron & Castro, 2021), the same is less true of RL
hyperparameters. Progress in self-adapting algorithms (Zahavy et al., 2020), RL-specific hyperparameter optimization
tools (Franke et al., 2020; Wan et al., 2022), and meta-learnt
hyperparameters (Flennerhag et al., 2022) has not yet been
adopted by RL practitioners. In fact, most papers only report
final model hyperparameters or grid search sweeps known
to be suboptimal and costly compared to even simple Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) baselines like random
search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012). In addition, the seeds
used for tuning and evaluation are rarely reported, leaving it
unclear if the hyperparameters were tuned on the test seeds,
which is – as we will show – a major reproducibility issue.
In this paper, we aim to lay out and address the potential
causes for the lack of adoption of HPO methods in the RL
community.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms contain a
number of design decisions and hyperparameter settings,
many of which have a critical influence on the learning
speed and success of the algorithm. While design deci-

Underestimation of Hyperparameter Influence While it
has been previously shown that hyperparameters are important to an RL algorithm’s success (Henderson et al., 2018;
Engstrom et al., 2020; Andrychowicz et al., 2021), the impact of even seemingly irrelevant hyperparameters is still underestimated by the community, as indicated by the fact that
many papers tune only two or three hyperparameters (Schulman et al., 2017; Berner et al., 2019; Badia et al., 2020;

*

Work was done during an internship at Meta AI. 1 Leibniz
University Hannover 2 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Theresa Eimer
<t.eimer@ai.uni-hannover.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

