Adaptive Annealed Importance Sampling with Constant Rate Progress

Shirin Goshtasbpour 1 2 Victor Cohen 2 Fernando Perez-Cruz 1 2

Abstract

estimation (Salakhutdinov & Murray, 2008; Grosse et al.,
2015; 2016), moment estimation (Johansen et al., 2015;
Jasra et al., 2011), generative model evaluation (Wu et al.,
2017) and more recently it has been incorporated in variational inference and training of deep generative networks
(Maddison et al., 2017; Naesseth et al., 2018; Wu et al.,
2020; Thin et al., 2021; Masrani et al., 2019).

Annealed Importance Sampling (AIS) synthesizes
weighted samples from an intractable distribution
given its unnormalized density function. This algorithm relies on a sequence of interpolating distributions bridging the target to an initial tractable
distribution such as the well-known geometric
mean path of unnormalized distributions which
is assumed to be suboptimal in general. In this
paper, we prove that the geometric annealing corresponds to the distribution path that minimizes
the KL divergence between the current particle
distribution and the desired target when the feasible change in the particle distribution is constrained. Following this observation, we derive
the constant rate discretization schedule for this
annealing sequence, which adjusts the schedule
to the difficulty of moving samples between the
initial and the target distributions. We further
extend our results to f -divergences and present
the respective dynamics of annealing sequences
based on which we propose the Constant Rate AIS
(CR-AIS) algorithm and its efficient implementation for α-divergences. We empirically show that
CR-AIS performs well on multiple benchmark
distributions while avoiding the computationally
expensive tuning loop in existing Adaptive AIS.

To perform annealing, this algorithm uses a sequence of
bridging distributions between proposal distribution and the
target which is chosen in advance. Gelman & Meng (1998)
have demonstrated that the optimal path with lowest variance for thermodynamic integral estimator depends on the
Hellinger distance of the distributions and it is intractable
in complex setups. Instead, the geometric mean path has
been utilized for years (Neal, 2001; 1996). As alternatives,
moment-averaging have been proposed for exponential family distributions (Grosse et al., 2013) and further generalized
to power mean for arbitrary endpoint distributions (Masrani
et al., 2021; Brekelmans et al., 2020). These heuristic annealing paths achieve viable estimation results even though
they are considered to be suboptimal.
In this work, we analyze a version of AIS algorithm where
we apply infinitesimal changes to the initial density along
the annealing distribution path to get to the target distribution. We take a greedy approach and modify the particle
distribution in the direction that optimally reduces the remaining estimation bias at every instance. The remaining
bias is equivalent to the inverse KL-divergence between
current particle distribution and the target distribution under
common assumptions (Grosse et al., 2013) and we prove
that in this setup the optimal greedy strategy is achieved using the geometric mean path. Extending our analysis to the
larger class of f -divergences, we are able to derive an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) for the optimal greedy
annealing dynamics. In the subclass of α-divergences, this
ODE has a closed form solution and we show that power
mean annealing is a solution to this equation.

1. Introduction
Annealed Importance Sampling (AIS) (Neal, 2001) is one of
the most popular sampling methods to estimate intractable
expectations given an unnormalized density of a distribution. Together with its other variants such as thermodynamic
integration (Ogata, 1989; Gelman & Meng, 1998) and Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) (Del Moral et al., 2006) this
algorithm has vast applications, such as marginal likelihood
*
Equal contribution 1 Computer Science Department, ETH
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 2 Swiss Data Science Center,
Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Shirin Goshtasbpour
<shirin.goshtasbpour@inf.ethz.ch>.

While other variational representations of geometric and
power mean paths have been provided in the previous work
(Grosse et al., 2013; Masrani et al., 2021), to the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to show the relation of
these annealing sequences with the functional derivatives
of various probability divergences. Using this framework,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

