Surface Snapping Optimization Layer
for Single Image Object Shape Reconstruction

Yuan-Ting Hu 1 Alexander G. Schwing 1 Raymond A. Yeh 2

Abstract

fields (Chen & Zhang, 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019; Park
et al., 2019) or point clouds (Groueix et al., 2018). The main
visual cue of these works is a deep feature extracted from
an image via a convolutional network. Notably, these works
often do not leverage explicit 2.5D sketches, such as depth
maps or surface normals. Use of these sketches has been
advocated by Marr (1982), and has previously been found
to be useful by Bansal et al. (2016) and Wu et al. (2017).

Reconstructing the 3D shape of objects observed
in a single image is a challenging task. Recent
approaches rely on visual cues extracted from
a given image learned from a deep net. In this
work, we leverage recent advances in monocular scene understanding to incorporate an additional geometric cue of surface normals. For this,
we proposed a novel optimization layer that encourages the face normals of the reconstructed
shape to be aligned with estimated surface normals. We develop a computationally efficient
conjugate-gradient-based method that avoids the
computation of high-dimensional sparse matrices.
We show this framework to achieve compelling
shape reconstruction results on the challenging
Pix3D and ShapeNet datasets.

In this work, we study how shape reconstruction methods
can efficiently benefit from an explicit geometric cue of
surface normals. We choose surface normals as its estimation has made tremendous progress in recent years (Ladický
et al., 2014; Eigen & Fergus, 2015; Wang et al., 2015; 2016;
Liao et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019; Hickson et al., 2019;
Qi et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Do et al., 2020; Zamir
et al., 2020; Bae et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022).
To incorporate surface normal estimates, we propose a novel
optimization layer: an optimization problem viewed as a
differentiable function that maps from its input to its solution (Amos & Kolter, 2017; Gould et al., 2022). The
proposed optimization layer minimizes a cost function that
explicitly encourages the normals of the reconstructed shape
to match the surface normals predicted from the image.

1. Introduction
Humans can reason about the 3D geometry of objects even
from a monocular image. This capability enables us to
efficiently and effortlessly interact with our environment.
Developing a system that has this capability is hence an
important problem for applications across many fields, e.g.,
robotics, the entertainment industry, and augmented and
virtual reality.

We minimize each optimization layer objective to optimality during a forward pass through the deep net, which repositions the vertices of the reconstructed shape. Consequently, the reconstructed shape vertices “snap” to the observed geometry, hence the name surface snapping. The
effect of surface snapping is illustrated in Fig. 1, where we
observe a more accurately recovered shape.

Classical works (Horn, 1975; Nayar et al., 1991; Wolff
et al., 1993; Pentland, 1987) on shape reconstruction rely
on visual cues such as texture, shading, or camera focus.
More recent methods aim to learn the visual cues from data
via deep nets. These works study different shape representations and propose corresponding deep net architectures,
e.g., meshes (Wang et al., 2018), occupancy grids (Wu
et al., 2015), octrees (Tatarchenko et al., 2017), implicit

To compute the exact solution of the optimization layer, we
develop an efficient conjugate-gradient-based method that
considers the sparsity structure of the problem to improve
both the memory and computational efficiency. Using standard solvers without considering the sparsity structure is
intractable with present-day hardware. The layer is interpretable and exposes a trainable parameter that controls the
strength of the snapping. Finally, the developed surface
snapping layer can be inserted into any deep net operating
on meshes. This layer can be trained via gradient-based
methods along with the standard layers.

1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Department of Computer
Science, Purdue University. Correspondence to: Yuan-Ting Hu
<ythu2@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

