Guiding Pretraining in Reinforcement Learning with Large Language Models

Yuqing Du * 1 Olivia Watkins * 1 Zihan Wang 2 Cédric Colas 3 4 Trevor Darrell 1 Pieter Abbeel 1
Abhishek Gupta 2 Jacob Andreas 3

Abstract
You see trees,
cows, grass,
table, and
bushes. You have
wood in your
inventory. You
feel hungry,
thirsty, and
sleepy.

Reinforcement learning algorithms typically
struggle in the absence of a dense, well-shaped
reward function. Intrinsically motivated exploration methods address this limitation by rewarding agents for visiting novel states or transitions,
but these methods offer limited benefits in large
environments where most discovered novelty is
irrelevant for downstream tasks. We describe a
method that uses background knowledge from
text corpora to shape exploration. This method,
called ELLM (Exploring with LLMs) rewards an
agent for achieving goals suggested by a language
model prompted with a description of the agent’s
current state. By leveraging large-scale language
model pretraining, ELLM guides agents toward
human-meaningful and plausibly useful behaviors without requiring a human in the loop. We
evaluate ELLM in the Crafter game environment
and the Housekeep robotic simulator, showing
that ELLM-trained agents have better coverage of
common-sense behaviors during pretraining and
usually match or improve performance on a range
of downstream tasks.

Prompt:
What should
you do next?

LLM

1. Cut down the tree.
2. Craft a pickaxe.
3. Eat cow.
4. Sleep.
. . .
k. Build a wood house.

Figure 1: ELLM uses a pretrained large language model
(LLM) to suggest plausibly useful goals in a task-agnostic
way. Building on LLM capabilities such as contextsensitivity and common-sense, ELLM trains RL agents to
pursue goals that are likely meaningful without requiring
direct human intervention. Prompt is illustrative; see full
prompt and goal format in Appendix D.

learn some behaviors in the absence of externally-defined
rewards. What should they learn?
Intrinsically motivated RL methods answer this question
by augmenting rewards with auxiliary objectives based on
novelty, surprise, uncertainty, or prediction errors (Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021; Yarats et al., 2021).
But not everything novel or unpredictable is useful: noisy
TVs and the movements of leaves on a tree may provide an
infinite amount of novelty, but do not lead to meaningful
behaviors (Burda et al., 2019). More recent approaches compute novelty with higher-level representations like language
(Tam et al., 2022; Mu et al., 2022), but can continue driving
the agent to explore behaviors that are unlikely to correspond to any human-meaningful goal—like enumerating
unique configurations of furniture in a household. It is not
sufficient for extrinsic-reward-free RL agents to optimize
for novelty alone: learned behaviors must also be useful.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning algorithms work well when learners
receive frequent rewards that incentivize progress toward
target behaviors. But hand-defining such reward functions
requires significant engineering efforts in all but the simplest
cases (Amodei et al., 2016; Lehman et al., 2020). To master
complex tasks in practice, RL agents may therefore need to
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 University of Washington, Seattle 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Inria, Flowers Laboratory. Correspondence to:
Yuqing Du <yuqing du@berkeley.edu>, Olivia Watkins <oliviawatkins@berkeley.edu>.

In this paper, we describe a method for using not just
language-based representations but pretrained language
models (LLMs) as a source of information about useful
behavior. LLMs are probabilistic models of text trained on
large text corpora; their predictions encode rich information
about human common-sense knowledge and cultural conven-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

