A Kernelized Stein Discrepancy for Biological Sequences

Alan N. Amin 1 Eli N. Weinstein * 2 Debora S. Marks * 1 3

Abstract

ological sequence models, as for all generative models, is
model evaluation. How accurate are density estimates and
how realistic are sequences sampled from the model?

Generative models of biological sequences are
a powerful tool for learning from complex sequence data, predicting the effects of mutations,
and designing novel biomolecules with desired
properties. To evaluate generative models it is important to accurately measure differences between
high-dimensional distributions. In this paper we
propose the “KSD-B”, a novel divergence measure for distributions over biological sequences
that is based on the kernelized Stein discrepancy
(KSD). The KSD-B can be evaluated even when
the normalizing constant of the model is unknown;
it allows for variable length sequences and can
take into account biological notions of sequence
distance. Unlike previous KSDs over discrete
spaces the KSD-B (a) is theoretically guaranteed
to detect convergence and non-convergence of
distributions over sequence space and (b) can be
efficiently estimated in practice. We demonstrate
the advantages of the KSD-B on problems with
synthetic and real data, and apply it to measure
the fit of state-of-the-art machine learning models.
Overall, the KSD-B enables rigorous evaluation
of generative biological sequence models, allowing the accuracy of models, sampling procedures,
and library designs to be checked reliably.

Common existing evaluation techniques for generative sequence models do not provide an absolute and reliable measure of model fit. For example, generative sequence models
are often evaluated based on their log likelihood; but this
only addresses whether one model fits to the data better than
another, not whether any model matches the data absolutely.
Another evaluation strategy is to draw sequences from the
model and test whether they match the data based on expertly chosen statistics or predictions of sequence properties
(hydrophobicity, secondary structure, etc.). However, a generative model that passes such a test may still poorly fit the
data outside of the chosen statistics.
In this article, we address the model evaluation problem
by developing a divergence to compare distributions over
sequences. We call this divergence the “KSD-B”, as it is
based on the kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD) but applies
to biological sequences (B) (Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2016). The KSD-B allows us to answer whether or
not the distribution over sequences produced by a generative
model, p, equals the distribution of the data, q. That is, it
enables a goodness of fit test for biological sequences. The
KSD-B provides an absolute rather than a relative measure
of model quality, and, given enough data, it is able to detect
any difference between p and q.
KSDs compare distributions by (1) building a stochastic
process that is stationary for p, (2) applying it to q, and (3)
using a kernel to evaluate how much q changes. Much emphasis has been placed previously on the study of stochastic
processes and kernels over Euclidean space, i.e. Rd , such
as diffusion processes, and Gaussian, inverse multiquadric
or Matèrn kernels. The KSD-B, by contrast, is defined over
L
sequence space S = ∪∞
L=1 B , the set of all finite length
strings of an alphabet B, where B is nucleotides for DNA
or amino acids for proteins (Amin et al., 2021; Weinstein,
2022). The KSD-B uses a stochastic process based on substitutions, insertions and deletions (the sorts of mutations
often seen in biological sequences) and uses kernels such
as alignment kernels and kmer spectrum kernels (which
capture biological notions of sequence similarity).

1. Introduction
Generative models of biological sequences have wide and
growing application in protein design, phylogenetic analysis, clinical human genetics, epidemiology and beyond
(Hopf et al., 2017; Riesselman et al., 2018; Russ et al., 2020;
Shin et al., 2021; Frazer et al., 2021; Davidsen et al., 2019;
Weinstein et al., 2022b; Thadani et al., 2022; Meier et al.,
2021; Madani et al., 2020; Alley et al., 2019; Marcou et al.,
2018). A central challenge in working with generative bi*

Equal contribution 1 Harvard Medical School 2 Columbia
University 3 Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT. Correspondence to: Alan N. Amin <alanamin@g.harvard.edu>, Eli N.
Weinstein <ew2760@columbia.edu>, Debora S. Marks <debbie@hms.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Despite the shift in setting, we build the stochastic process
and kernel carefully so that the KSD-B shares with the orig1

