Quantile Credit Assignment

Thomas Mesnard * 1 Wenqi Chen * 2 Alaa Saade * 1 Yunhao Tang 1 Mark Rowland 1 Theophane Weber 1
Clare Lyle 1 Audrunas Gruslys 1 Michal Valko 1 Will Dabney 1 Georg Ostrovski 1 Eric Moulines 3
Remi Munos 1

Abstract

ing credits, it is important to separate “action” from “luck”,
i.e., external factors that actions cannot control.

In reinforcement learning, the credit assignment
problem is to distinguish luck from skill, that
is, separate the inherent randomness in the environment from the controllable effects of the
agent’s actions. This paper proposes two novel
algorithms, Quantile Credit Assignment (QCA)
and Hindsight QCA (HQCA), which incorporate distributional value estimation to perform
credit assignment. QCA uses a network that
predicts the quantiles of the return distribution,
whereas HQCA additionally incorporates information about the future. Both QCA and HQCA
have the appealing interpretation of leveraging
an estimate of the quantile level of the return
(interpreted as the level of “luck”) in order to
derive a “luck-dependent” baseline for policy gradient methods. We show theoretically that this approach gives an unbiased policy gradient estimator that can yield significant variance reductions
over a standard value estimate baseline. QCA
and HQCA significantly outperform prior state-ofthe-art methods on a range of extremely difficult
credit assignment problems.

Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms such
as policy gradient methods (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al.,
1999) use time as a proxy to perform credit assignment,
where actions are credited based upon temporal proximity to subsequent rewards. In spite of the simplicity of
such a credit assignment mechanism, such methods tend
to introduce high variance due to the uncertainty from the
environment. As a result, the agent often requires a larger
number of samples to learn good policies, i.e., associating
actions with desired outcomes in the optimal way.
A number of prior works have sought to improve the credit
assignment mechanisms in model free RL for this type of
environment. One important line of work proposed to incorporate hindsight information from the future to perform
more efficient credit assignment (Andrychowicz et al., 2017;
Harutyunyan et al., 2019). Recently, this has entailed efficient algorithms (e..g, (Mesnard et al., 2020)) that significantly improve over baseline methods in environments
where it is important to carry out precise credit assignment
for the agent to perform well.
A ubiquitous and indispensable notion to model-free credit
assignment is random return, i.e., the cumulative sum of
reward received by the agent. In this work, we investigate
Quantile Credit Assignment (QCA), an credit assignment
approach that fully exploits the rich structure of random
returns in a generic way. QCA leverages the full distribution
of the random return, to formalize the notion of “luck” in
credit assignment. By performing credit assignment with
QCA, model-free agents can disentangle the effect of actions from random external factors more efficiently, leading
to much faster policy improvement. Furthermore, we show
that QCA can also be flexibly combined with other credit
assignment methods, such as incorporating hindsight information. Overall, QCA greatly improves data efficiency in
high-variance environments and enable the agents to have
robust performance.

1. Introduction
Credit assignment (Minsky, 1961) is a critical aspect of
sequential decision making. On a high level, the central
problem of credit assignment is to understand the relationship between actions and outcomes, and equivalently, to
determine to what extent an outcome is caused by external
factors instead of actions. For example, a player may have
won a football game not because of the actions they took,
but because the competitors were weak or they happened to
score a low-quality shot on goal. Therefore, when attribut*

Equal contribution 1 DeepMind 2 Harvard University 3 Ecole
polytechnique. Correspondence to: Thomas Mesnard <mesnard@deepmind.com>.

Our main contributions are as follows: (1) We formalize the
notion of luck with distributions of random return, and how
this relates to theoretically grounded variance reduction of

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

