Are Neurons Actually Collapsed? On the Fine-Grained Structure in
Neural Representations

Yongyi Yang 1 Jacob Steinhardt 2 Wei Hu 1

Abstract

or features, of the data (Rumelhart et al., 1985). Although
neural networks are often trained to optimize a single objective function with no explicit requirements on the inner
representations, there is ample evidence suggesting that
these learned representations contain rich information about
the input data (Levy & Goldberg, 2014; Olah et al., 2017).
As a result, formally characterizing and understanding the
structural properties of neural representations is of great
theoretical and practical interest, and can provide insights
on how deep learning works and how to make better use of
these representations.

Recent work has observed an intriguing ªNeural Collapseº phenomenon in well-trained neural
networks, where the last-layer representations of
training samples with the same label collapse into
each other. This appears to suggest that the lastlayer representations are completely determined
by the labels, and do not depend on the intrinsic
structure of input distribution. We provide evidence that this is not a complete description, and
that the apparent collapse hides important finegrained structure in the representations. Specifically, even when representations apparently collapse, the small amount of remaining variation can
still faithfully and accurately captures the intrinsic
structure of input distribution. As an example, if
we train on CIFAR-10 using only 5 coarse-grained
labels (by combining two classes into one superclass) until convergence, we can reconstruct the
original 10-class labels from the learned representations via unsupervised clustering. The reconstructed labels achieve 93% accuracy on the
CIFAR-10 test set, nearly matching the normal
CIFAR-10 accuracy for the same architecture. We
also provide an initial theoretical result showing
the fine-grained representation structure in a simplified synthetic setting. Our results show concretely how the structure of input data can play
a significant role in determining the fine-grained
structure of neural representations, going beyond
what Neural Collapse predicts.

One intriguing phenomenon recently discovered by Papyan
et al. (2020) is Neural Collapse, which identifies structural
properties of last-layer representations during the terminal
phase of training (i.e. after zero training error is reached).
The simplest of these properties is that the last-layer representations for training samples with the same label collapse
into a single point, which is referred to as ªvariability collapse (NC1).º This is surprising, since the collapsed structure is not necessary to achieve small training or test error,
yet it arises consistently in standard architectures trained on
standard classification datasets.
A series of recent papers were able to theoretically explain
Neural Collapse under a simplified model called the unconstrained feature model or layer-peeled model (see Section 2
for a list of references). In this model, the last-layer representation of each training sample is treated as a free optimization variable and therefore the training loss essentially
has the form of a matrix factorization. Under a variety of
different setups, it was proved that the solution to this simplified problem should satisfy Neural Collapse. Although
Neural Collapse is relatively well understood in this simplified model, this model completely ignores the role of the
input data because the loss function is independent of the input data. Conceptually, this suggests that Neural Collapse
is only determined by the labels and may happen regardless of the input data distribution. Zhu et al. (2021) provided
further empirical support of this claim via a random labeling
experiment.

1. Introduction
Much of the success of deep neural networks has, arguably,
been attributed to their ability to learn useful representations,
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 2 UC
Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: Wei Hu
<vvh@umich.edu>.

On the other hand, it is conceivable that the intrinsic structure of the input distribution should play a role in determining the structure of neural net representations. For

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

