Nearly Optimal Algorithms with Sublinear Computational Complexity for
Online Kernel Regression

Junfan Li 1 Shizhong Liao 1

Abstract

reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) H induced by
a positive semidefinite kernel function (Aronszajn, 1950;
Shawe-Taylor & Cristianini, 2004). At each round t =
1, 2, . . . ,, the adversary sends an instance xt ∈ Rd to the
learner. Then the learner chooses a hypothesis ft ∈ H ⊂ H
and output ft (xt ). After that the adversary reveals the true
output yt . The learner suffers a loss `(ft (xt ), yt ). The goal
is to minimize the regret defined as follows

The trade-off between regret and computational
cost is a fundamental problem for online kernel
regression, and previous algorithms worked on
the trade-off can not keep optimal regret bounds
at a sublinear computational complexity. In this
paper, we propose two new algorithms, AOGDALD and NONS-ALD, which can keep nearly optimal regret bounds at a sublinear computational
complexity, and give sufficient conditions under
which our algorithms work. Both algorithms dynamically maintain a group of nearly orthogonal
basis used to approximate the kernel mapping,
and keep nearly optimal regret bounds by controlling the approximate error. The number of
basis depends on the approximate error and the
decay rate of eigenvalues of the kernel matrix. If
the eigenvalues decay exponentially, then AOGDALD and p
NONS-ALD separately achieves a regret of O( L(f )) and O(deff (µ) ln T ) at a computational complexity in O(ln2 T ). If the eigenvalues decay polynomially with degree p ≥ 1,
then our algorithms keep the same regret bounds
at a computational complexity in o(T ) in the case
of p > 4 and p ≥ 10, respectively. L(f ) is the
cumulative losses of f and deff (µ) is the effective
dimension of the problem. The two regret bounds
are nearly optimal and are not comparable.

∀f ∈ H, Reg(f ) =

T
X
[`(ft (xt ), yt )−`(f (xt ), yt )]. (1)
t=1

One of the challenges minimizing the regret is to balance
the computational cost. Kernel
p online gradient descent
(KOGD) enjoys a regret of O( L(f )) at a computational
complexity (space and per-round time) in O(dT ) (Zinkevich, 2003;
Zhang et al., 2019), where
PTSrebro et al., 2010;p
L(f ) = t=1 `(f (xt ), yt ). O( L(f )) implies the “smallloss” bound (Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). Kernel
online Newton step (KONS) (Calandriello et al., 2017b) enjoys a regret of O(µkf k2H +deff (µ) ln T ) at a computational
complexity in O(T 2 ), where µ > 0 is a regularization parameter and deff (µ) is called effective dimension depending
on the decay rate of eigenvalues of the kernel matrix (Caponnetto & Vito, 2007; Rudi et al., 2015). The KAAR algorithm
(Gammerman et al., 2004) and kernel ridge regression algorithm (Zhdanov & Kalnishkan, 2013) enjoy the same regret
bound and computational complexity with KONS. If the
eigenvalues decay exponentially, then deff (µ) = O(ln Tµ )
(Li et al., 2019). If the eigenvalues decay polynomially with
degree p ≥ 1, then deff (µ) = O((T /µ)1/p ) (Jézéquel et al.,
2019a).

1. Introduction
Online kernel learning in the regime of the square loss is an
important non-parametric online learning method (Kivinen
et al., 2004; Vovk, 2006; Sahoo et al., 2014). The learning
protocol can be formulated as a game between a learner
and an adversary. Before the game, the learner selects a

The O(dT ) and O(T 2 ) computational complexities are prohibitive. Some approximate algorithms reduce the computational complexity at the expense of regret (Lu et al.,
2016; Calandriello et al., 2017b;a). The FOGD
p algorithm
approximating KOGD, achieves a regret of Õ( T L(f )/D)
at a computational complexity in O(dD) where D is a tunable parameter (Lu et al., 2016). Achieving the optimal
regret bound requires D = Ω(T ). The Sketched-KONS
algorithm approximating KONS, reduces the computational
complexity by a factor of γ −2 , but increases the regret by
γ > 1 (Calandriello et al., 2017b). The PROS-N-KONS

1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University,
Tianjin 300350, China. Correspondence to: Shizhong Liao
<szliao@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

