Federated Adversarial Learning: A Framework with Convergence Analysis

Xiaoxiao Li 1 Zhao Song 2 Jiaming Yang 3

Abstract

is feasible for non-IID clients.

Federated learning (FL) is a trending training
paradigm to utilize decentralized training data.
FL allows clients to update model parameters
locally for several epochs, then share them to
a global model for aggregation. This training
paradigm with multi-local step updating before
aggregation exposes unique vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks. Adversarial training is a popular and effective method to improve the robustness of networks against adversaries. In this
work, we formulate a general form of federated
adversarial learning (FAL) that is adapted from
adversarial learning in the centralized setting. On
the client side of FL training, FAL has an inner
loop to generate adversarial samples for adversarial training and an outer loop to update local
model parameters. On the server side, FAL aggregates local model updates and broadcast the
aggregated model. We design a global robust
training loss and formulate FAL training as a
min-max optimization problem. Unlike the convergence analysis in classical centralized training
that relies on the gradient direction, it is significantly harder to analyze the convergence in FAL
for three reasons: 1) the complexity of min-max
optimization, 2) model not updating in the gradient direction due to the multi-local updates on
the client-side before aggregation and 3) interclient heterogeneity. We address these challenges
by using appropriate gradient approximation and
coupling techniques and present the convergence
analysis in the over-parameterized regime. Our
main result theoretically shows that the minimum loss under our algorithm can converge to
 small with chosen learning rate and communication rounds. It is noteworthy that our analysis

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is playing an important role nowadays, as it allows different clients to train models collaboratively without sharing private information. One popular
FL paradigm called FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) introduces an easy-to-implement distributed learning method
without data sharing. Specifically, it requires a central
server to aggregate model updates computed by the local
clients (also known as nodes or participants) using local
imparticipable private data. Then with these updates aggregated, the central server use them to train a global model.
Nowadays deep learning model are exposed to severe
threats of adversarial samples. Namely, small adversarial
perturbations on the inputs will dramatically change the
outputs or output wrong answers (Szegedy et al., 2013). In
this regard, much effort has been made to improve neural
networks’ resistance to such perturbations using adversarial learning (Tramèr et al., 2017; Samangouei et al., 2018;
Madry et al., 2018). Among these studies, the adversarial
training scheme in (Madry et al., 2018) has achieved the
good robustness in practice. (Madry et al., 2018) proposes
an adversarial training scheme that uses projected gradient
descent (PGD) to generate alternative adversarial samples
as the augmented training set. Generating adversarial examples during neural network training is considered as one
of the most effective approaches for adversarial training up
to now according to the literature (Carlini & Wagner, 2017;
Athalye et al., 2018; Croce & Hein, 2020).
Although adversarial learning has attracted much attention in the centralized domain, its practice in FL is underexplored (Zizzo et al., 2020). Like training classical
deep neural networks that use gradient-based methods, FL
paradigms are vulnerable to adversarial samples. Adversarial learning in FL brings multiple open challenges due to
FL properties on low convergence rate, application in nonIID environments, and secure aggregation solutions. Hence
applying adversarial learning in an FL paradigm may lead
to unstable training loss and a lack of robustness. However,
a recent practical work (Zizzo et al., 2020) observed that
although there exist difficulties of convergence, the feder-

1
University of British Columbia, BC, Canada. 2 Adobe Research, CA, USA. 3 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
. Correspondence to: Zhao Song <zsong@adobe.com>, Jiaming
Yang <jiamyang@umich.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

