Disentangled Multiplex Graph Representation Learning

Yujie Mo 1 Yajie Lei 1 Jialie Shen 2 Xiaoshuang Shi 1 Heng Tao Shen 1 Xiaofeng Zhu 1 3

Abstract

Existing UMGRL methods can be roughly divided into two
categories, i.e., traditional unsupervised methods and selfsupervised methods. Traditional UMGRL methods aim
to extract hidden information without the help of labels
by random walk strategies (Dong et al., 2017) or proximity preservation (Shi et al., 2018a). However, they often
overemphasize proximity information and ignore node features. Inspired by the prosperity of self-supervised learning
(He et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021), self-supervised MGRL
methods (including intra-graph and inter-graph contrastive
learning methods) have been developed and achieved great
success in recent years. The intra-graph contrastive learning methods aim to capture the global properties, but they
ignore intrinsic associations among different graphs (Park
et al., 2020) and may lead to suboptimal representations.
To solve this issue, inter-graph contrastive learning methods are proposed as an alternative by modelling common
information among different graphs (Zhou et al., 2022). The
common information contains the consistency among all
graphs and has been verified to be the key component of
sample identification (Zhu et al., 2022).

Unsupervised multiplex graph representation
learning (UMGRL) has received increasing interest, but few works simultaneously focused on
the common and private information extraction.
In this paper, we argue that it is essential for conducting effective and robust UMGRL to extract
complete and clean common information, as well
as more-complementarity and less-noise private
information. To achieve this, we first investigate
disentangled representation learning for the multiplex graph to capture complete and clean common information, as well as design a contrastive
constraint to preserve the complementarity and
remove the noise in the private information. Moreover, we theoretically analyze that the common
and private representations learned by our method
are provably disentangled and contain more taskrelevant and less task-irrelevant information to
benefit downstream tasks. Extensive experiments
verify the superiority of the proposed method in
terms of different downstream tasks.

Although existing UMGRL especially inter-graph contrastive learning methods have achieved promising performance in many tasks, there are still some limitations to be
addressed. On the one hand, previous UMGRL methods are
designed to implicitly capture the common information, but
such a process is performed in a black box (Zhu et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2022). As a result, previous UMGRL methods
cannot verify if all common information has been obtained
(i.e., complete) and if it contained other confusing contents
(i.e., clean). On the other hand, apart from the common
information, the rest of the content specific to each graph
can be referred to as private information. Some private information is noise, but the other parts contain complementary
information, which is different from that in other graphs
and has been demonstrated to facilitate downstream tasks
in many fields (Xie et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022a). However, previous UMGRL methods do not consider private
information and thus ignoring its complementarity (Zhu
et al., 2022). Moreover, they generally fuse all representations from different graphs and thus including noise into the
fusion process (Jing et al., 2021a).

1. Introduction
Recently, multiplex graph representation learning (MGRL)
has emerged as a powerful tool to model complex relationships among nodes (Chu et al., 2019; Zhang & Kou, 2022).
In particular, unsupervised multiplex graph representation
learning (UMGRL) methods have attracted increasing attention due to the label availability for the training process and
have shown great potential in a wide range of applications,
such as anomaly detection and recommendation systems
(Chen et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022).
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Department of Computer Science, City, University of London, London, United Kingdom 3 Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology
of China, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Xiaofeng Zhu
<seanzhuxf@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Based on the above observations, it is a possible solution to
improve the effectiveness and robustness of UMGRL by ex1

