Tight and fast generalization error bound of graph embedding in metric space

Atsushi Suzuki 1 2 Atsushi Nitanda 3 4 Taiji Suzuki 2 4 Jing Wang 5 Feng Tian 6 Kenji Yamanishi 2

Abstract

ric space can outperform that in Euclidean space
with much smaller training data than the existing
bound has suggested.

Recent studies have experimentally shown that we
can achieve in non-Euclidean metric space effective and efficient graph embedding, which aims to
obtain the vertices’ representations reflecting the
graph’s structure in the metric space. Specifically,
graph embedding in hyperbolic space has experimentally succeeded in embedding graphs with
hierarchical-tree structure, e.g., data in natural
languages, social networks, and knowledge bases.
However, recent theoretical analyses have shown
a much higher upper bound on non-Euclidean
graph embedding’s generalization error than Euclidean one’s, where a high generalization error
indicates that the incompleteness and noise in
the data can significantly damage learning performance. It implies that the existing bound cannot guarantee the success of graph embedding in
non-Euclidean metric space in a practical training
data size, which can prevent non-Euclidean graph
embedding’s application in real problems. This
paper provides a novel upper bound of graph embedding’s generalization error by evaluating the
local Rademacher complexity of the model as a
function set of the distances of representation couples. Our bound clarifies that the performance of
graph embedding in non-Euclidean metric space,
including hyperbolic space, is better than the existing upper bounds suggest. Specifically, our new
upper bound is polynomial in the metric space’s
geometric radius R and can be O( S1 ) at the fastest,
where S is the training data size. Our bound is
significantly tighter and faster than the existing
one, which can be exponential in R and O( √1S ) at
the fastest. Specific calculations on example cases
show that graph embedding in non-Euclidean met-

1. Introduction
Graphs are a fundamental form of real-world entities and
their relations, such as words in natural languages, people
in social networks, and objects in knowledge bases. Here,
the vertices and edges of a graph correspond to the entities
and the relations among them, respectively. Based on the
formulation, graph embedding, learning representations of
the graph’s vertices in a metric space has enabled numerous applications for those data, such as machine translation
and sentiment analysis for natural language (Mikolov et al.,
2013; Pennington et al., 2014; Bojanowski et al., 2017;
Tifrea et al., 2019), and community detection and link prediction for social network data (Hoff et al., 2002; Perozzi
et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015b;a; Grover & Leskovec, 2016),
pathway prediction of biochemical network (Dale et al.,
2010; MA Basher & Hallam, 2021), and link prediction and
triplet classification for knowledge base (Nickel et al., 2011;
Bordes et al., 2013; Riedel et al., 2013; Nickel et al., 2016;
Trouillon et al., 2016; Ebisu & Ichise, 2018). The metric
space where we get representations of the vertices is called
the representation space in this paper. Graph embedding
aims to obtain representations such that the metric reflects
the relations defined by the edges. Specifically, we expect
the representations of a couple of vertices to be close if they
are connected and distant if not.
It is essential in the representation learning context to discuss a generic metric space, not only Euclidean space, as a
representation space, although Euclidean space or the inner
product space has been widely used (Mikolov et al., 2013;
Pennington et al., 2014; Bojanowski et al., 2017; Hoff et al.,
2002; Perozzi et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015b;a; Grover &
Leskovec, 2016). It is because many studies have experimentally shown the effectivity or representation learning
in non-Euclidean metric space, in particular, hyperbolic
space (Nickel & Kiela, 2017; Ganea et al., 2018a; Sala et al.,
2018; Ganea et al., 2018b; Chami et al., 2019; Gülçehre
et al., 2019; Tifrea et al., 2019; Balazevic et al., 2019) since
hyperbolic space can represent a graph with a hierarchical
tree-like structure with arbitrarily small approximation error

1

King’s College London, UK 2 The Univerity of Tokyo,
Japan 3 Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan 4 RIKEN,
Japan 5 University of Greenwich, UK 6 Duke Kunshan University, China. Correspondence to: Atsushi Suzuki <atsushi.suzuki.rd@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

