Equivariance with Learned Canonicalization Functions

Sékou-Oumar Kaba * 1 2 Arnab Kumar Mondal * 1 2 Yan Zhang 3 Yoshua Bengio 4 2 Siamak Ravanbakhsh 1 2

Abstract
Symmetry-based neural networks often constrain
the architecture in order to achieve invariance or
equivariance to a group of transformations. In
this paper, we propose an alternative that avoids
this architectural constraint by learning to produce canonical representations of the data. These
canonicalization functions can readily be plugged
into non-equivariant backbone architectures. We
offer explicit ways to implement them for some
groups of interest. We show that this approach
enjoys universality while providing interpretable
insights. Our main hypothesis, supported by our
empirical results, is that learning a small neural network to perform canonicalization is better
than using predefined heuristics. Our experiments
show that learning the canonicalization function
is competitive with existing techniques for learning equivariant functions across many tasks, including image classification, N -body dynamics
prediction, point cloud classification and part segmentation, while being faster across the board.
Figure 1: A classification of different frameworks for equivariant

1

predictions. In this example, the task is to restyle an MNIST digit
in a rotation equivariant way. We propose a class of models that
falls in the single-view-plus-transformation framework.

Introduction

The problem of designing machine learning models that
properly exploit the structure and symmetry of the data is
becoming more important as the field is broadening its scope
to more complex problems. In multiple applications, the
transformations with respect to which we require a model
to be invariant or equivariant are known and provide a
strong inductive bias (e.g., Bronstein et al., 2021; Bogatskiy
et al., 2022; van der Pol et al., 2020; Mondal et al., 2020;
Celledoni et al., 2021).

gies with human cognition is fruitful here. Human pattern
recognition handles some symmetries with relative ease.
When data is transformed in a way that preserves its essential characteristics, we precisely know if and how we should
adapt our response.
One context in which this has been particularly well-studied
in cognitive science is visual shape recognition. Experiments have shown that subjects can accurately distinguish
between different orientations of an object and actual modifications to the structure of an object (Shepard & Metzler,
1971; Carpenter & Eisenberg, 1978).

As is often the case, taking a step back and drawing analo*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, McGill University, Montréal, Canada 2 Mila - Quebec Artficial Intelligence
Institute, Montréal, Canada 3 Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montréal,
Canada 4 DIRO, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Sékou-Oumar Kaba <kabaseko@mila.quebec>.

There are multiple ways in which this could be achieved. According to Tarr & Pinker (1989), theories of invariant shape
recognition broadly fall into three categories: viewpointindependent models, in which object representations depend only on invariants features, multiple-view models in

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

