Boosting Offline Reinforcement Learning with Action Preference Query

Qisen Yang * 1 Shenzhi Wang * 1 Matthieu Gaetan Lin 2 Shiji Song 1 Gao Huang 1

Abstract

tional agents (Singla et al., 2021), healthcare (Liu et al.,
2020), and self-driving (Kiran et al., 2021). Therefore,
offline RL, where agents only learn from a pre-collected
dataset without any additional online interaction, emerges
and thrives (Levine et al., 2020).

Training practical agents usually involve offline
and online reinforcement learning (RL) to balance
the policy’s performance and interaction costs. In
particular, online fine-tuning has become a commonly used method to correct the erroneous estimates of out-of-distribution data learned in the offline training phase. However, even limited online
interactions can be inaccessible or catastrophic
for high-stake scenarios like healthcare and autonomous driving. In this work, we introduce an
interaction-free training scheme dubbed Offlinewith-Action-Preferences (OAP). The main insight
is that, compared to online fine-tuning, querying
the preferences between pre-collected and learned
actions can be equally or even more helpful to the
erroneous estimate problem. By adaptively encouraging or suppressing policy constraint according to action preferences, OAP could distinguish
overestimation from beneficial policy improvement and thus attains a more accurate evaluation
of unseen data. Theoretically, we prove a lower
bound of the behavior policy’s performance improvement brought by OAP. Moreover, comprehensive experiments on the D4RL benchmark and
state-of-the-art algorithms demonstrate that OAP
yields higher (29% on average) scores, especially
on challenging AntMaze tasks (98% higher).

Start Location

Target Location
Optimal Action

Collected Action
Current Action

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. An intuitive example of action preferences. (a) The task
is to find the shortest path. (b) If the current policy acts better than
the pre-collected action, it shows that the current learning direction
is right and should be supported. (c) Otherwise, the OOD data are
overestimated, and the distributional shift should be suppressed.

Moreover, learning from a static dataset also makes offline
RL suffer from the distributional shift, i.e., the gap between
state-action distributions of the training data and the test
environment. It hinders the agent’s performance due to
off-policy bootstrapping error accumulation caused by outof-distribution (OOD) data, i.e., data that is out of the distribution of the offline dataset. This problem is inevitable
because there exists a counterfactual inference problem:
given data that resulted from a set of decisions, infer the
consequence of a different set of decisions (Levine et al.,
2020). Hence, offline RL agents are usually fine-tuned by
further online training (Nair et al., 2020; Kostrikov et al.,
2022), where erroneous estimates of OOD data could be
corrected through accurate rewards and real-time transitions.
Notably, unlike regular online algorithms, the online finetuning phase usually has a limited interaction budget.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms iteratively collect experience by interacting with the environment (Sutton & Barto, 1998). However, such interactions are impractical in many applications, either because online data collection is expensive or dangerous (Yue
et al., 2023), e.g. in robotics(Singh et al., 2022), educa-

Nevertheless, for high-risk scenarios like healthcare and
autonomous driving, even a few online interactions with the
environment can cause catastrophic losses. Additionally,
designing an appropriate reward function takes significant
effort for many real-world environments. In this case, developing a safer approach to boosting offline RL without
any online interactions is valuable. Supposing that there
is a measure where the optimality of given actions can be
queried, it may be equally or even more helpful to the erro-

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Department of Computer Science, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Gao Huang <gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

