A Closer Look at the Intervention Procedure of Concept Bottleneck Models

Sungbin Shin 1 Yohan Jo 2 * Sungsoo Ahn 1 Namhoon Lee 1

Concept bottleneck models (CBMs) are a class
of interpretable neural network models that predict the target response of a given input based
on its high-level concepts. Unlike the standard
end-to-end models, CBMs enable domain experts
to intervene on the predicted concepts and rectify
any mistakes at test time, so that more accurate
task predictions can be made at the end. While
such intervenability provides a powerful avenue
of control, many aspects of the intervention procedure remain rather unexplored. In this work,
we develop various ways of selecting intervening
concepts to improve the intervention effectiveness and conduct an array of in-depth analyses as
to how they evolve under different circumstances.
Specifically, we find that an informed intervention
strategy can reduce the task error more than ten
times compared to the current baseline under the
same amount of intervention counts in realistic
settings, and yet, this can vary quite significantly
when taking into account different intervention
granularity. We verify our findings through comprehensive evaluations, not only on the standard
real datasets, but also on synthetic datasets that we
generate based on a set of different causal graphs.
We further discover some major pitfalls of the current practices which, without a proper addressing,
raise concerns on reliability and fairness of the
intervention procedure.

𝑔
Input
(𝑥)

..
.
..
.

𝑓
Target
(𝑦)

Concepts
(𝑐)

(a) Diagram of CBMs

Task error (%)

100

Abstract

80
60
40
20
0

0

3

6

9

12

15

Concept error (number)

(b) Task vs. Concept errors

Figure 1: (a) Given input data CBMs first predict its concepts (g : x → c), and then based on which it makes a
subsequent prediction for the target response (f : c → y).
(b) Average task error (mis-classification rate) vs. the number of incorrectly predicted concepts (on the CUB dataset).
The task error increases rapidly as more mistakes are made
in concept prediction; e.g., making a single mistake yields
25% increase in task error.

interpretable models have been proposed including, for example, those using concept activation vectors (Kim et al.,
2018; Ghorbani et al., 2019), relating pixel contributions
to image classification (Zhou et al., 2016; Selvaraju et al.,
2017), or building intrinsically interpretable architectures
(Alvarez Melis & Jaakkola, 2018).
Concept bottleneck models (CBMs) are among these to empower interpretability (Koh et al., 2020; Bahadori & Heckerman, 2021; Margeloiu et al., 2021; Mahinpei et al., 2021;
Sawada & Nakamura, 2022; Zarlenga et al., 2022). Unlike
standard end-to-end models, CBMs work in two steps: they
first predict human-interpretable properties of a given input called concepts, and based on which, they subsequently
make the final prediction for the given task. For instance,
CBMs may classify the species of a bird based on its wing
pattern or leg color rather than straight from the raw pixel
values (see Figure 1a).

1. Introduction
While deep learning has made rapid strides in recent years
(LeCun et al., 2015; Jordan & Mitchell, 2015), the standard
neural network models are not quite explainable, in that
their decision-making process is neither straightforward to
account for nor easy to control. To tackle this issue, various

Revisited recently by Koh et al. (2020), this classic idea
further facilitates human-model interaction in addition to
plain interpretability, in that it allows one to intervene on
the predicted concepts at test time, such that the subsequent
prediction is made based on the rectified concept values.
Notably, such intervention must be treated attentively as
we find that correcting only a small number of mistakes on
mis-predicted concepts can lead to a significant increase in

*

This work is not associated with Amazon. 1 POSTECH, South
Korea 2 Amazon – Alexa AI, USA. Correspondence to: Sungbin
Shin <ssbin4@postech.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

