Accounting For Informative Sampling When Learning to Forecast Treatment
Outcomes Over Time
Toon Vanderschueren * 1 2 Alicia Curth * 3 Wouter Verbeke 1 Mihaela van der Schaar 3 4

Abstract

Schaar, 2021b). Effectively using real data for estimating
such effects requires dealing with unique challenges arising from its observational nature. Therefore, the recent
ML literature on treatment effect estimation has paid great
attention to solving methodological issues arising due to
treatment assignment biases in static (Shalit et al., 2017)
and longitudinal settings (Bica et al., 2019). This paper
focuses on another challenge that has been largely overlooked by the ML literature on treatment effect estimation,
despite its relevance and prevalence in practice: the problem
of informative sampling, sometimes also called informed
presence bias (Goldstein et al., 2016). That is, in observational data, the timing at which an observation was made is
often not random, but rather indicative of some underlying
information relevant to the estimation problem of interest.

Machine learning (ML) holds great potential for
accurately forecasting treatment outcomes over
time, which could ultimately enable the adoption of more individualized treatment strategies in
many practical applications. However, a significant challenge that has been largely overlooked by
the ML literature on this topic is the presence of
informative sampling in observational data. When
instances are observed irregularly over time, sampling times are typically not random, but rather
informative–depending on the instance’s characteristics, past outcomes, and administered treatments. In this work, we formalize informative
sampling as a covariate shift problem and show
that it can prohibit accurate estimation of treatment outcomes if not properly accounted for. To
overcome this challenge, we present a general
framework for learning treatment outcomes in the
presence of informative sampling using inverse
intensity-weighting, and propose a novel method,
TESAR-CDE, that instantiates this framework using Neural CDEs. Using a simulation environment based on a clinical use case, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in learning under informative sampling.

In electronic health records, for example, patients are typically not recorded randomly over time, but informatively
(Lin et al., 2004): observations are only recorded at irregular visits to a health care provider, with visit times typically
depending on the patient’s past and present characteristics,
evolving health state, and administered treatments. The resulting sampling mechanism is inherently intertwined with
the patient’s observed outcomes and treatments, with more
check-ups being scheduled for patients in critical condition
or to follow up after a treatment. Throughout this work,
we will refer to examples from health care due to their societal relevance and intuitive appeal, but the problem of
informative sampling appears in a wide variety of other
domains, such as policy design (Lin et al., 2004), epidemiology (Del Moral & Murray, 2015), economics (Clithero,
2018), or maintenance (Vanderschueren et al., 2023).

1. Introduction
Due to its importance in applications ranging from economics to healthcare and marketing, the problem of estimating personalized causal effects of actions – e.g., treatments,
interventions, or policies – has received wide attention in the
recent machine learning (ML) literature (Curth & van der

Informative sampling poses an important challenge as it
can bias estimates of causal effects when not accounted
for (Robins et al., 1995; Lin et al., 2004; McCulloch et al.,
2016). Intuitively, informative sampling leads to relatively
more measurements of abnormal values and fewer measurements of normal values and, therefore, selection bias in the
data (Liu et al., 2008; Gasparini et al., 2020). Standard statistical methods can estimate causal effects in the presence
of informative sampling given a well-specified model of
the sampling mechanism (Hernán et al., 2009). However,
existing approaches for modeling the sampling mechanism
from the (bio)statistics literature assume a certain parametric

*
Equal contribution 1 Decision Sciences and Information
Management, KU Leuven 2 Applied Mathematics, University of Antwerp 3 DAMTP, University of Cambridge 4 The
Alan Turing Institute. Correspondence to: Toon Vanderschueren <toon.vanderschueren@kuleuven.be>, Alicia Curth
<amc253@cam.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

