Double-Weighting for Covariate Shift Adaptation

José I. Segovia-Martı́n 1 Santiago Mazuelas 1 2 Anqi Liu 3

Abstract

2008)), while the conditional label distribution stays the
same. In such scenarios, conventional supervised classification methods, like empirical risk minimization, can perform poorly because the empirical risk is approximating the
training expected risk, rather than the test expected risk.

Supervised learning is often affected by a covariate shift in which the marginal distributions
of instances (covariates x) of training and testing samples ptr (x) and pte (x) are different but
the label conditionals coincide. Existing approaches address such covariate shift by either
using the ratio pte (x)/ptr (x) to weight training
samples (reweighted methods) or using the ratio
ptr (x)/pte (x) to weight testing samples (robust
methods). However, the performance of such approaches can be poor under support mismatch
or when the above ratios take large values. We
propose a minimax risk classification (MRC) approach for covariate shift adaptation that avoids
such limitations by weighting both training and
testing samples. In addition, we develop effective
techniques that obtain both sets of weights and
generalize the conventional kernel mean matching method. We provide novel generalization
bounds for our method that show a significant increase in the effective sample size compared with
reweighted methods. The proposed method also
achieves enhanced classification performance in
both synthetic and empirical experiments.

Most of the existing methods for covariate shift
adaptation are based on the reweighted approach
(Sugiyama & Kawanabe, 2012; Quiñonero-Candela et al.,
2008; Cortes et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2006). These
methods weight loss functions at training using the ratio
pte (x)/ptr (x) so that training samples more likely in
the test distribution are assigned higher weights (see
Fig. 1), increasing their relevance at training. Such ratios
can be estimated by using training and testing instances
(Tsuboi et al., 2009; Yamada et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2013).
Reweighted methods are designed for situations where the
support of ptr contains that of pte . However, even if such
condition is satisfied, reweighted methods may achieve
poor performances if the ratio pte (x)/ptr (x) take large
values at certain training samples, leading to inaccurate
estimations of expected losses (see e.g., (Cortes & Mohri,
2014; Reddi et al., 2015)). Such problems can be alleviated by flattening the above ratio (Shimodaira, 2000;
Yamada et al., 2011), by utilizing a regularization term
based on the unweighted solution (Reddi et al., 2015), and
by directly estimating weights for training samples through
kernel mean matching (KMM) methods (Gretton et al.,
2008; Huang et al., 2006).

1. Introduction

Robust methods for covariate shift adaptation
(Liu & Ziebart, 2014; 2017; Chen et al., 2016) are derived from a distributionally robust learning framework,
where the feature expectation matching constraints are
obtained from training samples but the adversarial risk
is defined on the test distribution. Such methods weight
feature functions at testing using the ratio ptr (x)/pte (x)
(see Fig. 1). The resulting parametric form produces
less confident predictions when testing samples are less
likely in the training distribution. Robust methods are
designed for situations where the support of pte contains
that of ptr . However, even if such condition is satisfied,
robust methods may achieve poor performances if the ratio
ptr (x)/pte (x) take large values at certain testing samples,
leading to overconfident classification rules.

Most supervised learning methods assume that training
and testing samples are drawn i.i.d. from the same underlying distribution. However, practical scenarios are often affected by a covariate shift in which the marginal
distributions of instances (covariates x) of training and
testing samples ptr (x) and pte (x) are different (see e.g.,
(Sugiyama & Kawanabe, 2012; Quiñonero-Candela et al.,
1
Basque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM), Bilbao,
Spain 2 IKERBASQUE-Basque Foundation for Science 3 CS department, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. Correspondence to: José
I. Segovia-Martı́n <jsegovia@bcamath.org>, Santiago Mazuelas
<smazuelas@bcamath.org>, Anqi Liu <aliu@cs.jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

