Doubly Adversarial Federated Bandits

Jialin Yi 1 Milan Vojnović 1

Abstract

problems. In standard multi-armed bandit problems, a learning agent needs to balance the trade-off between exploring
various arms in order to learn how much rewarding they are
and selecting high-rewarding arms. In federated bandit problems, multiple heterogeneous agents collaborate with each
other to maximize their cumulative rewards. The challenge
here is to design decentralized collaborative algorithms to
find a globally best arm for all agents while keeping their
raw data decentralized.

We study a new non-stochastic federated multiarmed bandit problem with multiple agents collaborating via a communication network. The
losses of the arms are assigned by an oblivious
adversary that specifies the loss of each arm not
only for each time step but also for each agent,
which we call “doubly adversarial”. In this setting, different agents may choose the same arm in
the same time step but observe different feedback.
The goal of each agent is to find a globally best
arm in hindsight that has the lowest cumulative
loss averaged over all agents, which necessities
the communication among agents. We provide
regret lower bounds for any federated bandit algorithm under different settings, when agents have
access to full-information feedback, or the bandit
feedback. For the bandit feedback setting, we propose a near-optimal federated bandit algorithm
called F ED E XP 3. Our algorithm gives a positive
answer to an open question proposed in (CesaBianchi et al., 2016): F ED E XP 3 can guarantee a
sub-linear regret without exchanging sequences of
selected arm identities or loss sequences among
agents. We also provide numerical evaluations of
our algorithm to validate our theoretical results
and demonstrate its effectiveness on synthetic and
real-world datasets.

Finding a globally best arm with raw arm or loss sequences
stored in a distributed system has ubiquitous applications in
many systems built with a network of learning agents. One
application is in recommender systems where different recommendation app clients (i.e. agents) in a communication
network collaborate with each other to find news articles
(i.e. arms) that are popular among all users within a specific
region, which can be helpful to solve the cold start problem
(Li et al., 2010; Yi et al., 2021). In this setting, the system
avoids the exchange of users’ browsing history (i.e. arm or
loss sequences) between different clients for better privacy
protection. Another motivation is in international collaborative drug discovery research, where different countries (i.e.
agents) cooperate with each other to find a drug (i.e. arm)
that is uniformly effective for all patients across the world
(Varatharajah & Berry, 2022). To protect the privacy of the
patients involved in the research, the exact treatment history
of specific patients (i.e. arm or loss sequences) should not
be shared during the collaboration.
The federated bandit problems are focused on identifying a
globally best arm (pure exploration) or maximizing the cumulative group reward (regret minimization) in face of heterogeneous feedback from different agents for the same arm,
which has gained much attention in recent years (Dubey &
Pentland, 2020; Zhu et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021; Shi
et al., 2021; Réda et al., 2022). In prior work, heterogeneous
feedbacks received by different agents are modeled as samples from some unknown but fixed distributions. Though
this formulation of heterogeneous feedback allows elegant
statistical analysis of the regret, it may not be adequate
for dynamic (non-stationary) environments. For example,
consider the task of finding popular news articles within a
region mentioned above. The popularity of news articles
on different topics can be time-varying, e.g. the news on
football may become most popular during the FIFA World

1. Introduction
There is a rising trend of research on federated learning,
which coordinates multiple heterogeneous agents to collectively train a learning algorithm, while keeping the raw data
decentralized (Kairouz et al., 2021). We consider the federated learning variant of a multi-armed bandit problem which
is one of the most fundamental sequential decision making
1

Department of Statistics, London School of Economics and
Political Science, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Jialin Yi <j.yi8@lse.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

