Explaining Reinforcement Learning with Shapley Values

Daniel Beechey 1 Thomas M. S. Smith 1 Özgür Şimşek 1

Abstract

approach from game theory for identifying the contribution
of individual players to the outcome of a cooperative game.
Shapley values are the result of a rigorous mathematical formulation that satisfies four axioms of fairness. In supervised
learning, Shapley values explain a model by expressing the
contribution of individual features to the predictions of the
model.

For reinforcement learning systems to be widely
adopted, their users must understand and trust
them. We present a theoretical analysis of explaining reinforcement learning using Shapley values,
following a principled approach from game theory
for identifying the contribution of individual players to the outcome of a cooperative game. We call
this general framework Shapley Values for Explaining Reinforcement Learning (SVERL). Our
analysis exposes the limitations of earlier uses
of Shapley values in reinforcement learning. We
then develop an approach that uses Shapley values
to explain agent performance. In a variety of domains, SVERL produces meaningful explanations
that match and supplement human intuition.

We analyse, from first principles, how Shapley values can be
used to explain reinforcement learning. We make three main
contributions. First, we develop a theoretical framework for
using Shapley values in the context of reinforcement learning, showing that earlier uses of Shapley values in reinforcement learning are incorrect or incomplete. Secondly, we
consider which aspects of reinforcement learning are important to explain, arguing that explaining agent performance is
an important and overlooked element. Thirdly, we develop a
principled approach that identifies the contributions of state
features to the performance of an agent.

1. Introduction

We call this general framework Shapley Values for Explaining Reinforcement Learning (SVERL). In a variety
of domains, SVERL produces meaningful explanations that
match and supplement human intuition.

Reinforcement learning systems have potential for significant impact in real-world applications. To be widely
adopted, it is useful for these systems to not only perform
well but also be explainable.

2. Background

Methods for explaining reinforcement learning can be categorised as intrinsically interpretable or post-hoc. Intrinsically interpretable approaches improve the transparency of
models by substituting an opaque model with a more understandable one, such as a decision tree. This approach often
leads to a reduction in representational power. In contrast,
post-hoc methods hold no constraints on the complexity
of the model, treating it as a black box. Reinforcement
learning systems with the largest potential to positively benefit society depend on function approximators with large
representational power, such as deep neural networks. We
therefore focus on post-hoc explanation methods.

We model the interaction of an agent with its environment
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), defined by the tuple (S, A, p, r, γ, p0 ), where S denotes the set of states, A
the set of actions, p : S × A × S → [0, 1] the transition
dynamics, r : S × A → R the reward function, γ ∈ [0, 1]
the discount factor, and p0 : S → [0, 1] the initial state
distribution. At decision stage t, t ≥ 0, the agent observes
the current state of the environment, st ∈ S, and executes
action at ∈ A(st ). Consequently, the environment transitions to a new state, st+1 ∼ p(·|st , at ), and returns reward
rt+1 whose expected value is r(st , at ). The objective is to
learn a policyP
π that maximises the expected return Eπ [Gt ],
∞
where Gt = k=t γ k rk+1 . The policy can be stochastic,
π : S × A → [0, 1], or deterministic, π : S → A. A statevalue function, V π (s), gives the expected return from state s
when following policy π, V π (s) = Eπ [Gt |st = s]. A stateaction value function, Qπ (s, a), gives the expected return
from state s if the agent executes action a and follows policy
π thereafter, Qπ (s, a) = Eπ [Gt |st = s, at = a]. The opti-

An established, post-hoc explanation method for supervised
learning uses Shapley values (Shapley, 1953), a principled
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Bath, UK.
Correspondence to: Daniel Beechey <djeb20@bath.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

