Simplified Temporal Consistency Reinforcement Learning

Yi Zhao 1 Wenshuai Zhao 1 Rinu Boney 2 Juho Kannala 2 Joni Pajarinen 1

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is able to solve complex sequential decision-making tasks but is currently limited by sample efficiency and required
computation. To improve sample efficiency, recent work focuses on model-based RL which interleaves model learning with planning. Recent
methods further utilize policy learning, value estimation, and, self-supervised learning as auxiliary
objectives. In this paper we show that, surprisingly, a simple representation learning approach
relying only on a latent dynamics model trained
by latent temporal consistency is sufficient for
high-performance RL. This applies when using
pure planning with a dynamics model conditioned
on the representation, but, also when utilizing
the representation as policy and value function
features in model-free RL. In experiments, our
approach learns an accurate dynamics model to
solve challenging high-dimensional locomotion
tasks with online planners while being 4.1× faster
to train compared to ensemble-based methods.
With model-free RL without planning, especially
on high-dimensional tasks, such as the Deepmind Control Suite Humanoid and Dog tasks, our
approach outperforms model-free methods by a
large margin and matches model-based methods’
sample efficiency while training 2.4× faster.

Policy

Dog Run

Humanoid Walk
800

600
400
200

TCRL
SAC
TD-MPC

0
0

10

20
30
Clock Time (h)

40

Episode Return

Episode Return

800

Value

600
400
200
0

0

10

20
30
Clock Time (h)

40

Figure 1. Top: Model architecture for computing our temporal
consistency reinforcement learning (TCRL) latent state ẑt . At
each time step t the model encodes observation ot into a latent
state ẑt using a neural network. The latent dynamics model dϕ
predicts the next latent state ẑt+1 using ẑt and action at . A standard momentum encoder eθ− prevents collapse of the latent state
representation. We use the cosine loss between the latent state
and the momentum encoded latent state, denoted by a dashed line,
for training. The reward function, omitted for clarity, is trained
with the standard MSE loss. This simple model works surprisingly
well providing a trained dynamics model for planning experiments,
and, in model-free RL experiments, the trained latent states ẑt are
used as inputs to policy and value functions. Bottom: Episodic
returns of TCRL compared to SAC and TD-MPC with respect to
computing time on high-dimensional Humanoid and Dog tasks.
Agents are trained with 5 million environment steps, and we plot 5
runs with shaded areas denoting 95% confidence intervals.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has shown promising
results in games (Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Bellemare et al.,
2013), animation (Peng et al., 2018) and robotics (Wu et al.,
2022; Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020). However,
DRL is data-demanding requiring millions of data points
to train limiting the applicability of DRL in real-world scenarios. To make DRL more sample-efficient, motivated

by the success of self-supervised learning in both vision
and language tasks, a series of recent works (Ma et al.,
2020; Schwarzer et al., 2021; Laskin et al., 2020) introduce
self-supervised auxiliary losses. The aim is to improve representation learning for policy and value functions. The
adopted self-supervised losses include image reconstruction
(Yarats et al., 2021; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Watter et al.,
2015) and maximizing the similarity between two augmentations of the same image (contrastive training) (Laskin et al.,
2020). However, most of these methods demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method on pixel-based tasks.
And their conclusions can not always directly transfer to

1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Aalto
University, Finland 2 Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland. Correspondence to: Yi Zhao <yi.zhao@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

