Pruning via Sparsity-indexed ODE: a Continuous Sparsity Viewpoint

Zhanfeng Mo 1 Haosen Shi 1 2 Sinno Jialin Pan 1 3

Abstract

the era of big models, model compression methods are essential for the pursuit of acceleration and the deployment of
large models on edge devices.

Neural pruning, which involves identifying the
optimal sparse subnetwork, is a key technique for
reducing the complexity and improving the efficiency of deep neural networks. To address the
challenge of solving neural pruning at a specific
sparsity level directly, we investigate the evolution of optimal subnetworks with continuously
increasing sparsity, which can provide insight into
how to transform an unpruned dense model into
an optimal subnetwork with any desired level of
sparsity. In this paper, we proposed a novel pruning framework, coined Sparsity-indexed ODE
(SpODE) that provides explicit guidance on how
to best preserve model performance while ensuring an infinitesimal increase in model sparsity.
On top of this, we develop a pruning algorithm,
termed Pruning via Sparsity-indexed ODE (PSO),
that enables effective pruning via traveling along
the SpODE path. Empirical experiments show
that PSO achieves either better or comparable performance compared to state-of-the-art baselines
across various pruning settings. Our implementations are now available on GitHub1 .

As a highly promising compression paradigm, neural pruning has garnered increasing attention from both academia
and industry (Hoefler et al., 2021; Liang et al., 2021). A
neural pruner aims to eliminate the majority of the parameters in a dense reference model while maximizing retention
of model performance until a specific parameter budget is
reached. This pruning procedure is typically followed by
a retraining procedure to regain model performance (Han
et al., 2016).
Pruned models often suffer from a significant drop in performance. This is due to the fact that identifying the optimal sparse subnetwork is a high-dimensional zero-one programming problem, which is NP-hard and challenging to
solve (Papadimitriou & Steiglitz, 1998). Numerous pruning
methods (a.k.a pruners) have been developed to address
this intractable problem, including score-based pruners,
regularization-based pruners, sparse-training pruners, etc.
Score-based pruners (Han et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2020; Rachwan et al., 2022) first evaluate the
importance scores of each weight and then wipe out the
unimportant parameters with the lowest scores. The importance score function is designed to reflect the performance
drop when a typical parameter is pruned. However, these importance scores fail to provide strong guarantees in highly
sparse regimes, since they are only valid within the current model’s vicinity, and merely represent an upper bound
on the potential pruning error. When the target sparsity is
extremely high, the importance scores are inclined to provide misleading pruning guidance. An alternative approach
is to perform regularization-based pruning (Louizos et al.,
2018; Chen et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2018), which tries
to address the hard pruning problem by relaxing the hard
sparsity constraints to softer ones. Specifically, the pruner
optimizes over the parameter mask variables to minimize
a penalized objective, which is essentially a linear combination of the training loss and soft sparsity regularization.
However, the performance of regularization-based pruners
is limited in practice because the soft sparsity penalty is
numerically unstable. To alleviate this problem, sparsetraining approaches are proposed in (Zhu & Gupta, 2018;
Frankle & Carbin, 2019) to identify a sparse subnetwork

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been an unprecedented surge in the
widespread use of overparameterized neural networks in various complex real-world applications, due to the astounding
success of big models in areas such as vision (Radosavovic
et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), language generation
(Brown et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2018), speech recognition
(Babu et al., 2021), recommendation (Chen et al., 2019),
among others (Janner et al., 2021; Jumper et al., 2021). In
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU,
Singapore 2 Continental-NTU Corporate Lab, NTU Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong. Correspondence to: Zhanfeng Mo <ZHANFENG001@ntu.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/mzf666/sparsity-indexed-ode

1

