On Second-Order Scoring Rules for Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification

Viktor Bengs 1 2 Eyke Hüllermeier 1 2 Willem Waegeman 3

Abstract

as follows: Assuming that outcomes cannot be predicted
deterministically, and hence taking a conditional probability
p∗ = p∗ (· | x) on Y as the ground-truth, it is natural to train
a probabilistic predictor producing estimates p̂ = p̂(· | x).
Such estimates capture aleatoric uncertainty about the actual
outcome y ∈ Y, i.e., inherent randomness that the learner
cannot get rid of (even with perfect knowledge about p∗ ,
the outcome y remains random to some extent). However,
it does not allow the learner to express its epistemic uncertainty, namely, its lack of knowledge about how accurately
p̂ approximates p∗ . To capture this uncertainty as well, the
learner is allowed to predict a second-order distribution Q.
In other words, instead of committing to a single (point)
prediction p̂, the learner assigns probabilities Q(p) to all
candidate distributions p∗ .

It is well known that accurate probabilistic predictors can be trained through empirical risk minimisation with proper scoring rules as loss functions.
While such learners capture so-called aleatoric
uncertainty of predictions, various machine learning methods have recently been developed with
the goal to let the learner also represent its epistemic uncertainty, i.e., the uncertainty caused by a
lack of knowledge and data. An emerging branch
of the literature proposes the use of a secondorder learner that provides predictions in terms of
distributions on probability distributions. However, recent work has revealed serious theoretical
shortcomings for second-order predictors based
on loss minimisation. In this paper, we generalise these findings and prove a more fundamental
result: There seems to be no loss function that
provides an incentive for a second-order learner
to faithfully represent its epistemic uncertainty in
the same manner as proper scoring rules do for
standard (first-order) learners. As a main mathematical tool to prove this result, we introduce the
generalised notion of second-order scoring rules.

How to train a second-order predictor H on empirical data
in the form of tuples (x, y) ∈ X ×Y, as commonly assumed
in supervised learning? To this end, several authors have
proposed extensions of empirical risk minimisation, i.e., to
find a predictor H that minimises the (regularised) loss on
the training data. Obviously, this requires a second-order
loss function L2 that compares second-order predictions
with actual outcomes: L2 (Q, y) is the loss suffered by the
learner when predicting Q = H(x) and observing outcome
y. Different loss functions of this kind have been proposed
for classification (Sensoy et al., 2018; Malinin & Gales,
2018; 2019; Malinin et al., 2020b; Charpentier et al., 2020;
Huseljic et al., 2020; Kopetzki et al., 2021; Tsiligkaridis,
2021; Bao et al., 2021; Hammam et al., 2022) and regression
(Amini et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2021; Malinin et al., 2020a;
Charpentier et al., 2022; Oh & Shin, 2022; Pandey & Yu,
2022).

1. Introduction
The representation and quantification of uncertainty in machine learning, most notably of predictive uncertainty in
the setting of supervised learning, has recently attracted
increasing attention (Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021). Going beyond standard probabilistic prediction, various methods have been proposed that seek to distinguish between
so-called aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty (Senge et al.,
2014; Kendall & Gal, 2017). One way to do so is to learn
second-order predictors H : X −→ P(P(Y)) mapping a
query instance x to a probability distribution on the probability distributions over the outcome space Y. This is motivated

Focusing on the classification setting, Bengs et al. (2022)
have shown theoretical shortcomings of second-order loss
minimisation. In particular, they prove that the second-order
loss functions proposed in the literature do not incentivise
the learner to predict its epistemic uncertainty in a faithful
way. Similar issues have been revealed by Meinert et al.
(2022) for empirical loss minimisation in the regression
setting. While criticising specific types of losses, none
of these papers strictly excludes the existence of other loss
functions that may provide the right incentive for the learner.

1

LMU Munich, Germany 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany 3 Ghent University, Belgium. Correspondence to:
Viktor Bengs <viktor.bengs@lmu.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we therefore strive for a more general result,

1

