Do Embodied Agents Dream of Pixelated Sheep?:
Embodied Decision Making using Language Guided World Modelling

Kolby Nottingham 1 Prithviraj Ammanabrolu 2 Alane Suhr 2
Yejin Choi 3 2 Hannaneh Hajishirzi 3 2 Sameer Singh 1 2 Roy Fox 1

Abstract

pretraining or external knowledge (Agarwal et al., 2022).
In an effort to shift away from this paradigm, we focus on
the task of creating embodied RL agents that can effectively
exploit large-scale external knowledge sources presented in
the form of pretrained large language models (LLMs).

Reinforcement learning (RL) agents typically
learn tabula rasa, without prior knowledge of the
world. However, if initialized with knowledge of
high-level subgoals and transitions between subgoals, RL agents could utilize this Abstract World
Model (AWM) for planning and exploration. We
propose using few-shot large language models
(LLMs) to hypothesize an AWM, that will be verified through world experience, to improve sample
efficiency of RL agents. Our DECKARD agent
applies LLM-guided exploration to item crafting in Minecraft in two phases: (1) the Dream
phase where the agent uses an LLM to decompose a task into a sequence of subgoals, the hypothesized AWM; and (2) the Wake phase where
the agent learns a modular policy for each subgoal and verifies or corrects the hypothesized
AWM. Our method of hypothesizing an AWM
with LLMs and then verifying the AWM based
on agent experience not only increases sample
efficiency over contemporary methods by an order of magnitude but is also robust to and corrects errors in the LLM—successfully blending
noisy internet-scale information from LLMs with
knowledge grounded in environment dynamics.

LLMs contain potentially useful knowledge for completing tasks and compiling knowledge sources (Petroni et al.,
2019). Previous work has attempted to apply knowledge
from LLMs to decision-making by generating action plans
for executing in an embodied environment (Ichter et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2022b; Song et al., 2022b; Singh et al.,
2022; Liang et al., 2022b; Huang et al., 2022a). However,
LLMs still often fail when generating plans due to a lack
of grounding (Valmeekam et al., 2022). Additionally, many
of these agents that rely on LLM knowledge at execution
time are limited in performance by the accuracy of LLM
output. We hypothesize that if LLMs are instead applied
to improving exploration during training, resulting policies
will not be constrained by the accuracy of an LLM.
Exploration in environments with sparse rewards becomes
increasingly difficult as the size of the explorable state space
increases. For example, the popular 3D embodied environment Minecraft has a large technology tree of craftable items
with complex dependencies and a high branching factor. Before crafting a stone pickaxe in Minecraft an agent must:
collect logs, craft logs into planks and then sticks, craft a
crafting table from planks, use the crafting table to craft a
wooden pickaxe from sticks and planks, use the wooden
pickaxe to collect cobblestone, and finally use the crafting
table to craft a stone pickaxe from sticks and cobblestone.
Reaching a goal item is difficult without expert knowledge
of Minecraft via dense rewards (Baker et al., 2022; Hafner
et al., 2023) or expert demonstrations (Skrynnik et al., 2021;
Patil et al., 2020), making item crafting in Minecraft a longstanding AI challenge (Guss et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Despite evidence that practical sequential decision making
systems require efficient exploitation of prior knowledge
regarding a task, the current prevailing paradigm in reinforcement learning (RL) is to train tabula rasa, without any
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California
Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States 2 Allen Institute for Artificial
Intelligence, Seattle, WA, United States 3 Paul G. Allen School of
Computer Science, Seattle, WA, United States. Correspondence
to: Kolby Nottingham <knotting@uci.edu>.

We propose DECKARD* (DECision-making for
Knowledgable Autonomous Reinforcement-learning
Dreamers), an agent that hypothesizes an Abstract World
Model (AWM) over subgoals by few-shot prompting an

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

* https://deckardagent.github.io/

1

