Pairwise Ranking Losses of Click-Through Rates Prediction for Welfare
Maximization in Ad Auctions
Boxiang Lyu 1 Zhe Feng 2 Zachary Robertson 3 Sanmi Koyejo 2 3

Abstract

cost-per-click (CPC) bids, i.e., report how much they are
willing to pay if a user clicks. The CTR is the probability
that a user clicks the ad when the ad is shown. Combined
with the cost-per-click bid, the platform can then calculate
the value of showing the ad, usually called the cost-perimpression (eCPM). As the CTR needs to be learned, the
platform instead uses the predicted click-through rates (pCTRs) to convert the submitted CPC bids to predicted eCPM
bids, which then determine the auctions’ outcomes.

We study the design of loss functions for clickthrough rates (CTR) to optimize (social) welfare
in advertising auctions. Existing works either only
focus on CTR predictions without consideration
of business objectives (e.g., welfare) in auctions or
assume that the distribution over the participants’
expected cost-per-impression (eCPM) is known
a priori, then use various additional assumptions
on the parametric form of the distribution to derive loss functions for predicting CTRs. In this
work, we bring back the welfare objectives of
ad auctions into CTR predictions and propose a
novel weighted rankloss to train the CTR model.
Compared to existing literature, our approach provides a provable guarantee on welfare but without
assumptions on the eCPMs’ distribution while
also avoiding the intractability of naively applying existing learning-to-rank methods. Further,
we propose a theoretically justifiable technique
for calibrating the losses using labels generated
from a teacher network, only assuming that the
teacher network has bounded ℓ2 generalization error. Finally, we demonstrate the advantages of the
proposed loss on synthetic and real-world data.

Due to the importance of predicting the CTRs, a wealth
of related literature exists, and we refer interested reader
to Choi et al. (2020); Yang and Zhai (2022) for thorough
reviews of these advances. Of these works, the majority
focus on the various neural network architectures designed
for the task, such as DeepFM (Guo et al., 2017), Deep &
Cross Network (DCN) (Wang et al., 2017), MaskNet (Wang
et al., 2021), among many others. These works propose
novel neural network architectures but train these networks
using off-the-shelf classification losses with no guarantees
on the actual economic performance of the ad auctions,
creating a discrepancy between the upstream model training
for CTR prediction and downstream model evaluation.
Some works aim to ameliorate these discrepancies by using
business objectives such as social welfare (or welfare for
short) to motivate the design of loss functions (Chapelle,
2015; Vasile et al., 2017; Hummel and McAfee, 2017). However, these works either lack reproducible experiments on
publicly available real-world benchmarks (Hummel and
McAfee, 2017), or depend on ad-hoc heuristics with insufficient theoretical guarantees (Vasile et al., 2017). Moreover,
many of these works suffer from an unrealistic assumption
that bidders submit eCPM bids and the eCPM of the highest
competing bid follows a known and fixed distribution. However, in real life, some ad auctions at industry leaders such as
Amazon, Meta, and Google only accept CPC bids (Amazon
Ads, 2023; Meta Business Help Center, 2023; Google Ads
Help, 2023), and adjustments to the CTR prediction model
changes the distribution of competing bids’ eCPM.

1. Introduction
Global online advertising spending is expected to exceed
$700 billion in 2023 (Statista, 2022). At the core of online advertising are advertising (ad) auctions, held billions
of times per day, to determine which advertisers get the
opportunity to show ads (Jeunen, 2022). A critical component of these auctions is predicting the click-through rates
(CTR) (Yang and Zhai, 2022). Typically, advertisers submit
1
The University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago,
IL USA 2 Google Research, Mountain View, CA USA 3 Department
of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA USA.
Correspondence to: Boxiang Lyu <blyu@chicagobooth.edu>.

We avoid the pitfalls of existing works by limiting assumptions about the eCPMs’ distribution. Since various types
of ad auctions with drastically different revenue functions
are widely deployed, ranging from Generalized Second

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

