Understanding the Role of Feedback in Online Learning with Switching Costs

Duo Cheng 1 Xingyu Zhou 2 Bo Ji 1

Abstract

T -round repeated game between a learner and an adversary:
at each round, the learner chooses one of the K actions
and suffers the loss of this chosen action, where the loss
is determined by the adversary. At the end of each round,
the learner receives some feedback and uses it to update
her policy at the next round. The goal of the learner is to
minimize the regret, defined as the difference between her
cumulative loss and that of the best fixed action in hindsight.

In this paper, we study the role of feedback in
online learning with switching costs. It has been
shown that the minimax regret is e
Θ(T√2/3 ) under
e T ) under
bandit feedback and improves to Θ(
full-information feedback, where T is the length
of the time horizon. However, it remains largely
unknown how the amount and type of feedback
generally impact regret. To this end, we first consider the setting of bandit learning with extra observations; that is, in addition to the typical bandit
feedback, the learner can freely make a total of
Bex extra observations. We fully characterize the
minimax regret in this setting, which exhibits an
interesting phase-transition phenomenon: when
e 2/3 ), but
Bex = O(T 2/3 ), the regret remains Θ(T
√
2/3
e
when Bex = Ω(T ), it becomes Θ(T / Bex ),
which improves as the budget Bex increases. To
design algorithms that can achieve the minimax
regret, it is instructive to consider a more general
setting where the learner has a budget of B total
observations. We fully characterize the minimax
regret√
in this setting as well and show that it is
e / B), which scales smoothly with the total
Θ(T
budget B. Furthermore, we propose a generic
algorithmic framework, which enables us to design different learning algorithms that can achieve
matching upper bounds for both settings based on
the amount and type of feedback. One interesting
finding is that while bandit feedback can still guarantee optimal regret when the budget is relatively
limited, it no longer suffices to achieve optimal
regret when the budget is relatively large.

In terms of the type of feedback, two important settings
have been extensively studied in the literature: bandit and
full information. At each round, if the learner observes
only the loss of the chosen action, then it is called bandit
feedback, and the game is called adversarial multi-armed
bandits (MAB) or non-stochastic bandits with adversarial
losses (Auer et al., 2002b). On the other hand, if the losses
of all K actions are revealed to the learner, then it is called
full-information feedback, and the game becomes prediction
with expert advice (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006).
The regret in these two settings has √
been well understood.
Specifically, the minimax regret is Θ( T K)1 under bandit
feedback
√ (Auer et al., 2002b; Audibert & Bubeck, 2009) and
is Θ( T ln K) under full information (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006, Theorems 2.2 and 3.7) (Hazan, 2016) (Orabona,
2019, Section 6.8). These results imply that learning under bandit feedback is slightly harder than under full information, in the√sense that the dependency on K is worse
√
(Θ( K) vs. Θ( ln K)). However,
√ the scaling with respect
to T remains the same (i.e., Θ( T )).

Online learning over a finite set of actions is a classical problem in machine learning research. It can be formulated as a

In the above standard settings, the learner is allowed to arbitrarily switch actions at two consecutive rounds. However,
in many real-world decision-making problems, switching
actions may incur a cost (e.g., due to system reconfiguration and resource reallocation) (Zhang et al., 2005; Kaplan,
2011). Motivated by this practical consideration, a new
setting called online learning with switching costs has also
been extensively studied (Arora et al., 2012; Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 2013). In this setting, the learner needs to pay an
additional unit loss whenever she switches actions.

1
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA 2 Wayne State University,
Detroit, USA. Correspondence to: Bo Ji <boji@vt.edu>.

Interestingly, it has been shown that in this new setting,
learning under bandit feedback is significantly harder than

1. Introduction

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We use standard big O notations (e.g., O, Ω, and Θ); those
e Ω,
e and Θ)
e hide poly-logarithmic factors.
with tilde (e.g., O,

1

