On Coresets for Clustering in Small Dimensional Euclidean spaces

Lingxiao Huang * 1 Ruiyuan Huang * 2 Zengfeng Huang * 2 Xuan Wu * 3

Abstract

dataset, called coreset, so that vital properties of the original dataset are preserved. Coresets for various problems
have been extensively studied (Har-Peled & Mazumdar,
2004; Feldman & Langberg, 2011; Feldman et al., 2013;
Cohen-Addad et al., 2022; Braverman et al., 2022). In this
paper, we investigate coreset construction for k-M EDIAN
in Euclidean spaces.

We consider the problem of constructing small
coresets for k-M EDIAN in Euclidean spaces.
Given a large set of data points P ⊂ Rd , a
coreset is a much smaller set S ⊂ Rd , so that
the k-M EDIAN costs of any k centers w.r.t. P
and S are close. Existing literature mainly focuses on the high-dimension case and there has
been a great success in obtaining dimensionindependent bounds, whereas the case for small
d is largely unexplored. Considering many applications of Euclidean clustering algorithms are in
small dimensions and the lack of systematic studies in the current literature, this paper investigates
coresets for k-M EDIAN in small dimensions. For
small d, a natural question is whether existing
near-optimal dimension-independent bounds can
be significantly improved. We provide affirmative answers to this question for a range of parameters. Moreover, new lower bound results are
also proved, which are the highest for small d. In
particular, we completely settle the coreset size
bound for 1-d k-M EDIAN (up to log factors). Interestingly, our results imply a strong separation
between 1-d 1-M EDIAN and 1-d 2-M EDIAN. As
far as we know, this is the first such separation
between k = 1 and k = 2 in any dimension.

Coreset construction for Euclidean k-M EDIAN has been
studied for nearly two decades (Har-Peled & Mazumdar,
2004; Feldman & Langberg, 2011; Huang et al., 2018;
Cohen-Addad et al., 2021; 2022). For this particular problem, an ε-coreset is a (weighted) point set in the same Euclidean space that satisfies: given any set of k centers, the
k-M EDIAN costs of the centers w.r.t. the original point set
and the coreset are within a factor of 1 + ε. The most important task in theoretical research here is to characterize
the minimum size of ε-coresets. Recently, there has been
great progress in closing the gap between upper and lower
bounds in high-dimensional spaces. However, researches
on the coreset size in small dimensional spaces are rare.
There are still large gaps between upper and lower bounds
even for 1-d 1-M EDIAN.
Clustering in small dimensional Euclidean spaces is of
both theoretical and practical importance. In practice,
many applications involve clustering points in small dimensional spaces. A typical example is clustering objects
in R2 or R3 based on their spatial coordinates (Wheeler,
2007; Fonseca-Rodrı́guez et al., 2021). Another example
is spectral clustering for graph and social network analysis (Von Luxburg, 2007; Kunegis et al., 2010; Zhang et al.,
2014; Narantsatsralt & Kang, 2017). In spectral clustering, nodes are first embedded into a small dimensional Euclidean space using spectral methods and then Euclidean
clustering algorithms are applied in the embedding space.
Even the simplest 1-d k-M EDIAN has numerous practical
applications (Arnaboldi et al., 2012; Jeske et al., 2013;
Pennacchioli et al., 2014).

1. Introduction
Processing huge datasets is always computationally challenging. In this paper, we consider the coreset paradigm,
which is an effective data-reduction tool to alleviate the
computation burden on big data. Roughly speaking, given
a large dataset, the goal is to construct a much smaller
*
Equal contribution 1 State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 School
of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China 3 Huawei
TCS Lab, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Lingxiao Huang <huanglingxiao1990@126.com>, Zengfeng Huang
<huangzf@fudan.edu.cn>.

On the theory side, existing techniques for coresets in high
dimensions may not be sufficient to obtain optimal coresets in small dimensions. For example, much smaller size
is achievable in R1 by using geometric methods, while
the sampling methods for strong coresets in high dimension (Langberg & Schulman, 2010; Cohen-Addad et al.,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

