Safe Offline Reinforcement Learning with Real-Time Budget Constraints

Qian Lin 1 Bo Tang 2 * Zifan Wu 1 * Chao Yu 1 Shangqin Mao 2 Qianlong Xie 2 Xingxing Wang 2 Dong Wang 2

Abstract

satisfying certain constraints. Many safe RL approaches
have been proposed in the past few years (Achiam et al.,
2017; Zhang et al., 2020; Sootla et al., 2022; Liu et al.,
2022a). Unfortunately, most existing approaches only target at the online setting, where potentially risky constraint
violations can be incurred during interactions with the real
environment. As a kind of data-driven methods, offline
RL (Levine et al., 2020) aims to derive a policy from offline
data without further real-world exploration, and thus is particularly suitable for safety-critical applications. Despite the
recent progress in the offline RL literature (Fujimoto et al.,
2019; Kumar et al., 2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021), however,
there are still limited works focusing on attaining a safe
policy under the offline setting.

Aiming at promoting the safe real-world deployment of Reinforcement Learning (RL), research
on safe RL has made significant progress in recent years. However, most existing works in the
literature still focus on the online setting where
risky violations of the safety budget are likely to
be incurred during training. Besides, in many realworld applications, the learned policy is required
to respond to dynamically determined safety budgets (i.e., constraint threshold) in real time. In
this paper, we target at the above real-time budget constraint problem under the offline setting,
and propose Trajectory-based REal-time Budget
Inference (TREBI) as a novel solution that approaches this problem from the perspective of
trajectory distribution. Theoretically, we prove
an error bound of the estimation on the episodic
reward and cost under the offline setting and thus
provide a performance guarantee for TREBI. Empirical results on a wide range of simulation tasks
and a real-world large-scale advertising application demonstrate the capability of TREBI in solving real-time budget constraint problems under
offline settings.

Moreover, many real-world scenarios require the deployed
policy to respond to dynamically determined budgets (i.e.,
constraint threshold) in real time, rather than simply satisfy the same budget fixed throughout both the training
and the deployment phase. In such a real-time budget constraint problem, it is often impossible to retrain a policy
from scratch for each unseen budget during the deployment
of the learned policy. Taking the advertising scenario for example, different advertisers set different budgets in real time,
and the advertising system needs to make the optimal decision on the allocation of display channels under different
budgets. Also, in the autonomous driving scenario, the road
conditions could change rapidly, imposing time-varying constraints on the speed, acceleration or safe distance of the
vehicles, hence the policy should be able to quickly adapt
to such changes without further time-consuming retraining.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton &
Barto, 2018) has achieved great successes in solving complex decision-making problems, such as games (Silver et al.,
2016; Vinyals et al., 2019), robotics (Peng et al., 2018;
Hanna et al., 2021) and recommendation systems (Zheng
et al., 2018). However, the concern of safety still remains a
major challenge preventing many real-world deployments
of RL, which motivates the research of safe RL (Xu et al.,
2022b; Gu et al., 2022). Briefly speaking, safe RL aims to
learn a policy that maximizes the long-term reward while

In this paper, we provide a novel offline RL solution, i.e.,
the Trajectory-based REal-time Budget Inference (TREBI),
to the above real-time budget constraint problem. The key
idea of TREBI lies in approaching the constrained policy
optimization problem from the perspective of trajectory
distribution. This can not only yield the derivation of the
optimal trajectory distribution w.r.t. a certain budget and a
given offline dataset, but also enable strict constraint satisfaction (i.e., with probability one in theory) in the trajectory
level, which is unlike the rough constraint satisfaction (i.e.,
expectation over trajectories) in most of previous studies.
Note that this is of great significance in real-life applications
of RL, particularly for safety-critical domains where only
one single constraint violation could possibly lead to catas-

*
Equal contribution 1 Sun Yat-Sen University 2 Meituan. Correspondence to: Chao Yu <yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

