Principled Acceleration of Iterative Numerical Methods Using Machine Learning

Sohei Arisaka 1 2 Qianxiao Li 1

Abstract

Thus, in recent years, many learning-based methods have
been proposed for repeated solutions of computational problems. These range from the direct prediction of solutions
as a supervised learning problem (Guo et al., 2016; Tang
et al., 2017; Shan et al., 2020; Özbay et al., 2021; Cheng
et al., 2021; Pfaff et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021) to tightly
coupling machine learning and traditional scientific computing to take advantage of both (Ajuria Illarramendi et al.,
2020; Um et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020; Vaupel et al.,
2020; Luna et al., 2021; Nikolopoulos et al., 2022). This
paper focuses on the acceleration of iterative algorithms by
(meta-)learning (Feliu-Fabà et al., 2020; Venkataraman &
Amos, 2021; Liu et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022; Guo et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2022; Psaros et al., 2022), which belongs
to the second class. For instance, (Chen et al., 2022) uses
meta-learning to generate smoothers of the Multi-grid Network for parametrized partial differential equations (PDEs),
and (Guo et al., 2022) proposes a meta-learning approach to
learn effective solvers based on the Runge-Kutta method for
ordinary differential equations. In (Liu et al., 2022; Huang
et al., 2022; Psaros et al., 2022), meta-learning is used to
accelerate the training of physics-informed neural networks
for solving PDEs.

Iterative methods are ubiquitous in large-scale
scientific computing applications, and a number
of approaches based on meta-learning have been
recently proposed to accelerate them. However,
a systematic study of these approaches and how
they differ from meta-learning is lacking. In this
paper, we propose a framework to analyze such
learning-based acceleration approaches, where
one can immediately identify a departure from
classical meta-learning. We theoretically show
that this departure may lead to arbitrary deterioration of model performance, and at the same
time, we identify a methodology to ameliorate it
by modifying the loss objective, leading to a novel
training method for learning-based acceleration
of iterative algorithms. We demonstrate the significant advantage and versatility of the proposed
approach through various numerical applications.

1. Introduction
It is common and important in science and engineering to
solve similar computational problems repeatedly. For example, in an actual project of structural engineering, the
structure design is considered iteratively to satisfy various
constraints, such as safety, cost, and building codes. This
iterative design process often involves a large number of
structural simulations (Gallet et al., 2022). Another example
is systems biology, where an important but challenging problem is to estimate parameters of mathematical models for
biological systems from observation data, and solving this
inverse problem often requires many numerical simulations
(Moles et al., 2003; Chou & Voit, 2009). In these situations,
we can utilize the data of the previously solved problems to
solve the next similar but unseen problems more efficiently,
and machine learning is a natural and effective approach for
this.

However, to date, there lacks a systematic scrutiny of the
overall approach. For example, does directly translating
a meta-learning algorithm, such as gradient-based metalearning (Hospedales et al., 2021), necessarily lead to acceleration in iterative methods? In this work, we perform a
systematic framework to study this problem, where we find
that there is indeed a mismatch between currently proposed
training methods and desirable outcomes for scientific computing. Using numerical examples and theoretical analysis,
we show that minimizing the solution error does not necessarily speed up the computation. Based on our analysis,
we propose a novel and principled training approach for
learning-based acceleration of iterative methods along with
a practical loss function that enables gradient-based learning
algorithms.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
Kajima Corporation, Japan. Correspondence to: Sohei Arisaka
<sohei.arisaka@u.nus.edu>.
2

1. In Section 2, we propose a general framework, called
gradient-based meta-solving, to analyze and develop
learning-based numerical methods. Using the framework, we reveal the mismatch between the training

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

