Adversarial Parameter Attack on Deep Neural Networks

Lijia Yu 1 2 Yihan Wang 1 2 Xiao-Shan Gao 1 2

Abstract

the survey papers (Akhtar & Mian, 2018; Bai et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020) for details.

The parameter perturbation attack is a safety
threat to deep learning, where small parameter perturbations are made such that the attacked network
gives wrong or desired labels of the adversary to
specified inputs. However, such attacks could
be detected by the user, because the accuracy of
the attacked network will reduce and the network
cannot work normally. To make the attack more
stealthy, in this paper, the adversarial parameter
attack is proposed, in which small perturbations
to the parameters of the network are made such
that the accuracy of the attacked network does
not decrease much, but its robustness against adversarial example attacks becomes much lower.
As a consequence, the attacked network performs
normally on standard samples, but is much more
vulnerable to adversarial attacks. The existence of
nearly perfect adversarial parameters under L∞
norm and L0 norm is proved under reasonable
conditions. Algorithms are given which can be
used to produce high quality adversarial parameters for the commonly used networks trained
with various robust training methods, in that the
robustness of the attacked networks decreases significantly when they are evaluated using various
adversarial attack methods.

The most widely studied safety issue for DNNs is the adversarial attack (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Carlini & Wagner, 2017), that is, it is possible to
intentionally make small modifications to a standard sample to generate adversarial examples which are essentially
imperceptible to the human eye, but the DNN outputs a
wrong label or even any label given by the adversary. The
existence of adversary examples makes the DNN vulnerable
in safety-critical applications and many effective methods
were proposed to develop more robust DNNs against adversarial attacks (Madry et al., 2017; Akhtar & Mian, 2018;
Bai et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). On the other hand,
it was shown that adversaries examples are inevitable for
commonly used DNN models in certain sense (Azulay &
Weiss, 2018; Shafahi et al., 2018; Bastounis et al., 2021;
Gao et al., 2022).
The parameter perturbation attacks (Liu et al., 2017; Zhao
et al., 2019; Breier et al., 2018; Tsai et al., 2021; Sun et al.,
2021; Weng et al., 2020; Tyukin et al., 2020; 2021) were
also shown to be a safety threat to DNNs. It was shown
that by making small parameter perturbations, the attacked
DNN can output wrong or desired labels to specified inputs
and still gives the correct labels to other samples (Liu et al.,
2017; Zhao et al., 2019; Tyukin et al., 2020; 2021). However,
these attacks are easy to be detected by users, possibly due
to a prominent decline in performance such as the training
accuracy.

1. Introduction

In this paper, the adversarial parameter attack is proposed
as a more stealthy parameter perturbation attack, in which
small perturbations to the parameters of a DNN are made
such that the attack to the DNN is essentially imperceptible
to the user, but the robustness of the DNN becomes much
lower. The adversarial parameter attack is stronger than
previous parameter perturbation attacks in that not only the
accuracy but also the robustness of DNNs are considered.

The deep neural network (DNN) (LeCun et al., 2015) has
become one of the most powerful machine learning methods, which has been successfully applied in computer vision, natural language processing, and many other fields. In
security-critical systems using DNNs, such as autonomous
vehicles, banking systems, etc., safety is a key desired feature of DNNs, which has been studied extensively. Refer to

The goal of this paper is to demonstrate such type of potential threat to neural network security. Our inspiration came
from an unexpected error in a License Plate Recognition
System. A system that has been used for a long time suddenly cannot recognize dirty license plates, but clean license
plates can still be recognized. So we suspect that the system

1

Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence to: Xiao-Shan Gao <xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

