Thompson Sampling with Diffusion Generative Prior

Yu-Guan Hsieh* 1 Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan 2 Branislav Kveton 3 Patrick Blöbaum 2

Abstract

t, the learner receives reward rt ∈ R drawn from an armdependent distribution P at . The goal of the learner is either
to i) accumulate the highest possible reward over time (a.k.a.
regret-minimization, see Lai and Robbins, 1985; Auer et al.,
2002 ) or to ii) find the arm with the highest expected reward
(a.k.a. best-arm identification, see Even-Dar et al., 2006;
Bubeck et al., 2009; Audibert et al., 2010).

In this work, we initiate the idea of using denoising diffusion models to learn priors for online
decision making problems. We specifically focus
on bandit meta-learning, aiming to learn a policy
that performs well across bandit tasks of a same
class. To this end, we train a diffusion model that
learns the underlying task distribution and combine Thompson sampling with the learned prior
to deal with new tasks at test time. Our posterior
sampling algorithm carefully balances between
the learned prior and the noisy observations that
come from the learner’s interaction with the environment. To capture realistic bandit scenarios,
we propose a novel diffusion model training procedure that trains from incomplete and noisy data,
which could be of independent interest. Finally,
our extensive experiments clearly demonstrate the
potential of the proposed approach.

For both purposes, we need to have a reasonable estimate of
the arms’ mean rewards µa = Era ∼P a [ra ]. In general, this
would require pulling each arm a certain number of times,
which becomes inefficient when K is large. While the nofree-lunch principle prevents us from improving upon this
bottleneck in general situations, it is worth noticing that the
bandit instances (referred to as tasks hereinafter) that we
encounter in most practical problems are far from arbitrary.
To name a few examples, in recommender systems, each
task corresponds to a user with certain underlying preferences that affect how much they like each item; in online
shortest path routing, we operate in real-world networks
with specific characteristics. In this regard, introducing such
inductive bias to the learning algorithm would be beneficial. In Bayesian models, this can be expressed through
the choice of the prior distribution. Moreover, as suggested
by the meta-learning paradigm, the prior itself can also be
learned from data, which often leads to superior performance (Rothfuss et al., 2021; Hospedales et al., 2021). This
has led to the idea of meta-learning a prior for bandits (Cella
et al., 2020; Basu et al., 2021; Bastani et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Uncertainty quantification is an integral part of online decision making, and forms the basis of various online algorithms that trade off exploration for exploitation (Puterman,
1994; Sutton and Barto, 1998). Among these, Bayesian
methods quantify uncertainty using probability distributions,
with the help of the powerful tools of Bayesian inference.
Nonetheless, their performance is known to be sensitive to
the choice of prior (Murphy, 2022).

On the other hand, we have recently witnessed the success
of deep generative modeling in producing high-quality synthetic data across various modalities (Saharia et al., 2022;
Wu et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2020). The impressive results
of these methods show that they are a powerful tool for
modeling complex distributions. While different models
have their own strengths and weaknesses, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) are particularly appealing for our use case because their iterative
sampling scheme makes them more flexible to be applied
on a downstream task. In this regard, this paper attempts to
answer the following question:

For concreteness, let us consider the problem of stochastic
multi-armed bandits (MABs) (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi,
2012; Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020), in which a learner
repeatedly pulls one of the K arms from a given set A =
{1, ..., K} and receives rewards that depend on the learner’s
choices. More precisely, when arm at is pulled at round
*

Work done during internship at Amazon. 1 Université Grenoble
Alpes 2 Amazon 3 AWS AI Labs. Correspondence to: Yu-Guan
Hsieh <yu-guan.hsieh@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>.

Can diffusion models provide better priors to address the
exploration-exploitation trade-off in bandits?

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our Contributions. In this work, we initiate the idea of
1

