Lifelong Language Pretraining with Distribution-Specialized Experts

Wuyang Chen * 1 Yanqi Zhou 2 Nan Du 2 Yanping Huang 2 James Laudon 2 Zhifeng Chen 2 Claire Cui 2
Distribution

Abstract
Pretraining on a large-scale corpus has become a
standard method to build general language models (LMs). Adapting a model to new data distributions targeting different downstream tasks
poses significant challenges. Naive fine-tuning
may incur catastrophic forgetting when the overparameterized LMs overfit the new data but fail to
preserve the pretrained features. Lifelong learning (LLL) aims to enable information systems to
learn from a continuous data stream across time.
However, most prior work modifies the training
recipe assuming a static fixed network architecture. We find that additional model capacity and
proper regularization are key elements to achieving strong LLL performance. Thus, we propose
Lifelong-MoE, an extensible MoE (Mixture-ofExperts) architecture that dynamically adds model
capacity via adding experts with regularized pretraining. Our results show that by only introducing a limited number of extra experts while keeping the computation cost constant, our model can
steadily adapt to data distribution shifts while preserving the previous knowledge. Compared to
existing lifelong learning approaches, LifelongMoE achieves better few-shot performance on 19
downstream NLP tasks.

ℬ

Distribution

𝒞

Experts:
Progressive Expansion

⋯

⋯

Regularizations Regularizations

Figure 1: Overview of our Lifelong-MoE method: 1) During
pretraining, the expanded experts (and gatings) are specialized
for each data distribution; 2) We freeze the pretrained old experts
and gatings; 3) We further introduce regularizations to the MoE to
avoid the catastrophic forgetting.

up both pretraining data and large models (Shazeer et al.,
2017; Huang et al., 2019; Kaplan et al., 2020) enable the
inference on complicated NLP tasks with much less data,
and fewer or even no additional label for downstream tasks.
For example, BERT (Xu et al., 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown
et al.) demonstrate that for few-shot or even zero-shot generalization on downstream corpus, current LMs only require
very few labeled examples to achieve good generalization
on unseen tasks. More recently, GLaM (Du et al., 2022)
proposes using a sparsely activated mixture-of-experts
architecture to scale the model capacity while incurring
substantially less training cost compared to dense variants.
Pretraining large language models (LMs) has become the de
facto standard before adapting NLP models to downstream
tasks. This is extremely successful when the pretraining
and downstream task are drawn from the same corpus distribution. Most of time, benchmarking large LMs blindly
assumes the existence of a static and well-balanced pretraining dataset. While being accurate, the performance
of large LMs on downstream tasks heavily relies on the
high quality of large-scale pretraining, which is not always
guaranteed in the wild for several reasons. First, at the data
level, new language corpus (online forum conversations,
new wikipedia pages, websites, book chapters, etc.) mostly
emerges in a streaming online fashion. That means to keep
our pretraining dataset up-to-date, new data distributions
will be collected continuously, instead of being statically
stored offline in batches. However, in real-world scenarios,
sequentially pretraining LMs on new corpus samples with
changing distributions will cause catastrophic forgetting on

1. Introduction
Language models (LMs),
from word embeddings/vectors (Mikolov et al., 2013), to recurrent
neural networks (Sutskever et al., 2014), and to the latest
self-attention-based Transformer networks (Vaswani et al.),
play increasingly important roles in natural language
processing (NLP) tasks, including both language generation
and language understanding. Recent works on scaling
*

Distribution

𝒜

Work is done during the research internship with Google. 1 The
University of Texas at Austin 2 Google. Correspondence to: Yanqi
Zhou <yanqiz@google.com>, Nan Du <dunan@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

