All in a Row: Compressed Convolution Networks for Graphs

Junshu Sun 1 2 Shuhui Wang 1 3 Xinzhe Han 1 2 Zhe Xue 4 Qingming Huang 1 2 3

Abstract

tasks, such as node classification (Hamilton et al., 2017)
and graph classification (Xu et al., 2019). Despite their effectiveness, convolutional GNNs (Defferrard et al., 2016;
Kipf & Welling, 2017; He et al., 2021; Chien et al., 2022)
suffer from inherent problems. First, the customized graph
convolution based on polynomials is less expressive under
limited parameter scales (Li et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2022;
Eliasof et al., 2022). Second, convolutional GNNs fail to
directly perform hierarchical representation learning (Ying
et al., 2018). Existing graph convolution models require
additional node clustering (Ying et al., 2018) or node drop
methods (Gao & Ji, 2019) to extract multi-scale features. In
contrast, Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) based on
Euclidean convolution are free of the above problems. Owning to the local feature learning ability and global parameter
sharing mechanism, CNNs can learn diverse convolution
operators and capture multi-scale local patterns on regular
grid data. The expressiveness of CNN has led to its great
success in various domains such as image understanding
(Krizhevsky et al., 2017; He et al., 2016) and video understanding (Ji et al., 2013; Tran et al., 2015). In light of this, a
straightforward solution is to adopt Euclidean convolution
for GNNs on non-grid graph data.

Compared to Euclidean convolution, existing
graph convolution methods generally fail to learn
diverse convolution operators under limited parameter scales and depend on additional treatments of multi-scale feature extraction. The challenges of generalizing Euclidean convolution to
graphs arise from the irregular structure of graphs.
To bridge the gap between Euclidean space and
graph space, we propose a differentiable method
for regularization on graphs that applies permutations to the input graphs. The permutations constrain all nodes in a row regardless of their input
order and therefore enable the flexible generalization of Euclidean convolution. Based on the
regularization of graphs, we propose Compressed
Convolution Network (CoCN) for hierarchical
graph representation learning. CoCN follows the
local feature learning and global parameter sharing mechanisms of Convolution Neural Networks.
The whole model can be trained end-to-end and
is able to learn both individual node features and
the corresponding structure features. We validate
CoCN on several node classification and graph
classification benchmarks. CoCN achieves superior performance over competitive convolutional
GNNs and graph pooling models. Codes are available at https://github.com/sunjss/CoCN.

Nevertheless, directly generalizing Euclidean convolution
to graphs faces with challenges from various aspects. From
the graph perspective, they generally have irregular local
structures that are different from the grid data in Euclidean
space. Therefore, a graph regularization module is required
to extend the expressiveness of Euclidean convolution from
regular grids to irregular topology. Methods have been
proposed for the regularization of graphs based on node sequence selection (Niepert et al., 2016; Eliasof et al., 2022).
However, these methods may generate less informative regularized graphs for the subsequent convolution operations,
since their regularization methods on graphs are independent of the convolution process and hence cannot be optimized for specific tasks. From the Euclidean convolution
perspective, it is sensitive to the local spatial order, while
GNNs should preserve permutation invariance, i.e., produce
the same node representations regardless of the order of
the nodes. For permutation invariant transformation, recent
studies (Murphy et al., 2019a;b; Huang et al., 2022) propose
to enumerate or sample permutations to adopt permutationsensitive operators for GNNs, but they are computationally

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) based on convolution have
become ubiquitous in various graph representation learning
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
China 2 School of Computer Science and Technology, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory,
China 4 Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Telecommunication
Software and Multimedia, School of Computer Science, Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, China. Correspondence to: Shuhui Wang <wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

