Improving Hyperparameter Learning under Approximate Inference
in Gaussian Process Models
Rui Li 1 ST John 1 Arno Solin 1

−0.4

−0.3

MCMC
VI ELBO
Ours

Training proxy for. . .
. . . test performance on holdout data

−0.1
−0.3

Predictive density
log p(y∗ ; θ)

Approximate inference in Gaussian process (GP)
models with non-conjugate likelihoods gets
entangled with the learning of the model hyperparameters. We improve hyperparameter learning
in GP models and focus on the interplay between
variational inference (VI) and the learning
target. While VI’s lower bound to the marginal
likelihood is a suitable objective for inferring
the approximate posterior, we show that a direct
approximation of the marginal likelihood as in
Expectation Propagation (EP) is a better learning
objective for hyperparameter optimization. We
design a hybrid training procedure to bring the
best of both worlds: it leverages conjugatecomputation VI for inference and uses an EP-like
marginal likelihood approximation for hyperparameter learning. We compare VI, EP, Laplace approximation, and our proposed training procedure
and empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposal across a wide range of data sets.

−0.2

Marginal likelihood
log p(y; θ)

Abstract

1

2

3

4

5

Characteristic lengthscale, log θ

Figure 1. Practical benefits on I ONOSPHERE: Marginal likelihood
(top) acts as a training proxy for predictive density (bottom) of
unseen future data. Our training objective produces a better point
for prediction that also matches the MCMC baseline.

pirical risk minimization, Vapnick, 1998). Under the GP
paradigm, the go-to solution to learning is finding θ ⋆ that
maximizes the marginal likelihood. The marginal likelihood summarizes the probability that we would generate
the observations y with the model parameters θ if we would
sample over the prior. It is formed by marginalizing over
the latent functions from the GP prior, thus also known as
the evidence. Even if this does not capture all aspects of
generalization (see discussion in Vehtari et al., 2016; Lotfi
et al., 2022), it is still used as a practical proxy for performance on unseen test points (see Fig. 1 for the proxy and
test performance on the IONOSPHERE benchmark data set).

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs, Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
provide a plug-and-play approach for inference and learning,
with principled ways of incorporating prior knowledge over
functions and quantifying uncertainty. While GP regression
under a conjugate (Gaussian) likelihood can be carried out
elegantly in closed form, we focus on the non-conjugate
case, where exact inference is intractable. Training of the
GP consists of inferring the approximate posterior and learning the hyperparameters of the model. For clarity, by training we refer to the combination of inference and learning.

Under approximate inference, the marginalization step
entangles the representation of the posterior with the
learning target evaluation. The common approach is to
assume an approximative Gaussian form for the posterior,
so that the inference problem turns into finding a ‘good’ parameterization for the Gaussian (see Wilkinson et al., 2023,
for a recent discussion on linearization/Gaussianization approaches). The simplest approach is the so-called Laplace’s
approximation (LA, Williams & Barber, 1998), which uses
a second-order Taylor approximation. It is efficient but not
very accurate. Variational inference (VI, Opper & Archam-

In a supervised learning setting, GPs are typically trained
to optimize performance on the training samples (as in em1

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland,
and Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence (FCAI). Correspondence to: Rui Li <rui.li@aalto.fi>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

