Returning The Favour:
When Regression Benefits From Probabilistic Causal Knowledge

Shahine Bouabid * 1 Jake Fawkes * 1 Dino Sejdinovic 2

Abstract

P

A directed acyclic graph (DAG) provides valuable prior knowledge that is often discarded in
regression tasks in machine learning. We show
that the independences arising from the presence
of collider structures in DAGs provide meaningful
inductive biases, which constrain the regression
hypothesis space and improve predictive performance. We introduce collider regression, a framework to incorporate probabilistic causal knowledge from a collider in a regression problem.
When the hypothesis space is a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, we prove a strictly positive generalisation benefit under mild assumptions and
provide closed-form estimators of the empirical
risk minimiser. Experiments on synthetic and climate model data demonstrate performance gains
of the proposed methodology.

f

Pf
f∗

F
X2

Y
X1

X2

Y
X1

Figure 1. When performing regression in a hypothesis space F
(blue), we implicitly assume that the data generating process could
follow any DAG structure. The optimal regressor f ∗ lies in the
subspace of function that satisfy the independence structure arising
from the collider (pink), onto which the projection P maps.

informs on which predictors should be selected to regress a
given response variable Y . This process, known as feature
selection, is solved by selecting the predictors that are either
adjacent to Y , or that influence children of Y . The resulting
set of predictors is called the Markov boundary of Y (Pearl,
1987).

1. Introduction
Causality has recently become a main pillar of research
in the machine learning community. Historically, machine
learning has been used to help solve problems in the field of
causal inference (Shalit et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2012). But
recently a different focus has emerged, asking what causality
can do to return the favour to machine learning (Schölkopf
et al., 2021). In this work we continue in this vein, and
aim to answer whether the knowledge of a causal directed
acyclic graph (DAG) underpinning the data generating process can assist and improve performance in regression tasks.

As we will see, the presence of a particular structure in a
Markov boundary is typically overlooked in regression problems: colliders of the form Y → X1 ← X2 . In this work,
we investigate how the conditional independence constraints
arising due to colliders in the Markov boundary can be used
to construct useful inductive biases in a regression problem
and to guide the choice of the hypothesis space. We will see
that the colliders are also unique in that regard: beyond colliders, the Markov boundary cannot contain any graphical
structure implying a conditional independence with Y .

When a causal DAG is available, it constitutes a source of
prior knowledge that is typically discarded when addressing
a regression problem. It can however guide the setup of
the regression problem. Classically, the structure of a DAG

To understand the intuition behind colliders, consider this
classic example: imagine we have a randomly timed sprinkler (X2 ) and we want to infer whether it has rained (Y ),
having observed whether the sidewalk is wet (X1 ). Although the sprinkler and the rain are marginally independent,
knowing whether the sprinkler has been active is important
for determining whether it has rained. Colliders arise naturally in many application domains. For example, in climate
science, the objective may be to regress an environmental driver Y that, independently from human activity X2 ,
influences observed global temperatures X1 .

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK 2 School of CMS & AIML, University of Adelaide, Australia. Correspondence to: Shahine
Bouabid <shahine.bouabid@stats.ox.ac.uk>, Jake Fawkes
<jake.fawkes@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

