Progressive Purification for Instance-Dependent Partial Label Learning

Ning Xu 1 Biao Liu 1 Jiaqi Lv 2 Congyu Qiao 1 Xin Geng 1

Abstract

tial label learning (PLL) (Nguyen & Caruana, 2008; Cour
et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2017b; Yao et al., 2020b; Lv et al.,
2020; Feng et al., 2020b; Wen et al., 2021). PLL deals with
the problem where each training example is associated with
a set of candidate labels, among which only one label is
valid. This paradigm naturally arises in various real-world
applications, such as web mining (Luo & Orabona, 2010),
multimedia content analysis (Zeng et al., 2013), ecoinformatics (Tang & Zhang, 2017), etc.

Partial label learning (PLL) aims to train multiclass classifiers from the examples each annotated
with a set of candidate labels where a fixed but
unknown candidate label is correct. In the last
few years, the instance-independent generation
process of candidate labels has been extensively
studied, on the basis of which many theoretical advances have been made in PLL. Nevertheless, the
candidate labels are always instance-dependent in
practice and there is no theoretical guarantee that
the model trained on the instance-dependent PLL
examples can converge to an ideal one. In this
paper, a theoretically grounded and practically
effective approach named P OP, i.e. PrOgressive
Purification for instance-dependent partial label
learning, is proposed. Specifically, P OP updates
the learning model and purifies each candidate
label set progressively in every epoch. Theoretically, we prove that P OP enlarges the region appropriately fast where the model is reliable, and
eventually approximates the Bayes optimal classifier with mild assumptions. Technically, P OP
is flexible with arbitrary PLL losses and could
improve the performance of the previous PLL
losses in the instance-dependent case. Experiments on the benchmark datasets and the realworld datasets validate the effectiveness of the
proposed method. Source code is available at
https://github.com/palm-ml/POP.

A large number of deep PLL algorithms have recently
emerged that aimed to design regularizers (Yao et al.,
2020a;b; Lyu et al., 2022) or network architectures (Wang
et al., 2022) for PLL data. Further, there are some PLL
works that provided theoretical guarantees while making
their methods compatible with deep networks (Lv et al.,
2020; Feng et al., 2020b; Wen et al., 2021; Wu & Sugiyama,
2021). These existing works have focused on the instanceindependent setting where the generation process of candidate labels is homogeneous across training examples. With
an explicit formulation of the generation process, the asymptotical consistency (Mohri et al., 2018) of the methods, i.e.,
the classifier learned from partially labeled examples could
approximate the Bayes optimal classifier, can be analyzed.
Previous works have extensively studied instanceindependent PLL and many theoretical advances have been
made in this setting. However, the candidate labels are
always instance-dependent (feature-dependent) in practice
as the incorrect labels related to the feature are more
likely to be picked as candidate label set for each instance.
Therefore, instance-dependent (ID) candidate labels (Xu
et al., 2021b) should be quite realistic and could describe
the ambiguous labeling information for the instance which
is difficult to be annotated with an exact true label in PLL.
By adopting the latent label distributions, recent work (Xu
et al., 2021b) has empirically validated that the classifier
trained on instance-dependent PLL examples could achieve
good performance. Nevertheless, there is no theoretical
guarantee that the model trained on the instance-dependent
PLL examples can converge to an ideal one.

1. Introduction
The difficulty of collecting large scale datasets with highquality annotations for training classifiers induces weakly
supervised learning, a typical example among which is par1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China. E-mail: {xning, liubiao01, qiaocy,
xgeng}@seu.edu.cn. 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence
Project, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan. E-mail: is.jiaqi.lv@gmail.com.
Correspondence to: Xin Geng <xgeng@seu.edu.cn>.

In this paper, we propose a theoretically grounded method
named P OP, i.e. PrOgressive Purification for instancedependent partial label learning. Specifically, the observed
candidate labels are utilized to train a randomly initialized

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

