Fast Rates in Time-Varying Strongly Monotone Games

Yu-Hu Yan 1 Peng Zhao 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract

an accurate Nash equilibrium is generally computation-hard
or even PPAD-complete (Daskalakis et al., 2009). Fortunately, it has been revealed that when games exhibit certain
benign properties, effective algorithms can be developed to
achieve Nash equilibriums with provable guarantees. Particularly, recent advances show the great potential of the
regret minimization framework (Freund & Schapire, 1999)
for multi-player online games. Indeed, when each player
minimizes their own regret, the joint decision eventually
converges to a coarse correlated equilibrium. However, it
may differ from the Nash equilibrium. Fortunately, with
more structures in games, regret minimization algorithms
can provably achieve Nash equilibriums.

Multi-player online games depict the interaction
of multiple players with each other over time.
Strongly monotone games are of particular interest since they have benign properties and also
relate to many classic games that have applications in real life. Existing works mainly focus on
the time-invariant case with provable guarantees
established. However, the research of the more
general time-varying games in changing environments is underexplored and the best-known result
cannot match the guarantees in the time-invariant
case. In this work, we present a new decentralized
online algorithm for time-varying strongly monotone games, which greatly improves existing results and obtains fast rates, matching the best timeinvariant guarantee without knowing the environmental non-stationarity. Furthermore, to achieve
faster rates, we generalize the RVU property with
smoothness and establish a series of problemdependent bounds that also match the best timeinvariant one. To realize all those results, we
make a comprehensive use of the techniques in
non-stationary and universal online learning.

Among those successes, strongly monotone games (Rosen,
1965) is a significant subclass that encompasses many realworld applications of interest and has been extensively studied due to its benign mathematical properties (Monderer
& Shapley, 1996; Nemirovski et al., 2010). It is demonstrated that, when appropriate regret minimization algorithms are deployed to all players, the distance between
their decisions and Nash equilibrium can provably converge
to zero (Facchinei & Pang, 2003; Bravo et al., 2018). Existing results on strongly monotone games primarily concern
the time-invariant case, i.e., with fixed utility functions.
However, in real-world applications, many game-related
scenarios are time-varying. For instance, an important gametheoretic application is the Cournot competition (Monderer
& Shapley, 1996), where multiple firms provide goods to
the market, and the goods are then priced as a function of
the total supply. Due to various factors such as weather, holidays, politics, etc., the supply-market relationship is often
subject to change, while existing studies for time-invariant
scenarios cannot address this issue.

1. Introduction
Multi-player online games (Daskalakis et al., 2011; Rakhlin
& Sridharan, 2013b; Syrgkanis et al., 2015) is a versatile
model that depicts the interaction of multiple players over
time. At each round, each player makes a decision from a
convex compact set, and meanwhile, the environment selects convex loss functions (also called utility functions) for
them. Then each player suffers a loss decided by their own
utility function and the joint decisions of all players. A
fundamental task of game-theoretic learning is to find the
Nash equilibrium, a stable set of decisions where no player
has incentives to deviate (Nash Jr, 1950). However, solving

The only existing work for time-varying strongly monotone
games is by Duvocelle et al. (2023), but the attained results
are not favorable enough. Specifically, they investigated the
distance tracking error, the distance between the decisions
and the Nash equilibrium (a formal definition is introduced
in (2.1)), and further proposed a restart-based algorithm to
√
1/3
handle the non-stationarity, attaining an O( T +T 2/3 PT )
guarantee, where T is the time horizon, and PT measures the
environmental
non-stationarity. Notably, the result implies
√
an O( T ) tracking error in the time-invariant case (where
PT = 0), which unfortunately exhibits a large gap compared

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. Correspondence to:
Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

