Git-Theta: A Git Extension for Collaborative Development of
Machine Learning Models

Nikhil Kandpal * 1 Brian Lester * 1 Mohammed Muqeeth 1 Anisha Mascarenhas 1 Monty Evans 1
Vishal Baskaran 1 Tenghao Huang 1 Haokun Liu 1 Colin Raffel 1

Abstract

well-studied set of processes and methodologies that help ensure that software is performant, high-quality, and correctly
implemented (Brooks Jr., 1975). A key component of modern software development is version control systems, which
allow fine-grained tracking of changes to a piece of software.
Typically, version control systems also enable collaborative
development of software by providing functionality for soliciting and incorporating changes from contributors. This
functionality is key to the development of open-source software, i.e., software whose source code is developed and
released publicly. Open-source software underlies many
key technologies, including operating systems, compilers,
web servers, programming languages, and more. Much of
this ubiquitous open-source software is developed by distributed communities of individuals who iteratively build,
update, and improve the software through huge numbers of
contributed changes.

Currently, most machine learning models are
trained by centralized teams and are rarely updated. In contrast, open-source software development involves the iterative development of a
shared artifact through distributed collaboration
using a version control system. In the interest
of enabling collaborative and continual improvement of machine learning models (Raffel, 2023),
we introduce Git-Theta, a version control system
for machine learning models. Git-Theta is an
extension to Git, the most widely used version
control software, that allows fine-grained tracking
of changes to model parameters alongside code
and other artifacts. Unlike existing version control systems that treat a model checkpoint as a
blob of data, Git-Theta leverages the structure of
checkpoints to support communication-efficient
updates, automatic model merges, and meaningful
reporting about the difference between two versions of a model. In addition, Git-Theta includes
a plug-in system that enables users to easily add
support for new functionality. In this paper, we
introduce Git-Theta’s design and features and include an example use-case of Git-Theta where
a pre-trained model is continually adapted and
modified. We publicly release Git-Theta in hopes
of kickstarting a new era of collaborative model
development.1

In the last few decades, machine learning models have increasingly become a key part of software systems. However,
the development of machine learning models is relatively
primitive in comparison with software development. For example, in many applications of machine learning, it can be
useful to update a trained model—e.g., to fix problematic behavior, add new capabilities, or learn from newly collected
data. While sophisticated tools such as DVC, MLFlow,
and others (see Section 5 for a discussion) provide useful
functionality for keeping track of subsequent versions of
a machine learning model, these tools treat the machine
learning model’s checkpoint (the saved parameter values)
as a blob of data; i.e., they are simply treated as a generic
large file. As such, a change to any of the model’s parameters incurs the same communication and storage costs as
changing all of the model’s parameters. As an additional
consequence, these tools cannot support important operations involved in collaborative development such as merging
independently introduced updates from different contributors. We hypothesize that this lack of functionality is a
major reason that machine learning models are almost never
built collaboratively. However, we are optimistic that largescale collaboration is possible. As a motivating example,
there are currently over 10,000 variants of the BERT model

1. Introduction
Over the past fifty years, software development has gone
from a poorly understood and unregimented practice to a
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA. Correspondence to:
Brian Lester <bdlester@cs.unc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
https://github.com/r-three/git-theta/

1

