Dink-Net: Neural Clustering on Large Graphs
Yue Liu 1 2 Ke Liang 1 Jun Xia 2 Sihang Zhou 1 Xihong Yang 1 Xinwang Liu 1 † Stan Z. Li 2 †

Abstract

1. Introduction
Attribute graph clustering, which aims to separate the nodes
in an attribute graph into different groups, has become a fastgrowing research direction in recent years. As a pure unsupervised mission, promising achievements are made by models based on deep neural networks, especially graph neural
networks (GNN) (Kipf & Welling, 2017; 2016; Veličković
et al., 2018). Multiple models are proposed (Wang et al.,
2017; Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020; Peng et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2022b; Gong et al., 2022; Devvrit et al., 2022), which
generally first embed nodes into the hidden space and then
perform clustering algorithms on them. Although proven
effective, most existing models in such a manner suffer
from scalability issues, i.e., poor scalability on large graphs.
Such a problem is one of the most critical challenging tasks
in deep graph clustering (Liu et al., 2022c), and our work
attempts to seek a breakthrough according to it.

Deep graph clustering, which aims to group the
nodes of a graph into disjoint clusters with deep
neural networks, has achieved promising progress
in recent years. However, the existing methods
fail to scale to the large graph with million nodes.
To solve this problem, a scalable deep graph clustering method (Dink-Net) is proposed with the
idea of dilation and shrink. Firstly, by discriminating nodes, whether being corrupted by augmentations, representations are learned in a selfsupervised manner. Meanwhile, the cluster centers are initialized as learnable neural parameters.
Subsequently, the clustering distribution is optimized by minimizing the proposed cluster dilation loss and cluster shrink loss in an adversarial
manner. By these settings, we unify the two-step
clustering, i.e., representation learning and clustering optimization, into an end-to-end framework,
guiding the network to learn clustering-friendly
features. Besides, Dink-Net scales well to large
graphs since the designed loss functions adopt the
mini-batch data to optimize the clustering distribution even without performance drops. Both experimental results and theoretical analyses demonstrate the superiority of our method. Compared
to the runner-up, Dink-Net achieves 9.62% NMI
improvement on the ogbn-papers100M dataset
with 111 million nodes and 1.6 billion edges. The
source code is released: Dink-NetI . Besides, a
collection (papers, codes, and datasets) of deep
graph clustering is shared on GitHubII .

Based on our observations, there are three main reasons for
the poor scalability of existing models on large graphs with
millions of nodes. Firstly, some methods (Cui et al., 2020;
Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020; Liu et al., 2022b; Gong et al.,
2022) need to process the N ⇥ N dense graph diffusion matrix (Klicpera et al., 2019), where N is the number of nodes.
Secondly, unlike other tasks like node classification or link
prediction, clustering requires the method to estimate the
whole sample distribution at once. Therefore, when the node
number grows to a considerable value, e.g., 100 million, it
easily leads to out-of-memory failure or long-running time
problems. Thirdly, current attempts for this problem, such
as S3 GC (Devvrit et al., 2022), usually separate the optimization of representation learning and clustering, leading
to sub-optimal performance.
To solve this problem, we present a scalable deep graph clustering method termed dilation shrink network (Dink-Net).
The guidance idea is motivated by the dilation and shrink of
many galaxies in the universe. Concretely, it mainly consists
of the node discriminate module and the neural clustering
module. At first, in the node discriminate module, node representations are learned by telling apart the original samples
and augmented samples. After the pre-training, the cluster
centers are initialized and assigned as optimizable neural
parameters with gradients. Additionally, at fine-tuning stage,
the neural clustering module optimizes the clustering dis-

†
Corresponding Author 1 National University of Defense Technology 2 Westlake University. Email: Yue Liu
<yueliu19990731@163.com>,
Xinwang Liu <xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn>, Stan Z. Li <Stan.ZQ.Li@westlake.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
I
https://github.com/yueliu1999/Dink-Net
II
https://github.com/yueliu1999/Awesome-Deep-GraphClustering

1

