Graph Neural Networks can Recover the Hidden Features
Solely from the Graph Structure

Ryoma Sato 1 2

Abstract

(Gilmer et al., 2017). In this way, GNNs produce valuable
node embeddings that take neighboring nodes into account.
GNNs show strong empirical performance in machine learning and data mining tasks (Zhang & Chen, 2018; Fan et al.,
2019; He et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022).

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are popular models for graph learning problems. GNNs show
strong empirical performance in many practical
tasks. However, the theoretical properties have
not been completely elucidated. In this paper, we
investigate whether GNNs can exploit the graph
structure from the perspective of the expressive
power of GNNs. In our analysis, we consider
graph generation processes that are controlled by
hidden (or latent) node features, which contain all
information about the graph structure. A typical
example of this framework is kNN graphs constructed from the hidden features. In our main results, we show that GNNs can recover the hidden
node features from the input graph alone, even
when all node features, including the hidden features themselves and any indirect hints, are unavailable. GNNs can further use the recovered
node features for downstream tasks. These results show that GNNs can fully exploit the graph
structure by themselves, and in effect, GNNs can
use both the hidden and explicit node features for
downstream tasks. In the experiments, we confirm
the validity of our results by showing that GNNs
can accurately recover the hidden features using
a GNN architecture built based on our theoretical
analysis.

Roughly speaking, GNNs smooth out the node features on
the input graph by recursively mixing the node features
of neighboring nodes, and GNNs thereby transform noisy
features into clean ones (Figure 1 (a)). This smoothing
effect has been observed empirically (Chen et al., 2020a; NT
& Maehara, 2019) and shown theoretically (Li et al., 2018;
Oono & Suzuki, 2020). There are several GNN architectures
that are inspired by the smoothing process (Klicpera et al.,
2019; NT & Maehara, 2019; Wu et al., 2019). It has also
been pointed out that stacking too many layers harms the
performance of GNNs due to the over-smoothing effect (Li
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020b), which is caused by too
much mixing of the node features.
In this perspective, node features are the primary actors in
GNNs, and graphs are secondary. If node features are uninformative at all, GNNs should fail to obtain meaningful node
embeddings no matter how they mix node features (Figure 1
(b)). This is in contrast to the opposite scenario: Even if the
graphs are uninformative at all, if the node features are informative for downstream tasks, GNNs can obtain meaningful
node embeddings just by ignoring edges or not mixing node
features at all. Therefore, node features are the first requirement of GNNs, and the graph only provides some boost
to the quality of node features (NT & Maehara, 2019). It
indicates that GNNs cannot utilize the graph information
without the aid of good node features.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli
et al., 2009) are popular machine learning models for processing graph data. GNNs take a graph with node features
as input and output embeddings of nodes. At each node,
GNNs send the node features to neighboring nodes, aggregate the received features, and output the new node features

The central research question of this paper is as follows:
Can GNNs utilize the graph information
without the aid of node features?
We positively answer this question through our theoretical
analysis. We show that GNNs can recover the hidden node
features that control the generation of the graph structure
even without the help of informative node features (Figure
1 (c)). The recovered features contain all the information
of the graph structure. The recovered node features can

*

Equal contribution 1 Kyoto University 2 RIKEN AIP. Correspondence to: Ryoma Sato <r.sato@ml.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

