Hiding Data Helps: On the Benefits of Masking for Sparse Coding

Muthu Chidambaram 1 Chenwei Wu 1 Yu Cheng 2 Rong Ge 1

Abstract

learning parsimonious representations of data is of high
importance. The particular case of modeling data in some
high-dimensional space Rd as sparse linear combinations
of a set of p vectors in Rd (referred to as a dictionary) has
received significant attention over the past two decades,
leading to the development of many successful algorithms
and theoretical frameworks.

Sparse coding, which refers to modeling a signal
as sparse linear combinations of the elements of
a learned dictionary, has proven to be a successful (and interpretable) approach in applications
such as signal processing, computer vision, and
medical imaging. While this success has spurred
much work on provable guarantees for dictionary
recovery when the learned dictionary is the same
size as the ground-truth dictionary, work on the
setting where the learned dictionary is larger (or
over-realized) with respect to the ground truth is
comparatively nascent. Existing theoretical results in this setting have been constrained to the
case of noise-less data. We show in this work
that, in the presence of noise, minimizing the
standard dictionary learning objective can fail to
recover the elements of the ground-truth dictionary in the over-realized regime, regardless of
the magnitude of the signal in the data-generating
process. Furthermore, drawing from the growing body of work on self-supervised learning, we
propose a novel masking objective for which recovering the ground-truth dictionary is in fact optimal as the signal increases for a large class of
data-generating processes. We corroborate our
theoretical results with experiments across several
parameter regimes showing that our proposed objective also enjoys better empirical performance
than the standard reconstruction objective.

In this case, the typical assumption is that we are given
data yi generated as yi ∼ Azi + ϵi , where A ∈ Rd×p is
a ground truth dictionary, zi is a sparse vector, and ϵi is
some potentially non-zero noise. When the dictionary A
is known a priori, the goal of modeling is to recover the
sparse representations zi , and the problem is referred to as
compressed sensing. However, in many applications we do
not have access to the ground truth A, and instead hope to
simultaneously learn a dictionary B that approximates A
along with learning sparse representations of the data.
This problem is referred to as sparse coding or sparse dictionary learning, and is the focus of this work. One of the
primary goals of analyses of sparse coding is to provide
provable guarantees on how well one can hope to recover
the ground truth dictionary A, both with respect to specific
algorithms and information theoretically. Prior work on
such guarantees has focused almost exclusively on the setting where the learned dictionary B also belongs to Rd×p
(same space as the ground truth), which is in line with the
fact that recovery error is usually formulated as some form
of the Frobenius norm of the difference between B and A.
Unfortunately, in practice, one does not necessarily have
access to the structure of A, and it is thus natural to consider
what happens (and how to formulate recovery error) when
′
learning a B ∈ Rd×p with p′ ̸= p. Of particular interest is
the case where p′ > p, where it is possible to recover A as
a sub-dictionary of B.

1. Introduction
Modeling signals as sparse combinations of latent variables
has been a fruitful approach in a variety of domains, and
has been especially useful in areas such as medical imaging (Zhang et al., 2017), neuroscience (Olshausen & Field,
2004), and genomics (Tibshirani & Wang, 2008), where

The study of this over-realized setting was recently taken
up in the work of Sulam et al. (2020), in which the authors
showed (perhaps surprisingly) that a modest level of overrealization can be empirically and theoretically beneficial.

1

Department of Computer Science, Duke University
Department of Computer Science, Brown University. Correspondence to: Muthu Chidambaram <muthu@cs.duke.edu>.
2

However, the results of Sulam et al. (2020) are restricted
to the noise-less setting where data is generated simply as
yi ∼ Azi . We thus ask the following questions:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

