Fully Bayesian Autoencoders with Latent Sparse Gaussian Processes

Ba-Hien Tran 1 Babak Shahbaba 2 Stephan Mandt 2 Maurizio Filippone 1

Abstract

to a set of lower-dimensional latent codes and a decoder that
maps the latent codes back to the observations.

We present a fully Bayesian autoencoder model
that treats both local latent variables and global
decoder parameters in a Bayesian fashion. This
approach allows for flexible priors and posterior
approximations while keeping the inference costs
low. To achieve this, we introduce an amortized
MCMC approach by utilizing an implicit stochastic network to learn sampling from the posterior
over local latent variables. Furthermore, we extend the model by incorporating a Sparse Gaussian Process prior over the latent space, allowing for a fully Bayesian treatment of inducing
points and kernel hyperparameters and leading
to improved scalability. Additionally, we enable
Deep Gaussian Process priors on the latent space
and the handling of missing data. We evaluate
our model on a range of experiments focusing
on dynamic representation learning and generative modeling, demonstrating the strong performance of our approach in comparison to existing
methods that combine Gaussian Processes and
autoencoders.

In applications where data is scarce or uncertainty quantification is crucial, it is beneficial to treat these models in a
Bayesian manner (Mackay, 1992; Neal, 1996; Wilson & Izmailov, 2020; Izmailov et al., 2021) by imposing meaningful
prior distributions over both the parameters of the encoder
and decoder (Tran et al., 2021; Miani et al., 2022). A parallel
development are Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) that treat
the latent space of an autoencoder in a Bayesian fashion,
enabling scalable inference over a large number of local
(per-datapoint) latent variables using amortized variational
inference. Note that these models typically treat the encoder
and decoder as deterministic neural networks. In the related
works section, we further elaborate on the differences between several versions of AE models and the way Bayesian
inference is carried out.
A critical limitation of standard VAEs is their utilization
of factorized priors, which is inadequate for modeling correlations between latent encodings. However, capturing
latent correlations is often necessary to model structured
data. For example, in autonomous driving or medical imaging applications, high-dimensional images are correlated in
time. Spatio-temporal dependencies between samples are
also common in environmental and life sciences datasets.
To address this limitation, several works (Pearce, 2019;
Casale et al., 2018) have attempted to introduce Gaussian
process (GP) priors over the latent space of VAEs that capture correlations between pairs of latent variables through a
kernel function. While GP priors outperform conventional
priors on many tasks, they also introduce computational
challenges such as O(N 3 ) complexity for GP inference,
where N is the number of data instances. Recently, Jazbec
et al. (2021) proposed the SVGP-VAE model to tackle this
computational issue by relying on sparse approximations;
these summarize the dataset into a set of so-called inducing
points (Quiñonero-Candela & Rasmussen, 2005).

1. Introduction
The problem of learning representations of data that are
useful for downstream tasks is a crucial factor in the success of many machine learning applications (Bengio et al.,
2013). Among the numerous proposed solutions, modeling
approaches that evolved from autoencoders (AEs) (Cottrell
et al., 1989) are particularly appealing, as they do not require
annotated data and have proven effective in unsupervised
learning tasks, such as data compression and generative
modeling (Tomczak, 2022; Yang et al., 2022). AEs are neural networks consisting of an encoder that maps input data
1
Department of Data Science, EURECOM, France
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, USA. Correspondence to: Ba-Hien Tran
<ba-hien.tran@eurecom.fr>.
2

Although the SVGP-VAE model (Jazbec et al., 2021) has
achieved promising results, it has several significant drawbacks. First, similarly to VAEs, SVGP-VAE is strongly tied
to a variational inference (VI) formulation (Jordan et al.,
1999; Zhang et al., 2018), which can lead to poor approxi-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

