MonoFlow: Rethinking Divergence GANs via the
Perspective of Wasserstein Gradient Flows

Mingxuan Yi 1 Zhanxing Zhu 2 3 Song Liu 1

Abstract

eling framework that has gained tremendous attention in
recent years. GANs have achieved significant successes
in applications, especially in high-dimensional image processing such as high-fidelity image generation (Brock et al.,
2018; Karras et al., 2019), super-resolution (Ledig et al.,
2017) and domain adaption (Zhang et al., 2017).

The conventional understanding of adversarial training in generative adversarial networks
(GANs) is that the discriminator is trained to estimate a divergence, and the generator learns to
minimize this divergence. We argue that despite
the fact that many variants of GANs were developed following this paradigm, the current theoretical understanding of GANs and their practical
algorithms are inconsistent. In this paper, we
leverage Wasserstein gradient flows which characterize the evolution of particles in the sample
space, to gain theoretical insights and algorithmic
inspiration for GANs. We introduce a unified generative modeling framework – MonoFlow: the
particle evolution is rescaled via a monotonically
increasing mapping of the log density ratio. Under
our framework, adversarial training can be viewed
as a procedure first obtaining MonoFlow’s vector
field via training the discriminator and the generator learns to draw the particle flow defined by
the corresponding vector field. We also reveal the
fundamental difference between variational divergence minimization and adversarial training. This
analysis helps us to identify what types of generator loss functions can lead to the successful training of GANs and suggest that GANs may have
more loss designs beyond the literature (e.g., nonsaturated loss), as long as they realize MonoFlow.
Consistent empirical studies are included to validate the effectiveness of our framework.

In the GAN framework, a discriminator d and a generator
g play a minmax game. The discriminator is trained to
distinguish real and fake samples and the generator is trained
to generate fake samples to fool the discriminator. The
equilibrium of the vanilla GAN is defined by1

min max V (g, d) =Ex∼pdata log σ[d(x)] +
g
d

 (1)
Ez∼pz log 1 − σ[d(g(z))]
The elementary optimization approach to solve the minmax game is adversarial training. Previous perspectives explained it as first estimating Jensen-Shannon divergence and
the generator learns to minimize this divergence. Several
variants of GANs have been developed based on this point
of view for other probability divergences, e.g., χ2 divergence (Mao et al., 2017), Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
(Arbel et al., 2021) and general f -divergences (Nowozin
et al., 2016; Uehara et al., 2016), while others are developed
with Integral Probability Metrics (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Dziugaite et al., 2015; Mroueh et al., 2018a). However, we
emphasize that the traditional perspective on GANs is inconsistent and we present three non-negligible facts which are
commonly associated with adversarial training, making it
markedly different from the standard variational divergence
minimization (VDM) problem:

1. Introduction

1. The estimated divergence is computed from the discriminator d(x). d(x) is trained using samples x only
such that it cannot capture the variability of the generator’s distribution pg (Metz et al., 2017; Franceschi
et al., 2022). However, the optimal discriminator in the
adversarial game by Goodfellow et al. (2014) requires
pg to be a functional variable such that the dependency
between the optimal discriminator and pg exists, i.e.,

Generative adversarial nets (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Jabbar et al., 2021) are a powerful generative mod1

University of Bristol. 2 Changping National Laboratory, China.
3
Peking University. Correspondence to: Mingxuan Yi <mingxuan.yi@bristol.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

We use a slightly different notation: d(x) is the logit output of
the classifier and σ(·) is the Sigmoid activation.

