Quantum Policy Gradient Algorithm with Optimized Action Decoding

Nico Meyer 1 2 Daniel D. Scherer 1 Axel Plinge 1 Christopher Mutschler 1 Michael J. Hartmann 2

Abstract

environment

state

action at

st

U (st , λ)

U (θ)

variational quantum circuit

0100 · · · 1

Quantum machine learning implemented by variational quantum circuits (VQCs) is considered
a promising concept for the noisy intermediatescale quantum computing era. Focusing on applications in quantum reinforcement learning, we
propose an action decoding procedure for a quantum policy gradient approach. We introduce a
quality measure that enables us to optimize the
classical post-processing required for action selection, inspired by local and global quantum measurements. The resulting algorithm demonstrates
a significant performance improvement in several
benchmark environments. With this technique,
we successfully execute a full training routine on
a 5-qubit hardware device. Our method introduces
only negligible classical overhead and has the potential to improve VQC-based algorithms beyond
the field of quantum reinforcement learning.

classical

postprocessing

Figure 1. Proposed method: The prepared quantum state is measured in the computational basis. The results are post-processed
(with a function maximizing our proposed globality measure) before selecting an action. The update of the parameters Θ = (θ, λ)
utilizes the same post-processing scheme.

e.g. in the domains of self-driving cars (Bojarski et al., 2016)
or MIMO beamforming (Maksymyuk et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) currently receives increasing
attention due to its potential in a multitude of applications.
In an RL setup, an agent aims to learn a control strategy, i.e.,
a policy, for a specific problem. Training such a policy can
require approximating a complex, multimodal distribution,
which is often done with a deep neural network (DNN).
With increasing problem difficulty, this approach potentially
has an undesirable sampling and model complexity (Kakade,
2003; Nielsen, 2015; Poggio et al., 2020). Training data is
obtained by interaction with the environment via actions,
which returns a reward value and a new state. One can optimize the parameters of the policy to maximize the long-term
reward with gradient-based techniques, forming a policy gradient (PG) algorithm. Real-world applications can be found

Exploring the possibilities of other computing paradigms
might elevate the impact of RL, e.g. by circumventing the
problems caused by increasing parameter complexity of
DNN-based models. Quantum computing (QC), based on
the idea of exploiting quantum mechanical properties for
computation, might offer advantages in the approximation
and sampling from complex distributions. Although the
development of quantum computers is still in its infancy, a
number of studies have already claimed experimental results
beyond classical capabilities on specific tasks (Arute et al.,
2019; Zhong et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021).
The nowadays available quantum devices are considered noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) hardware (Preskill, 2018), i.e., they only provide a limited
amount of qubits that are heavily affected by noise. Therefore, a major part of current research focuses on strategies
and algorithms that are able to cope with these restrictions,
while at the same time aiming for computational power
beyond what is possible classically. A promising idea suggests using variational quantum algorithms as a platform for
quantum machine learning (QML) (Benedetti et al., 2019;

1

Fraunhofer IIS, Fraunhofer Institute for Integrated Circuits IIS, Nuremberg, Germany 2 Department of Physics,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg (FAU),
Erlangen, Germany.
Correspondence to: Nico Meyer
<nico.meyer@iis.fraunhofer.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

