Width and Depth Limits Commute in Residual Networks

Soufiane Hayou 1

Greg Yang 2

Abstract

However, in this paper, we show: to the contrary, at initialization, for a resnet with branches scaled the natural way so
as to avoid blowing up the output,1 the width and depth limits do commute. This justifies prior calculations that take
the width limit first, then depth, to understand the behavior
of deep residual networks, such as prior works in the signal
propagation literature (Hayou, Clerico, et al., 2021).

We show that taking the width and depth to infinity in a deep neural network with skip√connections, when branches are scaled by 1/ depth,
result in the same covariance structure no matter
how that limit is taken. This explains why the
standard infinite-width-then-depth approach provides practical insights even for networks with
depth of the same order as width. We also
demonstrate that the pre-activations, in this case,
have Gaussian distributions which has direct applications in Bayesian deep learning. We conduct extensive simulations that show an excellent
match with our theoretical findings.

In addition to the significance of the results, the mathematical novelty of this paper is the proof technique: we take the
depth limit first (fixing width), then take the width limit, in
contrast to the typical prior work which takes the limits in
the opposite order. In the process, we prove a concentration of measure result for a kind of McKean-Vlasov process (Mean-Field games). Our results provide new insights
into the behavior of deep neural networks and we discuss
implications for the design and analysis of these networks.

1. Introduction

The proofs of the theoretical results are provided in the appendix and referenced after each result. Empirical evaluations support our theoretical findings.

In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in a variety of tasks, such as image classification and natural language processing. However, the
behavior of these networks in the limit of large depth and
large width is still not fully understood.

2. Related Work
The theoretical analysis of randomly initialized neural networks with an infinite number of parameters has yielded
a wealth of interesting results, both theoretical and practical. A majority of this research has concentrated on examining the scenario in which the width of the network is
taken to infinity while the depth is fixed. However, in recent years, there has been a growing interest in exploring
the large depth limit of these networks. In this overview, we
present a summary of existing results in this area, though
it’s not exhaustive. A more comprehensive literature review
is provided in Appendix A.

The success of large language and vision models have recently amplified an existing trend of research on neural
network limits. Two main limits are the large-width and
the large-depth limits. While the former by itself is now
relatively well understood (Neal, 1995; Schoenholz et al.,
2017; Lee et al., 2018; Hayou, Doucet, et al., 2019a; Yang,
2020a), the latter and the interaction between the two have
not been studied as much. In particular, a basic question is:
do these two limits commute? Recent literature suggests
that, at initialization, in certain kinds of multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) or residual neural networks (resnets), the
depth and width limits do not commute; this would imply
that in practice, such kinds of networks would behave quite
differently depending on whether width is much larger than
depth or the other way around.

2.1. Infinite-width limit
The study of the infinite-width limit of neural network architectures has been a topic of significant research interest,
yielding various theoretical and algorithmic innovations.
These include initialization methods, such as the Edge of
Chaos (Poole et al., 2016; Schoenholz et al., 2017; Yang

1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore 2 Microsoft Research AI. Correspondence to: Soufiane
Hayou <hayou@nus.edu.sg>.

1

This contrasts with M. B. Li et al., 2022 whose non-commute
result requires the branches to be large enough to blow up the
network output in the case of standard resnet.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

