Efficient Transformed Gaussian Processes for
Non-Stationary Dependent Multi-class Classification

Juan Maroñas 1 2 Daniel Hernández-Lobato 1

Abstract

which have become a uniquely popular modeling tool. For
example, in the machine learning community GPs are used
as prior distributions over functions, used to solve tasks such
as regression, classification, feature extraction or hyperparameter optimization (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006;
Lawrence, 2003; Snoek et al., 2012). Their non-parametric
nature means that they become more expressive with more
data (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006). Furthermore, GPs are
characterized by a predictive distribution which provides
information about what the model does not know (Gal,
2016) and are easy to interpret since the covariance function
gives insights about the nature of the latent function to be
inferred (Duvenaud et al., 2013). GPs have also been applied
in spatial statistics (Krige, 1951), and to explain physics
phenomena such as those that arise when studying molecular dynamics (Leimkuhler & Matthews, 2015; Uhlenbeck
& Ornstein, 1930). Moreover, they are used as a theoretical
tool to understand Deep Neural Networks (DNN) (Neal,
1996; Yang, 2019) and lie at the core of a recent family of
Deep Generative Models that generate samples attending
to the dynamics of a diffusion process (Song et al., 2021).

This work introduces the Efficient Transformed
Gaussian Process (ETGP), a new way of creating
C stochastic processes characterized by: 1) the C
processes are non-stationary, 2) the C processes
are dependent by construction without needing a
mixing matrix, 3) training and making predictions
is very efficient since the number of Gaussian
Processes (GP) operations (e.g. inverting the
inducing point’s covariance matrix) do not depend
on the number of processes. This makes the ETGP
particularly suited for multi-class problems with
a very large number of classes, which are the
problems studied in this work. ETGP exploits the
recently proposed Transformed Gaussian Process
(TGP), a stochastic process specified by transforming a Gaussian Process using an invertible
transformation. However, unlike TGP, ETGP is constructed by transforming a single sample from a
GP using C invertible transformations. We derive
an efficient sparse variational inference algorithm
for the proposed model and demonstrate its utility
in 5 classification tasks which include low/medium/large datasets and a different number of
classes, ranging from just a few to hundreds. Our
results show that ETGP, in general, outperforms
state-of-the-art methods for multi-class classification based on GPs, and has a lower computational
cost (around one order of magnitude smaller).

In this paper, we focus on multi-class classification problems with C > 2 classes. For this, one often defines C independent GPs, one per each class (Rasmussen & Williams,
2006). In this case, the number of GP operations (such as
inverting the covariance matrix associated to the inducing
points) grows linearly with C. Thus, if C is large, this can
be too expensive. Some speed-up tricks include sharing the
inducing points or the covariance function across GPs, but
this may reduce prediction performance, as we show in our
experiments. Even with this trick, computing the predictive
distribution still has complexity O(CM 2 ) per datapoint.

1. Introduction

We can gain additional performance by defining a prior
process using C dependent GPs, which can be done by combining Q latent GPs with a mixing matrix Φ ∈ RQ×C . In
practice, however, these dependencies are often ignored
since the memory complexity scales as O(C 2 ) per datapoint.
In fact, modern SOTA GP software’s like GPFLOW (Matthews
et al., 2017; van der Wilk et al., 2020) require significant
source code modification (up to early 2023) to handle these
dependencies in an efficient way.

Gaussian Processes (GPs) are stochastic processes characterized by their finite-dimensional distributions being
multivariate Gaussian (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006),
1
Machine Learning Group, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain 2 Work done previous to joining Cognizant, Madrid, Spain. Correspondence to: Juan Maroñas
<juan.maronnas@uam.es, jmaronasm@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

A disadvantage of GPs is that they usually impose strong
1

