Robust Speech Recognition via Large-Scale Weak Supervision

Alec Radford * 1 Jong Wook Kim * 1 Tao Xu 1 Greg Brockman 1 Christine McLeavey 1 Ilya Sutskever 1

Abstract

training dataset which boost performance on held-out data
from the same dataset. However, some of these patterns are
brittle and spurious and don’t generalize to other datasets
and distributions. In a particularly disturbing example, Radford et al. (2021) documented a 9.2% increase in object
classification accuracy when fine-tuning a computer vision
model on the ImageNet dataset (Russakovsky et al., 2015)
without observing any improvement in average accuracy
when classifying the same objects on seven other natural
image datasets. A model that achieves “superhuman” performance when trained on a dataset can still make many
basic errors when evaluated on another, possibly precisely
because it is exploiting those dataset-specific quirks that
humans are oblivious to (Geirhos et al., 2020).

We study the capabilities of speech processing systems trained simply to predict large amounts of
transcripts of audio on the internet. When scaled
to 680,000 hours of multilingual and multitask
supervision, the resulting models generalize well
to standard benchmarks and are often competitive with prior fully supervised results without the
need for any dataset specific fine-tuning. When
compared to humans, the models approach their
accuracy and robustness. We are releasing models
and inference code to serve as a foundation for
further work on robust speech processing.

This suggests that while unsupervised pre-training has improved the quality of audio encoders dramatically, the lack
of an equivalently high-quality pre-trained decoder, combined with a recommended protocol of dataset-specific finetuning, is a crucial weakness which limits their usefulness
and robustness. The goal of a speech recognition system
should be to work reliably “out of the box” in a broad range
of environments without requiring supervised fine-tuning of
a decoder for every deployment distribution.

1. Introduction
Progress in speech recognition has been energized by the
development of unsupervised pre-training techniques exemplified by Wav2Vec 2.0 (Baevski et al., 2020). Since these
methods learn directly from raw audio without the need for
human labels, they can productively use large datasets of unlabeled speech and have been quickly scaled up to 1,000,000
hours of training data (Zhang et al., 2021), far more than the
1,000 or so hours typical of an academic supervised dataset.
When fine-tuned on standard benchmarks, this approach
has improved the state of the art, especially in a low-data
setting.

As demonstrated by Narayanan et al. (2018), Likhomanenko
et al. (2020), and Chan et al. (2021) speech recognition systems that are pre-trained in a supervised fashion across many
datasets/domains exhibit higher robustness and generalize
much more effectively to held-out datasets than models
trained on a single source. These works achieve this by
combining as many existing high-quality speech recognition datasets as possible. However, there is still only a
moderate amount of this data easily available. SpeechStew
(Chan et al., 2021) mixes together 7 pre-existing datasets
totalling 5,140 hours of supervision. While not insignificant, this is still tiny compared to the previously mentioned
1,000,000 hours of unlabeled speech data utilized in Zhang
et al. (2021).

These pre-trained audio encoders learn high-quality representations of speech, but because they are purely unsupervised they lack an equivalently performant decoder mapping
those representations to usable outputs, necessitating a finetuning stage in order to actually perform a task such as
speech recognition1 . This unfortunately limits their usefulness and impact as fine-tuning can still be a complex
process requiring a skilled practitioner. There is an additional risk with requiring fine-tuning. Machine learning
methods are exceedingly adept at finding patterns within a
Equal contribution 1 OpenAI, San Francisco, CA 94110, USA.
Correspondence to: Alec Radford <alec@openai.com>, Jong
Wook Kim <jongwook@openai.com>.

Recognizing the limiting size of existing high-quality supervised datasets, recent efforts have created larger datasets for
speech recognition. By relaxing the requirement of goldstandard human-validated transcripts, Chen et al. (2021) and

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Baevski et al. (2021) is an exciting exception - having developed a fully unsupervised speech recognition system

*

1

