End-to-End Full-Atom Antibody Design

Xiangzhe Kong 1 2 Wenbing Huang 3 4 Yang Liu 1 2
n

Antibody design is an essential yet challenging
task in various domains like therapeutics and
biology. There are two major defects in current learning-based methods: 1) tackling only
a certain subtask of the whole antibody design
pipeline, making them suboptimal or resourceintensive. 2) omitting either the framework regions or side chains, thus incapable of capturing
the full-atom geometry. To address these pitfalls,
we propose dynamic Multi-channel Equivariant
grAph Network (dyMEAN), an end-to-end fullatom model for E(3)-equivariant antibody design
given the epitope and the incomplete sequence of
the antibody. Specifically, we first explore structural initialization as a knowledgeable guess of
the antibody structure and then propose shadow
paratope to bridge the epitope-antibody connections. Both 1D sequences and 3D structures are
updated via an adaptive multi-channel equivariant encoder that is able to process protein residues
of variable sizes when considering full atoms. Finally, the updated antibody is docked to the epitope via the alignment of the shadow paratope.
Experiments on epitope-binding CDR-H3 design,
complex structure prediction, and affinity optimization demonstrate the superiority of our endto-end framework and full-atom modeling.

r
St

io
ic t
ed
pr ld)
e
r
tu Fo
uc (Ig

Docking
(HDock)

CDR generation
(MEAN)

Pipeline

g
in
ck
pa
in ta )
ha et
-c os
de (R
Si

Abstract

Side chains

Antigen
Epitope

End-to-end (ours)
Antibody
VH: ...YFC????????????WGQ...
VL : ...FATYFCLQGKGLPWTFG...

VH: ...YFCARGYYYGYYFDYWGQ...
VL : ...FATYFCLQGKGLPWTFG...

Figure 1. Our end-to-end full-atom antibody design. By contrast,
current computational methods resort to the multi-stage solution: e.g., IgFold (Ruffolo & Gray, 2022) for structure prediction, HDock (Yan et al., 2020) for docking on the target epitope, MEAN (Kong et al., 2022) for binding CDR generation,
and Rosetta (Alford et al., 2017) for side-chain packing.

and necessity in therapeutic and biological research (Tiller &
Tessier, 2015; Almagro et al., 2018; Yuan et al., 2020). Nevertheless, the task is challenging because the complementarity determining regions (CDRs), where the binding mainly
occurs, are highly variant, and the underlying regularity of
antigen-antibody interactions is arduous to unveil. The past
decade has seen the application of traditional energy-based
optimization (Li et al., 2014; Adolf-Bryfogle et al., 2018),
learning-based language models on the 1D sequence (Liu
et al., 2020; Saka et al., 2021), as well as recent deep generative methods to co-design the CDR sequences and 3D
structures simultaneously, exhibiting appealing superiority
over conventional sequence-based approaches. (Jin et al.,
2021; Luo et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2022).

1. Introduction

Despite the impressive progress, current computational models are still incapable of fulfilling the real need for antibody design. In most practical cases, we only know the
3D structure of antigen with the target epitope and the 1D
incomplete sequence (without CDRs) of antibody. To address this ill-posed task, a potential computational pipeline
includes: structure prediction (Ruffolo & Gray, 2022),
antigen-antibody docking (Yan et al., 2020), binding CDR
generation (Jin et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2022; Kong et al.,
2022), and side-chain packing (Alford et al., 2017), as illustrated in Figure 1. Existing works can solve each local problem separately, but lacks the mastery of the global picture,
making them suboptimal. Conducting wet-lab experiments,
such as obtaining the antigen-antibody complex structure

Antibodies are a family of Y-shaped proteins in immune
systems that binds to pathogens, commonly called antigens,
with specificity (Raybould et al., 2019). Antibody design for
target epitopes on the antigen exhibits tremendous potential
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua University 2 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR),
Tsinghua University 3 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence,
Renmin University of China 4 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data
Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>, Yang Liu
<liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

