Adaptive Computation with Elastic Input Sequence

Fuzhao Xue † 1 2 Valerii Likhosherstov 1 Anurag Arnab 1 Neil Houlsby 1 Mostafa Dehghani ‡ 1 Yang You 2

Abstract

tation could potentially be a powerful and essential inductive
bias for solving challenging problems that would have been
significantly harder otherwise (Dehghani et al., 2018; Banino et al., 2021; Shemiranifar & Dehghani, 2023; Tay et al.,
2022). Secondly, adaptive computation could imbue practitioners with downstream flexibility pertaining to the usage
of these models. For the most part, altering the computation
budget of a model after it has been trained becomes almost
impossible. Hence, the ability to flexibly scale computational
costs and budgets dynamically is highly desirable.

Humans have the ability to adapt the type of information they use, the procedure they employ, and
the amount of time they spend when solving problems. However, most standard neural networks
have a fixed function type and computation budget
regardless of the sample’s nature or difficulty.
Adaptivity is a powerful paradigm as it not only
imbues practitioners with flexibility pertaining to
the downstream usage of these models but can also
serve as a powerful inductive bias for solving certain challenging classes of problems. In this work,
we introduce a new approach called AdaTape,
which allows for dynamic computation in neural
networks through adaptive tape tokens. AdaTape
utilizes an elastic input sequence by equipping
an architecture with a dynamic read-and-write
tape. Specifically, we adaptively generate input
sequences using tape tokens obtained from a tape
bank which can be either trainable or derived from
input data. We examine the challenges and requirements to obtain dynamic sequence content and
length, and propose the Adaptive Tape Reading
(ATR) algorithm to achieve both goals. Through
extensive experiments on image recognition tasks,
we show that AdaTape can achieve better performance while maintaining the computational cost.
To facilitate further research, we have released
code at https://github.com/google-research/scenic.

This paper proposes AdaTape, a new general-purpose
adaptive computation method. The key idea is to introduce
elastic input sequences via the means of a dynamic read and
write memory tape. Unlike all prior works that investigate
adaptivity via sparse conditional computation (Fedus
et al., 2022; 2021; Lepikhin et al., 2020) or adaptivity
through recursion over architecture (Dehghani et al., 2018;
Banino et al., 2021; Graves, 2016), this work presents
a new perspective that explores adaptivity with respect
to input sequence length (or read/write memory tapes
from the perspective of a Neural Turing Machine (Graves
et al., 2014)). We postulate that this exploration is crucial
for the development of this class of methods and is very
complementary to the existing suite of methods developed
to encourage adaptive computation in neural networks.
AdaTape promotes adaptivity in both type and amount of
computation. Specifically, AdaTape controls (1) the contents
of the tape tokens (2) the number of tape tokens, that are
used for each input. To this end, AdaTape is characterized by
a tape bank that can be dynamically read from, using a newly
proposed dynamic halting algorithm which we call Adaptive
Tape Reading (ATR). Concretely, ATR method adaptively
and dynamically selects the content and length of this
memory tape which is appended to the inputs of a standard
Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). Given that the increasing
computation budget generally leads to improved quality
(Kaplan et al., 2020; Dehghani et al., 2021a; Hoffmann et al.,
2022; Zhai et al., 2022; Abnar et al., 2021; Likhosherstov
et al., 2021), this enables a new way for adaptively scaling
the computation budget without adding new parameters or
applying a part of the model recursively.

1. Introduction
Adaptive computation is central to human intelligence. This
is clear, given that humans spend a variable amount of time
and energy on different problems depending on their complexity (Meunier et al., 2009). Adaptivity in neural networks
is attractive for two key reasons. Firstly, adaptive compu†
Work performed while at Google ‡ Project lead 1 Google
Brain 2 National University of Singapore. Correspondence to:
Fuzhao Xue <xuefuzhao24@gmail.com>, Mostafa Dehghani
<dehghani@google.com>.

To ascertain the effectiveness of the proposed AdaTape
method, we first evaluate it on the challenging Parity

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

