Towards Deep Attention in Graph Neural Networks:
Problems and Remedies
Soo Yong Lee 1 Fanchen Bu 2 Jaemin Yoo 3 Kijung Shin 1 2

Abstract

diction (Qiu et al., 2018), traffic forecast (Derrow-Pinion
et al., 2021), physical system modeling (Sanchez-Gonzalez
et al., 2020), product recommendation (Wu et al., 2022),
and drug discovery (Stokes et al., 2020).

Graph neural networks (GNNs) learn the representation of graph-structured data, and their expressiveness can be further enhanced by inferring
node relations for propagation. Attention-based
GNNs infer neighbor importance to manipulate
the weight of its propagation. Despite their popularity, the discussion on deep graph attention
and its unique challenges has been limited. In
this work, we investigate some problematic phenomena related to deep graph attention, including vulnerability to over-smoothed features and
smooth cumulative attention. Through theoretical and empirical analyses, we show that various
attention-based GNNs suffer from these problems.
Motivated by our findings, we propose AEROGNN, a novel GNN architecture designed for
deep graph attention. AERO-GNN provably mitigates the proposed problems of deep graph attention, which is further empirically demonstrated
with (a) its adaptive and less smooth attention
functions and (b) higher performance at deep layers (up to 64). On 9 out of 12 node classification
benchmarks, AERO-GNN outperforms the baseline GNNs, highlighting the advantages of deep
graph attention. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/syleeheal/AERO-GNN.

GNNs widely adopt message-passing frameworks, composed of two main pillars: feature transformation and propagation (a.k.a. neighborhood aggregation) (Wu et al., 2019;
Gilmer et al., 2017). Feature transformation updates node
features from previous layers’ features. Propagation involves each node passing its own features to its neighbors,
and for each node, the passed-down neighbor features are aggregated to update its own node features. In this framework,
a propagation layer determines the propagation weight for
each adjacent node pair, and each additional layer allows
nodes to propagate to one more hop of neighbors.
Attention-based GNNs aim to learn to propagate by inferring the relational importance between node pairs. Graph
attention infers relational importance for node pairs. Among
many, GAT and its variants (Veličković et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2019; Brody et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2021; Kim & Oh,
2021; Bo et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a; Yang et al., 2021;
He et al., 2021) learn edge attention. The edge-attention
models infer the importance, or weight, of each neighbor
w.r.t. each source node by applying an attention mechanism
between adjacent node pairs. During propagation, each
source node aggregates features from its neighbors based
on the inferred importance.
Another class of GNNs, which we call hop-attention (or
layer-attention) models, learns the relative importance of
each hop (Liu et al., 2020; Chien et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2022; Chanpuriya & Musco, 2022). Hop-attention models
apply attention coefficients at every propagation layer to
express the relative importance of a given hop in determining the final node features. Thereby, hop-attention models
learn which hops, among multi-hop neighbors, each source
node should attend to during propagation. Intuitively, edgeattention models learn importance within each hop, and
hop-attention models learn importance of each hop.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a class of neural networks for representation learning on graph-structured data.
Recently, GNNs have been successfully applied to a wide
range of graph-related tasks, including social influence pre1

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence,
KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 2 School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea 3 Heinz College
of Information Systems and Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Kijung Shin
<kijungs@kaist.ac.kr>.

Can the existing attention-based GNNs learn expressive attention over deep layers? Prior research does not provide a
clear answer. While many studies report the over-smoothing
problem of node features at deep layers (Li et al., 2018;

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

