Explore and Exploit the Diverse Knowledge in Model Zoo
for Domain Generalization
Yimeng Chen 1 2 Tianyang Hu 3 Fengwei Zhou 3 Zhenguo Li 3 Zhiming Ma 1 2

Abstract

et al., 2018b; Dai & Van Gool, 2018). A central cause for
such failures has been recognized as the vulnerability to
the distribution shifts of the test data (Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2021). This can occur when test
data is collected under new conditions such as different
weather (Volk et al., 2019), locations (Beery et al., 2018b),
or light conditions (Dai & Van Gool, 2018), resulting in a
distribution that differs from the training set.

The proliferation of pretrained models, as a result of advancements in pretraining techniques,
has led to the emergence of a vast zoo of publicly available models. Effectively utilizing these
resources to obtain models with robust out-ofdistribution generalization capabilities for downstream tasks has become a crucial area of research.
Previous research has primarily focused on identifying the most powerful models within the model
zoo, neglecting to fully leverage the diverse inductive biases contained within. This paper argues
that the knowledge contained in weaker models is
valuable and presents a method for leveraging the
diversity within the model zoo to improve out-ofdistribution generalization capabilities. Specifically, we investigate the behaviors of various
pretrained models across different domains of
downstream tasks by characterizing the variations
in their encoded representations in terms of two
dimensions: diversity shift and correlation shift.
This characterization enables us to propose a new
algorithm for integrating diverse pretrained models, not limited to the strongest models, in order to
achieve enhanced out-of-distribution generalization performance. Our proposed method demonstrates state-of-the-art empirical results on a variety of datasets, thus validating the benefits of
utilizing diverse knowledge.

To address this challenge, the task of domain generalization
(DG) has gained significant attention, where models are
trained on multiple source domains in order to improve their
generalizability to unseen domains (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz,
2021). Multiple DG algorithms have been proposed from
various perspectives. However, this problem is still far from
being resolved. For example, Ye et al. (2022) have identified
two distinct categories of data distribution shifts, namely diversity shift and correlation shift, and empirically observed
that the majority of existing algorithms are only able to
surpass the simple empirical risk minimization (ERM) in at
most one of the categories.
Exploiting pretrained models (PTMs) has shown to be one of
the most promising directions for addressing the challenge
of DG tasks (Wiles et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2022). Research
has demonstrated that pretraining can provide a significant
improvement in performance for DG tasks (Wiles et al.,
2022). The growing PTM hubs further bring in great opportunities. With the thriving of pretraining technologies,
we now have a huge amount of pretrained models (PTMs)
published. For example, Hugging Face Hub (2023) contains
over 80K models that vary in data sources, architectures, and
pretraining frameworks. Such a zoo of PTMs thus enjoys
both high transfer ability and diversity. By selecting optimal
PTMs for given DG datasets from a zoo of PTMs, Dong et
al. (2022) boosted the state-of-the-art DG performance on
some benchmarks for over 14%.

1. Introduction
Although remarkable success has been achieved on multiple
benchmarks, machine learning models encounter failures
in their real-world applications (Volk et al., 2019; Beery

While utilizing PTMs has proven to be a promising approach for domain generalization, it remains unclear how
to effectively leverage the diverse inductive biases present
in different PTMs. Ensemble methods of PTMs have been
explored (Dong et al., 2022; You et al., 2021), however,
these methods typically only consider the top-performing
models based on performance ranking scores. For exam-

1

Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Correspondence to: Tianyang Hu
<hutianyang1@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

