Model-Bellman Inconsistency for Model-based Offline Reinforcement Learning

Yihao Sun * 1 Jiaji Zhang * 1 2 Chengxing Jia 1 2 Haoxin Lin 1 2 Junyin Ye 1 2 Yang Yu 1 2 3

Abstract

direct applications of online off-policy algorithms perform
poorly in the offline setting (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar
et al., 2019). This is mainly attributed to the distribution
shift between the learned policy and the behavior policy
throughout training, which makes the policy evaluation on
out-of-distribution (OOD) samples quite inaccurate and induces terrible performance.

For offline reinforcement learning (RL), modelbased methods are expected to be data-efficient
as they incorporate dynamics models to generate more data. However, due to inevitable
model errors, straightforwardly learning a policy in the model typically fails in the offline setting. Previous studies have incorporated conservatism to prevent out-of-distribution exploration. For example, MOPO penalizes rewards
through uncertainty measures from predicting the
next states, which we have discovered are loose
bounds of the ideal uncertainty, i.e., the Bellman
error. In this work, we propose MOdel-Bellman
Inconsistency penalized offLinE Policy Optimization (MOBILE), a novel uncertainty-driven offline
RL algorithm. MOBILE conducts uncertainty
quantification through the inconsistency of Bellman estimations under an ensemble of learned
dynamics models, which can be a better approximator to the true Bellman error, and penalizes
the Bellman estimation based on this uncertainty.
Empirically we have verified that our proposed uncertainty quantification can be significantly closer
to the true Bellman error than the compared methods. Consequently, MOBILE outperforms prior
offline RL approaches on most tasks of D4RL and
NeoRL benchmarks.

Thus, a major principle for offline RL is to introduce conservatism to prevent the learned policy from executing OOD
actions. Model-free offline RL algorithms train a policy
from only the offline data and achieve conservatism by compelling the learned policy to be close to the behavior policy (Kumar et al., 2019; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021), or by penalizing the learned value functions from being over-optimistic
upon OOD actions (Kumar et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022).
Compared to the model-free approaches, model-based offline RL approaches (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020;
Yu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021) are inherently dataefficient as they incorporate dynamics models to generate
more data. With the help of supplementary synthetic data,
model-based algorithms can potentially generalize better
to states not present in the dataset. Similarly, model-based
offline RL also needs to incorporate conservatism due to
inevitable model errors (Xu et al., 2020; Janner et al., 2019;
Luo et al., 2019). To this end, some work (Yu et al., 2020;
Kidambi et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022) proposes to quantify
the uncertainty of learned dynamics models, and explicitly
apply it to penalize reward. For example, MOPO (Yu et al.,
2020) penalizes rewards through the aleatoric uncertainty
from predicting the next states. However, referring to recent
theoretical investigation on offline RL (Jin et al., 2021), we
have discovered such uncertainty quantification is a loose
bound of the ideal uncertainty, i.e., the Bellman error. Therefore, the performance of these model-based approaches falls
short of the model-free counterparts.

1. Introduction
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Lange et al., 2012;
Levine et al., 2020), which learns a policy from a previously collected static dataset, is a promising way to enable a
safe training paradigm compared to conventional RL, which
needs a lot of online trial-and-error explorations. However,

In this work, we propose MOBILE (MOdel-Bellman
Inconsistency Penalized OffLinE Policy Optimization), an
uncertainty-driven model-based algorithm for offline RL.
To better incorporate conservatism into the model utilization, we devise a novel uncertainty quantifier termed ModelBellman Inconsistency to penalize the value estimation in
the learned dynamics. Concretely, this quantifier estimates
the Bellman errors induced by the learned dynamics through

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
2
Polixir Technologies, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China. Correspondence to: Yang Yu
<yuy@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

