Smooth Non-stationary Bandits

Su Jia 1 Qian Xie 1 Nathan Kallus 1 Peter I. Frazier 1

Abstract

1)| ≤ V . The problem under this framework is well under
stood. In particular, an optimal regret bound Õ V 1/3 T 2/3
is known (Besbes et al., 2014), even when V is unknown
(Cheung et al., 2019).

In many applications of online decision making,
the environment is non-stationary and it is therefore crucial to use bandit algorithms that handle changes. Most existing approaches are designed to protect against non-smooth changes,
constrained only by total variation or Lipschitzness over time, where they guarantee Θ̃(T 2/3 )
regret. However, in practice environments are often changing smoothly, so such algorithms may
incur higher-than-necessary regret in these settings and do not leverage information on the rate
of change. We study a non-stationary two-armed
bandits problem where we assume that an arm’s
mean reward is a β-Hölder function over (normalized) time, meaning it is (β − 1)-times Lipschitzcontinuously differentiable. We show the first
separation between the smooth and non-smooth
regimes by presenting a policy with Õ(T 3/5 ) regret for β = 2. We complement this result by
an Ω(T (β+1)/(2β+1) ) lower bound for any integer β ≥ 1, which matches our upper bound for
β = 2.

This model may nonetheless be overly pessimistic for some
applications as it allows the adversary to instantaneously
shock the reward function’s slope. However, in many applications, the underlying environment changes in a smooth
manner, e.g., temperature, demand for a seasonal products,
economic factors, just to name a few.
This motivates us to consider adversaries constrained to
choose reward functions that are smooth in time. We model
the level of smoothness by borrowing a standard concept
from non-parametric statistics, called the Hölder class. As
formally defined in Section 2, a function is β-Hölder if the
first (β − 1) derivatives exist and are Lipschitz. In particular,
for β = 1, our model recovers the model of Besbes et al.
(2014) with V = O(1), which has an optimal Θ̃(T 2/3 )
regret. By setting β > 1, we constrain the adversary more
than in past literature. This motivates the following question:
Can we break the Õ(T 2/3 ) regret bound (i.e., optimal bound
for β = 1) under smooth non-stationarity (i.e., β ≥ 2)?
In this work, we provide an affirmative answer by showing
an Õ(T 3/5 ) upper bound for β = 2. A natural idea would
be to predict the derivative of the reward function and then
make decisions based on the predicted trend. Surprisingly,
our algorithm, which achieves the optimal regret, does not
use any derivative information. Moreover, we show that this
bound is in fact nearly optimal:1 for any integer β ≥ 1, we
show every policy has worst-case regret Ω(T (β+1)/(2β+1) ).

1. Introduction
As a fundamental variant of the MAB problem, nonstationary bandits provide a middleground between the
stochastic bandits (Lai et al., 1985) and adversarial bandits (Auer et al., 2002). In the standard non-stationary
model (Besbes et al., 2014), the mean reward function is
adversarially chosen in advance, and rewards are realized
stochastically.

1.1. Related Work
Past multi-armed bandit literature has recognized the importance of non-stationarity by considering several aspects: contextual information (Luo et al., 2018; Russac et al., 2019);
uncertainty in the number of changes (Auer et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2019); and Bayesian prior information (Trovo
et al., 2020). However, these papers make no smoothness
assumptions. (The “smoothly changing setting” in Trovo
et al. (2020) assumes Lipschitz reward functions that may

The adversary is confined by the total variation budget V :
the mean reward function ra (t) of every arm a is required to
PT
be Lipschitz and have total variation t=1 |ra (t) − ra (t +
1
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Su Jia <sj693@cornell.edu>, Qian Xie
<qx66@cornell.edu>, Nathan Kallus <kallus@cornell.edu>,
Peter I. Frazier <pf98@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Unless stated otherwise, “nearly optimal” means optimal up
to logarithmic factors.

1

