Text-To-Concept (and Back) via Cross-Model Alignment

Mazda Moayeri * 1 Keivan Rezaei * 1 Maziar Sanjabi 2 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract
We observe that the mapping between an image’s
representation in one model to its representation
in another can be learned surprisingly well with
just a linear layer, even across diverse models.
Building on this observation, we propose text-toconcept, where features from a fixed pretrained
model are aligned linearly to the CLIP space, so
that text embeddings from CLIP’s text encoder
become directly comparable to the aligned features. With text-to-concept, we convert fixed offthe-shelf vision encoders to surprisingly strong
zero-shot classifiers for free, with accuracy at
times even surpassing that of CLIP, despite being much smaller models and trained on a small
fraction of the data compared to CLIP. We show
other immediate use-cases of text-to-concept, like
building concept bottleneck models with no concept supervision, diagnosing distribution shifts in
terms of human concepts, and retrieving images
satisfying a set of text-based constraints. Lastly,
we demonstrate the feasibility of concept-to-text,
where vectors in a model’s feature space are decoded by first aligning to the CLIP before being
fed to a GPT-based generative model. Our work
suggests existing deep models, with presumably
diverse architectures and training, represent input
samples relatively similarly, and a two-way communication across model representation spaces
and to humans (through language) is viable.

Figure 1. Overview. After aligning the representation space of a
given image encoder to a CLIP image encoder, we can compare
aligned representations of images to concept vectors obtained
directly from text (typically, an example set of data is required to
obtain each concept vector; our method is example-free, i.e. O(1)
w.r.t. data collection). Using a GPT-based CLIP decoder, we can
map arbitrary vectors in representation space to text. Our method
yields efficient interpretability: we only train one linear layer.

terpret, mainly because it is hard for us to digest thousands
of numbers at once. Unlike deep models, which encode
concepts as vectors in high (e.g. d = 2048) dimensional
spaces, humans have developed language to describe the
world around us concisely. In this work, we propose a
method to map text to concept vectors that can be compared
directly to image representations obtained from off-the-shelf
vision encoders trained with no text supervision.

1. Introduction
The representation spaces of deep vision models are undoubtedly rich in semantic structure. However, these deep
feature spaces are notoriously challenging for humans to in-

Our method works by aligning the representation space of
a given vision model to the representation space of a CLIP
(Radford et al., 2021) model. By design, the CLIP representation space is shared across jointly trained vision and text
encoders. Thus, CLIP models already have text-to-concept
built in, via the text encoder. To extend this capability to
off-the-shelf models, we propose to learn a mapping between representation spaces. Specifically, we optimize a
function to predict the representation of an image for a target

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of University of Maryland 2 Meta AI. Correspondence
to: Mazda Moayeri <mmoayeri@umd.edu>, Keivan Rezaei
<krezaei@umd.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

