An Effective Meaningful Way to Evaluate Survival Models

Shi-ang Qi 1 Neeraj Kumar 2 Mahtab Farrokh 1 Weijie Sun 1 Li-Hao Kuan 1
Rajesh Ranganath 3 Ricardo Henao 4 Russell Greiner 1 2

Abstract

This paper focuses on the most prevalent type of censorship, right-censoring, which provides only a lower bound
on event time. For example, consider a patient who entered
a 5-year study at its beginning and was still alive at the end
of the study. We only know this patient survived for at least
5 years, but do not know whether that patient lived a day, a
month, or 20 years after the study ended.

One straightforward metric to evaluate a survival
prediction model is based on the Mean Absolute
Error (MAE) – the average of the absolute difference between the time predicted by the model
and the true event time, over all subjects. Unfortunately, this is challenging because, in practice,
the test set includes (right) censored individuals,
meaning we do not know when a censored individual actually experienced the event. In this
paper, we explore various metrics to estimate
MAE for survival datasets that include (many)
censored individuals. Moreover, we introduce a
novel and effective approach for generating realistic semi-synthetic survival datasets to facilitate
the evaluation of metrics. Our findings, based on
the analysis of the semi-synthetic datasets, reveal
that our proposed metric (MAE using pseudoobservations) is able to rank models accurately
based on their performance, and often closely
matches the true MAE – in particular, is better
than several alternative methods.

Numerous statistical and machine learning models have
been developed to estimate survival outcomes from input
features. In this paper, we focus on a class of survival
models that learns to compute an individual’s survival distribution (ISD) (Haider et al., 2020): a probability curve
for all future time points for a specific patient. Note that
one can use an individual’s ISD to (i) compute that individual’s expected time-to-event, (ii) provide single-time
estimations (e.g., 5-year cancer onset probability, like the
Gail model (Costantino et al., 1999)), or (iii) estimate a risk
score (like Cox Proportional Hazard model (Cox, 1972)).
Obviously, the computation of aforementioned quantities
from ISDs will only be reliable if a model’s predicted ISD
is “accurate”. One question that plagues the survival prediction community is: What is an appropriate scoring rule
for evaluating survival models? The answer may vary from
task to task – e.g., the concordance index (C-index) (Harrell Jr et al., 1996) is useful in several clinical problems that
require comparing patients, such as prioritizing patients for
liver transplants (a patient at the highest risk of death should
be treated first). Figure 1 shows a visualization of six typical
evaluation metrics (see discussion in Section 3).

1. Introduction
Survival prediction models are often used to predict how
long an individual will survive – or in general, the time
until an individual experiences a specific event. These have
many applications in medicine (time to death, relapse, or
recovery), business (time to service cancellation), and social
sciences (war or peace duration). Unlike typical regression problems, one challenge of training and evaluating a
survival prediction model is that survival datasets often contain censored observations (Klein & Moeschberger, 2003).

However, the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) seems to be
the most intuitive metric for evaluating survival prediction
models, as it measures the expected difference between predicted and actual event times. While this difference is trivial
to compute for uncensored individuals, it is problematic for
censored individuals. Thus, researchers have proposed several versions of MAE to handle censored individuals, such
as MAE-uncensored and MAE-hinge (Haider et al., 2020).
However, these approaches often produce biased MAEs for
high censoring.

1
Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Edmonton, Canada
3
Computer Science & Center for Data Science, New York University, New York City, USA 4 Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, Duke
University, Durham, USA. Correspondence to: Shi-ang Qi <shiang@ualberta.ca>, Russell Greiner <rgreiner@ualberta.ca>.
2

Here, we propose an MAE-inspired evaluation metric using
the pseudo-observation de-censoring technique (Andersen
et al., 2003), MAE-PO (defined in Section 3.6). Our metric

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

