Integrating Prior Knowledge in Contrastive Learning with Kernel

Benoit Dufumier 1 2 Carlo Alberto Barbano 2 3 Robin Louiset 1 2 Edouard Duchesnay 1 Pietro Gori 2

Abstract

The objective in CL is to increase the similarity in the representation space between positive samples (semantically
close), while decreasing the similarity between negative
samples (semantically distinct). Despite its simple formulation, it requires the definition of a similarity function (that
can be seen as an energy term (LeCun & Huang, 2005)),and
of a rule to decide whether a sample should be considered
positive or negative. Similarity functions, such as the Euclidean scalar product (e.g. InfoNCE (Oord et al., 2019)),
take as input the latent representations of an encoder f ∈ F,
such as a CNN (Chen et al., 2020b) or a Transformer (Caron
et al., 2021) for vision datasets.

Data augmentation is a crucial component in
unsupervised contrastive learning (CL). It determines how positive samples are defined and,
ultimately, the quality of the learnt representation. In this work, we open the door to new perspectives for CL by integrating prior knowledge,
given either by generative models–viewed as prior
representations– or weak attributes in the positive
and negative sampling. To this end, we use kernel
theory to propose a novel loss, called decoupled
uniformity, that i) allows the integration of prior
knowledge and ii) removes the negative-positive
coupling in the original InfoNCE loss. We draw a
connection between contrastive learning and conditional mean embedding theory to derive tight
bounds on the downstream classification loss. In
an unsupervised setting, we empirically demonstrate that CL benefits from generative models
to improve its representation both on natural and
medical images. In a weakly supervised scenario,
our framework outperforms other unconditional
and conditional CL approaches. Source code is
available at this https URL.

In supervised settings (Khosla et al., 2020), positives are
simply images belonging to the same class while negatives
are images belonging to different classes. In unsupervised
problems (Chen et al., 2020a), since labels are unknown,
positives are usually defined as transformed versions (views)
of the same original image (a.k.a. the anchor) and negatives
are the transformed versions of all other images. As a result, the augmentation distribution A used to sample both
positives and negatives is crucial (Chen et al., 2020a) and
it conditions the quality of the learnt representation. The
most-used augmentations for visual representations involve
aggressive crop and color distortion. Cropping induces representations with high occlusion invariance (Purushwalkam
& Gupta, 2020) whereas color distortion may avoid the
encoder f to take a shortcut (Chen et al., 2020a) while aligning positive samples and therefore to fall into the simplicity
bias (Shah et al., 2020).

1. Introduction
Contrastive Learning (CL) (Becker & Hinton, 1992; Bromley et al., 1993; Oord et al., 2019; Bachman et al., 2019;
Chen et al., 2020a) is a paradigm designed for selfsupervised representation learning which has been applied to unsupervised (Chen et al., 2020a;c), weakly supervised (Tsai et al., 2022; Dufumier et al., 2021) and supervised problems (Khosla et al., 2020). It gained popularity
during the last years by achieving impressive results in the
unsupervised setting on standard vision datasets (e.g. ImageNet) where it almost matched the performance of its
supervised counterpart (Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020).

Nevertheless, learning a representation that mainly relies
on augmentations comes at a cost: both crop and color distortion induce strong biases in the final representation (Purushwalkam & Gupta, 2020). Specifically, dominant objects
inside images can prevent the model from learning features
of smaller objects (Chen et al., 2021) (which is not apparent in object-centric datasets such as ImageNet) and few,
irrelevant and easy-to-learn features, that are shared among
views, are sufficient to collapse the representation (Chen
et al., 2021) (a.k.a feature suppression). Finding the right
augmentations in other visual domains, such as medical
imaging, remains an open challenge (Dufumier et al., 2021)
since we need to find transformations that preserve semantic
anatomical structures (e.g. discriminative between pathological and healthy) while removing unwanted noise. If

1

NeuroSpin, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay 2 LTCI, Télécom
Paris, IPParis 3 University of Turin. Correspondence to: Benoit
Dufumier <benoit.dufumier@cea.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

