KDEformer: Accelerating Transformers via Kernel Density Estimation

Amir Zandieh 1 Insu Han * 2 Majid Daliri * 3 Amin Karbasi 2

Abstract

because naïve exact computation of their attention layers
incurs quadratic (in sequence length) runtime and memory
complexities. This can inhibit the training of large-scale
long-sequence models.

Dot-product attention mechanism plays a crucial
role in modern deep architectures (e.g., Transformer) for sequence modeling, however, naïve
exact computation of this model incurs quadratic
time and memory complexities in sequence length,
hindering the training of long-sequence models.
Critical bottlenecks are due to the computation
of partition functions in the denominator of softmax function as well as the multiplication of
the softmax matrix with the matrix of values.
Our key observation is that the former can be
reduced to a variant of the kernel density estimation (KDE) problem, and an efficient KDE solver
can be further utilized to accelerate the latter via
subsampling-based fast matrix products. Our proposed KDEformer can approximate the attention
in sub-quadratic time with provable spectral norm
bounds, while all prior results merely provide
entry-wise error bounds. Empirically, we verify
that KDEformer outperforms other attention approximations in terms of accuracy, memory, and
runtime on various pre-trained models. On BigGAN image generation, we achieve better generative scores than the exact computation with over
4× speedup. For ImageNet classification with
T2T-ViT, KDEformer shows over 18× speedup
while the accuracy drop is less than 0.5%.

Several algorithms have been proposed to improve Transformers’ efficiency via approximating the softmax matrices
in their attention layers with either sparse matrices (Kitaev et al., 2020; Daras et al., 2020; Roy et al., 2021; Sun
et al., 2021) or low-rank matrices (Choromanski et al., 2021;
Katharopoulos et al., 2020), or a combination of both (Chen
et al., 2021b; Zaheer et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021a; Dass
et al., 2022). However, all prior advances solely focused on
point-wise approximating the entries of the softmax matrix
and fail to provide rigorous approximation guarantees on
the final output of the attention mechanism. In this work,
we design algorithms to approximate the output matrix of
attention layers with provable spectral norm guarantees.
1.1. Problem Formulation and Setting.
Let n be the number of tokens in the input sequence and d
be the dimension of latent representations. The dot-product
attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) is a mapping which takes
inputs Q, K, V ∈ Rn×d (interpreted as queries, keys, and
values of a dictionary) and outputs the following matrix:
Att(Q, K, V) := D−1 AV

√ 
A := exp QK⊤ / d , D := diag(A1n ),
where exp(·) is applied in an element-wise manner, 1n is
the ones vector in Rn , and diag(·) maps its input vector to a
diagonal matrix. We refer to A ∈ Rn×n as the attention matrix and to D−1 A as the softmax matrix. Exact computation
of the attention matrix A takes Θ(n2 d) operations and storing it requires Θ(n2 ) memory. Thus, naïve computation of
Att(Q, K, V) requires Ω(n2 d) runtime and Ω(n2 ) memory.
Our aim is to approximate the output matrix Att(Q, K, V)
efficiently while preserving its spectral structure.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have been successfully
applied to a wide variety of learning tasks in areas such
as natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Yang
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020), computer vision (Carion et al., 2020; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021),
and time series forecasting (Zhou et al., 2021). Although
popular, these models face serious scalability limitations
*

Equal contribution 1 Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik, Germany 2 Yale University, USA 3 New York University, USA. Correspondence to: Amir Zandieh <amir.zed512@gmail.com>.

Our approach is based on reducing the number of columns
of matrix A using importance sampling. We also devise
an efficient estimator for the diagonal scaling matrix D,
which bypasses exact and explicit computation of matrix A.
Formally, for any given ε > 0 and any Q, K, V ∈ Rn×d , we
want to quickly find a sampling matrix Π ∈ Rm×n with a

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

