Understanding INT4 Quantization for Language Models:
Latency Speedup, Composability, and Failure Cases

Xiaoxia Wu * 1 Cheng Li * 1 Reza Yazdani Aminabadi 1 Zhewei Yao 1 Yuxiong He 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

As pre-trained large language models (LLMs) (Vaswani
et al., 2017) such as BERT (Tenney et al., 2019),
BART (Lewis et al., 2020), and GPT (Radford et al.,
2019) require a significant amount of GPU resources to
deploy, compression becomes a common practice to optimize model inference, especially for resource-constrained
environments. One of the widely used compression techniques is quantization where data are stored and manipulated in a lower-precision format, such as 8-bit or 4-bit integers instead of 32-bit or 16-bit floating-point numbers. It
not only reduces the amount of memory required to store
the model, but also can leverage the higher GEMM computation throughput for lower-bit data types on supported
GPUs (e.g., peak INT4 Tensor Core TFLOPS doubles that
of INT8 and quadruples that of FP16) to improve inference
latency. Note that only quantizing the model weights without computing in lower-bit data types (i.e., keeping activation in FP16 or FP32) introduces no latency improvement
(or even slower due to type conversion at runtime) but only
memory saving.

Improving the deployment efficiency of
transformer-based language models has been
challenging given their high computation and
memory cost. While INT8 quantization has
recently been shown to be effective in reducing
both the memory cost and latency while preserving model accuracy, it remains unclear whether
we can leverage INT4 (which doubles peak
hardware throughput) to achieve further latency
improvement. In this study, we explore the
feasibility of employing INT4 weight and activation (W4A4) quantization for language models.
Our findings indicate that W4A4 quantization
introduces no to negligible accuracy degradation for encoder-only and encoder-decoder
models, but causes a significant accuracy drop
for decoder-only models. To materialize the
performance gain using W4A4, we develop a
highly-optimized end-to-end W4A4 encoder
inference pipeline supporting different quantization strategies. Our INT4 pipeline is 8.5×
faster for latency-oriented scenarios and up to
3× for throughput-oriented scenarios compared
to the inference of FP16, and improves the
SOTA BERT INT8 performance from FasterTransformer by up to 1.7×. We provide insights
into the failure cases when applying W4A4 to
decoder-only models, and further explore the
compatibility of INT4 quantization with other
compression methods, like pruning and layer
reduction.

Recent work proposes techniques to apply INT8 quantization (using INT8 computation where both weight and activation are quantized, referred to as W8A8) to all linear
layers without introducing accuracy degradation for transformers (Yao et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2022; Dettmers et al.,
2022a;b; Li et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2021). Yao et al. (2022)
also present an INT8 inference pipeline and show good
end-to-end (E2E) performance improvement over FP16
model inference. NVIDIA’s FasterTransformer (NVIDIA,
2023) holds SOTA open-source INT8 implementations
where aggressive quantization are explored: mode-1 quantizes the attention computation beyond linear layers, and
mode-2 further quantizes the residual connection trading
off accuracy for latency.
While we are advancing W8A8 quantization algorithms
and implementations proven to be effective for LLMs, the
questions arise: (1) whether INT4 inference (using INT4
computation where both activation and weight are quantized, referred to as W4A4) is feasible (acceptable accuracy
drop) for these models, and (2) how it can be leveraged
for performance improvement on real hardware. Although

*
1
Equal contribution
Deepspeed Team @ Microsoft.
Code is released at https://github.com/microsoft/
DeepSpeed.
Correspondence to: Xiaoxia Wu <xiaoxiawu@microsoft.com>, Cheng Li <chengli1@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

