Multi-User Reinforcement Learning with Low Rank Rewards

Dheeraj Nagaraj 1 Suhas S Kowshik 2 3 Naman Agarwal 4 Praneeth Netrapalli 1 Prateek Jain 1

Abstract

practical applications. However, even simple instances of
multi-agent RL, like restless bandits, can be provably hard
(Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1999).

We consider collaborative multi-user reinforcement learning, where multiple users have the same
state-action space and transition probabilities but
different rewards. Under the assumption that the
reward matrix of the N users has a low-rank structure – a standard and practically successful assumption in the collaborative filtering setting – we
design algorithms with significantly lower sample
complexity compared to the ones that learn the
MDP individually for each user. Our main contribution is an algorithm which explores rewards
collaboratively with N user-specific MDPs and
can learn rewards efficiently in two key settings:
tabular MDPs and linear MDPs. When N is large
and the rank is constant, the sample complexity
per MDP depends logarithmically over the size of
the state-space, which represents an exponential
reduction (in the state-space size) when compared
to the standard “non-collaborative” algorithms.
Our main technical contribution is a method to
construct policies which obtain data such that low
rank matrix completion is possible (without a generative model). This goes beyond the regular RL
framework and is closely related to mean field
limits of multi-agent RL.

In this work, we consider the problem of learning optimal
policies for multiple MDPs collaboratively so that the total
number of trajectories sampled per MDP is smaller than the
number of trajectories required to learn them individually.
We assume that the various users have the same transition
matrices, but different rewards and the rewards have a low
rank structure. This is closely related to mean-field limits of certain instances of multi-agent RL as described in
Section 3.
Motivation From the point of view of RL, this is an instance
of multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL), various versions of which have been considered in the literature (Brunskill & Li, 2013; D’Eramo et al., 2020; Teh et al., 2017;
Hessel et al., 2019; Lazaric, 2012). Here, an agent learns
different MDPs together with certain common structures.
This shared structure could be a common domain (such as
moving towards different target points, but in the same environment) or similarity in the task to be performed (such
as picking up and moving different kinds of objects). Our
problem setup falls in the former category.
Recently, collaborative filtering has been studied in the online learning setting (Bresler & Karzand, 2021; Jain & Pal,
2022; Ariu et al., 2020; Huleihel et al., 2021; Nguyen-Thanh
et al., 2019), where multiple bandit instances are simultaneously explored under low rank assumptions in order to learn
the preferences of multiple users simultaneously. From this
point of view, our work adds temporal dynamics, such as
change in preferences over time, based on past actions. That
is, we consider non-stationary environments via Markov
Decision Processes.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently seen tremendous
empirical and theoretical success (Mnih et al., 2015; Sutton
et al., 1992; Jin et al., 2020b; Gheshlaghi Azar et al., 2013;
Dann & Brunskill, 2015). Near optimal algorithms have
been proposed to explore and learn a given MDP with sample access to trajectories. Multi-agent RL, where multiple
agents interact among themselves and the environment to
collect rewards, has gained a lot of interest due to immense

To motivate our setup, we consider the example of recommendation systems in e-commerce or video streaming. In
this context, classical collaborative filtering setup assumes
that the preferences are static and not influenced by the recommendation system itself. However, this is untrue in the
real world. Buying an item changes the preferences of the
customer. In case the system recommends a TV and the
customer buys a TV, a TV stand might be the most relevant
recommendation. In case they watch a recommended video
about astrophysics, they might want to watch other astro-

*
Equal contribution 1 Google Research, Bangalore 2 Amazon
India 3 Work was done prior to joining Amazon 4 Google Research,
Princeton. Correspondence to: Dheeraj Nagaraj <dheerajnagaraj@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

