Multi-Objective GFlowNets

Moksh Jain 1 2 Sharath Chandra Raparthy 1 2 * Alex Hernandez-Garcia 1 2 Jarrid Rector-Brooks 1 2
Yoshua Bengio 1 2 3 Santiago Miret 4 Emmanuel Bengio 5

Abstract

ity as molecules that are effective against a target may also
have detrimental effects on humans, making it infeasible to
find a single molecule that maximizes all the objectives simultaneously. Instead, the goal in these Multi-Objective Optimization (MOO; Ehrgott, 2005; Miettinen, 2012) problems
is to identify candidate molecules that are Pareto optimal,
covering the best possible trade-offs between the objectives.

We study the problem of generating diverse candidates in the context of Multi-Objective Optimization. In many applications of machine learning such as drug discovery and material design,
the goal is to generate candidates which simultaneously optimize a set of potentially conflicting objectives. Moreover, these objectives are
often imperfect evaluations of some underlying
property of interest, making it important to generate diverse candidates to have multiple options
for expensive downstream evaluations. We propose Multi-Objective GFlowNets (MOGFNs), a
novel method for generating diverse Pareto optimal solutions, based on GFlowNets. We introduce
two variants of MOGFNs: MOGFN-PC, which
models a family of independent sub-problems defined by a scalarization function, with rewardconditional GFlowNets, and MOGFN-AL, which
solves a sequence of sub-problems defined by an
acquisition function in an active learning loop.
Our experiments on wide variety of synthetic and
benchmark tasks demonstrate advantages of the
proposed methods in terms of the Pareto performance and importantly, improved candidate diversity, which is the main contribution of this work.

A less appreciated aspect of multi-objective problems is
that the objectives to optimize are usually underspecified
proxies which only approximate the true design objectives.
For instance, the binding affinity of a molecule to a target
is an imperfect approximation of the molecule’s inhibitory
effect against the target in the human body. In such scenarios
it is important to not only cover the Pareto front but also to
generate sets of diverse candidates for each Pareto optimal
solution in order to increase the likelihood of success of the
generated candidates in expensive downstream evaluations,
such as in-vivo tests and clinical trials (Jain et al., 2022).
The benefits of generating diverse candidates are twofold.
First, by diversifying the set of candidates we obtain an
advantage similar to Bayesian ensembles: we reduce the
risk of failure that might occur due to the imperfect generalization of learned proxy models. Diverse candidates
should lie in different regions of the input-space manifold
where the objective of interest might be large (considering
the uncertainty in the output of the proxy model). Second,
experimental measurements such as in-vitro assays may not
reflect the ultimate objectives of interest, such as efficacy in
human bodies. Multiple candidates may have the same assay score, but different downstream efficacy, so diversity in
candidates increases odds of success. Existing approaches
for MOO overlook this aspect of diversity and instead focus
primarily on generating Pareto optimal solutions.

1. Introduction
Decision making in practical applications usually involves reasoning about multiple, often conflicting, objectives (Keeney et al., 1993). Consider the example of in-silico
drug discovery, where the goal is to generate novel drug-like
molecules that effectively inhibit a target, are easy to synthesize, and possess a safety profile for human use (Dara et al.,
2021). These objectives often exhibit mutual incompatibil-

Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets; Bengio et al.,
2021a;b) are a recently proposed family of probabilistic
models which tackle the problem of diverse candidate generation. Contrary to the reward maximization view of prevalent Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Bayesian optimization (BO) approaches, GFlowNets sample candidates with
probability proportional to their reward. Sampling candidates, as opposed to greedily generating them implicitly encourages diversity in the generated candidates. GFlowNets

∗
Work done during an internship at Recursion 1 Université de
Montréal 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute 3 CIFAR Fellow & IVADO
4
Intel Labs 5 Recursion. Correspondence to: Moksh Jain <mokshjn00@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

