Generalized Polyak Step Size for First Order Optimization with Momentum

Xiaoyu Wang 1 Mikael Johansson 2 Tong Zhang 1

Abstract

(1), which we assume is non-empty. In other words, there is
at least one x∗ ∈ Rd such that f ∗ = f (x∗ ) = min f (x).

In machine learning applications, it is well known
that carefully designed learning rate (step size)
schedules can significantly improve the convergence of commonly used first-order optimization
algorithms. Therefore how to set step size adaptively becomes an important research question. A
popular and effective method is the Polyak step
size, which sets step size adaptively for gradient
descent or stochastic gradient descent without the
need to estimate the smoothness parameter of the
objective function. However, there has not been
a principled way to generalize the Polyak step
size for algorithms with momentum accelerations.
This paper presents a general framework to set the
learning rate adaptively for first-order optimization methods with momentum, motivated by the
derivation of Polyak step size. It is shown that
the resulting techniques are much less sensitive
to the choice of momentum parameter and may
avoid the oscillation of the heavy-ball method
on ill-conditioned problems. These adaptive step
sizes are further extended to the stochastic settings, which are attractive choices for stochastic
gradient descent with momentum. Our methods
are demonstrated to be more effective for stochastic gradient methods than prior adaptive step size
algorithms in large-scale machine learning tasks.

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins & Monro,
1951) has been the workhorse for training machine learning
models. To accelerate its practical performance, one often
adds a momentum term to SGD, leading to algorithms such
as SGDM (Sutskever et al., 2013). SGDM has been widely
used in deep neural networks due to its empirical success
and is a default choice in machine learning libraries (PyTorch and TensorFlow). However, its practical performance
relies heavily on the choice of the step size (learning rate)
that controls the rate at which the model learns.
In the traditional optimization literature, Polyak’s heavy ball
(momentum) method (Polyak, 1964) is a well-known technique to accelerate gradient descent. By accounting for the
history of the iterates, it achieves a linear convergence that is
substantially faster than gradient descent on ill-conditioned
problems. However, to achieve its optimal performance,
the heavy-ball method relies on a specific combination of
momentum parameter β and step size η adapted to the condition number of the problem. One downside of the method
is that its empirical performance is very sensitive to the
momentum factor β ∈ (0, 1) (see Figure 4), which makes
the method difficult to use when the condition number is
unknown. For the heavy-ball method, each component of
the decision vector is updated independently and shares the
same step size. Even in very simple examples, the method
exhibits a zigzag phenomenon in the dimension with large
curvature (Polyak, 1964), leading to a slow and oscillatory
convergence. Thus, an adaptive step size is important for
the best practical behavior of the heavy-ball method.

1. Introduction
We consider stochastic optimization problems on the form
min f (x) := Eξ∼Ξ [f (x; ξ)]

x∈Rd

For convex functions whose optimal value is known a priori,
the Polyak step size, which depends on the current function
value and the magnitude of the gradient (subgradient), is
optimal in a certain sense (Polyak, 1987; Camerini et al.,
1975; Brännlund, 1995). Hazan & Kakade (2019) revisited
the Polyak step size and proved near-optimal convergence
even when the optimal value is unknown. Still, it is impractical to use the deterministic Polyak step size due to
the computation of exact function values and gradients in
each iteration. Recently, there has been a strong interest
in developing adaptive step size policies that are inspired
by the classical Polyak step size (Rolinek & Martius, 2018;

(1)

where ξ is a random variable with probability distribution
Ξ and f (x; ξ) is the instantaneous realization of f with
respect to ξ. We use X ∗ to denote the set of minimizers of
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Royal
Institute of Technology (KTH). Correspondence to: Xiaoyu Wang
<maxywang@ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

