Partially Observable Multi-agent RL with (Quasi-)Efficiency:
The Blessing of Information Sharing

Xiangyu Liu 1 Kaiqing Zhang 1

Abstract

(Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016; Sallab et al., 2017). Many
of these application domains by nature involve multiple
decision-makers operating in a common environment, with
either aligned or misaligned objectives that are affected by
their joint behaviors. This has thus inspired surging research
interests in multi-agent RL (MARL), with both deeper theoretical and empirical understandings (Busoniu et al., 2008;
Zhang et al., 2021a; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2019).

We study provable multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) in the general framework of
partially observable stochastic games (POSGs).
To circumvent the known hardness results and the
use of computationally intractable oracles, we propose to leverage the potential information-sharing
among agents, a standard practice in empirical
MARL and a common model for multi-agent control systems with communications. We first establish several computation complexity results
to justify the necessity of information-sharing,
as well as the observability assumption that has
enabled quasi-efficient single-agent RL with partial observations, for computational efficiency in
solving POSGs. We then propose to further approximate the shared common information to construct an approximate model of the POSG, in
which planning an approximate equilibrium (in
terms of solving the original POSG) can be quasiefficient, i.e., of quasi-polynomial-time, under
the aforementioned assumptions. Furthermore,
we develop a partially observable MARL algorithm that is both statistically and computationally
quasi-efficient. We hope our study can open up
the possibilities of leveraging and even designing
different information structures, for developing
both sample- and computation-efficient partially
observable MARL.

1. Introduction

One central challenge of multi-agent learning in these applications is the imperfection of information, or more generally,
the partial observability of environments. Specifically, each
agent may possess different information about the state and
action processes while making decisions. For example, in
vision-based multi-robot learning and autonomous driving,
each agent only accesses a first-person camera to stream
noisy measurements of the object/scene, without accessing
the observations or past actions of other agents. This is also
referred to as information asymmetry in game theory and decentralized decision-making (Nayyar et al., 2013a; Shi et al.,
2016). Despite its ubiquity in practice, theoretical understandings of MARL in partially observable settings remain
scant. This is somewhat expected since even in single-agent
settings, planning and learning under partial observability
suffer from well-known computational and statistical hardness results (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987; Mundhenk
et al., 2000; Jin et al., 2020). The hardness is known to
be amplified for multi-agent decentralized decision-making
(Witsenhausen, 1968; Tsitsiklis & Athans, 1985). Existing
provable partially observable MARL algorithms either only
apply to a small subset of highly structured problems (Zinkevich et al., 2007; Kozuno et al., 2021), or computationally
intractable (Liu et al., 2022b).

Recent years have witnessed fast development of reinforcement learning (RL) in a wide range of applications, including playing Go games (Silver et al., 2017), robotics (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Long et al., 2018), video games (Vinyals
et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019), and autonomous driving

With these hardness results that can be doubly exponential in the worst case, even a (quasi-)polynomial efficient
algorithm could represent a non-trivial improvement in partially observable MARL. In particular, we ask and attempt
to answer the following question:

1 University of Maryland, College Park. Correspondence to:
Kaiqing Zhang <kaiqing@umd.edu>.

Can we have partially observable MARL algorithms that
are both statistically and computationally efficient?

Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We provide some results towards answering the question
positively, by leveraging the potential information-sharing
among agents, together with a careful compression of the
1

