Distortion and Uncertainty Aware Loss for Panoramic Depth Completion

Zhiqiang Yan 1 Xiang Li 1 Kun Wang 1 Shuo Chen 2 Jun Li 1 Jian Yang 1
{yanzq,xiang.li.implus,kunwang,junli,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp

Abstract

1. Introduction
Depth completion aims to recover dense depth from the
sparse one and its corresponding perspective color image
with narrow field of vision (FoV). Plenty of works (Cheng
et al., 2020; Tang et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022) have been
proposed to tackle this task. With the advent of panoramic
cameras, predicting depth from the 360◦ full-FoV color image becomes a fashionable trend (Wang et al., 2020; Sun
et al., 2021).Recently, instead of directly estimating depth
from pure 360◦ full-FoV image, panoramic depth completion (PDC) task has been raised in M3 PT (Yan et al., 2022)
where the sparse depth can be facilitated to generate much
more accurate prediction. Generally, to produce precise
depth estimations, most of these works employ MSE loss
to optimize their networks. However, it is well-known that
such loss distributes same weight to each pixel regardless
of their uneven importance in an image, which is especially
not appropriate for panoramic data in two aspects:

Standard MSE or MAE loss function is commonly
used in limited field-of-vision depth completion,
treating each pixel equally under a basic assumption that all pixels have same contribution during
optimization. Recently, with the rapid rise of
panoramic photography, panoramic depth completion (PDC) has raised increasing attention in
3D computer vision. However, the assumption is
inapplicable to panoramic data due to its latitudewise distortion and high uncertainty nearby textures and edges. To handle these challenges, we
propose distortion and uncertainty aware loss
(DUL) that consists of a distortion-aware loss
and an uncertainty-aware loss. The distortionaware loss is designed to tackle the panoramic
distortion caused by equirectangular projection,
whose coordinate transformation relation is used
to adaptively calculate the weight of the latitudewise distortion, distributing uneven importance
instead of the equal treatment for each pixel. The
uncertainty-aware loss is presented to handle the
inaccuracy in non-smooth regions. Specifically,
we characterize uncertainty into PDC solutions
under Bayesian deep learning framework, where a
novel consistent uncertainty estimation constraint
is designed to learn the consistency between multiple uncertainty maps of a single panorama. This
consistency constraint allows model to produce
more precise uncertainty estimation that is robust
to feature deformation. Extensive experiments
show the superiority of our method over standard
loss functions, reaching the state of the art.

Latitude-wise distortion in panoramas. For panoramic
depth perception (Zioulis et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2022),
the most commonly used data format is the equirectangular
projection (ERP) image (Pintore et al., 2021; Zhuang et al.,
2022) from spherical coordinate to plane coordinate, which
is shown in Fig. 1(a). We observe that the area of grid is
gradually increasing from the poles to the equator. However,
ERP maps each grid to image plane with an equivalent area,
indicating that the closer the grid is to poles, the more pixels
are interpolated during the projection process. Hence, the
distortion of the ERP panoramic image gets severe step by
step from the equator to poles. Besides, most objects are
located mainly near the equator, i.e., the middle region of the
image, while the two poles primarily contain the ceiling and
floor. Therefore, traditional loss distributing same weight to
each pixel is no longer suitable for PDC.
High uncertainty nearby non-smooth regions. It is usually difficult for networks to predict accurate depth with
high uncertainty near edge, occlusion, blur, outlier, etc (Eldesokey et al., 2020; Park et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2022;
Jin et al., 2020). Moreover, the panoramic data introduces
latitude-wise distortion which makes those regions more
irregular, negatively leading to even worse depth prediction.
Fig. 1(b) demonstrates that non-smooth regions (e.g., edges

1

PCALab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan. Correspondence to: Shuo Chen <shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp>, Jun Li
<junli@njust.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

