Hyperbolic Representation Learning: Revisiting and Advancing
2.1.1 Poincaré Shallow Models
Menglin Yang 1 Min Zhou 2 Rex Ying 3 Yankai Chen 1 Irwin King 1

Abstract
The non-Euclidean geometry of hyperbolic spaces
has recently garnered considerable attention in
the realm of representation learning. Current endeavors in hyperbolic representation largely presuppose that the underlying hierarchies can be
automatically inferred and preserved through the
adaptive optimization process. This assumption,
however, is questionable and requires further validation. In this work, we first introduce a positiontracking mechanism to scrutinize existing prevalent hyperbolic models, revealing that the learned
representations are sub-optimal and unsatisfactory. To address this, we propose a simple yet effective method, hyperbolic informed embedding
(HIE), by incorporating cost-free hierarchical information deduced from the hyperbolic distance
of the node to origin (i.e., induced hyperbolic
norm) to advance existing hyperbolic models. The
proposed method HIE is both task-agnostic and
model-agnostic, enabling its seamless integration
with a broad spectrum of models and tasks. Extensive experiments across various models and different tasks demonstrate the versatility and adaptability of the proposed method. Remarkably, our
method achieves a remarkable improvement of up
to 21.4% compared to the competing baselines.

Figure 1. Illustration of an optimal embedding in hyperbolic space
that preserves the local dependencies while maintaining a hierarchical relationships of the entities. Left: A tree-like graph. Right:
Hyperbolic embedding of the tree-like graph.

tion error (Suzuki et al., 2021a;b), and impressive performance (Nickel & Kiela, 2017; Chami et al., 2019; Yang
et al., 2022a), has been extensively validated in recent works,
spanning a plethora of research topics and downstream applications (Peng et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021a; Mettes
et al., 2023), including graph learning, image, and text understanding.
An essential implicit and unspoken objective in utilizing hyperbolic space is to extract intrinsic hierarchical information
within data. The expected learning objective, as illustrated
in Figure 1, involves optimizing parent nodes above their
respective descendants, or from a global perspective, to push
the root closer to the hyperbolic origin while simultaneously
situating leaf nodes at a greater distance from the hyperbolic
origin. This can be understood from the following two aspects. Intuitively, in original data, the parent node occupies
a higher hierarchical level than its offspring. Consequently,
in the learning space, a high-fidelity embedding necessitates
the parent node being positioned relatively higher position,
or equivalently in smaller distance to the hyperbolic origin.
Mathematically, let us consider the Poincaré ball model as
an illustrative example, which is the most frequently used
hyperbolic geometry models1 . When the root node of a
tree-like data structure is placed at the hyperbolic origin, it
manifests a relatively small distance to all other nodes, as
its norm is equal to zero. Meanwhile, leaf nodes typically
locate closer to the periphery of the ball, as the distance
between points increases rapidly as the norm approaches
one, thus achieving an optimal and low-distortion embedding that effectively preserves the underlying hierarchical

1. Introduction
Hyperbolic space, considered as the continuous analogue
of discrete trees (Krioukov et al., 2010), exhibits a natural
advantage for modeling data with implicit or explicit treelike layouts, such as hierarchical structures and power-law
distributed data (Adcock et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2022a).
The superiority of hyperbolic space in representation learning, e.g., low distortion (Sarkar, 2011), small generaliza1
Department of Computer Sciences and Engineering, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Technologies Co.,
Ltd. 3 Yale University. Correspondence to: Menglin Yang
<mlyang.cuhk@outlook.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

The term “hyperbolic geometry models” denotes the mathematical formations for building hyperbolic geometry and creating
hyperbolic space, e.g., Poincaré ball model and Lorentz model.

1

