Inflow, Outflow, and Reciprocity in Machine Learning

Mukund Sundararajan 1 Walid Krichene 2

Abstract

However, notice that both of these views are one-sided: they
are concerned with the contributions of the individual to the
system, but do not take into consideration how much the
individual benefits from the system. In this work, we study
contributions, benefits, and the balance between them.

Data is pooled across entities (individuals or enterprises) to create machine learning models, and
sometimes, the entities that contribute the data
also benefit from the models. Consider for instance a recommender system (e.g. Spotify, Instagram or YouTube), a health care app that predicts
the risk for some disease, or a service built by
pooling data across enterprises.
In this work we propose a framework to study this
value exchange, i.e., we model and measure contributions (outflows), benefits (inflows) and the
balance between contributions and benefits (the
degree of reciprocity). We show theoretically,
and via experiments that under certain distributional assumptions, some classes of models are
approximately reciprocal.
These results only scratch the surface; we conclude with several open directions.

1.1. Running Examples
In some applications, the agents that contribute data to a
system also benefit from it. We would like to study this
inflow of value to the user, and the resulting exchange of
value stemming from contributions and benefits.
Recommender Systems: Popular recommender systems
such as Spotify, Instagram or YouTube recommend items
(e.g. music, videos, posts) to their users. Past interactions
of an individual with items are used to learn not only the
preferences of the individual, but also the characteristics of
the item, that are then used to recommend it to other individuals. This is the premise of collaborative filtering (Koren
& Bell, 2015). Indeed, an individual’s data helps others
and vice-versa. Furthermore, this applies to any system
that leverages user behavior (such as clicks on content, or
the length of engagement with the content) to determine
recommendations or rankings.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (henceforth ML) depends on training data,
and as machine learning and the artificial intelligence powered by it have increased in importance, there is an interest
in understanding the role of data. This data may be collected from raters who are compensated for labeling the
data, or from end-users of products powered by ML, or
from enterprises that own and license data.

Healthcare: Alternatively, consider initiatives that collect
health data from several individuals and use this to build
models that predict sleep, or the risk of disease (Perez et al.,
2019; Gulshan et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Brajer et al.,
2020; Rajkomar et al., 2018). Such models benefit the
individual contributing the data, besides their data benefiting
other individuals that use the model’s predictions.

Different approaches have been considered to study the role
of data. Techniques such as (Jia et al., 2019; Ghorbani &
Zou, 2019; Hara et al., 2019; Pruthi et al., 2020; Hoaglin
& Welsch, 1978; Koh & Liang, 2017a; Yeh et al., 2018)
measure the contribution of data to model quality. Data
has also been viewed through the lens of privacy (for instance, (Dwork & Roth, 2014)), which asks whether an
individual’s contributions reveal something about the individual.

Federated Learning: Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed training techniques where individuals (or larger
entities such as enterprises) build shared models in a decentralized way, without the data moving to a central location.
This is important in domains where data is scarce and pooling data from different entities can lead to significant quality
improvements. One problem in federated learning is the
incentives for entities to contribute data. This is particularly
true in the cross-silo FL setting, in which larger entities
(such as companies) contribute their data to train a shared
model. As the survey (Kairouz et al., 2021, Section 2.2)
discusses, “Clients might worry that contributing their data
to training federated learning models will benefit their com-

1
Google 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Mukund Sundararajan <mukunds@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

