RGE: A Repulsive Graph Rectification for Node Classification via Influence

Jaeyun Song * 1 SungYub Kim * 1 Eunho Yang 1 2

Abstract

improvements in many node classification tasks (Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Veličković et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2019). However, GNNs are still susceptible to
structural noises, such as task-irrelevant edges, in real-world
graphs (Zheng et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2021). Consequently,
these noises in graphs can hamper the use of GNNs in the
industry due to the deterioration in the generalization performance.

In real-world graphs, noisy connections are inevitable, which makes it difficult to obtain unbiased node representations. Among various attempts to resolve this problem, a method of estimating the counterfactual effects of these connectivities has recently attracted attention, which
mainly uses influence functions for single graph
elements (i.e., node and edge). However, in this
paper, we argue that there is a strongly interacting group effect between the influences of graph
elements due to their connectivity. In the same
vein, we observe that edge groups connecting to
the same train node exhibit significant differences
in their influences, hence no matter how negative
each is, removing them at once may have a rather
negative effect as a group. Based on this motivation, we propose a new edge-removing strategy,
Repulsive edge Group Elimination (RGE), that
preferentially removes edges with no interference
in groups. Empirically, we demonstrate that RGE
consistently outperforms existing methods on the
various benchmark datasets.

Recently, several algorithms have been proposed to resolve
these structural noises using topological information from
graphs. ReNode (Chen et al., 2021) and TAM (Song et al.,
2022) modify loss functions (e.g., adjusting loss weights or
margins) to decrease the signals of deteriorating nodes. On
the other hand, NeuralSparse (Zheng et al., 2020) and PTDNet (Luo et al., 2021) remove edges by learning auxiliary
networks to sparsify graphs in an end-to-end manner. To the
best of our knowledge, none of the existing methods explain
why each edge is helpful or harmful, as they do not assess
the counterfactual effects of removing edges.
To mitigate this issue, Chen et al. (2022a) proposed an influence function for individual nodes and edges to estimate the
counterfactual effects of removing these elements. Based
on this, they found that removing negative influence edges,
called opponent edges (Pruthi et al., 2020), could significantly improve classification performance. However, this
approach is intractable on graphs with many edges, as they
retrain GNNs for each accumulative opponent edge set and
select one using the validation accuracy of retrained GNNs.
Furthermore, this type of graph rectification cannot consider the group effect of edges (i.e., how an edge’s influence
changes as neighboring edges are removed). For example, if
removing an edge makes the influence of surrounding edges
positive, preserving its neighbors will help generalize, and
vice versa.

1. Introduction
Learning effective node representations becomes increasingly crucial as the need for graph-structured data processing increases in diverse industrial applications such as
social networks (Mohammadrezaei et al., 2018), bioinformatics (Hamilton et al., 2017), and recommendation systems (Perozzi et al., 2016) to name a few. Recently, various
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been proposed to integrate the topological information of graphs into node representation, and have achieved unprecedented performance
*

Therefore, to develop more efficient and effective strategies, we study a simple approach, Exhaustive edge Group
Elimination (EGE), that eliminates all opponent edges at
once. This approach can discover the most opponent set if
influence additivity holds (i.e. there does not exist any group
effect). Nevertheless, we hypothesize that neighboring opponent edges mainly cause significant group effects. In fact,
we demonstrate that, due to group influence estimation error
(the gap between group influence and the sum of individual

1

Equal contribution
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea 2 AITRICS, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Jaeyun Song <mercery@kaist.ac.kr>,
SungYub Kim <sungyub.kim@kaist.ac.kr>, Eunho Yang <eunhoy@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

