Bootstrapped Representations in Reinforcement Learning

Charline Le Lan 1 Stephen Tu 2 Mark Rowland 2
Anna Harutyunyan 2 Rishabh Agarwal 2 Marc G. Bellemare 2 Will Dabney 2

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL), state representations are key to dealing with large or continuous
state spaces. While one of the promises of deep
learning algorithms is to automatically construct
features well-tuned for the task they try to solve,
such a representation might not emerge from endto-end training of deep RL agents. To mitigate
this issue, auxiliary objectives are often incorporated into the learning process and help shape the
learnt state representation. Bootstrapping methods are today’s method of choice to make these
additional predictions. Yet, it is unclear which
features these algorithms capture and how they
relate to those from other auxiliary-task-based
approaches. In this paper, we address this gap
and provide a theoretical characterization of the
state representation learnt by temporal difference
learning (Sutton, 1988). Surprisingly, we find
that this representation differs from the features
learned by Monte Carlo and residual gradient
algorithms for most transition structures of the
environment in the policy evaluation setting. We
describe the efficacy of these representations
for policy evaluation, and use our theoretical
analysis to design new auxiliary learning rules.
We complement our theoretical results with an
empirical comparison of these learning rules for
different cumulant functions on classic domains
such as the four-room domain (Sutton et al.,
1999) and Mountain Car (Moore, 1990).

Figure 1: In deep RL, we see the penultimate layer of the network as the representation φ which is linearly transformed
into a value prediction V̂φ,w and auxiliary predictions Ψ(x)
by bootstrapping methods.
representation φ which is linearly mapped into a value function (Figure 1) (Yu and Bertsekas, 2009; Bellemare et al.,
2019; Levine et al., 2017); this approach often leads to stateof-the-art performance in the field (Mnih et al., 2015). State
representations are key to the stability and quality of this
learning process.

1
University of Oxford 2 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Charline Le Lan <charline.lelan@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

However, a representation supporting the downstream task
of interest might not emerge from end-to-end training.
Hence, auxiliary objectives are often incorporated into the
training process to help the agent combine its inputs into
useful features (Sutton et al., 2011; Jaderberg et al., 2017;
Bellemare et al., 2017; Lyle et al., 2021) and the resulting network’s representation can help the agent estimate
the value function. To construct representations supporting
these characteristics, different kind of auxiliary tasks have
thus been incorporated into the learning process such as controlling visual aspects of observed states (Jaderberg et al.,
2017), predicting the values of several policies (Bellemare
et al., 2019; Dabney et al., 2021), predicting values over
multiple discount factors (Fedus et al., 2019) or prediction
of next state observations (Jaderberg et al., 2017; Gelada
et al., 2019) and rewards (Dabney et al., 2021; Lyle et al.,
2021; Farebrother et al., 2023).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

While these tasks have mainly been trained by bootstrapping, a precise characterization of the representations they
learn is lacking. This paper aims to fill this gap. We study

1. Introduction
The process of representation learning is crucial to the success of reinforcement learning at scale. In deep reinforcement learning, a neural network is used to parameterise a

1

