Searching Large Neighborhoods for
Integer Linear Programs with Contrastive Learning

Taoan Huang 1 Aaron Ferber 1 Yuandong Tian 2 Bistra Dilkina 1 Benoit Steiner 3

Abstract

Recently, there has been an increased interest in automating
algorithm designs for COPs with machine learning (ML).
Many ML approaches learn to either construct or improve
solutions within an algorithmic framework, such as greedy
search, local search or tree search, for a specific COP, such
as the traveling salesman problem (TSP) (Xin et al., 2021;
Zheng et al., 2021), vehicle routing problem (VRP) (Kool
et al., 2018) or independent set problem (Li et al., 2018),
and are often not easily applicable to other COPs.

Integer Linear Programs (ILPs) are powerful tools
for modeling and solving a large number of combinatorial optimization problems. Recently, it
has been shown that Large Neighborhood Search
(LNS), as a heuristic algorithm, can find highquality solutions to ILPs faster than Branch and
Bound. However, how to find the right heuristics
to maximize the performance of LNS remains an
open problem. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach, CL-LNS, that delivers state-of-the-art
anytime performance on several ILP benchmarks
measured by metrics including the primal gap,
the primal integral, survival rates and the best
performing rate. Specifically, CL-LNS collects
positive and negative solution samples from an
expert heuristic that is slow to compute and learns
a more efficient one with contrastive learning. We
use graph attention networks and a richer set of
features to further improve its performance.

In contrast, Integer Linear Programs (ILPs) can flexibly
encode and solve a broad family of COPs, such as network design (Johnson et al., 1978; Dilkina & Gomes, 2010;
Huang & Dilkina, 2020), mechanism design (De Vries &
Vohra, 2003), facility location (Heragu & Kusiak, 1991;
Amaral, 2008) problems. ILPs can be solved by Branch and
Bound (BnB) (Land & Doig, 2010), an optimal tree search
algorithm that can achieve state-of-the-art for ILPs. Over
the past decades, BnB has been improved tremendously to
become the core of many popular ILP solvers such as SCIP
(Bestuzheva et al., 2021), CPLEX (Cplex, 2009) and Gurobi
(Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2022). However, due to its
exhaustive search nature, it is hard for BnB to scale to large
instances (Khalil et al., 2016; Gasse et al., 2019).

1. Introduction

On the other hand, Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) has
been shown to find high-quality solutions much faster than
BnB for large ILP instances (Song et al., 2020; Wu et al.,
2021; Sonnerat et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2023a). LNS starts
from an initial solution (i.e., a feasible assignment of values
to variables) and then improves the current best solution by
iteratively picking a subset of variables to reoptimize while
leaving others fixed. Picking which subset to reoptimize, i.e.,
the destroy heuristic, is a critical component in LNS. Handcrafted destroy heuristics, such as the randomized heuristic
(Song et al., 2020; Sonnerat et al., 2021) and the Local
Branching (LB) heuristic (Fischetti & Lodi, 2003), are often
either inefficient (slow to find good subsets) or ineffective
(find subsets of bad quality). ML-based destroy heuristics
have also been proposed and outperformed hand-crafted
ones. State-of-the-art approaches include IL-LNS (Sonnerat
et al., 2021) that uses imitation learning (IL) to imitate
the LB heuristic and RL-LNS (Wu et al., 2021) that uses a
similar framework to IL-LNS but trained with reinforcement

Algorithm designs for combinatorial optimization problems
(COPs) are important and challenging tasks. A wide variety
of real-world problems are COPs, such as vehicle routing
(Toth & Vigo, 2002), path planning (Pohl, 1970) and resource allocation (Manne, 1960) problems, and a majority
of them are NP-hard to solve. In the past few decades,
algorithms, including optimal algorithms, approximation
algorithms and heuristic algorithms, have been studied extensively due to the importance of COPs. Those algorithms
are mostly designed by humans through costly processes
that often require a deep understanding of the problem domains and their underlying structures as well as considerable
time and effort.
1
University of Southern California 2 Meta AI, FAIR 3 Anthropic.
Correspondence to: Taoan Huang <taoanhua@usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

