Eliminating Adversarial Noise via
Information Discard and Robust Representation Restoration

Dawei Zhou * 1 Yukun Chen * 1 Nannan Wang 1 Decheng Liu 1 Xinbo Gao 2 Tongliang Liu 3 4

Abstract

raised security concerns about the reliability of DNNs in
decision-critical deep learning applications.

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to
adversarial noise. Denoising model-based defense
is a major protection strategy. However, denoising models may fail and induce negative effects
in fully white-box scenarios. In this work, we
start from the latent inherent properties of adversarial samples to break the limitations. Unlike
solely learning a mapping from adversarial samples to natural samples, we aim to achieve denoising by destroying the spatial characteristics of
adversarial noise and preserving the robust features of natural information. Motivated by this,
we propose a defense based on information discard and robust representation restoration. Our
method utilize complementary masks to disrupt
adversarial noise and guided denoising models
to restore robust-predictive representations from
masked samples. Experimental results show that
our method has competitive performance against
white-box attacks and effectively reverses the negative effect of denoising models.

A major class of adversarial defense pre-processes input
samples to alleviate the interference of adversarial noise
In particular, the denoising model-based defense strategy
exploited DNNs to remove adversarial noise and restore
natural information of original natural samples (Liao et al.,
2018; Jin et al., 2019; Naseer et al., 2020). In addition,
this strategy was typically scalable, i.e., the defense can
be deployed to different tasks without retraining the target
model (Naseer et al., 2020). Thus, defensive denoising
model have shown great potential to safeguard target models
from adversarial attacks.
However, experienced attackers usually considered the possibility that defenses being used (Athalye & Carlini, 2018)
and deployed powerful attacks to disrupt defenses. Recent
researches (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a; Tramer et al., 2020)
showed that the protection for general target models by
defensive denoising models was significantly weaker in a
fully white-box scenario (i.e., the attacker had access to all
information about the defense and target models). In addition, the studies in Zhou et al. (2021) revealed a robustness
degradation effect. That is, for adversarially trained target models, applying a defensive denoising model reduced
rather than improved the robust accuracy against white-box
attacks. The white-box attacks here aimed at disrupting the
overall model (i.e., the ensemble of the denoising model and
target model). Moreover, simply incorporating defensive
denoising models into adversarial training cannot effectively
handle this negative effect (Zhou et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in many fields, such as computer vision (He et al., 2016;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and speech recognition (Wang
et al., 2017). However, DNNs were found to be vulnerable
to adversarial samples which were crafted by adding imperceptible but adversarial noise on natural samples (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015). This vulnerability

To solve above problems, we sought breakthroughs from
the latent inherent properties of adversarial samples. On the
one hand, considering the perturbations carefully crafted
by adversarial attacks had spatial characteristics (Qian &
Tolkova; Tsipras et al., 2018; Aydin et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2022), adversarial noise might lose its destructiveness when
it was spatially corrupted. We conducted a proof-of-concept
experiment in Section. 3.2 and its result showed that the
interference of adversarial noise was effectively suppressed
via spatial information discard. On the other hand, adversarial samples retained a lot of natural information from
original natural samples (called retained natural informa-

*
Equal contribution 1 School of Telecommunications Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian
University, Xian, Shaanxi, China 2 Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Image Cognition, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China 3 Mohamed bin Zayed University
of Artificial Intelligence, Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates 4 University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW, Australia. Correspondence to: Nannan Wang <nnwang@xidian.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

