Bootstrap in High Dimension with Low Computation

Henry Lam 1 Zhenyuan Liu 1

Abstract

reduction in bootstrap computation cost by using a fewer
number of Monte Carlo replications or resamples. In particular, we target the following question: Is it possible to
run a valid bootstrap for high-dimensional problems with
very little Monte Carlo computation? While conventional
bootstraps rely heavily on adequate resamples, recent work
(Lam, 2022a;b) shows that it is possible to reduce the resampling effort dramatically, even down to one Monte Carlo
replication. The rough idea of this “cheap” bootstrap is to exploit the approximate independence among the original and
resample estimates, instead of their distributional closeness
utilized in the conventional bootstraps. We will leverage
this recent idea in this paper. However, since Lam (2022a;b)
is based purely on asymptotic derivation, giving an affirmative answer to the above question requires the study of new
finite-sample bounds to draw understanding on bootstrap
behaviors jointly in terms of problem dimension p, sample
size n and number of resamples B.

The bootstrap is a popular data-driven method
to quantify statistical uncertainty, but for modern
high-dimensional problems, it could suffer from
huge computational costs due to the need to repeatedly generate resamples and refit models. We
study the use of bootstraps in high-dimensional
environments with a small number of resamples.
In particular, we show that with a recent “cheap”
bootstrap perspective, using a number of resamples as small as one could attain valid coverage
even when the dimension grows closely with the
sample size, thus strongly supporting the implementability of the bootstrap for large-scale problems. We validate our theoretical results and compare the performance of our approach with other
benchmarks via a range of experiments.

To this end, our main theoretical contribution in this paper
is three-fold:

1. Introduction

General Finite-Sample Bootstrap Bounds: We derive
general finite-sample bounds on the coverage error of confidence intervals aggregated from B resample estimates,
where B is small using the “cheap” bootstrap idea, and
B = ∞ for traditional quantile-based bootstrap methods
including the basic and percentile bootstraps (e.g., Davison
& Hinkley (1997) Section 5.2-5.3). Our bounds reveal that,
given the same primitives on the approximate normality of
the original and each resample estimate, the cheap bootstrap
with fixed small B achieves similar coverage error bounds
as conventional bootstraps using infinite resamples. This
also simultaneously recovers the main result in Lam (2022a),
but stronger in terms of the finite-sample guarantee.

The bootstrap is a widely used method for statistical uncertainty quantification, notably confidence interval construction (Efron & Tibshirani, 1994; Davison & Hinkley, 1997;
Shao & Tu, 2012; Hall & Martin, 1988). Its main idea is
to resample data and use the distribution of resample estimates to approximate a sampling distribution. Typically, this
approximation requires running many Monte Carlo replications to generate the resamples and refit models. This is
affordable for classical problems, but for modern large-scale
problems, this repeated fitting could impose tremendous
computation concerns. This issue motivates an array of recent works to curb the computation effort, mostly through a
“subsampling” perspective that fits models on smaller data
sets in the bootstrap process, e.g., Kleiner et al. (2012);
Lu et al. (2020); Giordano et al. (2019); Schulam & Saria
(2019); Alaa & Van Der Schaar (2020).

Bootstrap Bounds on Function-of-Mean Models Explicit
in p, n and B: We specialize our general bounds above to
the function-of-mean model that is customary in the highdimensional Berry-Esseen and central limit theorem (CLT)
literature (Pinelis & Molzon, 2016; Zhilova, 2020). In particular, our bounds explicit on p, n and B conclude vanishing
coverage errors for the cheap bootstrap when p = o(n), for
any given B ≥ 1. Note that the function-of-mean model
does not capture all interesting problems, but it has been
commonly used – and in fact, appears the only model used

In contrast to subsampling, we consider in this paper the
1

Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Henry Lam <khl2114@columbia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

