On the convergence of the MLE as an estimator of the learning rate in the Exp3
algorithm

Julien Aubert 1 Luc Lehéricy 1 Patricia Reynaud-Bouret 1

Abstract

2008). Because all these realistic ingredients vary from
one individual to another, it is clear that the fitting of a particular model should be done individual by individual and
experience by experience (Estes, 1956).

When fitting the learning data of an individual to
algorithm-like learning models, the observations
are so dependent and non-stationary that one may
wonder what the classical Maximum Likelihood
Estimator (MLE) could do, even if it is the usual
tool applied to experimental cognition. Our objective in this work is to show that the estimation of
the learning rate cannot be efficient if the learning
rate is constant in the classical Exp3 (Exponential
weights for Exploration and Exploitation) algorithm. Secondly, we show that if the learning
rate decreases polynomially with the sample size,
then the prediction error and in some cases the
estimation error of the MLE satisfy bounds in
probability that decrease at a polynomial rate.

The problem of proving that a certain model (or algorithm)
is better suited to model reality than others is so crucial in
cognitive science that the methodology for fitting any kind
of learning algorithm to real learning data has been well
established and emphasized (Wilson & Collins, 2019). Any
scientist wishing to develop their own new learning model
can follow the same numerical experiments to test whether
their model is realistic or not.
The first step in the methodology is to apply the MLE to estimate the model parameters (Daw, 2011; Wilson & Collins,
2019). Recall that we are observing an individual learning
a specific task. Therefore, not only the training data (i.e.
the observations) strongly depend on each other, but they
are also often non stationary (otherwise the individual could
not have learned). These data make the study of the MLE
very complex from a theoretical point of view.

1. Introduction
1.1. Context

This is also why extensive simulations are required by (Wilson & Collins, 2019): depending on the set of chosen parameters, not only can a model learn or not learn, but there
is also often a set of parameters for which the estimator
behaves poorly. For instance in (Mezzadri, 2020)’s PhD
thesis, large learning rates imply a too fast learning (if the
model learns at all), which in turn prevents the MLE from
performing well. Unfortunately, there is a lack of theoretical
guarantees on whether it is possible to estimate the parameters of these models consistently. Our goal is to prove
rigorously what can be said about the properties of the MLE
when fitting a learning algorithm to real data.

Imagine that you observe a rat in a maze, learning progressively to find food. How would you guess the learning
process (or the algorithm) it actually uses ? This question
is of paramount importance in cognitive science where the
problem is not to find the fastest or best learning algorithm to
learn a specific task but to discover the most realistic learning model (always formulated as an algorithm) (Botvinick
et al., 2009).
Many learning algorithms, and in particular all those associated with reinforcement learning, are often used to model
real human or animal behavior (Sutton, 1988; Schultz et al.,
1997). Realistic models may take into account attentional
effects (Gluck & Bower, 1988), differences in reasoning
(Mezzadri et al., 2022), or granularity of actions (Botvinick,

1.2. Why Bandits Algorithms ?
This study strongly depends on the algorithm and the experiment. One typical example is the Skinner box experiment,
introduced in the 30’s, whose goal was to study rodents
ability to undergo operant conditioning. Once inside the
box, the rat could pull one or more levers and get a reward
or a punishment for it. This simplified framework allowed
scientists to work in a fully controlled environment. The

1

Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, LJAD, France. Correspondence to: Julien Aubert <julien.aubert@univ-cotedazur.fr>, Luc
Lehéricy <luc.lehericy@univ-cotedazur.fr>, Patricia ReynaudBouret <Patricia.Reynaud-Bouret@univ-cotedazur.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

