Leveraging Label Non-Uniformity for Node Classification in Graph Neural
Networks
Feng Ji 1 See Hian Lee 1 Hanyang Meng 2 Kai Zhao 1 Jielong Yang 2 Wee Peng Tay 1

Abstract

et al. (2022); Yang et al. (2021); Zhao et al. (2023); Zhao &
Akoglu (2020); Zhu et al. (2020)) have sophisticated mechanisms, they are influenced by earlier models such as GCN
(Defferrard et al., 2016) and GAT (Velic̄ković et al., 2018).
Quite a few important features of these primitive models are
inherited by their up-to-date counterparts.

In node classification using graph neural networks (GNNs), a typical model generates logits
for different class labels at each node. A softmax
layer often outputs a label prediction based on
the largest logit. We demonstrate that it is possible to infer hidden graph structural information from the dataset using these logits. We introduce the key notion of label non-uniformity,
which is derived from the Wasserstein distance
between the softmax distribution of the logits
and the uniform distribution. We demonstrate that
nodes with small label non-uniformity are harder
to classify correctly. We theoretically analyze how
the label non-uniformity varies across the graph,
which provides insights into boosting the model
performance: increasing training samples with
high non-uniformity or dropping edges to reduce
the maximal cut size of the node set of small
non-uniformity. These mechanisms can be easily
added to a base GNN model. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach improves the
performance of many benchmark base models.

We briefly recall a few features of a model such as GCN that
are most relevant. The basic idea of a GNN model is to generate an embedding of nodes in an appropriate geodesic metric space such as Euclidean space. Nodes are subsequently
grouped into different classes using a union of hyperplanes.
Such a strategy is realized by applying a message-passing
algorithm. In each iteration of the algorithm, each node updates its feature vector by using a weighted average of the
feature vectors from its neighbors. The generated embedding is then input to fully connected layers that output logits,
which after normalization via softmax, are interpreted as
probability weights of the label classes. The predicted label of each node is the class with the largest probability.
Geometric information (e.g., hyperbolicity Gulcehre et al.
(2019); Zhang et al. (2021); Zhu et al. (2020)) on the graph
plays a fundamental role in the process as we need to utilize
the local neighborhood of each node.
On the other hand, there is hidden graph structural information crucial to the success of the classification task. For example, we may be interested to know what are the boundary
nodes (i.e., those nodes that have neighbors with different
classes) between different label classes. In this work, we aim
to retrieve such graph structural information using predicted
logits from a model such as GCN. Therefore, in contrast to
the procedure described in the previous paragraph, information retrieval is in the reverse direction.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are neural networks that
learn from graph-structured data (Defferrard et al., 2016). A
problem of interest is the node classification problem. In a
graph, one is given the labels of a subset of nodes and must
predict the labels of remaining nodes using features associated with each node. Through many years of development,
numerous GNN models have been proposed to tackle the
node classification problem. Though many more recent approaches (e.g., Kang et al. (2021); Rusch et al. (2022); Song

The main tool we use is the notion of non-uniformity of
the probability weights of the label classes derived from
logits, inspired by the idea of distributional graph signals
(Ji et al., 2023a;b). It measures the extent to which the
probability distribution is not uniform. The insight is that
for a node near class boundaries, during training, we have
mixed contributions from different label classes as some
of its neighbors belong to different classes. As messagepassing has a smoothing effect (Oono & Suzuki, 2020), the
resulting predicted logits should reflect the phenomenon

1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 2 School of Internet of Things
Engineering, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, Jiangsu, China. Correspondence to: J. Yang <jyang022@e.ntu.edu.sg>, W. P. Tay <wptay@ntu.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

