I2 SB: Image-to-Image Schrödinger Bridge

Guan-Horng Liu * 1 Arash Vahdat 2 De-An Huang 2 Evangelos A. Theodorou 1
Weili Nie † 2 Anima Anandkumar † 2 3

Abstract

Input

Reference

Super-resolution

Inpainting

JPEG restoration

Deblurring

We propose Image-to-Image Schrödinger Bridge
(I2 SB), a new class of conditional diffusion models that directly learn the nonlinear diffusion processes between two given distributions. These
diffusion bridges are particularly useful for image restoration, as the degraded images are structurally informative priors for reconstructing the
clean images. I2 SB belongs to a tractable class
of Schrödinger bridge, the nonlinear extension
to score-based models, whose marginal distributions can be computed analytically given boundary pairs. This results in a simulation-free framework for nonlinear diffusions, where the I2 SB
training becomes scalable by adopting practical
techniques used in standard diffusion models. We
validate I2 SB in solving various image restoration tasks, including inpainting, super-resolution,
deblurring, and JPEG restoration on ImageNet
256×256 and show that I2 SB surpasses standard
conditional diffusion models with more interpretable generative processes. Moreover, I2 SB
matches the performance of inverse methods that
additionally require the knowledge of the corruption operators. Our work opens up new algorithmic opportunities for developing efficient nonlinear diffusion models on a large scale. Project page
and codes: https://i2sb.github.io/.

2

I SB output

Figure 1. Outputs of our proposed Image-to-Image Schrödinger
Bridge (I2 SB) on ImageNet 256×256 validation set for various
image restoration tasks.

ill-posed (Banham & Katsaggelos, 1997; Richardson, 1972)
and typically solved by modern data-driven approaches with
conditional generation (Mirza & Osindero, 2014; Khan et al.,
2022), i.e., by learning to sample the underlying (clean) data
distribution given the degraded distribution.

1. Introduction
Image restoration is a crucial problem in vision and image
processing with applications in optimal filtering (Motwani
et al., 2004), data compression (Wallace, 1991), adversarial defense (Nie et al., 2022), and safety-critical systems
such as medicine and robotics (Song et al., 2021b; Li et al.,
2021). Common image restoration tasks are known to be

Diffusion and score-based generative models (SGMs; SohlDickstein et al. (2015); Song et al. (2020b)) have emerged as
powerful conditional generative models with their remarkable successes in synthesizing high-fidelity data (Dhariwal
& Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Vahdat et al., 2021).
These models rely on progressively diffusing data to noise,
and learning the score functions (often parameterized by
neural networks) to reverse the processes (Anderson, 1982);
the reversed processes enable generation from noise to data.

Work done in part as a research intern at NVIDIA. † Equal advising. 1 Georgia Institute of Technology 2 NVIDIA 3 California Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: <ghliu@gatech.edu>.
*

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

