Towards Understanding and Reducing Graph Structural Noise for GNNs

Mingze Dong 1 2 Yuval Kluger 1 2 3

Abstract

oversquashing (Alon and Yahav, 2020; Topping et al., 2021).
Moreover, GNNs may even be outperformed by traditional
NNs when the graphs exhibit significant heterophily (Zhu
et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2021).

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged
as a powerful paradigm to learn from relational
data mostly through applying the message passing
mechanism. However, this approach may exhibit
suboptimal performance when applied to graphs
possessing various structural issues. In this work,
we focus on understanding and alleviating the
effect of graph structural noise on GNN performance. To evaluate the graph structural noise in
real data, we propose edge signal-to-noise ratio
(ESNR), a novel metric evaluating overall edge
noise level with respect to data features or labels based on random matrix theory. We have
found striking concordance between the proposed
ESNR metric and the GNN performance in various simulated and real data. To reduce the effect
of the noise, we propose GPS (Graph Propensity Score) graph rewiring, which estimates the
edge likelihood for rewiring data graphs based
on self-supervised link prediction. We provide
a theoretical guarantee for GPS graph rewiring
and demonstrate its efficacy by comprehensive
benchmarks.

There are two general strategies towards overcoming the limitations of traditional GNNs. One is by designing more dedicated GNN architectures, such as H2GCN (Zhu et al., 2020)
and CPGNN (Zhu et al., 2021) for heterophily, GIN (Xu
et al., 2018) for GNN expressive power, and +FA (Alon and
Yahav, 2020) for oversquashing respectively. In this work,
our focus is on the other strategy named graph rewiring,
which aim to modify the original data graph such that the
new graph has better properties (Bi et al., 2022; Klicpera
et al., 2019; Topping et al., 2021).
Despite existing works targeting various graph properties for
improving GNN performance, the effect of graph structural
noise on GNN training is not yet systematically characterized. This is partly due to the lack of structural noise metrics
for the structural noise in real graph-structured data. Furthermore, existing graph denoising methods are based on either
only the graph structure (such as DIGL (Klicpera et al.,
2019)) or joint optimization resulting in task-dependent
rewired graphs (Jin et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021; Franceschi
et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2021; ArnaizRodríguez et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2022). The potential of a
expressive feature-aware graph rewiring method that learns
a task-independent denoised graph remains to be explored.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) represent a framework to
learn from relational data by message passing on the provided data graph (Scarselli et al., 2008; Kipf and Welling,
2016a;b; Gilmer et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017). Despite
the prevalence of the message passing mechanism in GNNs,
recent works pointed out several limitations of message
passing neural networks, including limited power (Xu et al.,
2018; Morris et al., 2019; Maron et al., 2019), oversmoothing (Nt and Maehara, 2019; Oono and Suzuki, 2019), and

Our contributions. In this work, we aim to both understand
and minimize the effect of structural noise level in GNN
training. Our key contributions in the work are two-folds:
• We propose a novel metric, edge signal-to-noise ratio
(ESNR), to estimate the overall graph structural noise
level with respect to either node features or node labels.
We validate the metric in various synthetic and real
data and show it has strikingly high consistency with
GNN learning performance.

1

Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 2 Department of
Pathology, School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA 3 Applied Math Program, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA. Correspondence to: Yuval Kluger <yuval.kluger@yale.edu>.

• We propose a graph rewiring framework named graph
propensity score (GPS) that denoises graphs in a
feature-aware manner based on self-supervised training. We provide both theoretical guarantee and extensive benchmarking showing the efficacy of the GPS
framework combining with the ESNR metric.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

