Principled Offline RL in the Presence of Rich Exogenous Information

Riashat Islam * 1 2 3 Manan Tomar * 4 2 Alex Lamb 3 Yonathan Efroni 5 Hongyu Zang 6 Aniket Didolkar 7 3
Dipendra Misra 3 Xin Li 6 Harm Van Seijen 2 Remi Tachet Des Combes 2 John Langford 3

Abstract

information in sensory data. For example, visual datasets of
a robot or car navigating in busy city streets might contain
information such as advertisement billboards, birds in the
sky, or other people crossing the road. Parts of the observation (such as birds in the sky) are irrelevant for controlling
the agent, while other parts (such as people crossing along
the navigation route) are extremely relevant. How can we
effectively learn a representation of the world that extracts
just the relevant information for controlling the agent while
ignoring irrelevant information?

Learning to control an agent from offline data
collected in a rich pixel-based visual observation
space is vital for real-world applications of reinforcement learning (RL). A major challenge in
this setting is the presence of input information
that is hard to model and irrelevant to controlling
the agent. This problem has been approached by
the theoretical RL community through the lens of
exogenous information, i.e., any control-irrelevant
information contained in observations. For example, a robot navigating in busy streets needs to
ignore irrelevant information, such as other people walking in the background, textures of objects, or birds in the sky. In this paper, we focus
on the setting with visually detailed exogenous
information and introduce new offline RL benchmarks that offer the ability to study this problem. We find that contemporary representation
learning techniques can fail on datasets where the
noise is a complex and time-dependent process,
which is prevalent in practical applications. To address these, we propose to use multi-step inverse
models to learn Agent-Centric Representations
for Offline-RL (ACRO). Despite being simple
and reward-free, we show theoretically and empirically that the representation created by this
objective greatly outperforms baselines.

Real-world tasks are often more easily solved with fixed offline datasets since operating from offline data enables thorough testing before deployment, which can ensure safety,
reliability, and quality in the deployed policy (Lange et al.,
2012; Ebert et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2019; Jaques et al.,
2019; Levine et al., 2020). The Offline-RL setting also
eliminates the need to address exploration and planning,
which come into play during data collection.1 Although
approaches from representation learning have been studied
in the online case, yielding improvements, exogenous information has proved to be empirically challenging. In this
paper, we therefore ask the question: is it possible to learn
distraction-invariant representations from rich observations
in offline RL?
Approaches for discovering small tabular MDPs (≤500 discrete latent states) or linear control problems invariant to
exogenous information have been introduced (Dietterich
et al., 2018; Efroni et al., 2021; 2022a;b) before. However,
the planning and exploration techniques in these algorithms
are difficult to scale. A key insight that Lamb et al. (2022)
uncovered is the usefulness of multi-step action prediction
for learning exogenous-invariant representation. However
this work was limited to settings where the endogenous dynamic is tabular and contains small amount of latent states.
Further, they did not use the learned representations to solve
a downstream task.

1. Introduction
Effective real-world applications of reinforcement learning
or sequential decision-making must cope with exogenous
*

Equal contribution 1 McGill University, Quebec AI Institute
Microsoft Research, Montreal 3 Microsoft Research, New York
4
University of Alberta 5 Meta, New York 6 Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 7 University of Montreal, Quebec AI Institute. Correspondence to: Riashat Islam <riashat.islam@mail.mcgill.ca>,
Manan Tomar <manan.tomar@gmail.com>, Alex Lamb <lambalex@microsoft.com>, John Langford <jcl@microsoft.com>.
2

We propose to learn Agent-Centric Representations for
Offline-RL (ACRO) using multi-step inverse models, which
predict actions given current and future observations, as
in Figure 2. ACRO avoids the problem of learning distrac-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
This elimination, however, can make offline RL more difficult
if the wrong data is collected.

1

