Gaussian Process Priors for Systems of Linear Partial Differential Equations
with Constant Coefficients
Marc Härkönen 1 2 Markus Lange-Hegermann 3 Bogdan Rait, ă 4

Abstract

and learning hyperparameters in GPs allows to interpret
data (Duvenaud, 2014; Steinruecken et al., 2019; Berns
et al., 2020). They serve as stable regression models in
applications with few data points and provide calibrated
variances of predictions. In particular, they can serve as
simulation models for functions that are costly to evaluate,
e.g. in Bayesian optimization (Hernández Rodrı́guez et al.,
2022) or active learning (Zimmer et al., 2018). Furthermore,
GPs are often the models of choice to encode mathematical
information in a prior or if mathematical results should be
extracted from a model. One example is the estimation
of derivatives from data by differentiating the covariance
function (Swain et al., 2016; Harrington et al., 2016).

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are important tools to model physical systems and including
them into machine learning models is an important way of incorporating physical knowledge.
Given any system of linear PDEs with constant
coefficients, we propose a family of Gaussian process (GP) priors, which we call EPGP, such that
all realizations are exact solutions of this system.
We apply the Ehrenpreis-Palamodov fundamental
principle, which works as a non-linear Fourier
transform, to construct GP kernels mirroring standard spectral methods for GPs. Our approach
can infer probable solutions of linear PDE systems from any data such as noisy measurements,
or pointwise defined initial and boundary conditions. Constructing EPGP-priors is algorithmic,
generally applicable, and comes with a sparse version (S-EPGP) that learns the relevant spectral
frequencies and works better for big data sets. We
demonstrate our approach on three families of
systems of PDEs, the heat equation, wave equation, and Maxwell’s equations, where we improve
upon the state of the art in computation time and
precision, in some experiments by several orders
of magnitude.

These techniques using derivatives have been generalized to
construct GPs with realizations in the solution set of specific
systems of linear partial differential equations (PDEs) with
constant coefficients (Macêdo & Castro, 2008; Scheuerer &
Schlather, 2012; Wahlström et al., 2013; Solin et al., 2018;
Jidling et al., 2018; Särkkä, 2011). These constructions
interpret such a solution set as the image of some latent
functions under a linear operator matrix. Assuming a GP
prior for these latent function leads to a GP prior for the
solution set of the system of PDEs. Jidling et al. (2017)
pointed out that these constructions of GP priors had striking similarities and suggested an approach for a general
construction, after which Lange-Hegermann (2018) reinterpreted this approach in terms of Gröbner bases and made it
algorithmic. One limitation was that the method could only
work on a subclass of systems of linear PDEs with constant
coefficients: the so-called controllable (or parametrizable)
systems. The restriction to such controllable systems was
lifted for systems of ordinary differential equations (ODEs)
in (Besginow & Lange-Hegermann, 2022).

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
are a major tool in probabilistic machine learning and serve
as the default functional prior in Bayesian statistics. GPs
are specified by a mean function and a covariance function.
The covariance function in particular can be constructed
flexibly to allow various kinds of priors (Thewes et al., 2015)

In this paper, we develop an algebraic and algorithmic construction of GP priors inside the solution set of any given
system of (ordinary or partial) linear differential equations
with constant coefficients, eliminating previous restrictions
to special forms of equations, controllable systems, or ODEs.
Our construction is built upon the classical EhrenpreisPalamodov fundamental principle (see Section 3) and recent
algorithms for the construction of Noetherian multipliers
used in this theorem (Chen et al., 2022b; Cid-Ruiz et al.,
2021; Cid-Ruiz & Sturmfels, 2021; Chen & Cid-Ruiz, 2022;

1

Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig,
Germany 2 Fano Labs, Hong Kong SAR, China 3 Institute Industrial IT, OWL University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Lemgo,
Germany 4 Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., USA. . Correspondence to: Marc Härkönen <marc.harkonen@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

