Diffusion Models are Minimax Optimal Distribution Estimators

Kazusato Oko 1 2 Shunta Akiyama 1 Taiji Suzuki 1 2

Abstract

of the backward process is dependent on the data distribution, specifically on the gradient of the logarithmic density
(score) at each time of the forward process.

While efficient distribution learning is no doubt
behind the groundbreaking success of diffusion
modeling, its theoretical guarantees are quite limited. In this paper, we provide the first rigorous
analysis on approximation and generalization abilities of diffusion modeling for well-known function spaces. The highlight of this paper is that
when the true density function belongs to the
Besov space and the empirical score matching
loss is properly minimized, the generated data
distribution achieves the nearly minimax optimal
estimation rates in the total variation distance and
in the Wasserstein distance of order one. Furthermore, we extend our theory to demonstrate how
diffusion models adapt to low-dimensional data
distributions. We expect these results advance
theoretical understandings of diffusion modeling
and its ability to generate verisimilar outputs.

In practice, however, we have only access to the true distribution through a finite number of sample. For this reason,
the score of the diffusion process from the empirical distribution is utilized instead (Vincent, 2011; Sohl-Dickstein
et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019). Moreover, for computational efficiency, the empirical score is further replaced
by a neural network (score network) that is close to the
empirical score in terms of some loss function using score
matching techniques (Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005; Vincent,
2011). In this way, diffusion modeling implicitly learns the
true distribution via learning of the empirical score.
Then the following natural question immediately arises:
Is diffusion modeling a good distribution estimator? In
other words, how can the estimation error of the generated
data distribution be explicitly bounded by the number of the
training data and in a data structure dependent way?

Department of Mathematical Informatics, the University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project,
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Kazusato Oko <okokazusato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.

On the effect of score approximation errors Existing
literature has analyzed the estimation error with either of the
two assumptions on the accuracy of score approximation.
(i) One popular assumption is that the error of the loss function in score matching is sufficiently small, which was first
used by Song et al. (2020) to bound the Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence for continuous-time dynamics via Girsanov
theorem. Recently, the polynomial bound has appeared in
discrete-time, meaning that the polynomial order of the error
in score estimate at each step and number of steps suffice to
obtain the final estimation error in the total variation (TV)
distance (Lee et al., 2022b). Lee et al. (2022b) assumed
the smoothness and log-Sobolev inequality (LSI) for the
true density, and Chen et al. (2023b) and Lee et al. (2022a)
eliminated the LSI but still with the smoothness. Also, following Song et al. (2020), Pidstrigach (2022) considered the
true distribution on a manifold. (ii) Another assumption is
to bound the difference between the score and the network
at each time and point. De Bortoli et al. (2021) (also with
dissipativily) and De Bortoli (2022) (under the manifold
hypothesis) derived non-polynomial bounds in TV and in
the Wasserstein distance of order one (W1 ), respectively.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Generalization error analyses However, most of the literature assumes availability of the true score, and thus whether

1. Introduction
Diffusion modeling, also called score-based generative modeling (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019;
Song et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2020; Vahdat et al., 2021) has
achieved state-of-the-art performance in image (Song et al.,
2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021), video (Ho et al., 2022),
and audio (Chen et al., 2020; Kong et al., 2020).
Borrowing explanation from the unifying framework of
Song et al. (2020), diffusion modeling first gradually adds
noise to the data distribution, and transforms the distribution to a predefined noise distribution. This time evolution,
called the forward process, can be formulated as a stochastic
differential equation (SDE) that is data independent. On
the other hand, we can consider the time-reversal of the
SDE, and by following this so-called backward process, one
can generate data from noise. Importantly, the drift term
1

1

