How to Address Monotonicity for Model Risk Management?

Dangxing Chen 1 Weicheng Ye 1

Abstract

easily verify conceptual soundness and fairness.
Nevertheless, conceptual soundness and fairness are not
necessarily guaranteed for ML models, even if they are
transparent. Our focus in this paper is on monotonicity, one
of the most important indicators. In recent years, monotonic
machine learning models have received extensive research
attention (Yanagisawa et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2020; Milani Fard et al., 2016; You et al., 2017; Potharst & Feelders,
2002; Duivesteijn & Feelders, 2008). These studies have led
to a more reasonable and fair approach to ML. The majority
of papers, however, focus on individual monotonicity, that
is, on the fact that a model is monotonic with a particular
feature. It was only recently pointed out that individual
monotonicity is insufficient to summarize all relevant information (Chen & Ye, 2022; Gupta et al., 2020). It is also
important to consider pairwise monotonicity, a monotonicity that considers monotonicity between different features.
Furthermore, most of these models are not necessarily transparent.

In this paper, we study the problem of establishing the accountability and fairness of transparent
machine learning models through monotonicity.
Although there have been numerous studies on
individual monotonicity, pairwise monotonicity
is often overlooked in the existing literature. This
paper studies transparent neural networks in the
presence of three types of monotonicity: individual monotonicity, weak pairwise monotonicity,
and strong pairwise monotonicity. As a means of
achieving monotonicity while maintaining transparency, we propose the monotonic groves of neural additive models. As a result of empirical examples, we demonstrate that monotonicity is often
violated in practice and that monotonic groves of
neural additive models are transparent, accountable, and fair.

In this paper, pairwise monotonicity is explored in more detail, particularly in the context of transparent machine learning models. We divide pairwise monotonicity into two types:
the pairwise monotonicity introduced in (Chen & Ye, 2022)
is classified as weak pairwise monotonicity, and monotonic
dominance discussed in (Gupta et al., 2020) is classified as
strong pairwise monotonicity. Time and severity are the two
most common causes of pairwise monotonicity. In terms of
time, recent information should often be considered more
important than older information. For example, in credit
scoring, if there is one past due, the credit score should be
lower if the past due occurred recently. It is important to
take into account such pairwise monotonicity in order to
give people the opportunity to improve. It is important that
all individuals have the opportunity to succeed without being solely based on their past behaviors. In terms of severity,
some events are intrinsically more severe than others due to
the nature of justice. A felony, for example, is more serious
than a misdemeanor in criminal justice. It is important to
maintain pairwise monotonicity as justice is an important
component of fairness and a good society should have a
system of reward and punishment that is fair. Furthermore,
weak and strong pairwise monotonicity are distinguished
based on whether two features can only be compared at
the same magnitude. Strong pairwise monotonicity occurs

1. Introduction
There has been growing public concern over the misuse of
artificial intelligence models in the absence of regulations,
despite the success of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) in many fields (Radford et al., 2019;
He et al., 2016; Chen & Guestrin, 2016). The European
Commission (EC) has proposed the Artificial Intelligence
Act (AIA) (EU2, 2021), which represents a significant first
step toward filling the regulatory void. Regulations regarding artificial intelligence should consider transparency, accountability, and fairness (Carlo et al., 2021; OCC, 2021).
Many efforts have been made to develop transparent ML
models (Rudin, 2019; Agarwal et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2021; Tsang et al., 2020; Hastie, 2017; Caruana et al., 2015;
Lou et al., 2013). A transparent model facilitates the explanation of how it makes decisions, therefore allowing us to
1
Zu Chongzhi Center for Mathematics and Computational Sciences, Duke Kunshan University, Kunshan, Jiangsu,
China.
Correspondence to: Dangxing Chen <dangxing.chen@dukekunshan.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

