Sketching Meets Differential Privacy: Fast Algorithm for Dynamic Kronecker
Projection Maintenance

Zhao Song 1 Xin Yang 2 Yuanyuan Yang 2 Lichen Zhang 3

Abstract

structure with the following guarantees: it can preprocess
and compute an initial projection. At each iteration, B receives a low rank or sparse change, and the data structure
needs to update B to reflect these changes. It will then be
asked to approximately compute the matrix-vector product,
between the updated P and an online vector√h. For example, in linear programming, one sets B = W A, where
A ∈ Rm×n is the constraint matrix and W is the diagonal
slack matrix. Each iteration, W receives relatively small
perturbations. Then, the
√ data structure needs√to output an
approximate vector to W A(A⊤ W A)−1 A⊤ W h, for an
online vector h ∈ Rn .

Projection maintenance is one of the core data
structure tasks. Efficient data structures for projection maintenance have led to recent breakthroughs in many convex programming algorithms. In this work, we further extend this
framework to the Kronecker product structure.
Given a constraint matrix A and a positive semidefinite matrix W ∈ Rn×n with a sparse eigenbasis, we consider the task of maintaining the
projection in the form of B⊤ (BB⊤ )−1 B, where
B = A(W ⊗ I) or B = A(W 1/2 ⊗ W 1/2 ). At
each iteration, the weight matrix W receives a
low rank change and we receive a new vector
h. The goal is to maintain the projection matrix and answer the query B⊤ (BB⊤ )−1 Bh with
good approximation guarantees. We design a fast
dynamic data structure for this task and it is robust against an adaptive adversary. Following the
beautiful and pioneering work of [Beimel, Kaplan, Mansour, Nissim, Saranurak and Stemmer,
STOC’22], we use tools from differential privacy
to reduce the randomness required by the data
structure and further improve the running time.

In this work, we consider a specific type of projection maintenance problem. Concretely, our matrix B = A(W ⊗ I)
or B = A(W 1/2 ⊗ W 1/2 ), where W ∈ Rn×n is a pos2
itive semidefinite matrix and A ∈ Rm×n is a matrix
whose i-th row is the vectorization of an n × n matrix.
We call the problem for maintaining such kind of matrices, the Dynamic Kronecker Product Projection Maintenance Problem. Maintaining the Kronecker product projection matrix has important implications for solving semidefinite programs using interior point method (Jiang et al.,
2020a; Huang et al., 2022b;a; Gu & Song, 2022). Specifically, one has m constraint matrices A1 , . . . , Am ∈ Rn×n ,
and A is constructed by vectorization each of the Ai ’s as
its rows. The matrix W is typically the complementary
slack of the program. In many cases, the constraint matrices A1 , . . . , Am are simultaneously diagonalizable, meaning that there exists a matrix P such that P ⊤ Ai P is diagonal. This leads to the matrix W also being simultaneously diagonalizable, which implies potential faster algorithms for this kind of SDP (Jiang & Li, 2016). We study
this setting in a more abstract and general fashion: suppose
A1 , . . . , Am are fixed. The sequence of update matrices
W (0) , W (1) , . . . , W (T ) ∈ Rn×n share the same eigenbasis.

1. Introduction
Projection maintenance is one of the most important data
structure problems in recent years. Many convex optimization algorithms that give the state-of-the-art running time
heavily rely on an efficient and robust projection maintenance data structure (Cohen et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019;
Jiang et al., 2020b;a; Huang et al., 2022b). Let B ∈ Rm×n ,
consider the projection matrix P = B(B ⊤ B)−1 B ⊤ . The
projection maintenance task aims for the design of a data
1
Adobe Research 2 The University of Washington 3 MIT.
Correspondence to:
Zhao Song <zsong@adobe.com>,
Yuanyuan Yang <yyangh@cs.washington.edu>, Lichen Zhang
<lichenz@mit.edu>.

The data structure design problem can be decomposed into
2 parts: 1). How to update the projection matrix fast, and
2). How to answer the query efficiently. For the update
portion, we leverage the fact that the updates are relatively
small. Hence, by updating the inverse part of projection in
a lazy fashion, we can give a fast update algorithm.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

