PASTA: Pessimistic Assortment Optimization

Juncheng Dong * 1 Weibin Mo * 2 Zhengling Qi 3 Cong Shi 4 Ethan X. Fang 5 Vahid Tarokh 1

Abstract

brick-and-mortar and online retailing, the seller needs to
carefully choose a set of products from the vast collection of
all available products for displaying to its customers. In this
line, the problem of selecting an assortment, i.e., a collection
of products from all available products, in order to maximize
the seller’s revenue is the assortment optimization problem.
Obviously, the choice behavior of customers (McFadden,
1981) is of great importance in the problem of assortment optimization. Without loss of generality, we assume the choice
of each customer can be described by a preference vector θ˚ .
This subsumes the seminal multinomial logit (MNL) model
(McFadden, 1973) which is arguably the most well-studied
and widespread models in assortment optimization literature
(Please see Section 6 for more details) (Talluri & van Ryzin,
2004; Caro & Gallien, 2007; Rusmevichientong et al., 2010;
Davis et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2021a; Aouad et al., 2022).

We consider a class of assortment optimization
problems in an offline data-driven setting. A firm
does not know the underlying customer choice
model but has access to an offline dataset consisting of the historically offered assortment set,
customer choice, and revenue. The objective is
to use the offline dataset to find an optimal assortment. Due to the combinatorial nature of
assortment optimization, the problem of insufficient data coverage is likely to occur in the offline
dataset. Therefore, designing a provably efficient
offline learning algorithm becomes a significant
challenge. To this end, we propose an algorithm
referred to as Pessimistic ASsortment opTimizAtion (PASTA for short) designed based on the principle of pessimism, that can correctly identify the
optimal assortment by only requiring the offline
data to cover the optimal assortment under general
settings. In particular, we establish a regret bound
for the offline assortment optimization problem
under the celebrated multinomial logit model. We
also propose an efficient computational procedure
to solve our pessimistic assortment optimization
problem. Numerical studies demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over the existing
baseline method.

In practice, θ˚ is often unknown and needs to be estimated.
Assuming no historical data of customers, dynamic assortment optimization adaptively learns θ˚ in a trial-and-error
fashion by updating the assortment and observing the subsequent choices of customers sequentially (Caro & Gallien,
2007; Chen et al., 2020; Rusmevichientong et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2022). Meanwhile, in our era
of Big Data, companies often collect abundant customer
data. Therefore, it is often in companies’ best interest to
learn from the existing (potentially massive) offline datasets
rather than starting from scratch. Moreover, offline learning is beneficial since online exploration can sometimes be
expensive or infeasible. Hence, we take the first stab to
formally study the following important question faced by
every seller.

1. Introduction
One of the most critical problems faced by a seller is to
select products for presentation to potential buyers. Often
faced with limited display spaces and storage costs in both

Research Question: Given a pre-collected offline dataset
of historically offered assortment, customers choices, and
revenue, how can we find an efficient and theoretically justified offline algorithm to estimate the optimal assortment set
without unrealistic assumptions on the offline dataset?

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27705, United States.
2
Mitchell E. Daniels, Jr. School of Business, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN 47907, United States. 3 Department of Decision Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, DC
20052, United States. 4 Herbert Business School, University of
Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33146, United States. 5 Department
of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham,
NC 27705, United States.. Correspondence to: Zhengling Qi
<qizhengling@gwu.edu>.

When the dataset is not adaptively collected, it is not uncommon to encounter the challenge of insufficient coverage
of data. For estimators such as the maximum likelihood
estimator (MLE) to approximate θ˚ accurately, the offline
dataset must include sufficiently many assortments and customer choices. In other words, the data-collecting process
needs to sufficiently explore different assortments (by the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

