Optimal Horizon-Free Reward-Free Exploration for Linear Mixture MDPs

Junkai Zhang 1 Weitong Zhang 1 Quanquan Gu 1

Abstract

ceiving observations, including states and rewards. The goal
of the agent is to maximize the total reward. To achieve this
goal, the agent needs to explore the environment and exploit
the collected information to find the optimal policy. The
exploration has long been considered as a central challenge
for RL, for which the agent needs to strategically visit states
to learn transition dynamics and the value of different states.
RL algorithms are often designed to exploit the transition
and the reward information to achieve efficient exploration.

We study reward-free reinforcement learning (RL)
with linear function approximation, where the
agent works in two phases: (1) in the exploration phase, the agent interacts with the environment but cannot access the reward; and (2) in
the planning phase, the agent is given a reward
function and is expected to find a near-optimal
policy based on samples collected in the exploration phase. The sample complexities of existing
reward-free algorithms have a polynomial dependence on the planning horizon, which makes them
intractable for long planning horizon RL problems. In this paper, we propose a new reward-free
algorithm for learning linear mixture Markov decision processes (MDPs), where the transition
probability can be parameterized as a linear combination of known feature mappings. At the
core of our algorithm is uncertainty-weighted
value-targeted regression with exploration-driven
pseudo-reward and a high-order moment estimator for the aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties. When the total reward is bounded by 1, we
show thatour algorithm only needs to explore
e d2 ε−2 episodes to find an ε-optimal policy,
O
where d is the dimension of the feature mapping.
The sample complexity of our algorithm only has
a polylogarithmic dependence on the planning
horizon and therefore is “horizon-free”.
In addi
tion, we provide an Ω d2 ε−2 sample complexity
lower bound, which matches the sample complexity of our algorithm up to logarithmic factors, suggesting that our algorithm is optimal.

Unfortunately, in many real-world RL problems, reward
functions are manually designed to incentive the agent to
learn specific tasks, and they may change over time (Achiam
et al., 2017; Tessler et al., 2018; Miryoosefi et al., 2019).
To avoid learning the transition dynamics repeatedly, Jin
et al. (2020a) proposed a new RL paradigm, Reward-free
Exploration, which separates exploration and planning into
two different phases. In the exploration phase, the agent
cannot access the real reward function. It can only learn the
transition dynamics based on the collected episodes. While
in the planning phase, the agent can no longer interact with
the environment but has access to the reward function. The
goal is to find the optimal policy based on the reward function and previous exploration. A series of work (Jin et al.,
2020a; Kaufmann et al., 2021b; Ménard et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2020) have achieved the optimal sample complexity
e 2 S 2 Aε−2 ), where H is the planning horizon, S is
of O(H
the number of states, and A is the number of actions.
The sample complexity for learning tabular MDPs shows
that learning becomes intractable when the sizes of the state
and action spaces increase without further structural assumptions. Linear function approximation is a classical approach
to deal with this challenge, which approximates the transition dynamic or the value function by linear functions on
compact feature mappings. To this end, Wang et al. (2020b);
Zanette et al. (2020c) studied reward-free RL in linear MDPs
(Yang & Wang, 2019; Jin et al., 2020b). Zhang et al. (2021a)
studied reward-free exploration for linear mixture MDPs
(Ayoub et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021c), where the transition
probability is a linear combination of feature mappings. The
subsequent work Chen et al. (2021) has achieved
 near ope H 3 d(H + d)ε−2 . However,
timal sample complexity O
this sample complexity depends on the planning horizon,
which will blow up for long planning horizon problems.
Therefore, a natural question arises:

1. Introduction
In Reinforcement Learning (RL), the agent sequentially
interacts with the environment by executing policies and re1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, California, USA. Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu
<qgu@cs.ucla.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

