One Transformer Fits All Distributions in Multi-Modal Diffusion at Scale
Fan Bao 1 2 Shen Nie 3 2 Kaiwen Xue 3 2 Chongxuan Li 3 Shi Pu 1 2 Yaole Wang 1
Gang Yue 1 2 Yue Cao 4 Hang Su 1 5 Jun Zhu 1 2 5

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, we are witnessing a content-creation revolution
driven by the rapid advances of generative modeling on
multi-modal data. In particular, diffusion models (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021c)
have shown an incredible ability to create high-fidelity and
diverse data (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022a; Popov et al., 2021),
whose content aligns well with the input text condition.

This paper proposes a unified diffusion framework
(dubbed UniDiffuser) to fit all distributions relevant to a set of multi-modal data in one model.
Our key insight is – learning diffusion models for
marginal, conditional, and joint distributions can
be unified as predicting the noise in the perturbed
data, where the perturbation levels (i.e. timesteps)
can be different for different modalities. Inspired
by the unified view, UniDiffuser learns all distributions simultaneously with a minimal modification
to the original diffusion model – perturbs data in
all modalities instead of a single modality, inputs
individual timesteps in different modalities, and
predicts the noise of all modalities instead of a
single modality. UniDiffuser is parameterized by
a transformer for diffusion models to handle input types of different modalities. Implemented on
large-scale paired image-text data, UniDiffuser is
able to perform image, text, text-to-image, imageto-text, and image-text pair generation by setting
proper timesteps without additional overhead. In
particular, UniDiffuser is able to produce perceptually realistic samples in all tasks and its quantitative results (e.g., the FID and CLIP score) are not
only superior to existing general-purpose models
but also comparable to the bespoken models (e.g.,
Stable Diffusion and DALL·E 2) in representative tasks (e.g., text-to-image generation). Our
code is available at https://github.com/
thu-ml/unidiffuser.

However, these generative models are designed as bespoke
systems, which only allow a single task. Actually, humans
can generate various multi-modal content simultaneously,
with arbitrary conditioning types. For example, artists can
create paintings conditioned on texts, scenes, or just imagination and employ language ability to generate the caption
of a photo. Toward a general generative system on multimodal data, a unified training framework that can cover all
types of multi-modal generative tasks (see Figure 1) is one
of the fundamental components.
The task is solved by fitting a corresponding distribution
in the view of probabilistic modeling. For instance, textto-image generation can be formulated as learning the conditional distribution p(Image|Text). A classical way to fit
all relevant distributions is implicit – it first learns the joint
distribution and then infers the marginal and conditional
distributions by additional procedures (e.g., Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (Srivastava & Salakhutdinov, 2012)), which is
unaffordable on large-scale multi-modal data (Schuhmann
et al., 2022).
In contrast, this paper presents a diffusion-based framework
(dubbed UniDiffuser) that explicitly fits all relevant distributions in one model without introducing additional training or
inference overhead. Our key insight is – learning diffusion
models for all distributions can be unified as predicting the
noise in the perturbed data, where the perturbation levels
(i.e. timesteps) can be different for different modalities. For
instance, a zero level indicates conditional generation given
the corresponding modality, and a maximum level indicates
unconditional generation of other modalities by ignoring
the corresponding modality. Inspired by the unified view,
UniDiffuser learns all distributions simultaneously with a
minimal modification to the original diffusion model (Ho

1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, TsinghuaHuawei Joint Center for AI, BNRist Center, State Key Lab for
Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua University 2 ShengShu, Beijing,
China 3 Gaoling School of AI, Renmin University of China; Beijing
Key Lab of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing,
China 4 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 5 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China. Correspondence to: Jun
Zhu <dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

