Identifying Useful Learnwares for Heterogeneous Label Spaces

Lan-Zhe Guo * 1 Zhi Zhou * 1 Yu-Feng Li 1 Zhi-Hua Zhou 1

Abstract

resources (Guo et al., 2020). Moreover, the amount of possible machine learning tasks can be unimaginably big or
even infinite, it would be expensive or even impossible to
train a well-performing model for every task. Data privacy
concerns are also a serious issue when reusing or adapting a
trained model among different users.

The learnware paradigm aims to build a learnware market containing numerous learnwares,
each of which is a well-performing machine learning model with a corresponding specification to
describe its functionality so that future users can
identify useful models for reuse according to their
own requirements. With the learnware paradigm,
model developers can spontaneously submit models to the market without leaking data privacy,
and users can leverage models in the market to
accomplish different machine learning tasks without having to build models from scratch. Recent
studies have attempted to realize the model specification through Reduced Kernel Mean Embedding
(RKME). In this paper, we make an attempt to
improve the effectiveness of RKME specification
for heterogeneous label spaces, where the learnware market does not contain a model that has the
same label space as the user’s task, by considering a class-specific model specification explicitly,
along with a class-wise learnware identification
method. Both theoretical and empirical analyses
show that our proposal can quickly and accurately
find useful learnwares that satisfy users’ requirements. Moreover, we find that for a specific task,
reusing a small model identified via the specification performs better than directly reusing a
pre-trained generic big model.

To deal with the above challenges simultaneously, learnware (Zhou, 2016; Zhou & Tan, 2022) provides a new
paradigm that attempts to change the current style of standard machine learning to a style where the previous efforts
of other users can be identified and reused, by constructing a public learnware market containing numerous learnwares. Each learnware is a well-performing machine learning model with a specification that conveys its specialty
and utility. A standard learnware paradigm is conducted as
follows: a developer or owner of a trained machine learning
model (no matter whether the model structure or the training algorithm) can spontaneously submit the trained model
into the learnware market. The learnware market assigns a
specification to the model, which captures its specialty and
utility and enables it to be identified for reuse, and then incorporates the model into the market. When a user is going
to tackle a machine learning task, the user can submit the
requirement to the learnware market, and then the market
will identify useful learnware(s) by considering the model
specification. It is noteworthy that the learnware market has
no access to either the data of developers or users. Figure 1
presents a comparison of the standard machine learning
paradigm and the learnware paradigms.
It is evident that the specification plays a pivotal role in the
learnware paradigm. A model specification should satisfy
two important properties: 1) the specification should accurately describe the characteristics of the model, such that
given a new learning task, it is possible to identify useful
learnwares based on the specification; 2) the specification
must not leak its original training data, otherwise the model
developers may not be able to share their models due to
concerns about the leak of data privacy. A recent effort
is the RKME (Reduced Kernel Mean Embedding) specification (Zhou & Tan, 2022), based on techniques of the
reduced set of KME (Kernel Mean Embedding) (Muandet
et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2021). The KME is a powerful technique to map a probability distribution to a point in RKHS
(Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space) without losing infor-

1. Introduction
Machine learning has achieved great success in various
tasks and applications (Jordan & Mitchell, 2015). However, training a well-performing machine learning model
from scratch is difficult since it requires a huge number of
training data, particularly labeled data (Zhou, 2017); proficient training skills (LeCun et al., 2015); massive computing
*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China.
Correspondence to: Yu-Feng Li <liyf@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

