Explainability as statistical inference

Hugo Henri Joseph Senetaire 1 Damien Garreau 2 Jes Frellsen * 1 Pierre-Alexandre Mattei * 2
for black-box models, and we refer to Linardatos et al.
(2021) for a recent survey. Finding interpretable models
is hard. The lack of consensus for evaluating an explanation (Afchar et al., 2021; Jethani et al., 2021a; Liu et al.,
2021; Hooker et al., 2019) makes it difficult to assess the
qualities of the different methods. Many leads are explored
such as interpretability for unsupervised models (Crabbé
& van der Schaar, 2022; Moshkovitz et al., 2020), using
concept embedding models to obtain high-level explanation (Zarlenga et al., 2022), global feature selection (Tibshirani, 1996; Lemhadri et al., 2021). In this paper, we will
focus on methods that offer an understanding of which features are important for the prediction of a given instance
in a supervised learning setting. These types of methods
are called instance-wise feature selection and quantify how
much a prediction changes when only a subset of features
is shown to the model.

Abstract
A wide variety of model explanation approaches
have been proposed in recent years, all guided by
very different rationales and heuristics. In this
paper, we take a new route and cast interpretability as a statistical inference problem. We propose
a general deep probabilistic model designed to
produce interpretable predictions. The model’s
parameters can be learned via maximum likelihood, and the method can be adapted to any predictor network architecture, and any type of prediction problem. Our model is akin to amortized
interpretability methods, where a neural network
is used as a selector to allow for fast interpretation at inference time. Several popular interpretability methods are shown to be particular
cases of regularized maximum likelihood for our
general model. Using our framework, we identify imputation as a common issue of these models. We propose new datasets with ground truth
selection which allow for the evaluation of the
features importance map and show experimentally that multiple imputation provides more reasonable interpretations.

1

Related work Many different rationales enable explainability with feature importance maps with different successes.
Gradient-based methods leverage the gradient of the target with respect to the input to get feature importance.
For instance, Seo et al. (2018) create saliency maps by
back-propagating gradient through the model. However,
many works showed that these methods do not provide reliable explanations (Adebayo et al., 2018; Kindermans et al.,
2019; Hooker et al., 2019; Slack et al., 2020).

Introduction

Fueled by the recent advances in deep learning, machine
learning models are becoming omnipresent in society.
Their widespread use for decision making or predictions
in critical fields leads to a growing need for transparency
and interpretability of these methods. While Rudin (2019)
argues that we should always favor interpretable models for
high-stake decisions, in practice, black-box methods are
used due to their superior predictive power. Researchers
have proposed a variety of model explanation approaches

Other methods proposed to approximate locally a complicated black-box model using simpler models. Ribeiro et al.
(2016) fit an interpretable linear regression locally around
a given instance with LIME while Lundberg & Lee (2017)
approximates Shapley values (Shapley, 1953) for every instance with SHAP. Wang et al. (2021) proposed an algorithm that selects the most probable subset of features maximizing the same objective as the predictor called probabilistic sufficient explanation.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark 2 Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, Maasai, LJAD, CNRS,
Nice, France. Correspondence to: Hugo Henri Joseph Senetaire
<hhjs@dtu.dk>.

In practice, these methods focus on local explanations for a
single instance. An evaluation of the selection for a single
image requires a large number of passes through the blackbox model. To alleviate this issue, (Wang et al., 2021) proposed to combine a beam search with probabilistic circuits
(Choi et al., 2020). This allowed for tractable and faster calculation of the probabilistic sufficient explanations but only

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

