Tensor Decompositions Meet Control Theory:
Learning General Mixtures of Linear Dynamical Systems

Ainesh Bakshi * 1 Allen Liu * 1 Ankur Moitra * 1 Morris Yau * 1

Abstract

underlying system parameters. When there is only one
system, this is a classic problem in control theory called system identification (Åström & Eykhoff, 1971; Ljung, 1998).
A long line of recent works have established finite sample guarantees, often times from a single long trajectory,
in increasingly more general settings (Hardt et al., 2018;
Faradonbeh et al., 2018; Hazan et al., 2018; Simchowitz
et al., 2018b; Oymak & Ozay, 2019; Tsiamis & Pappas,
2019; Sarkar et al., 2019; Simchowitz et al., 2019; Bakshi
et al., 2023).

Recently Chen and Poor initiated the study of
learning mixtures of linear dynamical systems.
While linear dynamical systems already have
wide-ranging applications in modeling time-series
data, using mixture models can lead to a better
fit or even a richer understanding of underlying
subpopulations represented in the data. In this
work we give a new approach to learning mixtures of linear dynamical systems that is based on
tensor decompositions. As a result, our algorithm
succeeds without strong separation conditions on
the components, and can be used to compete with
the Bayes optimal clustering of the trajectories.
Moreover our algorithm works in the challenging
partially-observed setting. Our starting point is
the simple but powerful observation that the classic Ho-Kalman algorithm is a relative of modern
tensor decomposition methods for learning latent
variable models. This gives us a playbook for
how to extend it to work with more complicated
generative models.

But what about mixture models? Instead of one long trajectory, we observe many short trajectories. The main complication is that they are unlabelled — we don’t know which
system generated which trajectories. This problem has many
potential applications. For example, the microbiome is a
community of microorganisms that live in a host. They play
a key role in human health and are affected by our environment in complex ways. In scientific studies, the composition
of the microbiome is monitored over extended periods of
time and researchers model its behavior using dynamical
systems to discover new biological insights (Gonze et al.,
2018). But when these dynamics are heterogenous across
a population, it is natural to use a mixture model instead.
More generally, there are wide-ranging applications of dynamical systems in biology and engineering and in many
of these settings using a mixture model can lead to a better fit, or even a richer understanding of any underlying
subpopulations represented in the data.

1. Introduction
In this work, we study the problem of learning mixtures of
linear dynamical systems from unlabelled trajectories. Each
system evolves according to the following rules:
xt+1 = Ai xt + Bi ut + wt ,
yt = Ci xt + Di ut + zt ,

However there is not much in the way of theoretical guarantees. In an important recent work, Chen and Poor gave the
first efficient algorithms for learning mixtures of linear dynamical systems (Chen & Poor, 2022). This work received
an ICML 2022 Outstanding Paper award. They employed
a two-stage approach where they use coarse estimates to
cluster the trajectories and then, based on their clustering,
further refine their estimates. Essentially, they use the stationary covariances to find subspaces according to which
the trajectories from the systems are well-separated.

(1)

Here the ut ’s are control inputs to the system, the
wt ’s are the process noise and the zt ’s are the observation noise. We observe the input-output sequence
(u1 , y1 ), (u2 , y2 ), · · · , (uT , yT ) and the goal is to learn the
*

Equal contribution 1 MIT. Correspondence to: Ainesh Bakshi <ainesh@mit.edu>, Allen Liu <cliu568@mit.edu>, Ankur
Moitra <moitra@mit.edu>, Morris Yau <morrisy@mit.edu>.

In this work, we give a new approach for learning mixtures
of linear dynamical systems that is based on tensor decompositions. Our algorithm (Theorem 7.1) achieves essentially
optimal guarantees in many respects:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

