A Law of Robustness beyond Isoperimetry

Yihan Wu 1 Heng Huang 1 Hongyang Zhang 2

Abstract

results. In statistics and operation research, robustness is a
desirable property for optimization problems against uncertainty, which can be represented as deterministic or random
variability in the value of optimization parameters. This
is known as robust statistics or robust optimization. In
both cases, the problem can be stated as given a deterministic labeling function g : Rd → [−1, 1], (approximately)
interpolating the training data {(xi , g(xi ))}ni=1 or its noisy
counterpart by a function with small Lipschitz constant. The
focus of this paper is on the latter setting known as robust interpolation problem (Bubeck & Sellke, 2023). That is, given
noisy training data {(xi , g(xi ) + zi )}ni=1 of size n where
x1 , · · · , xn are restricted in a unit ball and z1 , · · · , zn have
variance > 0, how many network parameters and training
samples are needed for robust interpolation provided that
the functions in the class can (approximately) interpolate
the noisy training data with Lipschitz constant L?

We study the robust interpolation problem of arbitrary data distributions supported on a bounded
space and propose a two-fold law of robustness.
Robust interpolation refers to the problem of interpolating n noisy training data points in Rd
by a Lipschitz function. Although this problem
has been well understood when the samples are
drawn from an isoperimetry distribution, much
remains unknown concerning its performance under generic or even the worst-case distributions.
p
We prove a Lipschitzness lower bound Ω( n/p)
of the interpolating neural network with p parameters on arbitrary data distributions. With this
result, we validate the law of robustness conjecture in prior work by Bubeck, Li, and Nagaraj
on two-layer neural networks with polynomial
weights. We then extend our result to arbitrary interpolating approximators and prove a Lipschitzness lower bound Ω(n1/d ) for robust interpolation. Our results demonstrate a two-fold law of
robustness: i) we show the potential benefit of
overparametrization for smooth data interpolation
when n = poly(d), and ii) we disprove the potential existence of an O(1)-Lipschitz robust interpolating function when n = exp(ω(d)).

There are several reasons to study the noisy setting (Bubeck
& Sellke, 2023): 1) The real-world data are noisy. For example, it has been shown that around 3.3% of the data in
the most-cited datasets was inaccurate or mislabeled (Northcutt et al., 2021). 2) This noise assumption is necessary
from a theoretical point of view, as otherwise there could
exist a Lipschitz function which perfectly fits the training
data for any large n. Despite progress on the robust interpolation problem (Bubeck & Sellke, 2023; Bubeck et al.,
2021), many fundamental questions remain unresolved. In
modern learning theory, it was commonly believed that 1)
big data (Schmidt et al., 2018), 2) low dimensionality of
input (Blum et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020a; Kumar et al.,
2020), and 3) overparametrization (Bubeck & Sellke, 2023;
Bubeck et al., 2021) improve robustness. We view the robustness problem from the perspective of Lipschitzness and
ask the following question:

1. Introduction
Robustness has been a central research topic in machine
learning (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014),
statistics (Huber, 2004), operation research (Ben-Tal et al.,
2009), and many other domains. In machine learning, study
of adversarial robustness has led to significant advances
in defending against adversarial attacks, where test inputs
with slight modification can lead to problematic prediction

Are big data and large models a remedy for robustness?
In fact, there is significant empirical evidence to indicate
that enlarging the model size (overparametrization) improves robustness when n is moderately large (e.g., when
n = poly(d), see (Madry et al., 2017; Schmidt et al., 2018)).
Our work verifies the benefit of overparametrization for fitting a neural network with p parameters below the noise
level by proving such neural
p networks must have a Lipschitzness lower bound Ω( n/p). On the other hand, big

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland at College Park 2 School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo.
Correspondence to:
Yihan Wu
<ywu42@umd.edu>, Heng Huang <heng@umd.edu>,
Hongyang Zhang <hongyang.zhang@uwaterloo.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

