Fair yet Asymptotically Equal Collaborative Learning

Xiaoqiang Lin 1 * Xinyi Xu 1 2 * See-Kiong Ng 3 Chuan-Sheng Foo 2 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract

2021; Benczúr et al., 2018), for a possibly long-term collaboration (Xu & Wang, 2021; Yuan et al., 2021; Zhang
et al., 2022).1 The setting of streaming data is motivated by
scenarios where data collection is time-consuming and takes
place over a long term, e.g., hospitals collect 100 thousand
medical scans collaboratively over months (Flores, 2020;
Miller & Chin, 1996; van Leersum et al., 2013). Moreover,
due to data scarcity in the beginning of data collection, collaboration through data sharing can benefit the nodes by
providing them with an ML model trained on the shared
data, e.g., repeated interactions among 17 partners/nodes
(Hale, 2019). As the ML model is continuously trained,
it also finds application in real-time decision-making, e.g.,
provide real-time customized services (Zhao et al., 2020), or
make predictions in the stock market (Benczúr et al., 2018;
Bifet & Kirkby, 2009; Ntakaris et al., 2018). In contrast,
it is undesirable or infeasible to wait till the completion of
the data collection and model training, which can take over
weeks, months, or an indeterminate length (van Leersum
et al., 2013; Miller & Chin, 1996; Wang et al., 2021a).

In collaborative learning with streaming data,
nodes (e.g., organizations) jointly and continuously learn a machine learning (ML) model by
sharing the latest model updates computed from
their latest streaming data. For the more resourceful nodes to be willing to share their model updates, they need to be fairly incentivized. This
paper explores an incentive design that guarantees
fairness so that nodes receive rewards commensurate to their contributions. Our approach leverages
an explore-then-exploit formulation to estimate
the nodes’ contributions (i.e., exploration) for realizing our theoretically guaranteed fair incentives
(i.e., exploitation). However, we observe a “rich
get richer” phenomenon arising from the existing approaches to guarantee fairness and it discourages the participation of the less resourceful
nodes. To remedy this, we additionally preserve
asymptotic equality, i.e., less resourceful nodes
achieve equal performance eventually to the more
resourceful/“rich” nodes. We empirically demonstrate in two settings with real-world streaming
data: federated online incremental learning and
federated reinforcement learning, that our proposed approach outperforms existing baselines in
fairness and learning performance while remaining competitive in preserving equality.

To ensure the effectiveness of such collaboration of data
sharing through continuous learning,2 it is important to incentivize the nodes to share their latest data (indirectly) via
the latest model updates. In particular, a fair incentive mechanism is shown to be effective, by giving higher incentives
to nodes with higher contributions (Song et al., 2019; Sim
et al., 2020; Tay et al., 2022). One specific approach is
via ex post fair incentives (Chen et al., 2020b; Richardson
et al., 2020) based on the nodes’ true contributions from
all of their shared/uploaded model updates over the entire
training (Song et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020). This faces
two practical obstacles: 1. it requires an additional external
resource (e.g., money) for such incentives, but it is unclear
who should provide this resource or what the denomination
is, e.g., the exact monetary value of model updates (Sim
et al., 2020); 2. the incentives are realized only after training
completes which can take a long and indeterminate time.
It means the nodes do not know up-front when or what
they will receive as incentives, which makes it difficult to
convince them to join the collaboration.

1. Introduction
The problem of collaborative learning with streaming data
involves having multiple nodes collecting data incrementally (Chen et al., 2020a; Le et al., 2021) to jointly and
continuously learn an ML model by sharing the latest model
updates computed from their latest streaming data (Jin et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore. 2 Institute for Infocomm
Research, A*STAR, Singapore. 3 Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to:
Xinyi Xu <xinyi.xu@u.nus.edu>.

1

Refer to Sec. 4.2 for a detailed example.
We highlight it is different from continual learning (Yoon et al.,
2021) where a model is incrementally trained w.r.t. different tasks,
i.e., the distribution of data changes/shifts over time.
2

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

