Convergence of Proximal Point and Extragradient-Based Methods
Beyond Monotonicity: the Case of Negative Comonotonicity

Eduard Gorbunov 1 2 Adrien Taylor 3 Samuel Horváth 1 Gauthier Gidel 4 5

Abstract

2014), or games with decision-dependent data (Narang
et al., 2022). In this work, we focus on unconstrained
VIPs1 , which we state formally in the slightly more general
form of an inclusion problem:

Algorithms for min-max optimization and variational inequalities are often studied under
monotonicity assumptions. Motivated by nonmonotone machine learning applications, we follow the line of works (Diakonikolas et al., 2021;
Lee & Kim, 2021; Pethick et al., 2022; Böhm,
2022) aiming at going beyond monotonicity by
considering the weaker negative comonotonicity
assumption. In this work, we provide tight complexity analyses for the Proximal Point (PP), Extragradient (EG), and Optimistic Gradient (OG)
methods in this setup, closing several questions
on their working guarantees beyond monotonicity.
In particular, we derive the first non-asymptotic
convergence rates for PP under negative comonotonicity and star-negative comonotonicity and
show their tightness via constructing worst-case
examples; we also relax the assumptions for the
last-iterate convergence guarantees for EG and
OG and prove the tightness of the existing bestiterate guarantees for EG and OG via constructing counter-examples.

find x∗ ∈ Rd such that 0 ∈ F (x∗ ),

(IP)

where F : Rd ⇒ Rd is some (possibly set-valued) mapping.
In the sequel, we use the slightly abusive shorthand notation
F (x) to denote any particular image of x by the mapping
F , independently of F being single-valued of not.
Among the main simple first-order methods under
consideration for such problems, the extragradient
method (EG) (Korpelevich, 1976) and the optimistic gradient method (OG) (Popov, 1980) occupy an important place.
These two algorithms have been traditionally analyzed under the assumption that the considered operator is monotone
and Lipschitz (Korpelevich, 1976; Popov, 1980) and are
often interpreted as an approximation to the proximal point
(PP) method (Nemirovski, 2004; Mokhtari et al., 2019).
PP can be formally stated as an implicit iterative method
generating a sequence x1 , x2 , . . . ∈ Rd when initiated at
some x0 ∈ Rd :
xk+1 = xk − γF (xk+1 ),

1. Introduction

(PP)

for some well-chosen stepsize γ ∈ R. When F is singlevalued, one can instead use explicit methods such as EG:

The study of efficient first-order methods for solving
variational inequality problems (VIP) have known a surge
of interest due to the development of recent machine
learning (ML) formulations involving multiple objectives.
VIP appears in various ML tasks such as robust learning (Ben-Tal et al., 2009), adversarial training (Madry et al.,
2018), Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow et al.,

x
ek = xk − γ1 F (xk ),
xk+1 = xk − γ2 F (e
xk ),

∀k ≥ 0,

(EG)

or OG with the additional initialization x
e0 = x0 :
x
ek = xk − γ1 F (e
xk−1 ),

1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
2
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia (part of
this work was done while the author was a researcher at MIPT)
3
INRIA & D.I. École Normale Supérieure, CNRS & PSL Research
University, France 4 Université de Montréal and Mila, Canada
5
Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Eduard Gorbunov
<eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae>.

x

k+1

k

k

= x − γ2 F (e
x ),

∀k > 0,
∀k ≥ 0,

(OG)

where γ1 , γ2 ∈ R are some well-chosen stepsizes. For
examples of the usage of extragradient-based methods in
practice, we refer to (Daskalakis et al., 2018) who use a
variant of OG with Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) estimators to train WGAN (Gulrajani et al., 2017) on CIFAR10

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
We refer to (Gidel et al., 2019) for the details on how these
formulations appear in the real-world problems.

1

