Optimistic Online Mirror Descent for Bridging
Stochastic and Adversarial Online Convex Optimization

Sijia Chen 1 2 Wei-Wei Tu 1 3 4 Peng Zhao 1 Lijun Zhang 1 2

Abstract

management (Hazan, 2016). OCO problems can be mainly
divided into two categories: adversarial online convex optimization (adversarial OCO) (Zinkevich, 2003; Hazan et al.,
2007) and stochastic online convex optimization (SCO) (Nemirovski et al., 2009; Hazan & Kale, 2011; Lan, 2012).
Adversarial OCO assumes that the loss functions are chosen arbitrarily or adversarially and the goal is to minimize
the regret. SCO assumes that the loss functions are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.), and the goal
is to minimize the excess risk. Although the two models
have been extensively studied (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2009;
Shapiro et al., 2014; Hazan, 2016; Orabona, 2019), in real
scenarios the nature is not always completely adversarial or
stochastic, but often lies somewhere in between.

Stochastically Extended Adversarial (SEA) model
is introduced by Sachs et al. (2022) as an interpolation between stochastic and adversarial online convex optimization. Under the smoothness
condition, they demonstrate that the expected regret of optimistic follow-the-regularized-leader
(FTRL) depends on the cumulative stochastic
2
variance σ1:T
and the cumulative adversarial
variation Σ21:T for convex functions. They also
provide a slightly weaker bound based on the
2
maximal stochastic variance σmax
and the maxi2
mal adversarial variation Σmax for strongly convex functions. Inspired by their work, we investigate the theoretical guarantees of optimistic online mirror descent (OMD) for the SEA model.
For convex and
p smoothpfunctions, we obtain
2
the same O( σ1:T
+ Σ21:T ) regret bound,
without the convexity requirement of individual functions. For strongly convex and smooth
2
functions, we establish an O(min{log(σ1:T
+
2
2
2
Σ1:T ), (σmax + Σmax ) log T }) bound, better
2
than their O((σmax
+ Σ2max ) log T ) result. For
exp-concave and smooth functions, we achieve a
2
new O(d log(σ1:T
+ Σ21:T )) bound. Owing to the
OMD framework, we further establish dynamic
regret for convex and smooth functions, which is
more favorable in non-stationary online scenarios.

Recently, Sachs et al. (2022) introduce the Stochastically
Extended Adversarial (SEA) model, in which the nature
chooses distribution Dt and the learner suffers a loss ft (xt )
where ft ∼ Dt for each round t. The distributions are
allowed to vary over time, and by choosing them appropriately, SEA reduces to adversarial OCO, SCO, or other
intermediate settings. To analyze the performance, they propose to use two quantities — cumulative stochastic variance
2
σ1:T
and cumulative adversarial variation Σ21:T — to bound
the expected regret, which measure how stochastic or adversarial the distributions are. For convex and smooth functions, Sachs et al. (2022) prove that optimistic
follow-thep
p
2 +
regularized-leader (FTRL) enjoys an O( σ1:T
Σ21:T )
expected regret bound, from which we can derive an excess
risk bound for SCO (Lan, 2012) and a gradient-variation
regret bound for adversarial OCO (Chiang et al., 2012) (see
details in Section 3). However, for the strongly convex
case, Sachs et al. (2022) only establish a weak bound of
2
O((σmax
+ Σ2max ) log T ), which depends on the maximal
2
stochastic variance σmax
and the maximal adversarial variation Σ2max instead of the cumulative counterparts.

1. Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) is a fundamental framework for online learning and has been applied in a variety of
real-world applications such as spam filtering and portfolio

Optimistic FTRL belongs to optimistic online learning algorithms (Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013), which aim to exploit prior knowledge during the online process. Besides
optimistic FTRL, optimistic online mirror descent (OMD)
is another popular framework, and in fact, the gradientvariation bound of Chiang et al. (2012) is derived from optimistic OMD. Given the encouraging results of optimistic

1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory,
Shenzhen 518055, China 3 4Paradigm, Beijing, China 4 ChaLearn,
USA. Correspondence to: Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>,
Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

