Differentiable Tree Operations Promote Compositional Generalization

Paul Soulos 1 † Edward Hu 2 † Kate McCurdy 3 † Yunmo Chen 4 † Roland Fernandez 5 Paul Smolensky 1 5
Jianfeng Gao 5

Abstract
In the context of structure-to-structure transformation tasks, learning sequences of discrete symbolic operations poses significant challenges due
to their non-differentiability. To facilitate the
learning of these symbolic sequences, we introduce a differentiable tree interpreter that compiles
high-level symbolic tree operations into subsymbolic matrix operations on tensors. We present
a novel Differentiable Tree Machine (DTM) architecture that integrates our interpreter with an
external memory and an agent that learns to sequentially select tree operations to execute the
target transformation in an end-to-end manner.
With respect to out-of-distribution compositional
generalization on synthetic semantic parsing and
language generation tasks, DTM achieves 100%
while existing baselines such as Transformer,
Tree Transformer, LSTM, and Tree2Tree LSTM
achieve less than 30%. DTM remains highly interpretable in addition to its perfect performance.

Differentiable Tree Machine (DTM)
Neural
Tree
Agent

Differentiable
Tree
Interpreter

Tree
Memory

Figure 1. A high level overview of our model which consists of
three modules. The Neural Tree Agent is a learnable component
which, at each step of processing, selects the operation to perform
and the arguments over which to operate. The Differentiable Tree
Interpreter is a closed-form function precomputed at initialization
which compiles high level symbolic operations into subsymbolic
matrix operations on tensors. The output of the interpreter is a
blended tree that is written to Tree Memory, which functions as a
working memory to hold various partial and candidate trees. The
final tree written to memory is the output tree. Blue represents
the component with learnable parameters, and green represents
components that operate in tree space.

1. Introduction
Symbolic manipulation is a hallmark of human reasoning
(Newell, 1980; 1982). Reasoning within the symbolic space
through discrete symbolic operations can lead to improved
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization and enhanced interpretability. Despite the significant advances in representation learning made by modern deep learning, learning to
directly manipulate discrete symbolic structures remains a
challenge. One key issue is the non-differentiability of discrete symbolic operations, which makes them incompatible

with gradient-based learning methods. Continuous representations offer greater learning capacity, but often at the
expense of interpretability and compositional generalization.
Tensor Product Representation (TPR) provides a general
encoding of structured symbolic objects in vector space
(Smolensky, 1990). TPR decomposes a symbolic object
into a set of role-filler pairs, such as a position in a tree (the
role) and the label for that position (the filler of that role).
The role and filler in each pair are represented by vectors
and bound together using the tensor product operation.

1

Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA 2 Mila, Université de Montreal, Montreal,
CA 3 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
UK 4 Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA 5 Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA,
USA. † Work partially carried out while at Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to: Paul Soulos <psoulos1@jhu.edu>.

In this work, we focus on binary trees and three Lisp operators: car, cdr, and cons (Steele, 1990) (also known as
left-child, right-child, and construct new tree). Examples of
these operations are shown in Figure 2. Crucially, within

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

