Algorithmic Stability of Heavy-Tailed SGD with General Loss Functions

Anant Raj * 1 2 Lingjiong Zhu * 3 Mert Gürbüzbalaban 4 5 Umut Şimşekli 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Many supervised learning problems can be expressed as an
instance of the risk minimization problem
Heavy-tail phenomena in stochastic gradient descent (SGD) have been reported in several empirical studies. Experimental evidence in previous
works suggests a strong interplay between the
heaviness of the tails and generalization behavior of SGD. To address this empirical phenomena theoretically, several works have made strong
topological and statistical assumptions to link the
generalization error to heavy tails. Very recently,
new generalization bounds have been proven, indicating a non-monotonic relationship between
the generalization error and heavy tails, which is
more pertinent to the reported empirical observations. While these bounds do not require additional topological assumptions given that SGD
can be modeled using a heavy-tailed stochastic
differential equation (SDE), they can only apply
to simple quadratic problems. In this paper, we
build on this line of research and develop generalization bounds for a more general class of
objective functions, which includes non-convex
functions as well. Our approach is based on developing Wasserstein stability bounds for heavytailed SDEs and their discretizations, which we
then convert to generalization bounds. Our results
do not require any nontrivial assumptions; yet,
they shed more light to the empirical observations,
thanks to the generality of the loss functions.

min {F (θ) := Ex∼D [f (θ, x)]} ,

θ∈Rd

(1)

where x ∈ X is a random data point, distributed according
to an unknown probability distribution D and taking values
in the data space X , θ denotes the parameter vector of the
model to be learned and f (θ, x) is the instantaneous loss of
misprediction with parameters θ corresponding to the data
point x. With different choices of the function f , we can
recover many problems in supervised learning from deep
learning to logistic regression or support vector machines
(Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014).
As D is unknown in many scenarios, directly attacking (1)
is often not possible. Assuming we have access to a training
dataset Xn = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ X n with n independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations, in practice,
we can consider the empirical risk minimization (ERM)
problem instead, given as follows:
)
(
n
1X
f (θ, xi ) .
min F̂ (θ, Xn ) :=
n i=1
θ∈Rd
One of the most popular algorithms for attacking the ERM
problem is stochastic gradient descent (SGD) that is based
on the following recursion:
θk+1 = θk − η∇F̃k+1 (θk , Xn ),

(2)

where η is the step-size (or learning-rate) and
∇F̃k (θ, X) :=

1 X
∇f (θ, xi )
b
i∈Ωk

*

Equal contribution 1 Coordinated Science Laboraotry, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA 2 Inria, Ecole Normale
Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris, France 3 Department
of Mathematics, Florida State University, FL, USA 4 Department
of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers University, NJ, USA 5 Princeton University, NJ, USA. Correspondence
to: Umut Şimşekli <umut.simsekli@inria.fr>.

is the stochastic gradient, with Ωk ⊂ {1, . . . , n} being a
random subset drawn with or without replacement, and
b := |Ωk | ≪ n being the batch-size.
Understanding the generalization properties of SGD has
been a major challenge in modern machine learning. In this
context, the goal is to bound the so-called generalization
error: |F̂ (θ, Xn ) − F (θ)|, either in expectation or in high
probability.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

