Feed Two Birds with One Scone:
Exploiting Wild Data for Both Out-of-Distribution Generalization and Detection

Haoyue Bai 1 Gregory Canal 2 Xuefeng Du 1 Jeongyeol Kwon 3 Robert Nowak 3 Yixuan Li 1

Abstract

(Figure 1, middle). Under such a covariate shift, a model
is expected to generalize to the out-of-distribution (OOD)
data—correctly predicting the sample into one of the known
classes (e.g., car), despite the shift. Additionally, the model
may encounter a semantic shift, where samples are from
unknown classes (e.g., deer) that the model has not been
exposed to during training (Figure 1, right). Such semantic OOD data should be rejected instead of being blindly
predicted as a known class.

Modern machine learning models deployed in
the wild can encounter both covariate and semantic shifts, giving rise to the problems of outof-distribution (OOD) generalization and OOD
detection respectively. While both problems
have received significant research attention lately,
they have been pursued independently. This
may not be surprising, since the two tasks have
seemingly conflicting goals. This paper provides a new unified approach that is capable of
simultaneously generalizing to covariate shifts
while robustly detecting semantic shifts. We propose a margin-based learning framework that exploits freely available unlabeled data in the wild
that captures the environmental test-time OOD
distributions under both covariate and semantic shifts. We show both empirically and theoretically that the proposed margin constraint
is the key to achieving both OOD generalization and detection. Extensive experiments show
the superiority of our framework, outperforming competitive baselines that specialize in either
OOD generalization or OOD detection. Code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
deeplearning-wisc/scone.

These distributional shift scenarios give rise to the importance of two problems: OOD generalization, which focuses
on the covariate shift problem (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz,
2020; Koh et al., 2021; Ye et al., 2022), and OOD detection,
which targets semantic shift (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017;
Liu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021). Both problems have received increasing research attention lately, albeit have been
pursued independently; as a result, existing methods are
highly specialized in one task, but not capable of handling
both simultaneously. This has largely impeded the wider
adoption of OOD algorithms in real-world environments,
which often present heterogeneous data shifts. A critical yet
underexplored question thus arises:
Can we devise a unified learning framework for both
OOD generalization and OOD detection?
In this paper, we bridge the gap between OOD generalization and OOD detection, in one coherent framework. Our
driving idea is to exploit unlabeled wild data naturally arising in the model’s operating environment, turning the OOD
threat into valuable learning resources instead. Wild data
arises naturally for free upon deploying any machine learning classifier in its respective environment, and has been
largely overlooked for OOD learning purposes. Specifically,
we consider a generalized characterization of the wild data,
which can be modeled as a mixed composition of three data
distributions:

1. Introduction
Modern machine learning models deployed in the wild can
encounter different types of distributional shifts. Taking
autonomous driving as an example, a model trained on indistribution (ID) data with sunny weather (Figure 1, left)
may experience a covariate shift due to snowy weather
1

Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin,
Madison 2 Institute for Foundations of Data Science, University
of Wisconsin, Madison 3 Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison. Correspondence
to: Yixuan Li <sharonli@cs.wisc.edu>.

Pwild := (1 − πs − πc )Pin + πc Pcovariate
+ πs Psemantic
,
out
out
where Pin , Pcovariate
and Psemantic
denote the marginal distriout
out
butions of ID, covariate-shifted OOD and semantic-shifted
OOD data respectively. Such wild data is available in abundance, does not require any human annotation, and importantly, contains the true test time OOD distributions under

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

