Scalable Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning through
Intelligent Information Aggregation

Siddharth Nayak 1 Kenneth Choi 1 Wenqi Ding 1 Sydney Dolan 1 Karthik Gopalakrishnan 2
Hamsa Balakrishnan 1

Abstract

In such cases, multiple agents may need to work together
and share information in order to accomplish the task (Tan,
1993b). Naı̈ve extensions of single-agent RL algorithms
to multi-agent settings do not work well because of the
non-stationarity in the environment, i.e., the actions of one
agent affect the actions of others (Tan, 1993a; Tampuu et al.,
2015). Furthermore, tasks may require cooperation among
the agents. Classical approaches to optimal planning may
(1) be computationally intractable, especially for real-time
applications, and (2) be unable to account for complex interactions and shared objectives between multiple agents. The
ability of RL to learn by trial-and-error makes it well-suited
for problems in which optimization-based methods are not
effective. In particular, multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) approaches may be suitable in these situations
due to their fast run-times and superior performance, and
their ability to model shared goals between agents using
appropriate reward structures.

We consider the problem of multi-agent navigation and collision avoidance when observations
are limited to the local neighborhood of each
agent. We propose InforMARL, a novel architecture for multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) which uses local information intelligently to compute paths for all the agents in a
decentralized manner. Specifically, InforMARL
aggregates information about the local neighborhood of agents for both the actor and the critic
using a graph neural network and can be used in
conjunction with any standard MARL algorithm.
We show that (1) in training, InforMARL has better sample efficiency and performance than baseline approaches, despite using less information,
and (2) in testing, it scales well to environments
with arbitrary numbers of agents and obstacles.
We illustrate these results using four task environments, including one with predetermined goals
for each agent, and one in which the agents collectively try to cover all goals. Code available at
https://github.com/nsidn98/InforMARL.

In this paper, we focus on multi-agent navigation and collision avoidance problems in which there are N agents trying
to cooperate with each other to collectively solve a task in a
2D environment with static and/or dynamic obstacles. The
rewards are shared across all agents in these collaborative
environments. We assume that an agent can only sense the
presence of obstacles or other agents within a certain limited radius r. The overarching objective is for all the agents
to complete their tasks in the shortest time possible, while
avoiding collisions with other agents and obstacles. This
problem setting is quite general and arises in many contexts,
e.g., search-and-rescue robot teams (Kumar et al., 2004),
environmental monitoring (Dunbabin & Marques, 2012),
and drone delivery systems (Zhang et al., 2014; Dorling
et al., 2017; Hii et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has seen wide-ranging successes recently in high-dimensional robot control (Lillicrap
et al., 2016; Levine et al., 2015), solving physics-based control problems (Heess et al., 2015), playing Go (Silver et al.,
2016), Chess (Silver et al., 2017) and Atari video games
(Mnih et al., 2013; 2015), etc. However, challenges remain
in many real-world applications in which the tasks cannot be
handled by a single agent, e.g., multi-player games, searchand-rescue drone missions, etc. (Gronauer & Diepold, 2022).

MARL-based techniques have achieved significant successes in recent times, e.g., DeepMind’s AlphaStar surpassing professional level players in StarCraft II (Vinyals et al.,
2019), OpenAI Five defeating the world-champion in Dota
II (Berner et al., 2019), etc. The performance of many of
these MARL algorithms depends on the amount of information included in the state given as input to the neural
networks (Yu et al., 2022). In many practical multi-agent

1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
Stanford University, Stanford, USA. Correspondence to: Siddharth Nayak <sidnayak@mit.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

