GOAT: A Global Transformer on Large-scale Graphs

Kezhi Kong 1 Jiuhai Chen 1 John Kirchenbauer 1 Renkun Ni 1 C. Bayan Bruss 2 Tom Goldstein 1

Abstract

the mean node count of graphs from the ogbg-molhiv
dataset of the Open Graph Benchmark (Hu et al., 2020a)
is only 25.5. This tiny size enables self-attention across a
larger percent of the graph, enabling long-range or even
global self-attention. Despite a recent surge in interest in
attention-based networks, standard Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Veličković et al., 2017) are
still the de-facto model of choice for broader applications
involving node classification or large industrial graphs.

Graph transformers have been competitive on
graph classification tasks, but they fail to outperform Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) on node
classification, which is a common task performed
on large-scale graphs for industrial applications.
Meanwhile, existing GNN architectures are limited in their ability to perform equally well on
both homophilious and heterophilious graphs as
their inductive biases are generally tailored to only
one setting. To address these issues, we propose
GOAT, a scalable global graph transformer. In
GOAT, each node conceptually attends to all the
nodes in the graph and homophily/heterophily relationships can be learnt adaptively from the data.
We provide theoretical justification for our approximate global self-attention scheme, and show it to
be scalable to large-scale graphs. We demonstrate
the competitiveness of GOAT on both heterophilious and homophilious graphs with millions of
nodes. We open source our implementation at
https://github.com/devnkong/GOAT.

Research in other domains suggests that a transformer’s
ability to utilize long-range signals that were previously
inaccessible in more constrained sequential models are its
key success factor. However, it is well-known that this
self-attention is expensive, with time and memory overhead growing quadratically with the length of the input. To
address this issue for language transformers, a range of efficient variants have been proposed (Wang et al., 2020; Kitaev
et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021; Choromanski et al., 2020) and have demonstrated competitive
performance.
When applying transformers to graphs, sequence length is
akin to the size l of the l-hop neighborhood, but the size
grows exponentially instead of linearly. For large enough l,
the model becomes global and attends to the entire graph.
Tasks such as node classification are usually done on largescale graphs such as ogbn-products (2.4M nodes). Attending to the entirety of this graph in a naive way would
require 24TB of GPU memory (Geisler et al., 2021). It
is an open and pressing challenge to design efficient graph
transformer models that scale to graphs of this size. Existing
works on graph transformers for node classification never
go beyond recursive 1-hop-neighbor message passing (Shi
et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2020b) so they fail
to learn from larger context and perhaps fail to achieve the
full potential demonstrated in other domains.

1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have demonstrated efficacy in many domains including language understanding
and computer vision (Devlin et al., 2018; Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020), and this has spurred interest in applying transformers
to the graph domain. However, the success of transformers
for graphs has been more modest, and has mostly been in
the fairly narrow regime of graph classification tasks like
molecule classification (Ying et al., 2021; Mialon et al.,
2021; Hussain et al., 2021; Dwivedi & Bresson, 2020; Rong
et al., 2020; Kreuzer et al., 2021; Maziarka et al., 2021).
The success of transformers in this regime is largely a result
of the small size of each problem instance. For instance,

At the same time, an established limitation of GNNs is their
over-reliance on the homophily principle (McPherson et al.,
2001) causing them to perform poorly on heterophilious
graphs. Homophily (or heterophily) means that a node’s
neighbors are likely (unlikely) to be of the same class. Standard GNNs are built on the message passing scheme (Gilmer
et al., 2017), where features are aggregated recursively between 1-hop neighbors. This scheme has strong inductive

1

University of Maryland, College Park 2 Capital One. Correspondence to: Kezhi Kong <kong@cs.umd.edu>, Tom Goldstein
<tomg@cs.umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

