Interpolation for Robust Learning:
Data Augmentation on Wasserstein Geodesics

Jiacheng Zhu 1 Jielin Qiu 1 Aritra Guha 2 Zhuolin Yang 3 XuanLong Nguyen 4 Bo Li 3 Ding Zhao 1

Abstract

ventional defense techniques focus on obtaining adversarial
perturbations (Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Goodfellow et al.,
2014) and augmenting them to the training process. For instance, the projected gradient descent (PGD) (Madry et al.,
2018), which seeks the worst-case perturbation via iterative
updates, marks a category of effective defense methods.
Recent works show that additional training data, including
data augmentation and unlabeled datasets, can effectively
improve the robustness of deep learning models (Volpi et al.,
2018; Rebuffi et al., 2021). Despite augmenting worstcase samples with gradient information, an unlabeled, even
out-of-distribution dataset may also be helpful in this regard (Carmon et al., 2019; Bhagoji et al., 2019). Among
available strategies, Mixup (Zhang et al., 2018), which interpolates training samples via convex combinations, is shown
to improve both the robustness and generalization (Zhang
et al., 2021). Moreover, Gaussian noise is appended to training samples to achieve certifiable robustness (Cohen et al.,
2019a), which guarantees the model performance under a
certain degree of perturbation. However, most aforementioned approaches operate on individual data samples (or
pairs) and require the specification of a family of augmentation policies, model architecture, and additional datasets.
Thus, the robustness can hardly be generalizable, e.g., to
out-of-sample data examples. To this end, we are curious:
Can we let the underlying data distribution guide us to
robustness?
This paper proposes a framework to augment synthetic data
samples by interpolating the underlying distributions of the
training datasets. Specifically, we find the worst-case interpolation distributions that lie on the decision boundary
and improve the model’s smoothness with samples from
these distributions. This is justified by the fact that better
decision margin (Kim et al., 2021a) and boundary thickness (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2019) are shown to benefit
robustness.
The probabilistic perspective allows us to formulate the distribution interpolation as barycenter distribution on Wasserstein geodesics, where the latter can be reviewed as a dynamic formulation of optimal transport (OT) (Villani, 2009).
This formulation has the following benefits: (a). It nicely
connects our worst-case barycenter distribution to distributionally robust optimization (Duchi & Namkoong, 2021)

We propose to study and promote the robustness of a model as per its performance through
the interpolation of training data distributions.
Specifically, (1) we augment the data by finding the worst-case Wasserstein barycenter on the
geodesic connecting subpopulation distributions
of different categories. (2) We regularize the
model for smoother performance on the continuous geodesic path connecting subpopulation distributions. (3) Additionally, we provide a theoretical
guarantee of robustness improvement and investigate how the geodesic location and the sample
size contribute, respectively. Experimental validations of the proposed strategy on four datasets,
including CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, establish the
efficacy of our method, e.g., our method improves
the baselines’ certifiable robustness on CIFAR10
up to 7.7%, with 16.8% on empirical robustness
on CIFAR-100. Our work provides a new perspective of model robustness through the lens of
Wasserstein geodesic-based interpolation with a
practical off-the-shelf strategy that can be combined with existing robust training methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown tremendous
success in an increasing range of domains such as natural language processing, image classification & generation
and even scientific discovery (e.g. (Bahdanau et al., 2014;
Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Ramesh et al., 2022)). However,
despite their super-human accuracy on training datasets,
neural networks may not be robust. For example, adding
imperceptible perturbations, e.g., adversarial attacks, to the
inputs may cause neural networks to make catastrophic mistakes (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2014). Con1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Data Science & AI Research,
AT&T Chief Data Office 3 University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign 4 University of Michigan Ann Arbor. Correspondence
to: Jiacheng Zhu <jzhu4@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

