Probabilistic Attention-to-Influence Neural Models for Event Sequences

Xiao Shou 1 Debarun Bhattacharjya 2 Tian Gao 2 Dharmashankar Subramanian 2 Oktie Hassanzadeh 2
Kristin P. Bennett 1

Abstract

of other event types of interest. Consider the following
illustrative examples across different domains:

Discovering knowledge about which types of
events influence others, using datasets of event
sequences without time stamps, has several practical applications. While neural sequence models
are able to capture complex and potentially longrange historical dependencies, they often lack
the interpretability of simpler models for event
sequence dynamics. We provide a novel neural framework in such a setting – a probabilistic
attention-to-influence neural model – which not
only captures complex instance-wise interactions
between events but also learns influencers for each
event type of interest. Given event sequence data
and a prior distribution on type-wise influence,
we efficiently learn an approximate posterior for
type-wise influence by an attention-to-influence
transformation using variational inference. Our
method subsequently models the conditional likelihood of sequences by sampling the above posterior to focus attention on influencing event types.
We motivate our general framework and show improved performance in experiments compared to
existing baselines on synthetic data as well as realworld benchmarks, for tasks involving prediction
and influencing set identification.

• In healthcare, patient-level historical insurance data are
commonly aggregated by month (Mavroudeas et al.,
2021). Decision makers at the insurance company are
keen to learn about which prior event types impact the
occurrence of later high-cost events, so as to invest in
better preventative programs.
• Event sequences such as execution traces and error logs
arise naturally in software systems, and have been studied
extensively in data mining and related fields (Mannila
et al., 1997; Ammons et al., 2002; Chandola et al., 2009).
It can be beneficial to analyze such sequences and identify preceding event types that affect critical events such
as failures (to improve system reliability) or web-based
attacks (to strengthen computer security).
• There are well-known natural language processing (NLP)
approaches for extracting events and event sequences from
textual corpora (Chambers & Jurafsky, 2008). It is easier
to extract sequences and often impossible to obtain time
stamps for events, since they are typically not mentioned
in the source corpora. Identifying how certain event types
are influenced by others using extracted sequences could
be a potential source of information regarding pairwise
causal/entailment relations for knowledge graphs (Sap
et al., 2019; Heindorf et al., 2020; Hassanzadeh, 2021);
this in turn could be beneficial for downstream tasks such
as question answering.

1. Introduction
Multivariate event sequences are commonplace in a variety
of applications. They involve occurrences of different types
of events from a known event label set; these events are
either observed regularly, i.e. at discrete time units, or occur
without meaningful or reliable time stamps associated with
each event instance. Given a dataset of such sequences, one
may be interested in discovering which event types (rather
than specific instances) have an influence on the occurrence

In the above examples as well as in other domains, knowledge discovery about the influence of some types of events
on others can be of great interest to practitioners who engage
with event sequence data. This knowledge could drastically
improve model interpretability and therefore model trust
for important tasks – for instance, when a learned event
sequence model is used for prediction – but it could also
be of direct interest to analysts, scientists, or experts who
wish to gain further insights about sequence dynamics in a
particular domain.

1

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA 2 IBM AI
Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Xiao
Shou <shoux@rpi.edu>.

There are however challenges around discovering such
knowledge from multivariate event sequences: A) it is not
sufficient to capture how specific past instances of events
influence an event type, but to aggregate these effects mean-

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

