Probabilistic Imputation for Time-series Classification with Missing Data

SeungHyun Kim * 1 Hyunsu Kim * 1 EungGu Yun * 1 2 Hwangrae Lee 3 Jaehun Lee 3 Juho Lee 1 4

Abstract

1. Introduction

Multivariate time series data for real-world applications typically contain a significant amount
of missing values. The dominant approach for
classification with such missing values is to impute them heuristically with specific values (zero,
mean, values of adjacent time-steps) or learnable
parameters. However, these simple strategies do
not take the data generative process into account,
and more importantly, do not effectively capture
the uncertainty in prediction due to the multiple
possibilities for the missing values. In this paper,
we propose a novel probabilistic framework for
classification with multivariate time series data
with missing values. Our model consists of two
parts; a deep generative model for missing value
imputation and a classifier. Extending the existing deep generative models to better capture
structures of time-series data, our deep generative
model part is trained to impute the missing values
in multiple plausible ways, effectively modeling
the uncertainty of the imputation. The classifier
part takes the time series data along with the imputed missing values and classifies signals, and is
trained to capture the predictive uncertainty due
to the multiple possibilities of imputations. Importantly, we show that naı̈vely combining the
generative model and the classifier could result in
trivial solutions where the generative model does
not produce meaningful imputations. To resolve
this, we present a novel regularization technique
that can promote the model to produce useful imputation values that help classification. Through
extensive experiments on real-world time series
data with missing values, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

Multivariate time-series data are universal; many real-world
applications ranging from healthcare, stock markets, and
weather forecasting take multivariate time-series data as inputs. Arguably the biggest challenge in dealing with such
data is the presence of missing values, due to the fundamental difficulty of faithfully measuring data for all time
steps. The degree of missing is often severe, so in some
applications, more than 90% of data are missing for some
features. Therefore, developing an algorithm that can accurately and robustly perform predictions with missing data is
considered an important problem to be tackled.
In this paper, we focus on the task of classification, where
the primary goal is to classify given multivariate time-series
data with missing values, simply imputing the missing values with heuristically chosen values considered to be strong
baselines that are often competitive or even better than more
sophisticated methods. For instance, one can fill all the
missing values with zero, the mean of the data, or values
from the previous time steps. GRU-D (Che et al., 2018)
proposes a more elaborated imputation algorithm where the
missing values are filled with a mixture between the data
means and values from the previous time steps with the
mixing coefficients learned from the data. While these simple imputation-based methods work surprisingly well (Che
et al., 2018; Du et al., 2022), they lack a fundamental mechanism to recover the missing values, especially the underlying
generative process of the given time series data.
Dealing with missing data is deeply connected to handling
uncertainties originating from the fact that there may be
multiple plausible options for filling in the missing values,
so it is natural to analyze them with the probabilistic framework. There have been rich literature on statistical analysis
for missing data, where the primary goal is to understand
how the observed and missing data are generated. In the
seminal work of Little & Rubin (2002), three assumptions
for the missing data generative process were introduced, including Missing Completely At Random (MCAR), Missing
At Random (MAR), and Missing Not At Random (MNAR).
While MCAR or MAR simplifies the modeling and thus
makes the inference easier, they may be unrealistic for realworld applications, because they assume that the missing
mechanism is independent of the missing values (MAR) or

*
Equal contribution 1 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea 2 Saige Research, Seoul, South Korea 3 Samsung
Research, Seoul, South Korea 4 AITRICS, Seoul, South Korea.
Correspondence to: SeungHyun Kim <sh0776879@gmail.com>,
Juho Lee <juholee@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

