Discover and Cure: Concept-aware Mitigation of Spurious Correlation

Shirley Wu 1 Mert Yuksekgonul 1 Linjun Zhang 2 James Zou 1
Cat

(a) Grad-CAM

Instance-level

Abstract
Deep neural networks often rely on spurious
correlations to make predictions, which hinders
generalization beyond training environments.
For instance, models that associate cats with bed
backgrounds can fail to predict the existence of
cats in other environments without beds. Mitigating spurious correlations is crucial in building
trustworthy models. However, the existing
works lack transparency to offer insights into the
mitigation process. In this work, we propose an interpretable framework, Discover and Cure (DISC),
to tackle the issue. With human-interpretable
concepts, DISC iteratively 1) discovers unstable
concepts across different environments as spurious
attributes, then 2) intervenes on the training data
using the discovered concepts to reduce spurious
correlation. Across systematic experiments,
DISC provides superior generalization ability
and interpretability than the existing approaches.
Specifically, it outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods on an object recognition task and a
skin-lesion classification task by 7.5% and 9.6%,
respectively. Additionally, we offer theoretical
analysis and guarantees to understand the benefits
of models trained by DISC. Code and data are
available at https://github.com/Wuyxin/DISC.

(b) DISC
whiteness
0.05

wrinkle

0

Dog

pillow

bed

Class-level

0.1

curtain

Figure 1. Left: The dog/cat classifiers that rely (red) or do not rely
(green) on spurious correlations; Right: Spuriousness discovery
results of Grad-CAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017) and DISC, where
we propose a class-level metric to indicate the degree of spurious
correlation between concepts and the “cat” class.

holds. This lack of reliability is a central issue in critical
applications, e.g., medical diagnosis (Bissoto et al., 2020).
Existing works have developed methods to mitigate the
spurious correlations inside deep models. For instance,
invariant learning (Arjovsky et al., 2019; Ahuja et al., 2021)
learns a stable representation across environments to avoid
varying factors, including spurious attributes. Leveraging
the vulnerability of Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM)
models towards spurious attributes, some works upweights
over-confident (Nam et al., 2020) or misclassified (Liu et al.,
2021a) instances from a trained ERM model to counteract
the spurious correlation.
However, these works lack interpretability into what are the
information the model is learning or ignoring, which hinders
human understanding and model auditing. While post-hoc
explainability methods (Selvaraju et al., 2017; Ribeiro et al.,
2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017) offer visualization that could
contain spurious regions, it is still ambiguous to understand.
For example, in Figure 1 (a), the highlighted region shows the
attributes that contribute most to the prediction, explaining
why the image is mistakenly predicted as “cat” but “dog”.
Nevertheless, it is not clear which of the attributes (e.g.,
whiteness, wrinkle texture, or items like pillow) mostly
contributes to the spurious correlation. Moreover, such
instance-level interpretations are not informative about the
overall spurious correlations existing in the class.

1. Introduction
Spurious correlations are common in real-world data
analysis. Spurious attributes are typically associated with
the class label but are non-generalizable (Kaushik et al.,
2020; Sagawa et al., 2020). For example, as shown in
Figure 1, neural networks that mistakenly associate cats with
beds are prone to fail in different settings, e.g., dog-on-bed
or cat-on-desk, where the spurious correlation no longer
1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University.
Department of Statistics, Rutgers University. Correspondence to: Shirley Wu <shirwu@cs.stanford.edu>, James Zou
<jamesz@stanford.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we adopt concepts that align with human understandings to discover class-level spurious attributes, leverag1

