Reward-Mixing MDPs with Few Latent Contexts are Learnable

Jeongyeol Kwon 1 Yonathan Efroni 2 Constantine Caramanis 3 Shie Mannor 4 5

Abstract

identity of the chosen MDP is unknown to the agent. We
call this the latent context. This models the setting where
the decision-maker is unable to measure or perhaps even estimate an important identifying feature of the environment.

We consider episodic reinforcement learning in
reward-mixing Markov decision processes (RMMDPs): at the beginning of every episode nature randomly picks a latent reward model among
M candidates and an agent interacts with the
MDP throughout the episode for H time steps.
Our goal is to learn a near-optimal policy that
nearly maximizes the H time-step cumulative
rewards in such a model. Prior work (Kwon
et al., 2021a) established an upper bound for
RMMDPs with M = 2. In this work, we
resolve several open questions for the general
RMMDP setting. We consider an arbitrary
M ≥ 2 and provide a sample-efficient algorithm–
EM2 –that outputs an ϵ-optimal
policy using

O ϵ−2 · S d Ad · poly(H, Z)d episodes, where
S, A are the number of states and actions respectively, H is the time-horizon, Z is the support size
of reward distributions and√d = O(min(M, H)).
We also provide a (SA)Ω( M ) /ϵ2 lower bound,
supporting that super-polynomial sample complexity in M is necessary.

This problem falls into the general partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP) framework. While versatile, POMDPs are generally hard to learn, primarily because the optimal policy depends on the entire history of the
process (Smallwood & Sondik, 1973; Krishnamurthy et al.,
2016). To learn near-optimal policies with latent contexts,
existing POMDP solutions would require strong assumptions on reachability of the system (e.g., Azizzadenesheli
et al. (2016); Guo et al. (2016)) or certain separability assumptions (e.g., see conditions proposed in Liu et al. (2022);
Golowich et al. (2022); Kwon et al. (2021b)). However,
these assumptions do not necessarily align with the applications (e.g., dynamic web application (Hallak et al., 2015),
medical treatment (Steimle et al., 2018), transfer learning
(Brunskill & Li, 2013)).
In Kwon et al. (2021a) the authors developed a sampleefficient algorithm in the special case of two reward-mixing
MDPs (RMMDPs): when the state transition models are
shared across different MDPs, the number of latent contexts
is M = 2.While that work requires no additional assumptions (notably, reachability and separability), the techniques
are specific to M = 2. The more general M ≥ 2 RMMDP
setting is yet to be studied and no provable guarantees are
known to date.

1. Introduction
We consider the framework of Latent MDPs (LMDPs),
which has been studied in several prior works (Chadès et al.,
2012; Brunskill & Li, 2013; Hallak et al., 2015; Steimle
et al., 2018; Kwon et al., 2021b) and can be understood
as an extension of probabilistic mixture models to the sequential decision making setting. In LMDPs, one MDP is
randomly chosen from M possible candidate models at the
beginning of every episode, and an agent interacts with the
chosen MDP for H time steps of an episode. However, the

1.1. Our Contributions
In this work we develop new techniques to resolve several
open questions for learning near-optimal policies in RMMDPs with M ≥ 2. We summarize our main results:
1. We design an algorithm that learns an ϵ-optimal
policy for an RMMDP with M ≥ 2 that interacts with the environment at most Õ(poly(M, H) ·
SA)min(2M −1,H) /ϵ2 episodes.

1

Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of WisconsinMadison, USA 2 Meta, New York 3 Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin,
USA 4 Technion, Israel 5 Nvidia Research. Correspondence to:
Jeongyeol Kwon <kwonchungli@utexas.edu>, Yonathan Efroni
<jonathan.efroni@gmail.com>.

2. For the special case that all the probability distribution
of the reward is a strict integral of the base probability,
we show that the exponent of S and A can be improved
from O(M ) to O(log M ). Examples of such cases
include the case when all rewards are deterministic

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

