The Flan Collection: Designing Data and Methods for
Effective Instruction Tuning

Shayne Longpre 1 Le Hou 2 Tu Vu 2 Albert Webson 2 Hyung Won Chung 2 Yi Tay 2 Denny Zhou 2
Quoc V. Le 2 Barret Zoph 2 Jason Wei 2 Adam Roberts 2

Abstract

among others (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022) have
unlocked new capabilities in performing natural language
processing (NLP) tasks from reading instructive prompts.
Prior art has shown that instruction tuning—finetuning language models on a collection of NLP tasks formatted with
instructions—further enhances the ability of language models to perform an unseen task from an instruction (Wei et al.,
2021; Sanh et al., 2021; Min et al., 2022).

We study the design decisions of publicly available instruction tuning methods, by reproducing and breaking down the development of Flan
2022 (Chung et al., 2022). Through careful ablation studies on the Flan Collection of tasks and
methods, we tease apart the effect of design decisions which enable Flan-T5 to outperform prior
work by 3-17%+ across evaluation settings. We
find task balancing and enrichment techniques
are overlooked but critical to effective instruction tuning, and in particular, training with mixed
prompt settings (zero-shot, few-shot, chain-ofthought) actually yields equivalent or stronger
(2%+) performance in all settings. In further experiments, we show Flan-T5 requires less finetuning to converge higher and faster than T5 on
single downstream tasks—motivating instructiontuned models as more computationally-efficient
starting checkpoints for new tasks. Finally, to accelerate research on instruction tuning, we make
the Flan 2022 collection of datasets, templates,
and methods publicly available.1

In this work, we evaluate the methods and results of open
sourced instruction generalization efforts, comparing their
finetuning techniques and methods. And in particular, we
identify and evaluate the critical methodological improvements in the “Flan 2022 Collection”, which is the term we
use for the collection of data and the methods that apply
to the data and instruction tuning process, first introduced
in Chung et al. (2022). Where Chung et al. (2022) focuses
on the emergent and state-of-the-art results of combining
Flan 2022 with PaLM 540B, this work focuses in on the
details of the instruction tuning methods themselves, ablating individual factors, and comparing them directly to prior
work by keeping the pretrained model size and checkpoint
consistent.
The Flan 2022 Collection offers the most extensive publicly
available set of tasks and methods for instruction tuning,
which we have compiled in one place, and supplemented
with hundreds more high-quality templates and richer formatting patterns. We show that a model trained on this
collection outperforms other public collections on all tested
evaluation benchmarks, including the original Flan 2021
(Wei et al., 2021), T0++ (Sanh et al., 2021), Super-Natural
Instructions (Wang et al., 2022c), and the concurrent work
on OPT-IML (Iyer et al., 2022). As shown in Figure 1, this
includes a 4.2%+ and 8.5% improvements on the MMLU
(Hendrycks et al., 2020) and BIG-Bench Hard (Suzgun et al.,
2022) evaluation benchmarks, for equally sized models.

1. Introduction
Large language models such as PaLM (Chowdhery et al.,
2022), Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al., 2022), and ChatGPT
1
Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA 2 Google, Mountain View, USA. Correspondence
to: Shayne Longpre <slongpre@media.mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Data generation code available at: https://github.
com/google-research/FLAN/tree/main/flan/v2.
Generation code allows users to vary mixtures rates, templates,
prompt types and data augmentations techniques, for faster public
research.

Analysis of the Flan 2022 method suggests the strong results
stem both from the larger and more diverse set of tasks, but
also from a set of simple finetuning and data augmentation
techniques. In particular, training on a mix of examples
templatized with zero-shot, few-shot, and chain-of-thought
prompts improves or maintains performance in every one of
1

