On the Occupancy Measure of Non-Markovian Policies in Continuous MDPs

Romain Laroche* 1 Rémi Tachet des Combes* 1

Abstract

However, RL settings and algorithms often also involve
non-Markovian policies, which may choose different probability distributions of actions in the same state depending on
additional context. For example, non-Markovian policies
are encountered in Offline RL (Levine et al., 2020), where
the agent is not given the opportunity to interact with the
environment at all, but instead must learn from a dataset of
trajectories collected by an arbitrary set of policies. Other
examples are algorithms that use replay buffers (Mnih et al.,
2015), update online (Mnih et al., 2015), and/or allow subpolicy-switching, such as in the Semi MDP framework,
options, or hierarchical policies (Barto & Mahadevan, 2003;
Nachum et al., 2018; Stolle & Precup, 2002; Sutton et al.,
1999). Formal analysis of these settings is possible, but
somewhat involved. A typical approach is to prove a result under the restrictive assumption that trajectories are
collected with a Markovian policy (Simao et al., 2020; Peng
et al., 2019).

The state-action occupancy measure of a policy is
the expected (discounted or undiscounted) number of times a state-action couple is visited in a trajectory. For decades, RL books have been reporting the occupancy equivalence between Markovian and non-Markovian policies in countable
state-action spaces under mild conditions. This
equivalence states that the occupancy of any nonMarkovian policy can be equivalently obtained
by a Markovian policy, i.e. a memoryless probability distribution, conditioned only on its current
state. While expected, for technical reasons, the
translation of this result to continuous state space
has resisted until now. Our main contribution is
to fill this gap and to provide a general measuretheoretic treatment of the problem, permitting, in
particular, its extension to continuous MDPs. Furthermore, we show that when the occupancy is
infinite, we may encounter some non-trivial cases
where the result does not hold anymore.

Nevertheless, a certain form of equivalence exists between
Markovian policies and collections of non-Markovian policies. Indeed, the occupancy measure1 (Szepesvári, 2022) of
any non-Markovian policy whose total occupancy is finite
can be equivalently obtained by a Markovian policy:

1. Introduction

Theorem 1 (Restricted version of Theorem 4). Let m be
an MDP with countable state and action spaces, a discount
factor γ < 1, and let π be a policy. Then, there exists a
Markovian policy π̃ that has the same occupancy measure
in m as π.

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a popular and powerful theoretical framework for computational decision-making (Sutton & Barto, 2018), with many impressive accomplishments
(Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017). A central object
of study in the field is the Markovian policy, in which an
agent’s actions are chosen from a memoryless probability
distribution, i.e., are conditioned only on its current state.
The family of Markovian policies is broad enough to be
interesting, yet simple enough to be amenable to analysis.
For example, every MDP admits an optimal Markovian policy (Sutton & Barto, 2018), and it is possible to guarantee
monotonic improvement when moving between Markovian
policies (Kakade & Langford, 2002; Laroche & Tachet des
Combes, 2021).

Variations of Theorem 1 are given in Borkar (1988); Feinberg & Shwartz (2002); Altman (1999); Ziebart (2010);
Puterman (2014). Its most general version can be found
in Altman (1999) where it is proved for a countable state
space, a compact action space, and under the assumption
that the policy is absorbing (i.e. that its total occupancy is
finite), which subsumes the discounted case. Feinberg &
Sonin (1996) is also of particular interest as it gives counterexamples showing that the absorbing condition is necessary
for the equality to hold. When the condition is not verified but π is only transient, i.e. its occupancy measure on
each state is finite2 , Altman (1999) also proves that the con-

*

Equal contribution 1 Unemployed, work done while at Microsoft Research Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to: Romain
Laroche <romain.laroche@gmail.com>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Also called state-action visits (Sutton & Barto, 2018), or distribution (Silver et al., 2014; Cheng et al., 2020).
2
Transience is a necessary condition for the construction of π̃.

1

