What is Essential for Unseen Goal Generalization of
Offline Goal-conditioned RL?
Rui Yang 1 Yong Lin 1 Xiaoteng Ma 2 Hao Hu 2 Chongjie Zhang 2 Tong Zhang 1

Abstract

increasing attention because it enables learning generalpurpose decision-making rather than overfitting to a single
task (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Ghosh et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2020a). Particularly, offline GCRL (Chebotar et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2022b), which learns as many skills as possible
from previously collected datasets without any exploration
in the environment, is promising for large-scale and generalpurpose pre-training. Nevertheless, prior works (Chebotar
et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022b; Ma et al., 2022b) have
largely focused on reaching goals in the dataset, without
systematically studying the problem of out-of-distribution
(OOD) goal generalization. There are a number of questions:
what is the OOD generalization performance of current
offline GCRL algorithms? And more importantly, what is
essential for OOD generalization of offline GCRL?

Offline goal-conditioned RL (GCRL) offers a way
to train general-purpose agents from fully offline
datasets. In addition to being conservative within
the dataset, the generalization ability to achieve
unseen goals is another fundamental challenge
for offline GCRL. However, to the best of our
knowledge, this problem has not been well studied yet. In this paper, we study out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization of offline GCRL both theoretically and empirically to identify factors that
are important. In a number of experiments, we
observe that weighted imitation learning enjoys
better generalization than pessimism-based offline
RL method. Based on this insight, we derive a theory for OOD generalization, which characterizes
several important design choices. We then propose a new offline GCRL method, Generalizable
Offline goAl-condiTioned RL (GOAT), by combining the findings from our theoretical and empirical studies. On a new benchmark containing
9 independent identically distributed (IID) tasks
and 17 OOD tasks, GOAT outperforms current
state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

To answer these questions, we first design a 2D goalreaching task with different types of offline data. We find
that (1) pessimism-based offline RL is restrained from generalizing to OOD goals and (2) imitation learning overfits
the data noise and fails to generalize when given non-expert
data. On the contrary, (3) weighted imitation learning is
a strong baseline for OOD generalization across different
types of training data. The observation motivates us to
derive a generalization theory from the perspective of domain generalization (Muandet et al., 2013; Zhang et al.,
2012; Zhou et al., 2021a). Through analyzing our theory,
we find several techniques that are essential to minimize
the generalization bound, including advantage re-weighting,
data selection, density re-weighting, and goal-relabeling.
Particularly, we find re-weighting the training state-goal distribution with the reciprocal of its density can minimize the
worst-case distribution shift. Based on these results, we propose, Generalizable Offline goAl-condiTioned RL (GOAT),
by integrating these techniques into a general weighted imitation learning framework, which encourages optimistic
goal sampling while still maintaining pessimism on action
selection.

1. Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) makes it possible for
a learning agent to achieve superhuman performance on a
range of challenging tasks (Silver et al., 2016; 2018; Vinyals
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020b). However, recent studies have
found that DRL is prone to overfitting the training tasks
and is sensitive to environmental changes (Cobbe et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2020; Han et al., 2021; Kirk et al., 2023).
Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) is gaining
1

Due to the lack of benchmarks for evaluating the OOD
generalization performance of offline GCRL, we develop
a challenging robot manipulation benchmark based on a
robotic arm or an anthropomorphic hand. The benchmark
comprises nine offline datasets and 26 evaluation tasks, 9
of which contain independent and identically distributed

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Tsinghua University. Correspondence to: Tong Zhang
<tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

