Understanding Backdoor Attacks through the Adaptability Hypothesis

Xun Xian * 1 Ganghua Wang * 2 Jayanth Srinivasa 3 Ashish Kundu 3 Xuan Bi 4 Mingyi Hong 1 Jie Ding 2

Abstract

severe consequences, the security and trustworthiness of
these systems have become critical concerns (Dreossi et al.,
2019).

A poisoning backdoor attack is a rising security
concern for deep learning. This type of attack can
result in the backdoored model functioning normally most of the time but exhibiting abnormal
behavior when presented with inputs containing
the backdoor trigger, making it difficult to detect
and prevent. In this work, we propose the adaptability hypothesis to understand when and why a
backdoor attack works for general learning models, including deep neural networks, based on the
theoretical investigation of classical kernel-based
learning models. The adaptability hypothesis postulates that for an effective attack, the effect of
incorporating a new dataset on the predictions of
the original data points will be small, provided
that the original data points are distant from the
new dataset. Experiments on benchmark image
datasets and state-of-the-art backdoor attacks for
deep neural networks are conducted to corroborate the hypothesis. Our finding provides insight
into the factors that affect the attack’s effectiveness and has implications for the design of future
attacks and defenses.

The recent emergence of poisoning backdoor attacks, which
exploit the learning capabilities of DNNs, has further highlighted the need to ensure DL systems are robust and trustworthy. Poisoning backdoor attacks involve the insertion of
manipulated data samples, containing specific triggers such
as a square patch, into the training data, which are then labeled with a specific target class. This causes a DNN trained
on the poisoned dataset to learn both the patterns present in
the original data and the artificial relationship between the
manipulated samples and the target class. As a result, the
DNN behaves maliciously when presented with test input
that includes the trigger, but functions normally for input
without the trigger, making the attack more difficult to detect
as it does not impact normal inputs.
Empirical studies have demonstrated that poisoning
backdoor attacks can be very successful with humanimperceptible triggers and a relatively small proportion of
injected backdoor training data (Gu et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2017; Turner et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020; Nguyen & Tran,
2020; Li et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2021; Nguyen & Tran,
2021; Souri et al., 2022; Qi et al., 2023), such that poisoned
models can attain good test accuracy on both clean and
backdoor data. However, the understanding of when and
how these attacks are effective is still limited. For instance,
what is the minimum size of triggers to achieve the desired
accuracy, and what is the most efficient pattern of the trigger? Gaining a deeper understanding of these attacks could
provide principles for researchers and practitioners to build
more secure, robust, and trustworthy DL applications.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen significant growth in Deep Learning (DL) research, resulting in successful real-world applications such as autonomous driving and disease diagnosis (Grigorescu et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2020). However,
studies have revealed that deep neural networks (DNNs) are
susceptible to various adversarial attacks including adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015)
and data poisoning attacks (Biggio et al., 2012; Mei & Zhu,
2015; Koh & Liang, 2017). As DL is increasingly used in
safety-critical applications where a wrong decision can have

1.1. Our contributions
Theoretical analyses of backdoor attacks under classical
machine learning context. We analyze the effectiveness
of backdoor attacks for classical machine learning models,
such as kernel smoothing methods (Audibert & Tsybakov,
2007; Devroye et al., 2013). Our findings indicate that larger
backdoor triggers, as measured by certain norms, result in
more effective backdoor attacks. Additionally, under certain
conditions, we observed that the most effective directions
for adding a backdoor trigger are those dimensions of the

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of ECE, University of Minnesota 2 School of Statistics, University of Minnesota 3 Cisco Research 4 Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota.
Correspondence to: Jie Ding <dingj@umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

