Attribute-Efficient PAC Learning of Low-Degree Polynomial Threshold
Functions with Nasty Noise

Shiwei Zeng 1 Jie Shen 1
d PTFs: if the underlying PTF f ∗ is promised to depend
only on at most K unknown attributes of the input, whether
and how can one learn f ∗ by collecting O(poly(K d , log n))
samples under the classic probably approximately correct
(PAC) learning model (Valiant, 1984).

Abstract
The concept class of low-degree polynomial
threshold functions (PTFs) plays a fundamental role in machine learning. In this paper, we
study PAC learning of K-sparse degree-d PTFs
on Rn , where any such concept depends only
on K out of n attributes of the input. Our main
contribution is a new algorithm that runs in time
(nd/)O(d) and under the Gaussian marginal distribution, PAC learns the class up to error rate
4d
 with O( K2d · log5d n) samples even when an
η ≤ O(d ) fraction of them are corrupted by
the nasty noise of Bshouty et al. (2002), possibly the strongest corruption model. Prior to this
work, attribute-efficient robust algorithms are established only for the special case of sparse homogeneous halfspaces. Our key ingredients are:
1) a structural result that translates the attribute
sparsity to a sparsity pattern of the Chow vector under the basis of Hermite polynomials, and
2) a novel attribute-efficient robust Chow vector
estimation algorithm which uses exclusively a restricted Frobenius norm to either certify a good
approximation or to validate a sparsity-induced
degree-2d polynomial as a filter to detect corrupted samples.

A very special case of the problem, the class of sparse halfspaces (i.e. degree-1 PTFs), has been extensively investigated
in machine learning and statistics (Littlestone, 1987; Blum,
1990; Gentile, 2003; Plan & Vershynin, 2013a), and a fruitful set of results have been established even under strong
noise models (Plan & Vershynin, 2013b; Awasthi et al.,
2016; Zhang, 2018; Zhang et al., 2020; Shen & Zhang,
2021). It, however, turns out that the theoretical and algorithmic understanding of learning sparse degree-d PTFs fall
far behind the linear counterpart.
In the absence of noise, the problem can be cast as solving a
linear program by thinking of degree-d PTFs as halfspaces
on the space expanded by all monomials of degree at most
d (Maass & Turán, 1994). However, the problem becomes
subtle when samples might be contaminated adversarially.
In this work, we consider the nasty noise of Bshouty et al.
(2002), perhaps the strongest noise model in classification.
Definition 1 (PAC learning with nasty noise). Denote by
Hd,K the class of K-sparse degree-d PTFs on Rn . Let D
be a distribution on Rn and f ∗ ∈ Hd,K be the underlying PTF. A nasty adversary EX(η) takes as input a sample
size N requested by the learner, draws N instances independently according to D and annotates them by f ∗ , to
form a clean sample set S̄ = {(xi , f ∗ (xi ))}N
i=1 . The adversary may then inspect the learning algorithm and uses
its unbounded computational power to replace at most an η
fraction with carefully constructed samples for some η < 12 ,
and returns the corrupted set S̄ 0 to the learner. The goal of
the learner is to output a concept fˆ : Rn → {−1, 1}, such
that with probability 1 − δ (over the randomness of the samples and all internal random bits of the learning algorithm),
Prx∼D (fˆ(x) 6= f ∗ (x)) ≤  for any prescribed error rate
 ∈ (0, 1) and failure probability δ ∈ (0, 1). We say an
algorithm PAC learns the class Hd,K if the guarantee holds
uniformly for any member f ∗ ∈ Hd,K .

1. Introduction
A polynomial threshold function (PTF) f : Rn → {−1, 1}
is of the form f (x) = sign(p(x)) for some n-variate polynomial p. The class of low-degree PTFs plays a fundamental
role in learning theory owing to its remarkable power for
rich representations (Mansour, 1994; Anthony & Bartlett,
1999; Hellerstein & Servedio, 2007; O’Donnell, 2014). In
this paper, we study attribute-efficient learning of degree1

Department of Computer Science, Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Shiwei Zeng
<szeng4@stevens.edu>, Jie Shen <jie.shen@stevens.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Bshouty et al. (2002) presented a computationally inefficient
1

