Cross-Modal Fine-Tuning: Align then Refine

Junhong Shen 1 2 Liam Li 2 Lucio M. Dery 1 Corey Staten 2 Mikhail Khodak 1 Graham Neubig 1
Ameet Talwalkar 1 2

Abstract

only adapted for text-based tasks, and vision transformers
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) only for image datasets.

Fine-tuning large-scale pretrained models has led
to tremendous progress in well-studied modalities
such as vision and NLP. However, similar gains
have not been observed in many other modalities
due to a lack of relevant pretrained models. In this
work, we propose O RCA, a general cross-modal
fine-tuning framework that extends the applicability of a single large-scale pretrained model to
diverse modalities. O RCA adapts to a target task
via an align-then-refine workflow: given the target
input, O RCA first learns an embedding network
that aligns the embedded feature distribution with
the pretraining modality. The pretrained model is
then fine-tuned on the embedded data to exploit
the knowledge shared across modalities. Through
extensive experiments, we show that O RCA obtains state-of-the-art results on 3 benchmarks containing over 60 datasets from 12 modalities, outperforming a wide range of hand-designed, AutoML, general-purpose, and task-specific methods. We highlight the importance of data alignment via a series of ablation studies and demonstrate O RCA’s utility in data-limited regimes.

But imagine if we could use pretrained BERT models to
tackle genomics tasks, or vision transformers to solve PDEs?
Effective cross-modal fine-tuning could have immense impact on less-studied areas, such as physical and life sciences,
healthcare, and finance. Indeed, designing specialized networks in these areas is challenging, as it requires both domain knowledge and ML expertise. Automated machine
learning (AutoML) (e.g., Roberts et al., 2021; Shen et al.,
2022) and general-purpose architectures (e.g., Jaegle et al.,
2022) can be used to simplify this process, but they still
require training models from scratch, which is difficult for
data-scarce modalities. Applying models pretrained in datarich modalities to these new problems can potentially alleviate the modeling and data concerns, reducing the human
effort needed to develop high-quality task-specific models.
Despite the potential impact, the general feasibility of crossmodal fine-tuning remains an open question. While recent
work has demonstrated its possibility by applying pretrained
language models to vision tasks (Dinh et al., 2022; Lu et al.,
2022), referential games (Li et al., 2020c), and reinforcement learning (Reid et al., 2022), many of these approaches
are ad-hoc, relying on manual prompt engineering or architecture add-ons to solve specific tasks. Besides, they often
do not yield models that are competitive with those trained
from scratch. We aim to tackle both of these shortcomings.

1. Introduction

In this work, we propose a fine-tuning workflow called
O RCA that bridges the gap between generality and effectiveness in cross-modal learning. Our key insight is to perform task-specific data alignment prior to task-agnostic finetuning. By matching the data distribution of an unfamiliar
modality with that of a familiar one, O RCA can prevent the
distortion of the pretrained weights and exploit the knowledge encoded in the pretrained models, achieving significantly better results than naive fine-tuning and state-of-theart performance on 3 benchmarks—NAS-Bench-360 (Tu
et al., 2022), PDEBench (Takamoto et al., 2022), and
OpenML-CC18 (Vanschoren et al., 2014)—which contain
over 60 datasets from 12 distinct data modalities.

The rise of large-scale pretrained models has been a hallmark of machine learning (ML) research in the past few
years. Using transfer learning, these models can apply what
they have learned from large amounts of unlabeled data to
downstream tasks and perform remarkably well in a number
of modalities, such as language, vision, and speech processing (e.g., Radford & Narasimhan, 2018; Carion et al.,
2020; Baevski et al., 2020). Existing research focuses on
in-modality transfer within these well-studied areas—for
example, BERT models (Devlin et al., 2019) are typically
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Hewlett Packard Enterprise. Correspondence to: Junhong Shen <junhongs@andrew.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Concretely, O RCA adapts any pretrained transformer model
to a downstream task via a three-stage workflow (Figure 1).
1

