Corruption-Robust Algorithms with Uncertainty Weighting for Nonlinear
Contextual Bandits and Markov Decision Processes
Chenlu Ye 1 Wei Xiong 1 Quanquan Gu 2 Tong Zhang 1

Abstract

textual bandits or MDPs, we assume that the reward functions and transition kernels are subject to adversarial attacks
before they are revealed to the agent at each round. This corruption concept admits model misspecification as a special
case, and is complementary to the non-corruption model. It
has broad applications such as autonomous vehicles misled
by adversarially hacked navigation systems or contaminated
traffic signs (Eykholt et al., 2018); recommendation systems
tricked by adversarial comments to produce incorrect rankings (Deshpande & Montanari, 2012). Meanwhile, general
function approximation has gained considerable attention
since practical algorithms usually approximate true value
functions or policies by a general function class F (e.g.,
neural networks) to handle the numerous states in modern
large-scale reinforcement learning.

Despite the significant interest and progress in
reinforcement learning (RL) problems with adversarial corruption, current works are either confined
√ to the linear setting or lead to an undesired
Õ( T ζ) regret bound, where T is the number
of rounds and ζ is the total amount of corruption. In this paper, we consider contextual bandits
with general function approximation and propose
a computationally
√ efficient algorithm to achieve
a regret of Õ( T + ζ). The proposed algorithm relies on the recently developed uncertaintyweighted least-squares regression from linear
contextual bandits (He et al., 2022) and a new
weighted estimator of uncertainty for the general
function class. In contrast to the existing analysis
for the sum of uncertainty that is heavily based on
the linear structure, we develop a novel technique
to control the sum of weighted uncertainty, thus
establishing the final regret bound. We then generalize our algorithm to the episodic MDP and first
achieve an additive dependence on the corruption
level ζ in the scenario of general function approximation. Notably, our algorithms achieve regret
bounds that either nearly match the lower bound
or improve the performance of existing methods
for all the corruption levels in both known and
unknown ζ cases.

The goodness of an algorithm for learning a contextual
bandit or an MDP is often measured by the notion of regret, which is defined as the cumulative suboptimality compared with the best policy. In the standard setting without
corruption, statistically and computationally efficient algorithms have been developed for contextual bandits (Foster &
Rakhlin, 2020; Zhang, 2022) and MDPs (Wang et al., 2020;
Kong et al., 2021) under nonlinear function approximation.
However, the performance of these algorithms can severely
degrade when the underlying models are corrupted by an
adversary (Lykouris et al., 2018). Therefore, designing algorithms that are robust to adversarial corruption has attracted
tremendous attention (Bogunovic et al., 2021; Zhao et al.,
2021; Lee et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022;
He et al., 2022). In the linear contextual bandit setting with
T rounds,P
we denote the cumulative amount of corruption
T
by ζ := t=1 ζt . In this setting, Zhao et al. (2021) and
Ding et al. (2022) proposed a variant of the OFUL algorithm(Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011) which achieved a regret
√
√ 
of Õ
T + ζ T , where other dependencies are omitted
for simplicity. This multiplicative dependence on the corruption level ζ to T was undesirable as the dependence on T
degrades whenever ζ = ω(1). Wei et al. (2022) developed
the COBE+VOFUL algorithm basedon the model
selec
√
1
tion framework , which achieves an Õ
T + ζ regret but

1. Introduction
This paper studies contextual bandits (Langford & Zhang,
2007) and episodic Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) under adversarial corruption and with
general function approximation. Distinct from standard con1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; 2 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles;.
Correspondence to: Tong Zhang
<tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

The adversary in Wei et al. (2022) corrupts the environment
before the agent makes decisions and they define a maximization

1

