Continuously Parameterized Mixture Models

Christopher M. Bender 1 Yifeng Shi 1 Marc Niethammer 1 Junier B. Oliva 1

Abstract

There are two major challenges in applying GMMs to complicated, high dimensional data. First, the partitions (modes)
that we wish to characterize in data are rarely spherical
or simple enough in nature to be faithfully captured with
Gaussian components. As an alternative, one may consider
more complicated components (Holzmann et al., 2006),
however, this worsens identifiability issues and yields partitions that do not adequately summarize populations of
interest in the data (Böhning et al., 2007). Second, mixture
models converge to local minima and thus their optimization
is extremely sensitive to initialization. Some approaches propose to initialize via local fitting methods such as k-means
(Richardson & Weiss, 2018). However, the distance metrics, for example Euclidean distance, implied in those local
fitting methods is rarely appropriate in high dimensions,
imposing initial partitioning that is arduous to escape.

Mixture models are universal approximators of
smooth densities but are difficult to utilize in complicated datasets due to restrictions on typically
available modes and challenges with initialiations.
We show that by continuously parameterizing a
mixture of factor analyzers using a learned ordinary differential equation, we can improve the
fit of mixture models over direct methods. Once
trained, the mixture components can be extracted
and the neural ODE can be discarded, leaving us
with an effective, but low-resource model. We
additionally explore the use of a training curriculum from an easy-to-model latent space extracted
from a normalizing flow to the more complex input space and show that the smooth curriculum
helps to stabilize and improve results with and
without the continuous parameterization. Finally,
we introduce a hierarchical version of the model
to enable more flexible, robust classification and
clustering, and show substantial improvements
against traditional parameterizations of GMMs.

We propose to offset the first difficult by taking a mixture of
mixtures in a hierarchical approach by considering a mixture
of distinct dynamical systems. In effect, we propose to learn
to evolve the components of one partition (see Fig. 1(a)) in a
fashion that results in an infinite mixture model in the limit.
This alleviates the burden of learning a large number of separate modes through a shared generator of components in
an approach that is akin to hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2016).
We can then combine multiple partitions to cover the entire
support (see Fig. 1(b)). Specifically, each partition is itself
defined by multiple components that are spanned through
smooth dynamics to represent complex, multi-modal distributions. We sample discrete components from this continuous parameterization during inference to construct a cheap,
lightweight model that dramatically reduces the computational cost, maintains improved performance over typical
mixture methods, and simplifies model interpretation.

1. Introduction
Mixture models have long served as reliable tools for both
modeling (density estimation) and summarizing (cluster
analysis) datasets. Through their probabilistic nature, mixture models provide an estimate of the underlying data distribution; through a parsimonious collection of components,
mixture models succinctly summarize the major patterns
found in a dataset. Gaussian mixture models (GMMs),
which provide a universal approximation for smooth densities (Goodfellow et al., 2015), have been effectively deployed for modeling and clustering in a wide range of applications (Böhning et al., 2007; Gao et al., 2010; Jiao et al.,
2020).

We alleviate the second difficulty by creating a learned curriculum (Bengio et al., 2009) over the data. We construct the
curriculum by transforming the data into a standard Gaussian through a normalizing flow (Chen et al., 2019b; Dinh
et al., 2017; Grathwohl et al., 2019; Kingma & Dhariwal,
2018) and slowly annealing back to the original space. This
removes the difficulty with initialization since the distribution early in the training process is known. As we advance
through the curriculum, the model only requires minor perturbations from its previous state. We find that this process
results in considerably improved performance regardless of

1

Department of Computer Science, The University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. Correspondence to:
Christopher M. Bender <bender@cs.unc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

