Fast Private Kernel Density Estimation via Locality Sensitive Quantization

Tal Wagner 1 Yonatan Naamad 1 Nina Mishra 1

Abstract

comes at a high computational cost, and many DP computations are dramatically less efficient than their non-private
counterparts. This makes them infeasible for use on data of
the size and dimensionality that matches present-day scale.

We study efficient mechanisms for differentially
private kernel density estimation (DP-KDE). Prior
work for the Gaussian kernel described algorithms
that run in time exponential in the number of dimensions d. This paper breaks the exponential
barrier, and shows how the KDE can privately be
approximated in time linear in d, making it feasible for high-dimensional data. We also present
improved bounds for low-dimensional data.

DP-KDE. In this paper we focus on private density estimation, a fundamental problem with numerous applications in
data analysis and machine learning. A popular way to convert a collection of data points into a smoothed probability
distribution is the kernel density method, wherein a certain
probability measure—say, a Gaussian—is centered at each
data point, and the mixture of these measures is formed over
the space. The kernel density estimate (KDE) at every point
y is the mean of all such Gaussians evaluated at y. This
method has a long history in statistics and machine learning
(e.g., (Shawe-Taylor et al., 2004; Hofmann et al., 2008)).
Under private computation, it has recently been used for private crowdsourcing and location sharing (Huai et al., 2019;
Cunningham et al., 2021).

Our results are obtained through a general framework, which we term Locality Sensitive Quantization (LSQ), for constructing private KDE mechanisms where existing KDE approximation techniques can be applied. It lets us leverage several
efficient non-private KDE methods—like Random Fourier Features, the Fast Gauss Transform,
and Locality Sensitive Hashing—and “privatize”
them in a black-box manner. Our experiments
demonstrate that our resulting DP-KDE mechanisms are fast and accurate on large datasets in
both high and low dimensions.

The associated algorithmic task is: given a dataset X ⊂ Rd ,
return a map êX : Rd → R that approximates the KDE map
P
1
−∥x−y∥22 /σ 2
y 7→ |X|
. In DP-KDE, êX must also
x∈X e
be private w.r.t. X, no matter how many times it is queried.

Private analysis of massive-scale data is a prominent current
challenge in computing and machine learning. On the one
hand, it is widely acknowledged that big datasets drive advances and progress in many important problem spaces. On
the other hand, when the data contains sensitive information
such as personal or medical details, it is often necessary to
preserve the privacy of individual dataset records. Scalable
methods for private computations are therefore crucial for
progress in medical, financial and many other domains.

Absent privacy limitations, the Gaussian KDE at a point
y can be evaluated in time O(nd), where n is the number
of data points and d is their dimension. Many efficient approximation methods have been developed to speed this up
even further for large-scale data (e.g., (Greengard & Strain,
1991; Rahimi & Recht, 2007; Charikar & Siminelakis, 2017;
Phillips & Tai, 2020). In sharp contrast, in the DP setting,
existing methods for privately estimating the Gaussian KDE
have running time exponential in d (Hall et al., 2013; Hall,
2013; Wang et al., 2016; Alda & Rubinstein, 2017). This
makes them infeasible in many important cases where KDE
is utilized in high-dimensional feature spaces.

Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) is a rigorous and powerful notion of privacy-preserving computation,
widely accepted in machine learning. Unfortunately, it often

In this paper, we close this gap by systematically studying
efficient mechanisms for DP-KDE, and obtain improved
results in both the high and low dimensional regimes.

1. Introduction

1
Amazon.
Correspondence
<tal.wagner@gmail.com>.

to:

Tal

Wagner

1.1. Our Results
We focus on the Gaussian kernel, although we will discuss
other kernels as well. Our first result is an ϵ-DP function
release mechanism for Gaussian KDE (see Sections 1.2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

