A Study of Global and Episodic Bonuses for Exploration in Contextual MDPs

Mikael Henaff 1 Minqi Jiang 1 2 Roberta Raileanu 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
Balancing exploration and exploitation is a long-standing
challenge in reinforcement learning (RL). A large body of
research has studied this problem within the Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework (Sutton & Barto, 2018),
both from a theoretical standpoint (Kearns & Singh, 2002;
Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Agarwal et al., 2020) and
an empirical one. This has led to practical exploration algorithms such as pseudocounts (Bellemare et al., 2016b), intrinsic curiosity modules (Pathak et al., 2017a) and random
network distillation (Burda et al., 2019b), yielding impressive results on hard exploration problems like Montezuma’s
Revenge and PitFall (Bellemare et al., 2012).

Exploration in environments which differ across
episodes has received increasing attention in recent years. Current methods use some combination of global novelty bonuses, computed using the agent’s entire training experience, and
episodic novelty bonuses, computed using only
experience from the current episode. However,
the use of these two types of bonuses has been
ad-hoc and poorly understood. In this work, we
shed light on the behavior of these two types
of bonuses through controlled experiments on
easily interpretable tasks as well as challenging pixel-based settings. We find that the two
types of bonuses succeed in different settings,
with episodic bonuses being most effective when
there is little shared structure across episodes
and global bonuses being effective when more
structure is shared. We develop a conceptual
framework which makes this notion of shared
structure precise by considering the variance of
the value function across contexts, and which
provides a unifying explanation of our empirical results. We furthermore find that combining the two bonuses can lead to more robust
performance across different degrees of shared
structure, and investigate different algorithmic
choices for defining and combining global and
episodic bonuses based on function approximation. This results in an algorithm which sets a
new state of the art across 16 tasks from the MiniHack suite used in prior work, and also performs
robustly on Habitat and Montezuma’s Revenge.

More recently, there has been increasing interest in algorithms which move beyond the MDP framework. The standard MDP framework assumes that the agent is initialized
in the same environment at each episode (we will refer to
these MDPs as singleton MDPs). However, several studies have found that agents trained in singleton MDPs exhibit poor generalization, and that even minor changes to
the environment can cause substantial degradation in agent
performance (Justesen et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018a;b;
Packer et al., 2018; Farebrother et al., 2018; Cobbe et al.,
2019; Song et al., 2020; Kirk et al., 2021a). This has motivated the use of contextual MDPs (CMDPs) (Hallak et al.,
2015), where different episodes correspond to different environments which nevertheless share structure. Examples
of CMDPs include procedurally-generated environments
(Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018; Samvelyan et al., 2021;
Küttler et al., 2020; Juliani et al., 2019; Cobbe et al., 2020;
Beattie et al., 2016; Hafner, 2021; Petrenko et al., 2021) or
embodied AI tasks where the agent must generalize across
different physical spaces (Savva et al., 2019; Shen et al.,
2020; Gan et al., 2020; Xiang et al., 2020).
While exploration is well-studied in the singleton MDP case,
it becomes more nuanced when dealing with CMDPs. For
singleton MDPs, a common and successful strategy consists
of defining an exploration bonus which is added to the reward function being optimized. This exploration bonus typically represents how novel the current state is, where novelty
is computed with respect to the entirety of the agent’s experience across all episodes. However, it is unclear to what
extent this strategy is applicable in the CMDP setting—if

1
Meta AI Research 2 University College, London. Correspondence to: Mikael Henaff <mikaelhenaff@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

