A Study on Transformer Configuration and Training Objective

Fuzhao Xue 1 Jianghai Chen 1 Aixin Sun 2 Xiaozhe Ren 3 Zangwei Zheng 2 Xiaoxin He 1 Yongming Chen 4
Xin Jiang 3 Yang You 1

Abstract

ers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021a; Xue et al.,
2021; 2022) also outperform convolution-based models by
a large margin. With sufficient training data, transformerbased models can be scaled to trillions of trainable parameters (Fedus et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021). Through scaling
along the width (i.e., hidden dimension) and depth (i.e., number of transformer blocks), these huge transformers show
effectiveness across various tasks and even areas.

Transformer-based models have delivered impressive results on many tasks, particularly vision
and language tasks. In many model training
situations, conventional configurations are often
adopted. For example, we usually set the base
model with hidden size (i.e., model width) to be
768 and the number of transformer layers (i.e.,
model depth) to be 12. In this paper, we revisit
these conventional configurations by studying the
the relationship between transformer configuration and training objective. We show that the
optimal transformer configuration is closely related to the training objective. Specifically, compared with the simple classification objective, the
masked autoencoder is effective in alleviating the
over-smoothing issue in deep transformer training.
Based on this finding, we propose “Bamboo”, a
notion of using deeper and narrower transformer
configurations, for masked autoencoder training.
On ImageNet, with such a simple change in configuration, the re-designed Base-level transformer
achieves 84.2% top-1 accuracy and outperforms
SoTA models like MAE by 0.9%. On language
tasks, re-designed model outperforms BERT with
the default setting by 1.1 points on average, on
GLUE benchmark with 8 datasets.

Where are the configurations from? When using transformer, we typically follow the existing work to set the same
width and depth for a “fair” comparison. For instance, we
usually set the width of transformer-base model as 768 and
the depth as 12. An interesting question here is: Why do we
select these hyper-parameters, even for problems in different
areas? To answer this question, we revisit the conventional
configurations from some representative studies. For vision
transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), authors set the base
ViT configuration according to those used in BERT (Devlin
et al., 2018). BERT selects such configuration following
OpenAI GPT (Radford et al., 2018). OpenAI also follows
the original transformer paper (Vaswani et al., 2017). In the
original transformer paper, Vaswani et al. (2017) conduct a
set of ablation studies on machine translation task to find
the optimal configurations. That is, for a good range of
tasks, we have largely followed the transformer configuration based on an ablation study on machine translation task,
i.e., a sequence-to-sequence task.
Should we use the same configuration for different training objectives? Nowadays, transformer-based models can
be trained with various training objectives or strategies (Tay
et al., 2022a;b). Taking the vision transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) as an example, we can train transformer
from scratch with a supervised learning setting for image
classification. In this straightforward image classification
task, each image is modeled as a sequence of tokens, and
each token corresponds to a patch in the image. We use the
global information (from all tokens/patches of the image) to
predict a single label, the category of the image. Here, as
the training objective is to capture the global information
of an image, the differences between token representations
would not be considered directly. This image classification
task is quite different from machine translation task, which
requests for a strong understanding of a token sequence and

1. Introduction
Transformer-based language models have achieved promising results on natural language understanding tasks, e.g.,
Q&A (Qu et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020), relation extraction (Xue et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020) and dialogue system (Ni et al., 2021). Recently, on vision tasks, transform1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 4 School of Electrical
and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University.
Correspondence to: Fuzhao Xue <f.xue@u.nus.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

