Orthogonality-Enforced Latent Space in Autoencoders:
An Approach to Learning Disentangled Representations

Jaehoon Cha 1 Jeyan Thiyagalingam 1

Abstract

latent representation can be composed of multiple, independent generative factors of variations. The disentanglement
process renders the latent space features to become independent of one another, providing a basis for a set of novel
applications, including scene rendering, interpretability, and
unsupervised deep learning (Eslami et al., 2018; Iten et al.,
2020; Higgins et al., 2021).

Noting the importance of factorizing (or disentangling) the latent space, we propose a novel,
non-probabilistic disentangling framework for autoencoders, based on the principles of symmetry
transformations that are independent of one another. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
deterministic model that is aiming to achieve disentanglement based on autoencoders using only
a reconstruction loss without pairs of images or
labels, by explicitly introducing inductive biases
into a model architecture through Euler encoding. The proposed model is then compared with a
number of state-of-the-art models, relevant to disentanglement, including symmetry-based models
and generative models. Our evaluation using six
different disentanglement metrics, including the
unsupervised disentanglement metric we propose
here in this paper, shows that the proposed model
can offer better disentanglement, especially when
variances of the features are different, where other
methods may struggle. We believe that this model
opens several opportunities for linear disentangled
representation learning based on deterministic autoencoders.

Deep generative models, particularly that build on variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Kumar et al., 2017; Higgins et al., 2017; Tolstikhin et al., 2018;
Burgess et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018; Burgess et al., 2018;
Kim & Mnih, 2018; Zhao et al., 2019), have shown to be effective in learning factored representations. Although these
approaches have advanced the disentangled representation
learning by regularizing the latent spaces, there are a number
of issues that limit their full potential: (a) VAE-based models consist of two loss components, and balancing these loss
components is a well known issue (Asperti & Trentin, 2020)
(b) it is almost impossible to honor the idealized notion
of having a known prior distribution for VAEs in practical
settings (Takahashi et al., 2019; Asperti & Trentin, 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020; Aneja et al., 2021) and, (c) factorizing
the aggregated posterior in the latent space does not guarantee corresponding uncorrelated representations (Locatello
et al., 2019). An alternative approach for achieving disentangled representations is through seeking irreducible representations of the symmetry groups (Cohen & Welling, 2014;
Higgins et al., 2018; Painter et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021;
Tonnaer et al., 2022), where the aim is to find latent space
transformations that are independent of one another, underpinned by well-defined mathematical frameworks based
on group theory. As this group of methods exploits the
notion of transitions between samples, they require pairs
of images representing the transitions (Cohen & Welling,
2014; Worrall et al., 2017; Painter et al., 2020) or equivalent
labels (Tonnaer et al., 2022). Finally, there are attempts to
use Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) to learn factored representations by maximizing the mutual information
between a subset of latent variables and the observations.
Regardless of the approach, as shown in Locatello et al.
(2019), it is fundamentally impossible to learn disentangled
representations without having inductive biases on either the
model or the dataset, and both VAE- and symmetry-based

1. Introduction
Learning generalizable representations of data is one of the
fundamental aspects of modern machine learning (Rudin
et al., 2022). In fact, better representations are more than a
luxury now, and is a key to achieving generalization, interpretability, and robustness of machine learning models (Bengio et al., 2013; Brakel & Bengio, 2017; Spurek et al., 2020).
One of the primary and desired characteristics of the learned
representation is factorizability or disentanglement, so that
1

Scientific Computing, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,
Science and Technology Facilities Council, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Jaehoon Cha <jaehoon.cha@stfc.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

