Kernel QuantTree

Diego Stucchi 1 Paolo Rizzo 1 Nicoló Folloni 1 Giacomo Boracchi 1
2011), cryptographic attacks (Frittoli et al., 2020), and quality control (Hawkins et al., 2003).

Abstract
We present Kernel QuantTree (KQT), a nonparametric change detection algorithm that monitors multivariate data through a histogram. KQT
constructs a nonlinear partition of the input space
that matches pre-defined target probabilities and
specifically promotes compact bins adhering to
the data distribution, resulting in a powerful detection algorithm. We prove two key theoretical
advantages of KQT: i) statistics defined over the
KQT histogram do not depend on the stationary
data distribution ϕ0 , so detection thresholds can
be set a priori to control false positive rate, and
ii) thanks to the kernel functions adopted, the
KQT monitoring scheme is invariant to the rototranslation of the input data. Consequently, KQT
does not require any preprocessing step like PCA.
Our experiments show that KQT achieves superior detection power than non-parametric state-ofthe-art change detection methods, and can reliably
control the false positive rate.

Most CD algorithms consist of three major ingredients: i)
a model ϕb0 describing stationary data, which is usually
learned from a training set, ii) a statistical test, where a test
statistic T is computed to assess the consistency of incoming
data to ϕb0 , and iii) a decision rule on T to establish whether
a change has occurred. In many real-world multivariate
scenarios, estimating a density model for the stationary data
is often unfeasible. Therefore, non-parametric methods that
describe stationary data by flexible models are preferred.
Unfortunately, most non-parametric statistics are based on
ranking (Ross & Adams, 2012) and can only be applied
to univariate data. In Section 3, we overview the few nonparametric solutions to monitor multivariate datastreams.
A relevant example is QuantTree (QT) (Boracchi et al.,
2018), a change detection algorithm based on a histogram
partitioning of the input space, which is supported by sound
theoretical results. In particular, QT allows to operate at a
controlled false alarm rate without knowing ϕ0 nor resorting
to bootstrap to estimate detection thresholds.
A fundamental limitation of QT is that splits are defined
along the axis, as in Figure 1(a), resulting in a partitioning
that does not always adhere to the input distribution. To
mitigate this problem, a preprocessing stage is typically
introduced to align the split directions to the principal components of the training set, as shown in Figure 1(b). While
this procedure is often beneficial, we observe (Section 6)
that it can worsen the detection performance in some unpredictable cases. Moreover, many bins in Figure 1(a)(b) have
non-finite volumes, which can lead to poor estimation of
bin probabilities.

1. Introduction
Change Detection (CD) is the problem of detecting distribution changes ϕ0 → ϕ1 in a datastream, namely detecting
when the data-generating process drifts from a stationary
distribution ϕ0 towards an unknown post-change distribution ϕ1 . Here, we address the problem of batch-wise CD,
where data are analyzed in fixed-size batches that, under
normal conditions, contain samples drawn from ϕ0 . The
timely detection of distribution changes and the control
over the false alarm rate are fundamental problems that
have been widely explored in both the Machine Learning
(Gama et al., 2014) and Statistical Process Control (Basseville et al., 1993) literature. Among the many applications
of change-detection algorithms, we mention fault detection
(Tartakovsky et al., 2006), financial monitoring (Ross et al.,

In this paper, we introduce Kernel QuantTree (KQT), a nonparametric and multivariate CD algorithm that constructs
histogram bins via measurable kernel functions, resulting
in a powerful CD test. In contrast with the QT algorithm,
which constructs bins by axis-aligned splits, KQT partitions
the space in K − 1 compact bins defined by kernel functions
evaluated on the training data. An additional bin, denoted as
the residual bin, is non-compact and gathers all the points
that do not fall in any other bin. Figure 1(c)-(d)-(e) shows
that the KQT bins are compact subsets of the domain. Our
intuition is that compact bins increase the flexibility when

1

Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria,
Politecnico di Milano, Italy. Correspondence to: Diego Stucchi
<diego.stucchi@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

