Truncating Trajectories in Monte Carlo Reinforcement Learning

Riccardo Poiani 1 Alberto Maria Metelli 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract

2017; Schulman et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2020), and, consequently, is constantly gaining attention from the community.
A particular appealing feature is that RL is fully data-driven.
Indeed, the designer of the learning system only needs to
let the agent interacts with the environment to gather experience on the task of interest, and no additional expert
knowledge on the problem is required.

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), an agent acts
in an unknown environment to maximize the expected cumulative discounted sum of an external reward signal, i.e., the expected return. In
practice, in many tasks of interest, such as policy
optimization, the agent usually spends its interaction budget by collecting episodes of fixed length
within a simulator (i.e., Monte Carlo simulation).
However, given the discounted nature of the RL
objective, this data collection strategy might not
be the best option. Indeed, the rewards taken in
early simulation steps weigh exponentially more
than future rewards. Taking a cue from this intuition, in this paper, we design an a-priori budget
allocation strategy that leads to the collection of
trajectories of different lengths, i.e., truncated.
The proposed approach provably minimizes the
width of the confidence intervals around the empirical estimates of the expected return of a policy.
After discussing the theoretical properties of our
method, we make use of our trajectory truncation mechanism to extend Policy Optimization
via Importance Sampling (POIS, Metelli et al.,
2018) algorithm. Finally, we conduct a numerical
comparison between our algorithm and POIS: the
results are consistent with our theory and show
that an appropriate truncation of the trajectories
can succeed in improving performance.

However, given the well-known data inefficiency of RL algorithms, in real-world scenarios, a simulator is commonly
adopted, and the agent interacts with it, usually in parallel
over a cluster of machines to gather knowledge (e.g., performance and gradient estimates) on the task being solved
(e.g., Espeholt et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2018). Furthermore, since the goal consists on estimating/maximizing an
infinite sum of rewards, in practice, the designer usually
chooses a sufficiently large horizon T , so that the agent will
gather information up to time T via Monte Carlo simulation
(Owen, 2013), after which the state of the system is reset
to a (possibly stochastic) initial state. Although there exists alternatives, such as Temporal Difference (TD, Sutton
& Barto, 2018) methods, that do not require a finite horizon nor a reset possibility, a large variety of successful RL
approaches still rely on Monte Carlo evaluation. Indeed,
differently from TD methods, Monte Carlo approaches can
be transparently applied to non-Markovian environments,
as often happens in real-world domains. This is, indeed, the
usual case of policy search methods (e.g., Williams, 1992;
Baxter & Bartlett, 2001; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017; Metelli et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2021).
While these algorithms can differ across a large number of
dimensions (see, for instance, Metelli et al. (2018) for an
in-depth taxonomy), most of them share a common aspect:
the evaluation and optimization of the objective function
are performed by collecting, via Monte Carlo simulation, a
batch of K episodes of length T each. In this sense, they
allocate the budget of Λ = KT transitions uniformly w.r.t.
the horizon.

1. Introduction
In Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 2018), an
agent acts in an unknown, or partially known, environment
to maximize the expected cumulative discounted sum of
an external reward signal, referred to as expected return.
This abstract scenario models a large variety of sequential
decision-making problems (e.g., Mnih et al., 2016; Casas,

However, given the discounted nature of the RL objective,
coupled with the fact that, in practice, we have to estimate
the expected return with sample means, is this uniformin-the-horizon budget allocation strategy the best option?
Indeed, the discounted objective weighs each reward collected at step t with the factor γ t , and, consequently, the
early interaction steps weigh exponentially more than the

1

Diparimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria,
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Riccardo
Poiani <riccardo.poiani@polimi.it>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

