Improved Active Multi-Task Representation Learning via Lasso

Yiping Wang 1 Yifang Chen 2 Kevin Jamieson 2 Simon S. Du 2

Abstract

and natural language into a relatively low-dimensional representation. Recently, a big focus in deep learning has been
on few-shot learning, where there is not enough data to learn
a good representation and a prediction function from scratch.
One solution is using multi-task learning, which uses data
from other sources to help the few-shot target. This approach is based on the idea that different tasks can share a
common representation. The process starts by training on
a lot of source tasks to learn a simpler representation and
then uses that pre-trained representation to train on a limited
amount of target data.

To leverage the copious amount of data from
source tasks and overcome the scarcity of the target task samples, representation learning based
on multi-task pretraining has become a standard
approach in many applications. However, up
until now, most existing works design a source
task selection strategy from a purely empirical
perspective. Recently, Chen et al. (2022) gave
the first active multi-task representation learning
(A-MTRL) algorithm which adaptively samples
from source tasks and can provably reduce the
total sample complexity using the L2-regularizedtarget-source-relevance parameter ν 2 . But their
work is theoretically suboptimal in terms of total source sample complexity and is less practical in some real-world scenarios where sparse
training source task selection is desired. In this
paper, we address both issues. Specifically, we
show the strict dominance of the L1-regularizedrelevance-based (ν 1 -based) strategy by giving a
lower bound for the ν 2 -based strategy. When ν 1
is unknown, we propose a practical algorithm that
uses the LASSO program to estimate ν 1 . Our
algorithm successfully recovers the optimal result
in the known case. In addition to our sample complexity results, we also characterize the potential
of our ν 1 -based strategy in sample-cost-sensitive
settings. Finally, we provide experiments on realworld computer vision datasets to illustrate the
effectiveness of our proposed method.

Accessing a large amount of source data for multi-task representation learning (MTRL) may be easy, but processing
and training on all that data can be costly. Therefore, it is
important to find ways to minimize the number of samples,
and perhaps the number of sources, needed from source
tasks while still achieving the desired performance on the
target task. Naturally, not all source tasks are equally important for learning the representation and maximizing performance on the target task. But to the best of our knowledge,
most research in this area chooses which tasks to include
in the training of the multi-task representation in an ad hoc
way (Asai et al., 2022; Fifty et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2022;
Zaiem et al., 2021; Zamir et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2022b).
Notable exceptions include (Chen et al., 2021; 2022) that
study ways to improve training efficiency and reduce the
cost of processing source data by prioritizing certain tasks
during training with theoretical guarantees.
On the other hand, the significant empirical success of
MTRL has motivated a number of theoretical studies (Du
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Tripuraneni et al., 2021). In
particular, (Du et al., 2021) and (Tripuraneni et al., 2021)
provide generalization (excess risk) upper bounds on the
estimation error of the target task for passive multi-task
representation learning (P-MTRL). Here, passive means
that samples are drawn from tasks according to some nonadaptive sampling strategy fixed before data is observed
(e.g., an equal number of samples from each task). Tripuraneni et al. (2021) also proves a lower bound related to the
quality of whole feature representations in P-MTRL.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been successful because it can effectively learn a proper feature extractor that can map highdimensional, highly structured inputs like natural images
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University 2 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington. Correspondence to: Yiping Wang <yipingw@zju.edu.cn>.

In this paper, our main focus is to guarantee a specific level
of accuracy on a target task while provably using the least
amount of data from other related tasks. This is achieved

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

