Can Forward Gradient Match Backpropagation?

Louis Fournier * 1 Stéphane Rivaud * 1 Eugene Belilovsky 2 Michael Eickenberg 3 Edouard Oyallon 1

Abstract

memory, and computation of the update is blocked. This
is referred to as the backward lock (Jaderberg et al., 2017),
which is also an obstacle in the development of modelparallel asynchronous procedures (Belilovsky et al., 2021).
Backpropagation also lacks biological plausibility, which is
often considered a direction towards more scalable learning
(Ren et al., 2022). Indeed, the backpropagation algorithm
suffers from the weight transport problem (Carpenter, 1989),
which means that the weights of the above layers must be
shared during the backward pass of a given layer. This
requires a significant amount of communication and synchronization, which is not observed to be implementable
in biological systems (Liao et al., 2016). Since biological
systems have achieved learning without these restrictions,
researchers hope to isolate and use such principles to improve artificial neural network learning.

Forward Gradients - the idea of using directional
derivatives in forward differentiation mode - have
recently been shown to be utilizable for neural
network training while avoiding problems generally associated with backpropagation gradient
computation, such as locking and memorization
requirements. The cost is the requirement to guess
the step direction, which is hard in high dimensions. While current solutions rely on weighted
averages over isotropic guess vector distributions,
we propose to strongly bias our gradient guesses
in directions that are much more promising, such
as feedback obtained from small, local auxiliary
networks. For a standard computer vision neural
network, we conduct a rigorous study systematically covering a variety of combinations of gradient targets and gradient guesses, including those
previously presented in the literature. We find
that using gradients obtained from a local loss
as a candidate direction drastically improves on
random noise in Forward Gradient methods.

Recent contributions have re-examined the converse procedure of computing Forward Gradients (Baydin et al., 2022),
built on the classical forward mode automatic differentiation
(Baydin et al., 2018). It is an alternative to standard backpropagation algorithm, which allows the computation of a
directional derivative (i.e., a scalar product with the gradient, as opposed to the gradient vector itself) from a forward
pass. The gradient computations in forward mode explicitly
use the Jacobian of a given layer through Jacobian-Vector
Products but do not require storing any intermediary activations or backward passes. In other words, it is backward
unlocked (as described by Jaderberg et al. (2017)) in that
the computation of the derivative is finished as soon as the
forward pass is completed. This leads to a potential memory reduction and does not use the biologically implausible
weight transport. A Forward Gradient, as introduced by
Baydin et al. (2022), corresponds to an unbiased estimate
of an activation or weight gradient (which we will refer to
as a Gradient Target) computed via a random, isotropic, directional derivative, i.e., a projection of the Gradient Target
onto a direction vector (which we will define as the Gradient Guess). The motivation of Forward Gradient descent
is to approximate End-to-End Gradient descent. However,
this unbiased gradient approximation generally suffers from
high variance.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Amari, 1967; Bottou,
2012) using end-to-end backpropagation for gradient computation is the ubiquitous training method of state-of-the-art
Deep Neural Networks. However, one can identify at least
two issues with this gradient estimation procedure. For
one, it requires a significant amount of computational resources and memory. Indeed, a backpropagation update is
performed in two steps: a forward step which computes
activations, and a backward step which computes gradients.
Until a gradient at a given layer is computed, intermediary
computations which lead to this layer must be stored in
*

Equal contribution 1 Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR,
Paris, France 2 CCM, Flatiron Institute, New York, USA 3 MILA,
Concordia University, Montréal, Canada. Correspondence to:
Louis Fournier <louis.fournier@isir.upmc.fr>, Stéphane Rivaud
<stephane.rivaud@isir.upmc.fr>.

Several approaches (Ren et al., 2022; Silver et al., 2021)
have been proposed to reduce the corresponding variance.
Unfortunately, there is often an accuracy gap (Silver et al.,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

