Achieving Linear Speedup in Non-IID Federated Bilevel Learning

Minhui Huang * 1 Dewei Zhang * 2 Kaiyi Ji 3

Abstract

client stores data and computes locally and only transmits the privacy-preserving information. This paradigm
is increasingly attractive due to the growing computational
power of edge devices and the increasing demand for privacy
protection. Federated learning is facing more challenges
than traditional distributed optimization due to the high communication cost, data and system heterogeneity, and privacy
concerns. Recent years have witnessed great progress in the
algorithmic design and system deployment to address such
challenges (Wang & Joshi, 2021; Karimireddy et al., 2019;
Stich & Karimireddy, 2020).

Federated bilevel learning has received increasing
attention in various emerging machine learning
and communication applications. Recently, several Hessian-vector-based algorithms have been
proposed to solve the federated bilevel optimization problem. However, several important properties in federated learning such as the partial client
participation and the linear speedup for convergence (i.e., the convergence rate and complexity
are improved linearly with respect to the number of sampled clients) in the presence of noni.i.d. datasets, still remain open. In this paper,
we fill these gaps by proposing a new federated
bilevel algorithm named FedMBO with a novel
client sampling scheme in the federated hypergradient estimation. We show that FedMBO achieves
√ 
n
1
1
a convergence rate of O √nK
+K
on
+ K 3/2
non-i.i.d. datasets, where n is the number of participating clients in each round, and K is the total
number of iteration. This is the first theoretical linear speedup result for non-i.i.d. federated bilevel
optimization. Extensive experiments validate our
theoretical results and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

Recently, federated bilevel learning has received increasing
attention (Chen et al., 2018; Fallah et al., 2020; Zeng et al.,
2021) because many modern machine learning problems
naturally exhibit a bilevel optimization structure. For example, Chen et al. 2018; Fallah et al. 2020 studied the federated
meta-learning problems, Khodak et al. 2021 proposed federated hyperparameter optimization approaches, and Zeng
et al. 2021 improved the fairness in federated learning using
a bilevel method. This motivates us to study the following
federated bilevel optimization problem.
m

1 X
minp Φ(x) = f (x, y (x)) :=
fi (x, y ∗ (x))
x∈R
m i=1
∗

(1a)

m

s.t.

y ∗ (x) ∈ arg min g(x, y) :=
y∈Rq

1. Introduction

1 X
gi (x, y), (1b)
m i=1

where fi (x, y) = Efi (x, y; ξ i ), gi (x, y) = Egi (x, y; ζ i )
are stochastic upper- and lower-level loss functions of client
i, and m is the total number of clients. Existing federated
learning algorithms like FedAvg and its variants (McMahan et al., 2017) cannot be applied to solve the federated
bilevel problem Equation (1) due to the nested optimization structure, the global Hessian inverse estimation in the
hypergradient (i.e., ∇Φ(x)) computation, and the data heterogeneity in both the upper- and lower-level problems.

Federated learning is a privacy-preserving training paradigm
over distributed networks that are designed for edge computing (McMahan et al., 2017). In federated learning, multiple
edge devices (or clients) work together to learn a global
model under the coordination of a central server. Instead of
transmitting user data directly to the central server, each
*

The first two authors contributed equally, and they are listed according to the alphabetical order of their last names. 1 Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California,
Davis, USA 2 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
Ohio State University, Columbus, USA 3 Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Kaiyi Ji <kaiyiji@buffalo.edu>.

Recently, several approaches (Tarzanagh et al., 2022; Gao,
2022; Li et al., 2022) have been proposed to efficiently solve
Equation (1). Gao 2022; Li et al. 2022 focused on the homogeneous setting and proposed momentum-based distributed
bilevel algorithms. In the more practical but challenging heterogeneous setting, Tarzanagh et al. 2022 proposed FedNest
based on an implicit differentiation based federated hypergradient estimator. In the inner loop, FedNest calls T times

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

