Graph Contrastive Backdoor Attacks

Hangfan Zhang 1 Jinghui Chen 1 Lu Lin 1 Jinyuan Jia 1 Dinghao Wu 1

Abstract

tions (Wu et al., 2020; Monti et al., 2017; Ying et al., 2018),
link prediction (Zhang & Chen, 2018; Zhu et al., 2023;
Qu et al., 2020), and node classification (Kipf & Welling,
2016; Veličković et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018). Recently,
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016;
Veličković et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018) are widely adopted
as the feature extractor for graph structure data. However,
well-trained GNN models usually require large amounts of
labeled data, which are expensive and time-consuming to
collect, especially when the graph size is large.

Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) has attracted
considerable interest due to its impressive node
representation learning capability. Despite the
wide application of GCL techniques, little attention has been paid to the security of GCL. In this
paper, we systematically study the vulnerability
of GCL in the presence of malicious backdoor
adversaries. In particular, we propose GCBA, the
first backdoor attack for graph contrastive learning. GCBA incorporates three attacks: poisoning,
crafting, and natural backdoor, each targeting one
stage of the GCL pipeline. We formulate our attacks as optimization problems and solve them
with a novel discrete optimization technique to
overcome the discrete nature of graph-structured
data. By extensively evaluating GCBA on multiple datasets and GCL methods, we show that
our attack can achieve high attack success rates
while preserving stealthiness. We further consider potential countermeasures to our attack and
conclude that existing defenses are insufficient
to mitigate GCBA. We show that as a complex
paradigm involving data and model republishing,
GCL is vulnerable to backdoor attacks, and specifically designed defenses are needed to mitigate
the backdoor attacks on GCL.

Very recently, graph contrastive learning (GCL) (Velickovic et al., 2019; Hassani & Khasahmadi, 2020; You et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2021a; Zhu et al., 2020; 2021; Lin et al.,
2022b) were proposed to address this challenge. GCL has
achieved impressive effectiveness in dealing with a large
quantity of graph-structured data in the absence of supervisory signals. Its unsupervised property is especially favorable since collecting and labeling data in a traditional
supervised manner is extremely costly. GCL aims to pretrain a GNN encoder mapping each node in graph-structured
data to a low-dimensional representation called node embedding. Fine-tuning a downstream classifier based on a
GNN encoder significantly reduces the cost of collecting
and labeling data.
Prior works revealed that GNNs are vulnerable to so-called
backdoor attacks (Xi et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021b; Yang
et al., 2022). A graph backdoor adversary aims to inject
a hidden backdoor into the victim GNN model. The interfered GNN will behave like a genuine model on clean inputs. However, once the input is stamped with an adversarydefined “trigger”, the victim GNN will behave maliciously,
such as misclassifying the poisoned input into a specific
class. This is commonly achieved by poisoning the training
set involving modifying the labels. However, existing graph
backdoor attacks do not fit GCL settings since they need to
access labels to inject the backdoor. Nevertheless, humanfed supervisory labels are not required and thus unavailable
in GCL.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data is commonly seen nowadays, such as
social media networks, mobile payment networks, and credit
networks (Shchur et al., 2018; Hamilton et al., 2017; Zeng
et al., 2019). In such networks, identities are connected with
each other, and each of them contains rich information about
the identity’s properties. Extracting useful information from
these graph structure data can provide better services to
many downstream tasks on graphs such as recommenda1

Pennsylvania State University.
Dinghao Wu <dinghao@psu.edu>.

Despite the excessiveness of research on backdoor attacks (Gu et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; 2021; Li et al.,
2022), the vulnerability of GCL against backdoor attacks
has yet to be explored, which is highly concerning given
the broad application of GCL in security-sensitive domains

Correspondence to:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

