Policy Regularization with Dataset Constraint
for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Yuhang Ran * 1 Yi-Chen Li * 1 Fuxiang Zhang 1 2 Zongzhang Zhang 1 Yang Yu 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Online Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown remarkable success in a variety of domains such as games (Silver
et al., 2017), robotics (Li et al., 2021), and recommendation
systems (Chen et al., 2018). However, learning an optimal
policy online demands continual and possibly huge environmental interactions because of trial-and-error (Sutton &
Barto, 2018). For expense or safety concerns, this may be
impractical in real-world applications. On the other hand,
offline RL learns from a fixed, previously collected dataset,
thus eliminating the need for additional interactions during training. Due to the promise of turning datasets into
powerful decision-making engines, offline RL has attracted
significant interest in recent years (Levine et al., 2020).

We consider the problem of learning the best possible policy from a fixed dataset, known as offline
Reinforcement Learning (RL). A common taxonomy of existing offline RL works is policy regularization, which typically constrains the learned
policy by distribution or support of the behavior
policy. However, distribution and support constraints are overly conservative since they both
force the policy to choose similar actions as the behavior policy when considering particular states.
It will limit the learned policy’s performance, especially when the behavior policy is sub-optimal.
In this paper, we find that regularizing the policy
towards the nearest state-action pair can be more
effective and thus propose Policy Regularization
with Dataset Constraint (PRDC). When updating
the policy in a given state, PRDC searches the
entire dataset for the nearest state-action sample
and then restricts the policy with the action of
this sample. Unlike previous works, PRDC can
guide the policy with proper behaviors from the
dataset, allowing it to choose actions that do not
appear in the dataset along with the given state. It
is a softer constraint but still keeps enough conservatism from out-of-distribution actions. Empirical evidence and theoretical analysis show
that PRDC can alleviate offline RL’s fundamentally challenging value overestimation issue with
a bounded performance gap. Moreover, on a set of
locomotion and navigation tasks, PRDC achieves
state-of-the-art performance compared with existing methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/LAMDA-RL/PRDC.

One of the fundamental challenges of offline RL is value
overestimation in Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) actions (see
Section 2.3). According to the methodology of dealing with
OOD actions, existing works on offline RL could be roughly
categorized into the following two taxonomies (Jin et al.,
2021): (i) Pessimistic value-based approaches that learn an
underestimated or conservative value to discourage choosing
OOD actions (Kumar et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021; An et al.,
2021; Lyu et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022). (ii) Regularized
policy-based approaches that constrain the policy to avoid
visiting the states and actions that are less covered by the
dataset (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Nair et al., 2020; Kostrikov
et al., 2021a;b; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Wu et al., 2022).
Our work focuses on policy regularization. Generally, previous policy regularization approaches have constrained the
learned policy by either the distribution (Wu et al., 2019)
or the support (Kumar et al., 2019) of the behavior policy.
Considering a particular state, however, distribution and
support constraints are overly conservative since they both
restrict the policy by actions from the behavior policy. It
will limit the performance of the policy, especially when
the actions from the behavior policy in the dataset are not
optimal for the given state. Nevertheless, there are far more
actions in the dataset than in a particular state. A natural
question thus arises: Can we guide the policy by all actions
in the dataset rather than the limited ones in a given state?

*

Equal contribution 1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 Polixir Technologies. Correspondence to: Zongzhang Zhang <zzzhang@nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

It motivates us to propose a new approach on policy regular1

