High Fidelity Image Counterfactuals with Probabilistic Causal Models

Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro 1 Tian Xia 1 Miguel Monteiro 1 Nick Pawlowski 2 Ben Glocker 1

Abstract

to change the effect and not the other way around. The goal
is to leverage causal models to estimate the causal effect of
actions, even in hypothetical (counterfactual) scenarios.

We present a general causal generative modelling
framework for accurate estimation of high fidelity
image counterfactuals with deep structural causal
models. Estimation of interventional and counterfactual queries for high-dimensional structured
variables, such as images, remains a challenging
task. We leverage ideas from causal mediation
analysis and advances in generative modelling
to design new deep causal mechanisms for structured variables in causal models. Our experiments
demonstrate that our proposed mechanisms are
capable of accurate abduction and estimation of
direct, indirect and total effects as measured by
axiomatic soundness of counterfactuals.

The ability to generate plausible counterfactuals has wide
scientific applicability and is particularly valuable in fields
like medical imaging, wherein data are scarce and underrepresentation of subgroups is prevalent (Pawlowski et al.,
2020; Castro et al., 2020; Seyyed-Kalantari et al., 2020;
Glocker et al., 2023). Suppose we are granted access to
medical imaging data alongside reliable meta-data of the
respective patients, e.g. annotations of their protected attributes. In such cases, if we can make sensible medicallyinformed causal assumptions about the underlying data generating process, we may be able to construct a causal model
which better reflects reality. Furthermore, we argue that the
ability to answer counterfactual queries like ”why?” and
”what if..?” expressed in the language of causality could
greatly benefit several other important areas: (i) explainability (Wachter et al., 2017; Mothilal et al., 2020), e.g. through
causal mediation effects as studied herein; (ii) data augmentation, e.g. mitigating data scarcity and underrepresentation
of subgroups (Kaushik et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2022a); (iii)
robustness, to e.g. spurious correlations (Simon, 1954; Balashankar et al., 2021), and (iv) fairness notions in both
observed and counterfactual outcomes (Kusner et al., 2017;
Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018). Despite recent progress, accurate estimation of interventional and counterfactual queries
for high-dimensional structured variables (e.g. images) remains an open problem (Pawlowski et al., 2020; Yang et al.,
2021; Schut et al., 2021; Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2021).

1. Introduction
Many real-world challenges still prevent the adoption
of Deep Learning (DL) systems in safety-critical settings (D’Amour et al., 2022). It has been argued that such
obstacles arise partly from a purely statistical treatment of
predictive modelling, wherein notions of causality are not
taken into account (Pearl, 2009; Bengio et al., 2013; Kusner
et al., 2017; Peters et al., 2017). Consequently, research on
causality and representation learning has garnered significant interest (Schölkopf et al., 2021; Schölkopf, 2022).
Scientific inquiry is invariably motivated by causal questions: “how effective is X in preventing Y ?”, or “what
would have happened to Y had X been x?”. Such questions cannot be answered using statistical tools alone (Pearl,
2009). As such, a mathematical framework is required to
precisely express and answer such questions using observed
data. A causal model represents our assumptions about how
nature assigns values to variables of interest in a system.
The relationships between variables in a causal model are directed from cause to effect, and intervening on a cause ought

Our research bolsters an ongoing effort to combine causality and deep representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013;
Schölkopf et al., 2021). However, few previous works
have attempted to fulfil all three rungs of Pearl’s ladder
of causation (Pearl, 2009): association (L1 ); intervention
(L2 ) and counterfactuals (L3 ) in a principled manner using
deep models. Notable exceptions include Deep Structural
Causal Models (DSCMs) (Pawlowski et al., 2020) and Neural Causal Models (NCMs) (Xia et al., 2021; 2023), both
of which our research builds upon. Contrary to preceding
studies, our main focus is on exploring the practical limits
and possibilities of estimating and empirically evaluating
high-fidelity image counterfactuals of real-world data. For
this purpose, we introduce a specific system and method.

1

Imperial College London 2 Microsoft Research Cambridge,
UK. Correspondence to: Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro <f.de-sousaribeiro@imperial.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

