Over-parametrization via Lifting for Low-rank Matrix Sensing:
Conversion of Spurious Solutions to Strict Saddle Points

Ziye Ma 1 Igor Molybog 2 Javad Lavaei 3 Somayeh Sojoudi 1
n×n
matrices {Ai }m
. The goal is to find an unknown
i=1 ∈ R
∗
matrix M of rank r associated with the measurement vector b, meaning that b = A(M ∗ ), where r is often much
smaller than n. We factorize M ∗ as M ∗ = ZZ > where
Z ∈ Rn×r .

Abstract
This paper studies the role of overparametrization in solving non-convex optimization problems. The focus is on the
important class of low-rank matrix sensing,
where we propose an infinite hierarchy of
non-convex problems via the lifting technique
and the Burer-Monteiro factorization. This
contrasts with the existing over-parametrization
technique where the search rank is limited by the
dimension of the matrix and it does not allow a
rich over-parametrization of an arbitrary degree.
We show that although the spurious solutions of
the problem remain stationary points through the
hierarchy, they will be transformed into strict
saddle points (under some technical conditions)
and can be escaped via local search methods.
This is the first result in the literature showing that
over-parametrization creates a negative curvature
for escaping spurious solutions. We also derive
a bound on how much over-parametrization is
requited to enable the elimination of spurious
solutions.

The problem (1) is extremely broad since solving any arbitrary polynomial optimization can converted to a series
of problems in the form of (1) (Molybog et al., 2020). In
addition, the problem (1) directly arises in various applications such as collaborative filtering (Koren et al., 2009),
phase retrieval (Singer, 2011; Boumal, 2016; Shechtman
et al., 2015), motion detection (Fattahi & Sojoudi, 2020),
and power system state estimation (Zhang et al., 2017; Jin
et al., 2019). Moreover, its strikingly simple form is associated with only one source of non-convexity, which is the
rank constraint. As a result, the existing works have extensively studied under what conditions one can recover M ∗
exactly, and the centerpiece of this line of research is the notion of Restricted Isometry Property(RIP) of the measuring
operator A, which we state below:
Definition 1.1 (RIP). (Candès & Recht, 2009) Given a
natural number p, the linear map A : Rn×n 7→ Rm is said
to satisfy δp -RIP if there is a constant δp ∈ [0, 1) such that
(1 − δp )kM k2F ≤ kA(M )k2 ≤ (1 + δp )kM k2F

1. Introduction

holds for all matrices M ∈ Rn×n satisfying rank(M ) ≤ p.

In this paper, we focus on an important class of non-convex
optimization problems, named matrix sensing, which can
be formulated as the feasibility problem:
find M ∈ Rn×n

This criterion is also intuitive to understand, as it measures
how close A is to an identity operator (isometry) over matrices of rank at most r. If A is an exact isometry, or equivalently when it satisfies RIP with δr = 0, we measure M ∗
exactly and the recovery is trivial. Therefore, a small value
for the RIP constant usually implies that the problem has a
low computational complexity.

(1)

s.t. A(M ) = A(M ∗ )
rank(M ) ≤ r, M  0.
where the measurement operator A(·) : Rn×n 7→ Rm is a
linear operator returning a d-dimensional measurement vector A(M ) = [hA1 , M i, . . . , hAm , M i]T , for given sensing

A popular approach to solving (1) is to use the so-called
Burer-Monteiro (BM) factorization (Burer & Monteiro,
2003). The BM formulation explicitly factors M as M =
XX > , where X ∈ Rn×r

1

Department of EECS, UC Berkeley, USA 2 Meta AI
Department of IEOR, UC Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to:
Ziye Ma <ziyema@berkeley.edu>.
3

min f (X) :=

X∈Rn×r

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
kA(XX T ) − bk2 .
2

(2)

The problem (2) is an unconstrained smooth optimization
problem, which means that highly scalable local search
1

