Variance Control for Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Qi Kuang * 1 Zhoufan Zhu * 1 Liwen Zhang 1 Fan Zhou 1

Abstract

due to its simplicity, efficiency of training, and flexibility in
modeling the return distribution.

Although distributional reinforcement learning
(DRL) has been widely examined in the past few
years, very few studies investigate the validity
of the obtained Q-function estimator in the distributional setting. To fully understand how the
approximation errors of the Q-function affect the
whole training process, we do some error analysis and theoretically show how to reduce both
the bias and the variance of the error terms. With
this new understanding, we construct a new estimator Quantiled Expansion Mean (QEM) and
introduce a new DRL algorithm (QEMRL) from
the statistical perspective. We extensively evaluate our QEMRL algorithm on a variety of Atari
and Mujoco benchmark tasks and demonstrate
that QEMRL achieves significant improvement
over baseline algorithms in terms of sample efficiency and convergence performance.

Although the existing quantile-based algorithms achieve
remarkable empirical success, the approximated distribution still requires further understanding and investigation.
One aspect is the crossing issue, namely, a violation of the
monotonicity of the obtained quantile estimations. Zhou
et al. (2020; 2021) solves this issue by enforcing the monotonicity of the estimated quantiles using some well-designed
neural networks. However, these methods may suffer from
some underestimation or overestimation issues. In other
words, the estimated quantiles tend to be higher or lower
than their true values. Considering this shortcoming, Luo
et al. (2021) applies monotonic rational-quadratic splines to
ensure monotonicity, but their algorithm is computationally
expensive and hard to implement in large-scale tasks.
Another aspect is regard to the tail behavior of the return
distribution. It is widely acknowledged that the precision
of tail estimation highly depends on the frequency of tail
observations (Koenker, 2005). Due to data sparsity, the
quantile estimation is often unstable at the tails. To alleviate
this instability, Kuznetsov et al. (2020) proposes to truncate
the right tail of the approximated return distribution by
discarding some topmost atoms. However, this approach
lacks theoretical support and ignores the potentially useful
information hidden in the tail.

1. Introduction
Distributional Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms
have been shown to achieve state-of-art performance in RL
benchmark tasks (Bellemare et al., 2017; Dabney et al.,
2018b;a; Yang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020; 2021). The
core idea of DRL is to estimate the entire distribution of
the future return instead of its expectation value, i.e. the
Q-function, which captures the intrinsic uncertainty of the
whole process in three folds: (i) the stochasticity of rewards,
(ii) the indeterminacy of the policy, and (iii) the inherent
randomness of transition dynamics. Existing DRL algorithms parameterize the return distribution in different ways,
including categorical return atoms (Bellemare et al., 2017),
expectiles (Rowland et al., 2019), particles (Nguyen-Tang
et al., 2021), and quantiles (Dabney et al., 2018b;a). Among
these works, the quantile-based algorithm is widely used
*

The crossing issue and tail unrealization illustrate that there
is a substantial gap between the quantile estimation and
its true value. This finding reduces the reliability of the
Q-function estimator obtained by quantile-based algorithms
and inspires us to further minimize the difference between
the estimated Q-function and its true value. In particular,
the error associated with Q-function approximation can be
decomposed into three parts:
∆ ≡ Qπθ (x, a) − Qπ (x, a) = EZθπ (x, a) − EZ π (x, a)
= EZθπ (x, a) − Ex′ ∼D [R + γZθπ (x′ , a′ )]
|
{z
}

1

Equal contribution School of Statistics and Management,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China.
Correspondence to: Fan Zhou <zhoufan@mail.shufe.edu.cn>.

Target Approximation Error E1

+ Ex′ ∼D [R + γZθπ (x′ , a′ )] − Ex′ ∼P [R + γZθπ (x′ , a′ )]
|
{z
}
Bellman operator Approximation Error E2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

+ Ex′ ∼P [R + γZθπ (x′ , a′ )] − EZ π (x, a),
{z
}
|
Parametrization Induced Error E3

1

(1)

