LinSATNet: The Positive Linear Satisfiability Neural Networks

Runzhong Wang 1 2 Yunhao Zhang 1 Ziao Guo 1 Tianyi Chen 1 Xiaokang Yang 1 Junchi Yan 1 2

Abstract

Table 1. Comparison of constraint-encoding for neural networks
in finding a solution, with/without an explicit objective function.
Note the other works on enforcing a certain kind of satisfiability e.g.
permute, rank, match, (but not boolean-SAT) can be incorporated
by the positive linear constraints as fulfilled by our LinSAT.

Encoding constraints into neural networks is attractive. This paper studies how to introduce the
popular positive linear satisfiability to neural networks. We propose the first differentiable satisfiability layer based on an extension of the classic
Sinkhorn algorithm for jointly encoding multiple
sets of marginal distributions. We further theoretically characterize the convergence property of
the Sinkhorn algorithm for multiple marginals,
and the underlying formulation is also derived. In
contrast to the sequential decision e.g. reinforcement learning-based solvers, we showcase our
technique in solving constrained (specifically satisfiability) problems by one-shot neural networks,
including i) a neural routing solver learned without supervision of optimal solutions; ii) a partial
graph matching network handling graphs with unmatchable outliers on both sides; iii) a predictive
network for financial portfolios with continuous
constraints. To our knowledge, there exists no
one-shot neural solver for these scenarios when
they are formulated as satisfiability problems.
Source code is available at https://github.
com/Thinklab-SJTU/LinSATNet.

Formulation

Constraint type

Exact gradient?

Amos & Kolter (2017)
Pogančić et al. (2019)
Berthet et al. (2020)
Wang et al. (2019a)

Paper

optim.
optim.
optim.
optim.

linear
combinatorial
combinatorial
combinatorial

Yes
No
No
Yes

Selsam et al. (2019)
Cruz et al. (2017)
Adams & Zemel (2011)
Wang et al. (2019b)
LinSAT (ours)

sat.
sat.
sat.
sat.
sat.

boolean-SAT
permutation
ranking
matching
positive linear

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

may not have any explicit objectives. It is possible that decision problems also have underlying forms, however, their
objectives are usually interpreted as “finding a feasible solution nearest to the input”. In particular, the decision problem
can be divided into two cases: i) only judge if there exists a
feasible solution or not; ii) output a feasible solution close
to an unconstrained input. This paper focuses on the latter
case for decision problem, and we term it as satisfiability
problem if not otherwise specified.
Notably, machine learning has been well adopted in solving both optimization and decision problems, especially
for combinatorial optimization (CO) (Bengio et al., 2021)
and SAT problem (Guo et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023). It is
relatively easy to introduce learning into problem-solving
as a building block under the traditional solving framework (Wang et al., 2021b;a), yet it is more attractive to develop a learning-based framework in a more systematic manner. In this regard, reinforcement learning (RL) (Liu et al.,
2023) or alternative sequence-to-sequence models (Vinyals
et al., 2015) that solve the problem in an auto-regressive
way is of prominence adoption, while they are often less efficient for their sequential decision nature. Thus efforts have
also been put into one-shot problem solving, and a popular
alternative is designing certain penalties in the loss (Karalias & Loukas, 2020) to respect the constraints. Being
more thought-provoking, a more aggressive ambition is to
develop end-to-end differentiable neural networks whereby
the constraints are seamlessly encoded in their architecture,
such that the efficiency of neural networks for one-shot
solving can be fulfilled.

1. Introduction
It remains open for how to effectively encode the constraints
into neural networks for decision-making beyond unconstrained regression and classification. Roughly speaking,
we distinguish two categories of such constrained problems:
optimization and decision. Optimization problems consider
explicit objective functions that are directly related to downstream tasks, whereby their optimization forms are usually
more complicated. Decision problems do not consider the
objective of the downstream task, or the downstream task
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, and MoE
Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory. Correspondence to: Junchi Yan
<yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

