BP IPE: Memory-Balanced Pipeline Parallelism for Training
Large Language Models

Taebum Kim 1 2 Hyoungjoo Kim 1 Gyeong-In Yu 1 Byung-Gon Chun 1 2
memory
capacity

Abstract
Pipeline parallelism is a key technique for training large language models within GPU clusters.
However, it often leads to a memory imbalance
problem, where certain GPUs face high memory
pressure while others underutilize their capacity.
This imbalance results in suboptimal training performance, even when the overall GPU memory
capacity is sufficient for more efficient setups. To
address this inefficiency, we propose BP IPE, a
novel approach for achieving memory balance in
pipeline parallelism. BP IPE employs an activation balancing method to transfer intermediate
activations between GPUs during training, enabling all GPUs to utilize comparable amounts
of memory. With balanced memory utilization,
BP IPE enhances the training efficiency of large
language models like GPT-3 by eliminating redundant recomputations or increasing the microbatch size. Our evaluation conducted on 48 A100
GPUs across six nodes interconnected with HDR
InfiniBand shows that BP IPE accelerates the training of GPT-3 96B and GPT-3 134B models by
1.25x-2.17x compared to Megatron-LM, a stateof-the-art framework for training large language
models.

memory
transferred

memory
required

memory
balance

memory
imbalance

transfer

GPU

GPU

GPU

GPU

earlier
pipeline stage

later
pipeline stage

earlier
pipeline stage

later
pipeline stage

1F1B

BPIPE

Figure 1. An illustration of how BP IPE deals with a memory imbalance problem. With the 1F1B pipeline schedule (left), the memory
requirement of an earlier pipeline stage could exceed the memory
capacity of a GPU. In that case, training is not feasible even if
the total aggregated memory is sufficient for the memory requirement. BP IPE (right) balances the imbalanced memory requirement
by transferring intermediate activations between earlier and later
stages.

an overwhelming number of parameters incurs high memory pressure, making large language model (LLM) training
challenging. When training a model in mixed precision (Micikevicius et al., 2017) with the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014)
optimizer, we need 20 bytes of memory for each model
parameter (Smith et al., 2022). Hence, training a GPT-3
175B model needs more than 3,000 GiB to store the model
parameters and optimizer states. Yet, no GPU exists whose
memory capacity satisfies the requirement.

1. Introduction
After the advent of the Transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al., 2017), there has been a dramatic increase in the size
of language models (Brown et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2022;
Zhang et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023). These models
show astonishing results in a wide range of applications by
exploiting more than a hundred billion parameters. Such

A few methods, such as model parallelism and activation
recomputation (Griewank & Walther, 2000; Kirisame et al.,
2021), alleviate the memory pressure to satisfy the requirement. Model parallelism partitions the model parameters
and optimizer states across multiple GPUs so that each GPU
stores a subset of the model parameters. It is further classified into tensor parallelism (Shazeer et al., 2018; Shoeybi
et al., 2019) and pipeline parallelism (Huang et al., 2019),
where tensor parallelism splits the operations across GPUs
and pipeline parallelism splits the layers across GPUs. On
the other hand, activation recomputation releases intermediate activations from memory right after forward compu-

1

FriendliAI Inc., Seoul, Korea 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
Correspondence to: Byung-Gon Chun <bgchun@friendli.ai>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

