Can Neural Network Memorization Be Localized?
Pratyush Maini 1 Michael C. Mozer 2 Hanie Sedghi 2 Zachary C. Lipton 1 J. Zico Kolter 1 Chiyuan Zhang 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are capable of memorizing randomly
labeled data (Zhang et al., 2017) yet generalize remarkably
well on real world data. Theories have been developed to understand this puzzling phenomenon. For example, implicit
regularization argues that the training algorithms, i.e., SGD
and its variants, implicitly encourage the trained model to
converge to generalizable solutions when the underlying
data distribution is well-behaved (Soudry et al., 2018; Smith
et al., 2021). Alternatively, the theory of benign overfitting
argues that when a neural network is sufficiently overparameterized, it generalizes to the majority of the dataset using a
simple component of the input, and memorizes mislabeled
and irregular data using a complex component of the input
data (Bartlett et al., 2020). These components do not interfere, making such overfitting benign. Another theory of
label memorization suggests that when the data follows a
long-tailed distribution, memorizing rare examples in the
tail is necessary for achieving optimal generalization (Feldman, 2020; Feldman & Zhang, 2020). One common notion
of memorization is the ‘leave-one-out’ memorization—does
the prediction of an (atypical) example change significantly
if it was removed from the training set? Since this is computationally expensive, multiple prior works operationalize
memorization via mislabeled examples, which must be memorized for correct prediction. In our study, we consider both
types—mislabeled and atypical example memorization.

Recent efforts at explaining the interplay of
memorization and generalization in deep overparametrized networks have posited that neural
networks memorize “hard” examples in the final
few layers of the model. Memorization refers to
the ability to correctly predict on atypical examples of the training set. In this work, we show
that rather than being confined to individual layers, memorization is a phenomenon confined to
a small set of neurons in various layers of the
model. First, via three experimental sources of
converging evidence, we find that most layers are
redundant for the memorization of examples and
the layers that contribute to example memorization are, in general, not the final layers. The three
sources are gradient accounting (measuring the
contribution to the gradient norms from memorized and clean examples), layer rewinding (replacing specific model weights of a converged
model with previous training checkpoints), and
retraining (training rewound layers only on clean
examples). Second, we ask a more generic question: can memorization be localized anywhere in
a model? We discover that memorization is often
confined to a small number of neurons or channels
(around 5) of the model. Based on these insights
we propose a new form of dropout—example-tied
dropout that enables us to direct the memorization of examples to an a priori determined set of
neurons. By dropping out these neurons, we are
able to reduce the accuracy on memorized examples from 100% → 3%, while also reducing the
generalization gap.1

The practical implication of memorization in deep neural
networks has also been widely studied, especially from a
privacy and security perspective. For example, Carlini et al.
(2021) shows that it is possible to extract training data from
large language models. Other work has attempted to reconstruct training examples from output activations (Teterwak
et al., 2021) or even parameters (Haim et al., 2022) of discriminatively trained neural networks. However, previous
studies have largely focused on the implications of memorization and/or identifying memorized examples. The question of where memorization happens in a trained neural network remains unclear with only anecdotal observations. In
particular, Baldock et al. (2021) and Stephenson et al. (2021)
have argued that memorization of training examples happens in the last (or final few) layers of a deep network.

1

School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
Google Research, Mountain View, CA. Correspondence to:
Pratyush Maini <pratyushmaini@cmu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Code for reproducing our experiments can be found at
https://github.com/pratyushmaini/localizing-memorization.

In this work, we show that memorization is confined to a

1

