Conformal Prediction Sets for Graph Neural Networks

Soroush H. Zargarbashi 1 Simone Antonelli 1 Aleksandar Bojchevski 2

Abstract

methods are computationally expensive, and/or require modifications to the model architecture or at least retraining of
the model (Hüllermeier & Waegeman, 2021; Abdar et al.,
2021). Moreover, most techniques rely on the i.i.d. assumption, which is clearly violated for node classification due to
the interdependence between nodes. Hence, methodological
contributions in this direction are often incompatible with
graph-based models such as GNNs (Stadler et al., 2021).

Despite the widespread use of graph neural networks (GNNs) we lack methods to reliably quantify their uncertainty. We propose a conformal
procedure to equip GNNs with prediction sets
that come with distribution-free guarantees – the
output set contains the true label with arbitrarily
high probability. Our post-processing procedure
can wrap around any (pretrained) GNN, and unlike existing methods, results in meaningful sets
even when the model provides only the top class.
The key idea is to diffuse the node-wise conformity scores to incorporate neighborhood information. By leveraging the network homophily
we construct sets with comparable or better efficiency (average size) and significantly improved
singleton hit ratio (correct sets of size one). In
addition to an extensive empirical evaluation, we
investigate the theoretical conditions under which
smoothing provably improves efficiency.

Conformal prediction (CP) is a promising paradigm for
constructing prediction sets (or intervals in the case of regression) with a statistically sound coverage guarantee –
the output set covers the true label with any user-specified
probability. CP is distribution free and it relies on exchangeability, i.e. the only assumption is that every permutation
of the instances (in our case the nodes) is equally likely. In
other words, we assume that the indexing of the random
variables is immaterial. This makes CP a prime candidate
for uncertainty quantification on graphs since exchangeability relaxes the i.i.d. assumption. In § 3 we discuss in detail
the settings (e.g. transductive vs. inductive) under which this
assumption is satisfied for semi-supervised node classification. More generally, we prove that semi-supervised learning
with (subset-) permutation-equivariant models preserves exchangeability. Interestingly, even in cases where exchangeability may be violated, it is still possible to provide strong
guarantees while incurring a coverage penalty that is proportional to the degree of distribution shift (Barber et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
From health to traffic forecasting, graph neural networks
(GNNs) have become a fundamental building block in a
variety of applications. Even though their versatility places
them in the spotlight among other machine learning topics,
they seldom provide reliable uncertainty estimates. Since
test accuracy is not necessarily a trustworthy indicator of
performance, it is essential to explicitly quantify the model
uncertainty for different inputs, especially in safety-critical
domains. Naively considering the predicted distribution over
labels (e.g. from the softmax) does not produce a good estimate of the true conditional probability p(y | x) since
models are often overconfident and uncalibrated (Guo et al.,
2017; Hein et al., 2019). Most uncertainty quantification

Although full conformal prediction has a significant computational cost, split conformal prediction is fast, easy to
implement, and model and data-distribution independent
(Vovk et al., 2005; Shafer & Vovk, 2008). Since it uses the
model as a black box, there is no need to retrain or modify it.
Along with a provable coverage guarantee, the sets are interpretable and can be used to communicate with non-expert
stakeholders, making CP readily applicable to different domains like medicine (Vazquez & Facelli, 2022), electricity
market forecasting (Kath & Ziel, 2021), and robotics (Luo
et al., 2023). Contrary to full conformal, split conformal
prediction sacrifices statistical efficiency for computational
efficiency, while there are extensions that sit in the middle of
this tradeoff, e.g. cross-conformal prediction (Vovk, 2015),
and CV+/Jackknife+ (Barber, 2020; Barber et al., 2021). We
focus on the split conformal setting, but our diffusion-based
approach can be extended to CV+/Jackknife+.

1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
University of Cologne. Correspondence to: Soroush H.
Zargarbashi <sayed.haj-zargarbashi@cispa.de>, Simone Antonelli <simone.antonelli@cispa.de>, Aleksandar Bojchevski
<a.bojchevski@uni-koeln.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

