Few-Sample Feature Selection via Feature Manifold Learning

David Cohen 1 Tal Shnitzer 2 Yuval Kluger 3 4 Ronen Talmon 1

Abstract

projected into a lower dimension space, FS eliminates irrelevant and redundant features and preserves interpretability
(Hira & Gillies, 2015; Alelyani et al., 2018). This characteristic of FS has a significant societal impact since it enhances
the explainability of AI models.

In this paper, we present a new method for fewsample supervised feature selection (FS). Our
method first learns the manifold of the feature
space of each class using kernels capturing multifeature associations. Then, based on Riemannian geometry, a composite kernel is computed,
extracting the differences between the learned
feature associations. Finally, a FS score based
on spectral analysis is proposed. Considering
multi-feature associations makes our method multivariate by design. This in turn allows for
the extraction of the hidden manifold underlying the features and avoids overfitting, facilitating few-sample FS. We showcase the efficacy
of our method on illustrative examples and several benchmarks, where our method demonstrates
higher accuracy in selecting the informative features compared to competing methods. In addition, we show that our FS leads to improved classification and better generalization when applied
to test data.

In the literature, there are three main approaches for FS: (i)
wrapper, (ii) embedded, and (iii) filter (Tang et al., 2014;
Alelyani et al., 2018). In the wrapper approach, the classifier performance plays an integral role in the feature selection. Concretely, the performance of a specific classifier
is maximized by searching for the best subset of features.
Since examining all possible subsets is an NP-hard problem,
a suboptimal search is often applied. Still, this approach is
considered computationally heavy for problems with large
feature spaces (Hira & Gillies, 2015; Alelyani et al., 2018).
The embedded approach mitigates the wrapper limitations
by incorporating the feature selection in the model training,
and thus, avoids multiple optimization processes. Consequently, embedded methods are considered computationally
feasible and often preserve the advantages of the wrapper
approach. However, both wrapper and embedded methods
are prone to overfitting because the selection is part of the
training (Brown et al., 2012; Bolón-Canedo et al., 2013;
Venkatesh & Anuradha, 2019).

1. Introduction

In the filter approach, each feature is ranked according
to particular criteria independent of the model learning.
The various ranking techniques aim to identify the features
that best discriminate between the different classes. Then,
highly-ranked features are selected and utilized in downstream learning tasks. This approach is computationally
efficient and scalable for high-dimensional data. In addition,
the classifier performance is not controlled during the FS,
mitigating overfitting and enhancing generalization capabilities (Jain & Singh, 2018). Existing filter FS methods
consider each feature independently and ignore the underlying feature structure (Bolón-Canedo et al., 2015; Li et al.,
2017). However, multivariate information could be particularly important for feature selection due to various feature
interactions in many real-world applications (Li et al., 2017).

Feature selection (FS) plays a vital role in facilitating effective and efficient learning in problems involving highdimensional data (Bolón-Canedo et al., 2022; Hastie et al.,
2009; Duda et al., 2006). By selecting the relevant features, FS methods, in effect, reduce the dimension of the
data, which has been shown useful in improving learning,
especially in terms of generalization and noise reduction
(Remeseiro & Bolon-Canedo, 2019). In contrast to feature extraction (FE), in which the whole feature space is
1

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA 3 Department
of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511,
USA 4 Applied Mathematics Program, Yale University, New
Haven, CT 06511, USA. Correspondence to: David Cohen
<davidco@campus.technion.ac.il>.

In this work, we propose a filter FS method that identifies the meaningful features by comparing the underlying
geometry of the feature spaces of different classes in a supervised setting. First, the feature manifold of each class

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

