Unveiling the Latent Space Geometry of Push-Forward Generative Models

Thibaut Issenhuth 1 2 Ugo Tanielian 1 Jérémie Mary 1 David Picard 2

Abstract

from the composition of a large number of transformations
and are trained with an auxiliary denoising objective.

Many deep generative models are defined as a
push-forward of a Gaussian measure by a continuous generator, such as Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) or Variational Auto-Encoders
(VAEs). This work explores the latent space of
such deep generative models. A key issue with
these models is their tendency to output samples
outside of the support of the target distribution
when learning disconnected distributions. We
investigate the relationship between the performance of these models and the geometry of their
latent space. Building on recent developments
in geometric measure theory, we prove a sufficient condition for optimality in the case where
the dimension of the latent space is larger than
the number of modes. Through experiments on
GANs, we demonstrate the validity of our theoretical results and gain new insights into the latent
space geometry of these models. Additionally,
we propose a truncation method that enforces a
simplicial cluster structure in the latent space and
improves the performance of GANs.

The present paper aims at making a step towards a better
understanding of push-forward generative models such as
GANs. In particular, the goal is to shed light on the latent
space of these architectures, and to stress how it impacts the
performance of both GANs and VAEs. If empirical studies such as Donahue and Simonyan (2019) have suggested
the emergence of simple geometrical structure in the latent
space of GANs, there is still a poor theoretical understanding of how generators organize their latent space. We would
like to highlight that although our theoretical results apply
to all pushforward generative models, our primary emphasis
in the experiment section is on GANs.
To better understand the latent space of generative models,
the setting of disconnected distributions learning is enlightening. Experimental and theoretical works (Khayatkhoei
et al., 2018; Tanielian et al., 2020; Salmona et al., 2022) have
shown a fundamental limitation of push-forward generative
models. Since the modeled distribution is connected, some
areas of its support are necessarily mapped outside the true
data distribution. However, when covering several modes of
a disconnected distribution, generators still try to minimize
the numbers of samples lying outside the true modes (e.g.
the purple area on the right of Figure 1). In other words,
generators aim at minimizing the measure of the existing
borders between the modes in the latent space. Considering
a Gaussian latent space, finding such minimizers is closely
linked to Gaussian isoperimetric inequalities (Ledoux, 1996)
where the goal is to derive the partitions that split a Gaussian
space with minimal Gaussian-weighted perimeters. Most
notably, a recent result (Milman and Neeman, 2022) shows
that, as long as the number of components m in the partition
and the number of dimensions d of the Gaussian space are
such that m ≤ d + 1, the optimal partition is a ‘simplicial
cluster’: a Voronoi diagram with equidistant seeds, see left
of Figure 1 for m = 3 and d = 3.

1. Introduction
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and VAEs (Kingma and
Welling, 2014) have shown great capacities to generate photorealistic images (Karras et al., 2021; Vahdat and Kautz,
2020). These two models are also helpful for diverse tasks
such as image editing (Shen et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021) or
unsupervised image segmentation (Abdal et al., 2021; Zoran
et al., 2021). GANs and VAEs rely on learning a Lipschitzcontinuous transformation from a low dimensional Gaussian
space. As such, they have been described as push-forward
generative models (Salmona et al., 2022). According to
the same taxonomy, score-based models can be defined as
indirect push-forward generative models since they result

In this paper, we demonstrate the effectiveness of applying
simplicial clusters to the latent space of push-forward generative models. We show both experimentally and theoretically that generators with a latent space structured as a simplicial cluster minimize the occurrence of out-of-distribution
generated samples. Using the precision metric (Sajjadi et al.,

1

Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France 2 LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ
Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France. Correspondence
to: Thibaut Issenhuth <thibaut.issenhuth@live.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

