MG-GNN: Multigrid Graph Neural Networks for Learning Multilevel Domain
Decomposition Methods

Ali Taghibakhshi 1 Nicolas Nytko 2 Tareq Uz Zaman 3 Scott MacLachlan 4 Luke N. Olson 2 Matthew West 1

Abstract

discretization of partial differential equations (PDEs), domain decomposition methods (DDMs) are a popular approach (Toselli & Widlund, 2005; Quarteroni & Valli, 1999;
Dolean et al., 2015). They have been extensively studied
and applied to elliptic boundary value problems, but are
also considered for time-dependent problems. Schwarz
methods are among the simplest and most popular types of
DDM, and map well to MPI-style parallelism, with both
one-level and multilevel variants. One-level methods decompose the global problem into multiple subproblems
(subdomains), which are obtained either by discretizing
the same PDE over a physical subdomain or by projection
onto a discrete basis, using subproblem solutions to form a
preconditioner for the global problem. Classical Schwarz
methods generally consider Dirichlet or Neumann boundary conditions between the subdomains, while Optimized
Schwarz methods (OSM) (Gander et al., 2000) consider
a combination of Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions, known as Robin-type boundary conditions, to improve
the convergence of the method. Restricted additive Schwarz
(RAS) methods (Cai & Sarkis, 1999) are a common form
of Schwarz methods, and optimized versions of one-level
RAS has been theoretically studied by St-Cyr et al. (2007).
Two-level methods extend one-level approaches by adding
a (global) coarse-grid correction step to the preconditioner,
generally improving performance but at an added cost.

Domain decomposition methods (DDMs) are popular solvers for discretized systems of partial differential equations (PDEs), with one-level and
multilevel variants. These solvers rely on several
algorithmic and mathematical parameters, prescribing overlap, subdomain boundary conditions,
and other properties of the DDM. While some
work has been done on optimizing these parameters, it has mostly focused on the one-level setting or special cases such as structured-grid discretizations with regular subdomain construction.
In this paper, we propose multigrid graph neural
networks (MG-GNN), a novel GNN architecture
for learning optimized parameters in two-level
DDMs. We train MG-GNN using a new unsupervised loss function, enabling effective training on
small problems that yields robust performance on
unstructured grids that are orders of magnitude
larger than those in the training set. We show
that MG-GNN outperforms popular hierarchical
graph network architectures for this optimization
and that our proposed loss function is critical to
achieving this improved performance.

1. Introduction

Optimizing PDE solvers has been of significant importance
to the engineering and applied mathematic communities,
and studies have been using various tools such as genetic
programming (Schmitt et al., 2021). Nevertheless, in recent
years, there has been a growing focus on using machine
learning (ML) methods to learn optimized parameters for iterative PDE solvers, including DDM and algebraic multigrid
(AMG). In Greenfeld et al. (2019) convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are used to learn the interpolation operator in
AMG on structured problems, and in a following study (Luz
et al., 2020), graph neural networks (GNNs) are used to
extend the results to arbitrary unstructured grids. In a different fashion, reinforcement learning methods along with
GNNs are used to learn coarse-gird selection in reductionbased AMG in Taghibakhshi et al. (2021). As mentioned
in Heinlein et al. (2021), when combining ML methods
with DDM, approaches can be categorized into two main

Differential equations are at the core of many important scientific and engineering problems (Gholizadeh et al., 2021;
Han & Lin, 2011) and, often, there is no analytical solution
available; hence, researchers utilize numerical solvers (Vos
et al., 2002; Gholizadeh et al., 2023). Among numerical
methods for solving the systems of equations obtained from
1

Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Department of Computer
Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 3 Scientific
Computing Program, Memorial University of Newfoundland
4
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Memorial University of Newfoundland. Correspondence to: Ali Taghibakhshi
<alit2@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

