Learning to Maximize Mutual Information for Dynamic Feature Selection

Ian Covert 1 Wei Qiu 1 Mingyu Lu 1 Nayoon Kim 1 Nathan White 2 Su-In Lee 1

Abstract

performance given a fixed budget. This is easy to see, because selecting the same features for all instances (e.g., all
patients visiting a hospital’s emergency room) is suboptimal
when the most informative features vary across individuals.
Although it should in theory offer better performance, DFS
also presents a more challenging learning problem, because
it requires learning both (i) a feature selection policy and
(ii) how to make predictions given variable feature sets.

Feature selection helps reduce data acquisition
costs in ML, but the standard approach is to train
models with static feature subsets. Here, we consider the dynamic feature selection (DFS) problem where a model sequentially queries features
based on the presently available information. DFS
is often addressed with reinforcement learning,
but we explore a simpler approach of greedily
selecting features based on their conditional mutual information. This method is theoretically
appealing but requires oracle access to the data
distribution, so we develop a learning approach
based on amortized optimization. The proposed
method is shown to recover the greedy policy
when trained to optimality, and it outperforms
numerous existing feature selection methods in
our experiments, thus validating it as a simple but
powerful approach for this problem.

Prior work has approached DFS in several ways, though often using reinforcement learning (RL) (Dulac-Arnold et al.,
2011; Shim et al., 2018; Kachuee et al., 2018; Janisch et al.,
2019; Li & Oliva, 2021). RL is a natural approach for sequential decision-making problems, but current methods are
difficult to train and do not reliably outperform static feature selection methods (Henderson et al., 2018; Erion et al.,
2021). Our work therefore explores a simpler approach:
greedily selecting features based on their conditional mutual
information (CMI) with the response variable.
The greedy approach is known from prior work (Chen et al.,
2015b; Ma et al., 2019), but it is difficult to use in practice
because calculating the CMI requires oracle access to the
data distribution (Cover & Thomas, 2012). Our focus is
therefore developing a practical approximation. Whereas
previous work makes strong assumptions about the data (Geman & Jedynak, 1996) or approximates the data distribution
with generative models (Ma et al., 2019), we develop a flexible approach that directly predicts the optimal selection at
each step. Our method is based on a variational perspective
on the greedy CMI policy, and it uses a technique known
as amortized optimization (Amos, 2022) to enable training
using only a standard labeled dataset. Notably, the model is
trained with an objective function that recovers the greedy
policy when it is trained to optimality.

1. Introduction
A machine learning model’s inputs can be costly to obtain,
and feature selection is often used to reduce data acquisition
costs. In applications where information is gathered sequentially, a natural option is to select features adaptively based
on the currently available information, rather than using a
fixed feature set. This setup is known as dynamic feature
selection (DFS),1 and the problem has been considered by
several works in the last decade (Saar-Tsechansky et al.,
2009; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2015b; Early
et al., 2016a; He et al., 2016a; Kachuee et al., 2018).
Compared to static feature selection with a fixed feature
set (Li et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2018), DFS can offer better

Our contributions in this work are the following:

1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Washington 2 Department of Emergency Medicine,
University of Washington. Correspondence to: Ian Covert
<icovert@cs.uw.edu>.

1. We derive a variational, or optimization-based perspective on the greedy CMI policy, which shows it to be
equivalent to minimizing the one-step-ahead prediction
loss given an optimal classifier.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
The problem has also been referred to as sequential feature
selection, active feature acquisition, and information pursuit.

2. We develop a learning approach based on amortized optimization, where a policy network is trained to directly
predict the optimal selection at each step. Rather than requiring a dataset that indicates the correct selections, our
1

