On the Convergence of Federated Averaging with Cyclic Client Participation

Yae Jee Cho 1 Pranay Sharma 1 Gauri Joshi 1 Zheng Xu 2 Satyen Kale 2 Tong Zhang 3 2

Abstract

et al., 2021) are the most popular algorithms in FL. In each
communication round of the generalized FedAvg framework (Reddi et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021): 1) the server
broadcasts the current model to a subset of clients, 2) clients
update the model with local data and send back the local
model update, and 3) the server aggregates clients’ model
updates and computes the new global model. This algorithm
is popular in practice for various reasons including the compatibility with FL system implementation (Bonawitz et al.,
2019) and additional privacy techniques such as differential privacy (McMahan et al., 2018) and secure aggregation
(Bonawitz et al., 2016).

Federated Averaging (FedAvg) and its variants are
the most popular optimization algorithms in federated learning (FL). Previous convergence analyses
of FedAvg either assume full client participation
or partial client participation where the clients
can be uniformly sampled. However, in practical
cross-device FL systems, only a subset of clients
that satisfy local criteria such as battery status,
network connectivity, and maximum participation
frequency requirements (to ensure privacy) are
available for training at a given time. As a result, client availability follows a natural cyclic
pattern. We provide (to our knowledge) the first
theoretical framework to analyze the convergence
of FedAvg with cyclic client participation with
several different client optimizers such as GD,
SGD, and shuffled SGD. Our analysis discovers
that cyclic client participation can achieve a faster
asymptotic convergence rate than vanilla FedAvg
with uniform client participation under suitable
conditions, providing valuable insights into the
design of client sampling protocols.

The convergence of (generalized) FedAvg (also known as
local SGD) has been studied in many recent works (Li et al.,
2020b; Woodworth et al., 2020b; Wang et al., 2022; Karimireddy et al., 2019) due to its popularity in practice. While
these analyses tackle the theoretical challenge of data heterogeneity, they assume either full client participation where
all clients will participate every round, or partial client participation where the clients are chosen uniformly at random
from the entire set of clients. However, in practical crossdevice FL systems, clients can only participate in training
when local criteria such as being idle, plugged in for charging, and on an unmetered network are satisfied (Bonawitz
et al., 2019; Hard et al., 2018; Paulik et al., 2021; Huba
et al., 2022). Works like Yang et al. (2018); Eichner et al.
(2019); Zhu et al. (2021) observe client participation to
have a diurnal pattern, and Balle et al. (2020); Kairouz et al.
(2019); Wang et al. (2021) discuss the difficulty of controlling the sampling of clients for participation. Motivated
by differential privacy (Kairouz et al., 2021a), McMahan &
Thakurta (2022) seeks to limit the contribution of each client
by allowing it to participate at most once in a large time
window. The client participation control is then widely applied in training Gboard language models (Xu et al., 2023).
Similarly, concurrent work has also looked into regularized
client participation in FL and its convergence. For these
reasons, clients typically participate in training with a cyclic
pattern in practical FL systems.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed learning framework
that enables edge clients (e.g., mobile phones, tablets) to collaboratively train a machine learning (ML) model without
sharing their local data (McMahan et al., 2017). In crossdevice FL (Kairouz et al., 2019), millions of mobile devices
are orchestrated by a central server for training, and only a
subset of client devicess will participate in each communication round due to intermittent connectivity and resource
constraints (Bonawitz et al., 2019).
Federated Averaging (FedAvg) (McMahan et al., 2017) and
its variants (Reddi et al., 2021; Sahu et al., 2020; Wang
1

Carnegie Mellon University, USA 2 Google Research, USA
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong.
Correspondence to: Yae Jee Cho <yaejeec@andrew.cmu.edu>.

In this work, we provide the first (to the best of our knowledge) convergence analysis of federated averaging with
cyclic client participation. We consider that clients are implicitly divided into groups, and the groups become available
to the server in a cyclic order. We show that for a global PL

3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

