Internally Rewarded Reinforcement Learning

Mengdi Li * 1 Xufeng Zhao * 1 Jae Hee Lee 1 Cornelius Weber 1 Stefan Wermter 1
External
Environment

Abstract
We study a class of reinforcement learning problems where the reward signals for policy learning
are generated by a discriminator that is dependent
on and jointly optimized with the policy. This
interdependence between the policy and the discriminator leads to an unstable learning process
because reward signals from an immature discriminator are noisy and impede policy learning, and
conversely, an under-optimized policy impedes
discriminator learning. We call this learning setting Internally Rewarded Reinforcement Learning
(IRRL) as the reward is not provided directly by
the environment but internally by the discriminator. In this paper, we formally formulate IRRL
and present a class of problems that belong to
IRRL. We theoretically derive and empirically analyze the effect of the reward function in IRRL
and based on these analyses propose the clipped
linear reward function. Experimental results show
that the proposed reward function can consistently
stabilize the training process by reducing the impact of reward noise, which leads to faster convergence and higher performance compared with
baselines in diverse tasks. 2

Actions

Supervision Signals

Sensations

Discriminator

Internal
Environment

Estimated Posterior

Critic
Reward Function
Decisions

Rewards

States

Critic

Agent
"Organism"

Figure 1: Left: The agent-environment interaction loop of
IRRL. This diagram is based on the scheme of intrinsically
motivated RL (Singh et al., 2004) with an optional path
of supervision signals, which reflects an extrinsic reward.
Right: The internal critic consists of a discriminator, which
estimates a posterior probability of correct discrimination
given sensations and supervision signals from the external environment, and a reward function, which produces
rewards by processing the posterior probability.

cases, the child may misunderstand the praise as criticism,
thus wrongly obtaining a negative reward and impeding its
behavior learning. An elaborated view of the standard agentenvironment interaction formulation (Sutton & Barto, 1998)
of reinforcement learning (RL) demonstrates this mechanism (Singh et al., 2004). This framework separates the
environment into an external environment, which provides
external stimuli (e.g., a word of praise from the parents),
and an internal environment, which is in the same organism
with the agent and contains a critic that produces reward
signals based on both external stimuli and the internal state
(cf. Fig 1 left panel).

1. Introduction
Rewards are essential for animals and artificial agents to
learn by exploration in an environment. In the brain, reward
signals are emitted by specific neurons as a consequence
of the processing of external stimuli (Olds & Milner, 1954;
Schultz, 2015). For instance, when a child receives words
of praise from the parents as feedback for exhibiting appropriate behavior, the rewards obtained are contingent upon
the child’s individual understanding of the words. In some

In this work, we focus on situations where the reward is
determined by both external stimuli and the state of a sophisticated and evolutionary internal environment that produces
either task-relevant rewards (Mnih et al., 2014; Ba et al.,
2015; Li et al., 2021; Rangrej et al., 2022) or task-agnostic
rewards (Gregor et al., 2017; Strouse et al., 2022), and we
use the term Internally Rewarded Reinforcement Learning
(IRRL) to refer to the learning problem in these situations

*

Equal contribution 1 Knowledge Technology Group, Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. Correspondence to: Mengdi Li <mli@informatik.unihamburg.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
2
Project page: https://ir-rl.github.io/

1

