When does Privileged Information Explain Away Label Noise?

Guillermo Ortiz-Jimenez * 1 Mark Collier * 2 Anant Nawalgaria 2 Alexander D’Amour 2 Jesse Berent 2
Rodolphe Jenatton 2 Effrosyni Kokiopoulou 2

Abstract

et al., 2021). However, the standard approach in supervised
learning is to ignore this issue and treat all labels as correct,
leading to significant drops in model performance as the
models tend to memorize the noisy labels and degrade the
learned representations (Zhang et al., 2017).

Leveraging privileged information (PI), or features available during training but not at test time,
has recently been shown to be an effective method
for addressing label noise. However, the reasons
for its effectiveness are not well understood. In
this study, we investigate the role played by different properties of the PI in explaining away label
noise. Through experiments on multiple datasets
with real PI (CIFAR-N/H) and a new large-scale
benchmark ImageNet-PI, we find that PI is most
helpful when it allows networks to easily distinguish clean from mislabeled data, while enabling
a learning shortcut to memorize the mislabeled
examples. Interestingly, when PI becomes too
predictive of the target label, PI methods often perform worse than their no-PI baselines. Based on
these findings, we propose several enhancements
to the state-of-the-art PI methods and demonstrate
the potential of PI as a means of tackling label
noise. Finally, we show how we can easily combine the resulting PI approaches with existing noPI techniques designed to deal with label noise.

Recently, some studies have proposed to mitigate the
effect of label noise by leveraging privileged information
(PI) (Vapnik & Vashist, 2009; Collier et al., 2022) i.e.,
features available at training time but not at test time.
Examples of PI are features describing the human annotator
that provided a given label, such as the annotator ID, the
amount of time needed to provide the label, the experience
of the annotator, etc. While several PI methods have
shown promising gains in mitigating the effects of label
noise (Lopez-Paz et al., 2016; Lambert et al., 2018; Collier
et al., 2022), the reasons behind their success are not fully
understood. Moreover, the fact that existing results have
been provided in heterogeneous settings makes comparisons
and conclusions difficult to be drawn.
In this work, we aim to standardize the evaluation of PI and
conduct a large-scale study on the role of PI in explaining
away label noise. We examine the performance of several
PI methods on different noisy datasets and analyze their behavior based on the predictive properties of the available PI.
Interestingly, we find that when the PI is too predictive of
the target label, the performance of most PI methods significantly degrades below their no-PI baselines as the models
fail to learn the associations between the non-privileged
input features and the targets. Conversely, we discover that
the strongest form of PI exhibits two main properties: (i) it
allows the network to easily separate clean and mislabeled
examples, and (ii) it enables an easier “learning shortcut” (in
a sense to be clarified later) to overfit to the mislabeled examples (see Figure 1). When both these properties are present,
the performance of PI methods significantly exceeds their
no-PI counterparts by becoming more robust to label noise.

1. Introduction
Label noise, or incorrect labels in training data, is a
pervasive problem in machine learning that is becoming
increasingly common as we train larger models on more
weakly annotated data. Human annotators are often the
source of this noise, assigning incorrect labels to certain
examples (Snow et al., 2008; Sheng et al., 2008), e.g., when
the class categories are too fine-grained. Incorrect labeling
can also come from using other models to provide proxy
labels (Prabhu et al., 2022) or scraping the web (Radford
*

Equal contribution 1 Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne (EPFL). Work done during an internship at
Google. 2 Google Research. Correspondence to: Guillermo
Ortiz-Jimenez <guillermo.ortizjimenez@epfl.ch>, Mark Collier
<mark.collier@google.com>.

Overall, we observe that using PI during training can enable
models to discover shortcuts that can prevent learning the relationship between features and labels (Geirhos et al., 2020;
D’Amour et al., 2020). On the one hand, these PI-enabled
shortcuts can have a positive effect when the relationship
being ignored only concerns incorrect labels, which thus

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

