Nonlinear Causal Discovery with Latent Confounders

David Kaltenpoth 1 Jilles Vreeken 1

Abstract

all common causes of all variables in our data. Whenever this assumption holds, all correlations between the observed variables can be explained. When causal sufficiency
does not hold, however, methods that rely on it will not
be able to adequately explain the observed correlations and
hence return a causal network with many spurious edges.

Causal discovery, the task of discovering the
causal graph over a set of observed variables
X1 , . . . , Xm , is a challenging problem. One of
the cornerstone assumptions is that of causal sufficiency: that all common causes of all measured variables have been observed. When it
does not hold, causal discovery algorithms making this assumption return networks with many
spurious edges. In this paper, we propose a
nonlinear causal model involving hidden confounders. We show that it is identifiable from
only the observed data and propose an efficient
method for recovering this causal model. At the
heart of our approach is a variational autoencoder
which parametrizes both the causal interactions
between observed variables as well as the influence of the unobserved confounders. Empirically
we show that it outperforms other state-of-the-art
methods for causal discovery under latent confounding on synthetic and real-world data.

Because it is impossible to measure all relevant variables
in most applications, detecting and adjusting causal effects for such latent confounders has become an important research theme (Ogarrio et al., 2016; Wang & Blei,
2019; Janzing & Schölkopf, 2018; Kaltenpoth & Vreeken,
2019; Ranganath & Perotte, 2018). Existing work, however, can only do so in restricted settings, e.g., for two
high-dimensional variables (Janzing & Schölkopf, 2018) or
when additional information is available, such as data from
multiple environments, labels, time, or proxies of the latent
confounders (Khemakhem et al., 2020).
In contrast, in this paper, we propose a new method for
learning a causal directed acyclic graph (DAG) from observational data in the presence of latent confounders. Given
data over variables X1 , . . . , Xm , our goal is to determine
which Xi share a common cause Z, and return a causal network over both observed variables and hidden confounders.

1. Introduction

To do so, we define a nonlinear structural causal model
(SCM) with hidden confounders based on the postnonlinear (PNL) model (Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2010; Zhang
& Hyvarinen, 2012). We formally show that our model is
identifiable in both the linear and in the strictly nonlinear
case when the causal graph over X is sparse.

Causal models are at the heart of science (Pearl, 2009).
They are robust as they explain away spurious associations, interpretable as we can see what causes what, and
actionable as they allow us to estimate effects. Furthermore, they generalize across different, often novel, environments, making them suitable for many machine learning tasks (Pearl, 2009). However, deriving causal models is challenging. Not only is structure learning NPhard (Chickering et al., 2004), it is in fact impossible to
learn a causal model from data without making further assumptions on the generating process (Pearl, 2009). One of
the cornerstone assumptions in causal discovery is that of
causal sufficiency, the assumption that we have measured
1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for
rity, Germany.
Correspondence to:
<david.kaltenpoth@cispa.de>.

For discovery, we leverage recent advances in automatic
differentiation (Abadi et al., 2016; Baydin et al., 2018) and
present a novel method for causal discovery with hidden
confounding based on variational autoencoders (Kingma
& Welling, 2019). Specifically, the decoder is given by
our structural causal model. To ensure that we obtain an
acyclic causal network, we use a differentiable penalty
based on counting the number of weighted cycles in the
graph (Zheng et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019).

Information SecuDavid Kaltenpoth

With our approach for Nonlinear Causal Discovery under Latent Confounding, N O C A D I L AC for short, we efficiently obtain a fully directed network over both the observed variables X and their latent confounders Z. We

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

