MetaDiffuser: Diffusion Model as Conditional Planner for Offline Meta-RL
Fei Ni 1 Jianye Hao 1 2 Yao Mu 3 Yifu Yuan 1 Yan Zheng 1 Bin Wang 2 Zhixuan Liang 3
Dynamics Change Envs

Normalized Scores

Abstract
Recently, diffusion model shines as a promising
backbone for the sequence modeling paradigm
in offline reinforcement learning (RL). However,
these works mostly lack the generalization ability
across tasks with reward or dynamics change. To
tackle this challenge, in this paper we propose
a task-oriented conditioned diffusion planner for
offline meta-RL (MetaDiffuser), which considers
the generalization problem as conditional trajectory generation task with contextual representation. The key is to learn a context conditioned
diffusion model which can generate task-oriented
trajectories for planning across diverse tasks. To
enhance the dynamics consistency of the generated trajectories while encouraging trajectories
to achieve high returns, we further design a dualguided module in the sampling process of the
diffusion model. The proposed framework enjoys
the robustness to the quality of collected warmstart data from the testing task and the flexibility to incorporate with different task representation method. The experiment results on MuJoCo
benchmarks show that MetaDiffuser outperforms
other strong offline meta-RL baselines, demonstrating the outstanding conditional generation
ability of diffusion architecture. More visualization results are released on project page.

0.8
0.6

Reward Change Envs

FOCAL
CVAE-Planner
CORRO
Prompt-DT
MetaDiffuser

0.4

Figure 1. Overall few-shot generalization performance comparisons on various environments including 2 domains with dynamics
change and 4 domains with reward change. The expert performance in each environment is chosen as normalized baseline.

advertising (Hao et al., 2020). However, one of the inherent
difficulties of offline RL is the challenges to generalize to
unseen tasks. Recent work in offline meta-RL (Mitchell
et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2020; 2021a;b; Mu et al., 2022) aims
to solve this problem by training a meta-policy from multitask offline datasets that can efficiently adapt to unseen tasks
with small amounts of warm-start data.
Conventional offline meta-RL methods (Li et al., 2021a;
Yuan & Lu, 2022) learn a context encoder to infer task representation and a meta policy conditioned on the learned
context for generalization across tasks. These works extended from the online meta-RL setting, still rely on contextconditioned policy trained by temporal difference (TD)
learning, which may potentially cause instability in policy
optimization and limited performance (Levine et al., 2020;
Ajay et al., 2022). A more recent work Prompt-DT (Xu et al.,
2022) turn to tackle the generalization problem from the
sequence modeling perspective, which joint models stateaction trajectories to avoid TD-learning. This approach uses
prompting method to generalize across unseen tasks without the need for explicit extraction of task representation
through pre-trained context encoder. However, the key limitation is that the quality of the pre-collected warm-start data
must be high enough, which is challenging to collect in unseen tasks, to act as an expert prompt for guiding sequence
generation, otherwise performance may suffer with random
or medium data. The aforementioned limitations raise a key
question: Can we design a offline meta-RL framework to
achieve the generalization ability across multiple tasks with
robustness for the quality of warm-start data while utilize
the promising ability of sequence-modeling paradigm?

1. Introduction
Offline Reinforcement Learning (Offline RL) (Levine et al.,
2020) aims to learn policies from pre-collected data without interacting with the environment and has made many
success in the fields of games (Chen et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022), robotic manipulation (Ebert et al., 2018), sequential
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR. Correspondence to: Jianye Hao
<jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Planning with diffusion model (Janner et al., 2022b) provides a promising paradigm for offline RL, which utilizes
1

