Learn to Accumulate Evidence from All Training Samples: Theory and Practice

Deep Pandey 1 Qi Yu 1

Abstract

for applications from specialized domain (e.g., medicine,
public safety, and military operations) where data collection and annotation is highly costly. Accurate uncertainty
quantification is essential for successful application of DL
models in these domains. To this end, DL models have been
augmented to become uncertainty-aware (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Blundell et al., 2015; Pearce et al., 2020). However, commonly used extensions require expensive sampling
operations (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Blundell et al., 2015),
which significantly increase the computational costs (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017).

Evidential deep learning, built upon belief theory and subjective logic, offers a principled and
computationally efficient way to turn a deterministic neural network uncertainty-aware. The resultant evidential models can quantify fine-grained
uncertainty using the learned evidence. To ensure theoretically sound evidential models, the evidence needs to be non-negative, which requires
special activation functions for model training
and inference. This constraint often leads to inferior predictive performance compared to standard
softmax models, making it challenging to extend
them to many large-scale datasets. To unveil the
real cause of this undesired behavior, we theoretically investigate evidential models and identify a
fundamental limitation that explains the inferior
performance: existing evidential activation functions create zero evidence regions, which prevent
the model to learn from training samples falling
into such regions. A deeper analysis of evidential activation functions based on our theoretical
underpinning inspires the design of a novel regularizer that effectively alleviates this fundamental
limitation. Extensive experiments over many challenging real-world datasets and settings confirm
our theoretical findings and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

The recently developed evidential models bring together
evidential theory (Shafer, 1976; Jøsang, 2016) and deep
neural architectures that turn a deterministic neural network
uncertainty-aware. By leveraging the learned evidence, evidential models are capable of quantifying fine-grained uncertainty that helps to identify the sources of ‘unknowns’.
Furthermore, since only lightweight modifications are introduced to existing DL architectures, additional computational
costs remain minimum. Such evidential models have been
successfully extended to classification (Sensoy et al., 2018),
regression (Amini et al., 2020), meta-learning (Pandey & Yu,
2022a), and open-set recognition (Bao et al., 2021) settings.
Despite the attractive
uncertainty quantification capacity, evidential models are only
able to achieve a predictive performance on
par with standard deep
Figure 1. Cifar100 Result
architectures in relatively simple learning problems. They suffer from a significant performance drop when facing large datasets with
more complex features even in the common classification
setting. As shown in Figure 1, an evidential model using
ReLU activation and an evidential MSE loss (Sensoy et al.,
2018) only achieves 36% test accuracy on Cifar100, which
is almost 40% lower than a standard model trained using
softmax. Additionally, most evidential models can easily
break down with minor architecture changes and/or have
a much stronger dependency on hyperparameter tuning to
achieve reasonable predictive performance. The experiment
section provides more details on these failure cases.

1. Introduction
Deep Learning (DL) models have found great success in
many real-world applications such as speech recognition
(Kamath et al., 2019), machine translation (Singh et al.,
2017), and computer vision (Voulodimos et al., 2018). However, these highly expressive models may easily fit the noise
in the training data, which leads to overconfident predictions
(Nguyen et al., 2015). The challenge is further compounded
when learning from limited labeled data, which is common
1
Rochester Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Qi Yu
<qi.yu@rit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

