Uncertain Evidence in Probabilistic Models and Stochastic Simulators
Andreas Munk 1 Alexander Mead 1 Frank Wood 1 2 3

Abstract

time t it takes for a ball to drop to the ground in order to determine the acceleration due to gravity, g. Taking some prior
belief about the value of g, we may solve this problem using
Bayesian inference. That is, we infer p(g|t) ∝ p(g)p(t|g),
where p(g) is the prior density of g and p(t|g) is the likelihood representing the physical model (or simulation) of
the time t given g. In this setup, the uncertainty about t
given g would be due to neglecting air resistance or ignoring variations in the distance the ball drops as a result of
vibrations etc. Assume next that the observations (or data)
is given as in Table 1. It is not immediately obvious how
the uncertainty relates to t. There are arguably at least two
valid interpretations of the information in Table 1: (1) it describes a distribution of the real time t. For example, the real
time is normally distributed with mean 0.5s and standard
deviation 0.05s. (2) It describes additional uncertainty on
the predicted time and the observed value is, indeed, 0.5s.
For example, given the predicted time t the observed time t̂
is normally distributed with mean t and standard deviation
0.05s. Importantly, in either case the uncertainty can be
represented with a given external2 density q(·|·) which describes a stochastic relationship between t and an auxiliary
variable ζ. We consider in case (1) and (2) the density q(t|ζ)
and q(ζ|t). In the former case ζ is left implicit (something
gave rise to the uncertainty). In the latter ζ = t̂ and the
observation is t̂ = 0.5s. These two approaches are fundamentally different operations that may lead to profoundly
different inference results.

We consider the problem of performing Bayesian
inference in probabilistic models where observations are accompanied by uncertainty, referred
to as “uncertain evidence.” We explore how to
interpret uncertain evidence, and by extension
the importance of proper interpretation as it pertains to inference about latent variables. We consider a recently-proposed method “distributional
evidence” as well as revisit two older methods:
Jeffrey’s rule and virtual evidence. We devise
guidelines on how to account for uncertain evidence and we provide new insights, particularly
regarding consistency. To showcase the impact
of different interpretations of the same uncertain
evidence, we carry out experiments in which one
interpretation is defined as “correct.” We then
compare inference results from each different interpretation illustrating the importance of careful
consideration of uncertain evidence.

1. Introduction
In classical Bayesian inference, the task is to infer the
posterior density p(x|y) ∝ p(y, x) over the latent variable x given (observed) y. The joint density (or model),
p(y, x), is assumed known, and typically factorizes as
p(y, x) = p(y|x)p(x) where p(y|x) and p(x) are the likelihood and prior respectively. This paper deals with the case
where y is not observed exactly; rather it is associated with
uncertainty1 which we refer to as “uncertain evidence.” This
is a common scenario as these uncertainties may stem from:
observational errors; distrust in the source providing y; or
when y is derived (stochastically) from some other data.

The topic of observations associated with uncertainty has
been studied since at least 1965 (Jeffrey, 1965). Of particular relevance are the work of Jeffrey (1965) and Shafer
(1981); and Pearl (1988), giving rise to Jeffrey’s rule (Jeffrey, 1965; Shafer, 1981) and virtual evidence (Pearl, 1988).
In the example above, inference using approach (1) or (2)
corresponds to Jeffrey’s rule or virtual evidence respectively.
Since thenm other approaches, closely related to Jeffrey’s
rule and virtual evidence, has been proposed (e.g., Valtorta
et al., 2002; Tolpin et al., 2021; Yao, 2022). While each
approach has its own merits and is applicable under (almost)
the same circumstances, the original literature and most
prior work comparing these methods, (e.g., Pearl, 2001; Valtorta et al., 2002; Chan & Darwiche, 2005; Ben Mrad et al.,

As an example, consider the experiment of recording the
1
Department of Computer Science, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada 2 Inverted AI Ltd., Vancouver, B.C., Canada 3 Mila, CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to:
Andreas Munk <amunk@cs.ubc.ca>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Ideally one would remodel the system to account for such
uncertainties, but this is rarely easy to do.

2

In this context, external refers to a distribution provided from
some external source.

1

