Optimal Goal-Reaching Reinforcement Learning via Quasimetric Learning

Tongzhou Wang 1 Antonio Torralba 1 Phillip Isola 1 Amy Zhang 2 3

Abstract

However, additional structure emerges when we switch instead to the multi-task setting, where the (goal-conditioned)
value function V ∗ (s; g) : S × S → R models the cost-to-go
to a set of goals (Figure 1). In this case, the true optimal
value function, for any MDP, is always a quasimetric function (Wang & Isola, 2022b; Tian et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2022), which is a generalization of metric functions to allow
asymmetry while still respecting the triangle inequality.

In goal-reaching reinforcement learning (RL), the
optimal value function has a particular geometry, called quasimetric structure. This paper introduces Quasimetric Reinforcement Learning
(QRL), a new RL method that utilizes quasimetric models to learn optimal value functions. Distinct from prior approaches, the QRL objective
is specifically designed for quasimetrics, and provides strong theoretical recovery guarantees. Empirically, we conduct thorough analyses on a discretized MountainCar environment, identifying
properties of QRL and its advantages over alternatives. On offline and online goal-reaching
benchmarks, QRL also demonstrates improved
sample efficiency and performance, across both
state-based and image-based observations.
Project Page:
tongzhouwang.info/quasimetric_rl
Code:
github.com/quasimetric-learning/quasimetric-rl

Given this structure, it is natural to constrain value function search to the space of quasimetrics. This approach
searches within a much smaller subset of the space of all
functions S × S → R, ensuring that the true value function
is guaranteed to be present within this subspace. Recent
advancements in differentiable parametric quasimetric models (Wang & Isola, 2022a; Pitis et al., 2020) have already
enabled a number of studies (Liu et al., 2022; Wang & Isola,
2022b) to explore the use of these models in standard RL algorithms, resulting in improved performance in some cases.
However, traditional RL algorithms (such as Q-learning
(Watkins, 1989)) were designed for on large unconstrained
function spaces, and their performance may severely degrade with restricted spaces (Wang et al., 2020; 2021). Instead of constraining the search space, these methods encourage quasimetric properties via the objective function.
For example, the Bellman update partly enforces the triangle
inequality on the current state, next state, and target goal.
With the advent of differentiable parametrized quasimetric
models and their demonstrated effectiveness in RL, it is
newly possible to design a new RL algorithm that is specifically geared towards learning quasimetric value functions.

1. Introduction
Modern decision-making problems often involve dynamic
programming on the cost-to-go function, also known as
the value function. This function allows for bootstrapping,
where a complicated decision is broken up into a series of
subproblems. Once a subproblem is solved, its subgraph can
be collapsed into a single node whose cost is summarized
by the value function. This approach appears in nearly all
contemporary RL and planning algorithms.
In deep RL, value functions are modeled with general neural
nets, which are universal function approximators. Further,
most RL algorithms focus on optimizing toward a single
goal. In this setting, the value function V ∗ (s) reports the
(optimal) cost-to-go to achieve that single goal from state
s ∈ S. In this single-goal case, V ∗ can be any function
V ∗ : S → R, that is, for any V ∗ : S → R, there exists a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) for which that V ∗ is the
desired optimal value function.

In this work, we propose Quasimetric Reinforcement Learning (QRL). QRL is in the family of geometric approaches
to value function learning, which model the value function
as some distance metric, or, in our case, a quasimetric. Obtaining local distance estimates is easy because the cost
of a single transition is by definition given by the reward
function, which can be learned via supervised regression.
However, capturing global relations is hard. This is a problem studied in many fields such as metric learning (Roweis
& Saul, 2000; Tenenbaum et al., 2000), contrastive learning
(Oord et al., 2018; Wang & Isola, 2020), etc. A general
principle is to find a model where local relationships are
captured and otherwise states are spread out.

1
MIT 2 UT Austin 3 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Tongzhou
Wang <tongzhou@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

