Biases in Evaluation of Molecular Optimization Methods
and Bias Reduction Strategies

Hiroshi Kajino 1 Kohei Miyaguchi 1 Takayuki Osogami 1

Abstract

erty of the input molecule, it is rather trivial to estimate the
performance metric. However, when the target property is
costly to evaluate, which may involve wet-lab experiments,
we do not have access to f ⋆ , and the performance estimation
becomes harder. In such a case, we instead assume that we
have a dataset, D = {(mn , f ⋆ (mn )) ∈ M × R}N
n=1 , and
we often substitute a predictor fˆ: M → R trained on D
for f ⋆ , which allows us to estimate the performance metric.
We call the resultant performance estimator a plug-in performance estimator, deriving from the plug-in principle in
statistics. For example, Li et al. (2018) and Jin et al. (2020)
use predictors for JNK3 and GSK-3β activities; many of
the existing studies use the log P predictor developed by
Wildman & Crippen (1999). In contrast, little attention has
been paid to how reliable such estimators are. A few exceptions are empirical studies on it (Renz et al., 2019; Langevin
et al., 2022), although we have not reached any consensus.
Therefore, in this paper, we investigate the reliability of the
plug-in performance estimator from a theoretical perspective and discuss approaches to improve it.

We are interested in an evaluation methodology
for molecular optimization. Given a sample of
molecules and their properties of our interest, we
wish not only to train a generator of molecules optimized with respect to a target property but also
to evaluate its performance accurately. A common
practice is to train a predictor of the target property using the sample and apply it to both training
and evaluating the generator. However, little is
known about its statistical properties, and thus,
we are not certain about whether this performance
estimate is reliable or not. We theoretically investigate this evaluation methodology and show that
it potentially suffers from two biases; one is due
to misspecification of the predictor and the other
to reusing the same finite sample for training and
evaluation. We discuss bias reduction methods
for each of the biases, and empirically investigate
their effectiveness.

Our first contribution is to show that the plug-in performance estimator is biased in two ways, indicating that it is
not reliable in general (Section 3.1). The first bias called a
misspecification bias comes from the deviation between fˆ
and f ⋆ on the molecules discovered by the learned generator.
This bias is closely related to the one encountered in covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000). It grows as the molecules
discovered by the generator become dissimilar to those in
D. The second bias called a reuse-and-finiteness bias is
caused by reusing a finite dataset for training and testing the
generator. In fact, fˆ, which is dependent on D, is used to
train the generator and to estimate the performance metrics.
Due to these biases, the plug-in performance estimator is
not necessarily a good estimator for the true performance.

1. Introduction
Molecular optimization aims to generate novel molecules
with improved properties. This problem has been approached by a combination of a variational autoencoder
and Bayesian optimization (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018)
or reinforcement learning (Olivecrona et al., 2017). Such an
algorithm outputs a generator, which can generate desired
molecules. The performance of each algorithm can be measured by the quality of molecules generated by the generator;
some define the performance metric by top-k properties of
the generated molecules, and others may define it by the
average property of the generated molecules.

Our second contribution is to systematically discuss how
to reduce these two biases. Section 4.1 introduces three
approaches to reducing the misspecification bias. Since the
misspecification bias is caused by covariate shift, a natural
idea is to reduce it by applying covariate shift adaptation
methods when learning the predictor (Section 4.1.1). In addition to it, we find that we can reduce it by constraining the
generator so that the generated molecules become similar

Let M denote the set of molecules. If we have access to the
property function f ⋆ : M → R, which outputs the true prop1
IBM Research – Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to:
Hiroshi Kajino <kajino@jp.ibm.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

