MAGANet: Achieving Combinatorial Generalization by Modeling a Group
Action
Geonho Hwang 1 Jaewoong Choi 1 Hyunsoo Cho 2 Myungjoo Kang 2

Abstract

(Montero et al., 2020; Schott et al., 2021). In other words,
they have low generalizability under the distribution shift
situation. Generative models and unsupervised representation learning (Schott et al., 2021; Montero et al., 2020)
also suffer from the same problem. Especially combinatorial generalization (Vankov & Bowers, 2020) is one of the
crucial problems that has drawn attention recently in the
unsupervised representation field. It refers to the model’s
capacity to combinatorially combine the properties of two
different data and create novel data that the model was not
encountered through the learning process. For example, if
a model, that has not experienced an image of a bearded
woman while training, can generate the image by combining
the attributes from an image of a bearded man and an image
of a woman, we can say that the model has the combinatorial generalization capability. Because humans are innately
capable of these sorts of tasks (Processing, 1986), the ability of deep learning models to freely extract and combine
more abstract concepts is essential to achieve human-level
capacities.

Combinatorial generalization refers to the ability
to collect and assemble various attributes from
diverse data to generate novel unexperienced data.
This ability is considered a necessary passing
point for achieving human-level intelligence. To
achieve this ability, previous unsupervised approaches mainly focused on learning the disentangled representation, such as the variational autoencoder. However, recent studies discovered
that the disentangled representation is insufficient
for combinatorial generalization and is not even
correlated. In this regard, we propose a novel
framework for data generation that can robustly
generalize under these distribution shift situations.
Instead of representing each data, our model discovers the fundamental transformation between
a pair of data by simulating a group action. To
test the combinatorial generalizability, we evaluated our model in two settings: Recombinationto-Element and Recombination-to-Range. The
experiments demonstrated that our method has
quantitatively and qualitatively superior generalizability and generates better images than traditional
models.

A generative model pursuing disentangled representation
has long been regarded as one of the breakthroughs in solving the problem. A representation is called disentangled if
the underlying generative factors of the data and the axis
of latent representation encoded by the model have a correspondence (Eastwood & Williams, 2018); that is, a data
variation occurred by a change of one generative factor
should affect only one axis of latent representation and vice
versa. Since a perfectly disentangled representation enables
one to change each property independently by definition, it
has been considered that a well-disentangled representation
would accompany good combinatorial generalization capabilities. Unfortunately, as Montero et al. (2020) argued, it
turns out that there is little correlation between the disentanglement score and the combinatorial generalization capacity.
The model tended to have a high disentanglement score and
low reconstruction error only on the training data.

1. Introduction
Whether a deep learning model can generalize to different distributions is a topic that is being researched widely
(Shen et al., 2021). Traditional deep learning methods rely
on the overly ideal assumption that training and test data
are i.i.d. sampled from the same distribution. Although
these models accomplish superior performance in the standard setting, the models tend to overfit training data and
fail severely in the test dataset with different distributions
1

Korea Institute for Advanced Study, Seoul, South Korea 2 Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to:
Myungjoo Kang <mkang@snu.ac.kr>.

On the other hand, various attempts have been made to
disentangle models using the concept of group action (Yang
et al., 2021; Quessard et al., 2020). Higgins et al. (2018)
aim to derive the definition of disentangled representations
using the correspondence relationship of group structures
between data and representations. From this perspective, the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

