Memory-Based Meta-Learning on Non-Stationary Distributions

Tim Genewein * 1 Grégoire Delétang * 1 Anian Ruoss * 1 Li Kevin Wenliang 1 Elliot Catt 1 Vincent Dutordoir 1 2
Jordi Grau-Moya 1 Laurent Orseau 1 Marcus Hutter 1 Joel Veness 1

Abstract

ence with respect to more elaborate distributions than the
ones investigated in Mikulik et al. (2020). We focus on
piecewise stationary Bernoulli distributions, which produce
sequences that consist of Bernoulli segments (see Figure 1).
The predictor only observes a stream of samples (0s and
1s), with abrupt changes to local statistics at the unobserved
switching-points between segments. The focus on piecewise
stationary sources is inspired by natural language, where
documents often switch topic without explicit indication
(Xie et al., 2022), and observation-action streams in environments with discrete latent variables, e.g., multi-task RL
without task-indicators. In both domains, neural models that
minimize sequential prediction error demonstrate hallmarks
of sequential Bayesian prediction: strong context sensitivity or “in-context learning” (Reed et al., 2022), and rapid
adaptation or “few-shot learning” (Brown et al., 2020).

Memory-based meta-learning is a technique for
approximating Bayes-optimal predictors. Under
fairly general conditions, minimizing sequential
prediction error, measured by the log loss, leads
to implicit meta-learning. The goal of this work is
to investigate how far this interpretation can be realized by current sequence prediction models and
training regimes. The focus is on piecewise stationary sources with unobserved switching-points,
which arguably capture an important characteristic of natural language and action-observation
sequences in partially observable environments.
We show that various types of memory-based
neural models, including Transformers, LSTMs,
and RNNs can learn to accurately approximate
known Bayes-optimal algorithms and behave as
if performing Bayesian inference over the latent
switching-points and the latent parameters governing the data distribution within each segment.

To solve the sequential prediction problem, Bayes-optimal
(BO) predictors simultaneously consider a number of hypotheses over switching-points and use prior knowledge
over switching-points and segment-statistics. Tractable exact BO predictors require non-trivial algorithmic derivations,
and are only known for certain switching-point distributions.
The main question of this paper is whether neural predictors
with memory, trained by minimizing sequential prediction
error (log loss), can learn to mimic Bayes-optimal solutions
and match their prediction performance.

1. Introduction
Memory-based meta-learning (MBML) has recently risen to
prominence due to breakthroughs in sequence modeling and
the proliferation of data-rich multi-task domains. Previous
work (Ortega et al., 2019; Mikulik et al., 2020) showed how,
in principle, MBML can lead to Bayes-optimal predictors by
learning a fixed-parametric model that performs amortized
inference via its activations. This interpretation of MBML
can provide theoretical understanding for counter-intuitive
phenomena such as in-context learning that emerge in large
language models with frozen weights (Xie et al., 2022).

Our contributions are:
• Review of the theoretical connection between minimizing sequential prediction error, meta-learning, and its
implied Bayesian objective (Section 3).
• Theoretical argument for the necessity of memory to
minimize the former (Bayesian) objective (Section 4).

In this work, we investigate the potential of MBML to learn
parametric models that implicitly perform Bayesian infer-

• Empirical demonstration that meta-learned neural predictors can match prediction performance of two general non-parametric Bayesian predictors (Section 7).

*
Equal contribution 1 DeepMind 2 University of Cambridge.
Correspondence to: Tim Genewein <timgen@deepmind.com>,
Grégoire Delétang <gdelt@deepmind.com>, Anian Ruoss <anianr@deepmind.com>.

• Comparison of off-distribution generalization of
learned solutions and Bayesian algorithms (Section 7).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• Source code available at: https://github.com/
deepmind/nonstationary_mbml.
1

