Dissecting the Effects of SGD Noise in Distinct Regimes of Deep Learning

Antonio Sclocchi 1 Mario Geiger 2 Matthieu Wyart 1

Abstract

be precisely measured. Interestingly, exponents
characterizing the effect of SGD depend on the
density of data near the decision boundary, as we
explain.

Understanding when the noise in stochastic gradient descent (SGD) affects generalization of deep
neural networks remains a challenge, complicated
by the fact that networks can operate in distinct
training regimes. Here we study how the magnitude of this noise T affects performance as the
size of the training set P and the scale of initialization α are varied. For gradient descent, α is a
key parameter that controls if the network is ‘lazy’
(α ≫ 1) or instead learns features (α ≪ 1). For
classification of MNIST and CIFAR10 images,
our central results are: (i) obtaining phase diagrams for performance in the (α, T ) plane. They
show that SGD noise can be detrimental or instead useful depending on the training regime.
Moreover, although increasing T or decreasing α
both allow the net to escape the lazy regime, these
changes can have opposite effects on performance.
(ii) Most importantly, we find that the characteristic temperature Tc where the noise of SGD starts
affecting the trained model (and eventually performance) is a power law of P . We relate this
finding with the observation that key dynamical
quantities, such as the total variation of weights
during training, depend on both T and P as power
laws. These results indicate that a key effect of
SGD noise occurs late in training, by affecting the
stopping process whereby all data are fitted. Indeed, we argue that due to SGD noise, nets must
develop a stronger ‘signal’, i.e. larger informative
weights, to fit the data, leading to a longer training time. A stronger signal and a longer training
time are also required when the size of the training set P increases. We confirm these views in
the perceptron model, where signal and noise can

1. Introduction
Optimizing the generalization performances of overparametrized neural networks is one of the main challenges
in machine learning. A crucial role is played by gradientbased training algorithms, which converge to solutions
which generalize well also when no explicit regularization of
the model is used (Zhang et al., 2021). Mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the workhorse algorithm to
train modern neural networks. Yet, key aspects of these
algorithms are debated.
Effect on performance: A popular idea has been that minibatch SGD can generalize better than full batch gradient
descent (GD) (Heskes & Kappen, 1993; LeCun et al., 2012;
Keskar et al., 2016; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Jastrzebski et al., 2017; Chaudhari et al., 2019), yet this view is
debated (Hoffer et al., 2017; Dinh et al., 2017; Shallue et al.,
2018; Zhang et al., 2019). In fact, comparing SGD and GD
at fixed number of training epochs leads to a generalization gap (Keskar et al., 2016) that can be closed by training
longer with a fixed number of training steps (Hoffer et al.,
2017; Smith et al., 2020). More generally, the choice of the
computational budget can affect which algorithm performs
better (Shallue et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2020).
Theories for the role of SGD: Several works have argued
that larger SGD stochasticity leads the dynamics toward
flatter minima of the loss landscape, and it has been argued
that this effect leads to improved performances (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2016; Zhang et al.,
2018; Smith & Le, 2018; Wu et al., 2018). By contrast,
other studies suggest that the SGD noise biases the model
in a manner similar to initializing the network with small
weights, and helps recovering sparse predictors (Blanc et al.,
2020; HaoChen et al., 2021; Pesme et al., 2021).

1

Institute of Physics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, 1015, Switzerland 2 Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Antonio
Sclocchi <antonio.sclocchi@epfl.ch>.

1.1. This work
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we clarify these two debates by performing
systematic empirical studies of how performance is affected
1

