ESC: Exploration with Soft Commonsense Constraints
for Zero-shot Object Navigation

Kaiwen Zhou 1 Kaizhi Zheng 1 Connor Pryor 1 Yilin Shen 2 Hongxia Jin 2 Lise Getoor 1 Xin Eric Wang 1

Abstract

Goal: Find Fireplace

The ability to accurately locate and navigate to a
specific object is a crucial capability for embodied
agents that operate in the real world and interact
with objects to complete tasks. Such object navigation tasks usually require large-scale training in
visual environments with labeled objects, which
generalizes poorly to novel objects in unknown
environments. In this work, we present a novel
zero-shot object navigation method, Exploration
with Soft Commonsense constraints (ESC), that
transfers commonsense knowledge in pre-trained
models to open-world object navigation without
any navigation experience nor any other training
on the visual environments. First, ESC leverages
a pre-trained vision and language model for openworld prompt-based grounding and a pre-trained
commonsense language model for room and object reasoning. Then ESC converts commonsense
knowledge into navigation actions by modeling it
as soft logic predicates for efficient exploration.
Extensive experiments on MP3D (Chang et al.,
2017), HM3D (Ramakrishnan et al., 2021), and
RoboTHOR (Deitke et al., 2020) benchmarks
show that our ESC method improves significantly
over baselines, and achieves new state-of-theart results for zero-shot object navigation (e.g.,
288% relative Success Rate improvement than
CoW (Gadre et al., 2022) on MP3D).

There is a sofa in the living room. –>
Fireplace is likely to be in a living room.
–>
There are some unexplored space in the
living room. –>
I should explore there to find a fireplace.

Liv
ing

So

Living
room

fa

ro
o

m

free

frontier

Fireplace

Sofa

Obstacle

Figure 1. Commonsense reasoning in object navigation. In object navigation, our agent first does a semantic understanding of the
current scene (red text in the figure) and then performs commonsense reasoning (blue text in the figure). The agent reasons that a
fireplace is likely to be in a living room, so it decides to explore
the unobserved part of the living room (the frontier adjacent to the
observed part of the living room).

because navigating to a goal object is the preliminary for
the agent to interact with it. While current state-of-the-art
methods for object navigation achieve good results when
trained on specific datasets with limited goal objects and
similar environments, they often perform poorly when faced
with novel objects or environments due to distribution shifts.
Real-world situations often involve diverse objects and varied environments, making it difficult and costly to collect
extensive, annotated trajectory data. As a result, generalized zero-shot object navigation, in which the navigation
agent can adapt to novel objects and environments without
additional training, is a crucial area of study.

1. Introduction

Successfully navigating to a goal object requires two key
abilities, (1) semantic scene understanding, which involves
identifying objects and rooms in the environment, and (2)
commonsense reasoning, which involves making logical
inferences about the location of the goal object based on
commonsense knowledge. For example, as in Fig. 1, a fireplace is very likely in a living room, so the agent decides to
explore the unseen area in the living room to find a fireplace.
However, current zero-shot object navigation methods have
not yet effectively addressed this requirement and often lack
commonsense reasoning abilities. Existing methods require
training on other goal-oriented navigation tasks and envi-

Object navigation (ObjNav) is a task in which an embodied agent must navigate to a specific goal object within
an unknown environment (Batra et al., 2020). This task
is fundamental to other navigation-based embodied tasks
1

University of California, Santa Cruz 2 Samsung Research America.
Correspondence to: Xin Eric Wang
<xwang366@ucsc.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

