Graph Mixup with Soft Alignments

Hongyi Ling 1 Zhimeng Jiang 1 Meng Liu 1 Shuiwang Ji 1 * Na Zou 2 *

Abstract

results have shown that data augmentations can help improve the invariance and thus the generalization abilities
of deep learning models. While data augmentations are
relatively straightforward for grid-like data, such as images,
they are particularly challenging for graph data. A key difficulty lies in the lack of simple graph operations that preserve
the original labels, such as rotations on images. Most existing graph augmentation methods, such as DropEdge (Rong
et al., 2020), DropNode (Feng et al., 2020) and Subgraph
(You et al., 2020), assume labels are the same after simple
operations, such as drop a random node or edge, on training
graphs. On one hand, such simple operations may not be
able to generate sufficiently diverse new samples. On the
other hand, although the operations are simple, they are not
guaranteed to preserve the original labels.

We study graph data augmentation by mixup,
which has been used successfully on images. A
key operation of mixup is to compute a convex
combination of a pair of inputs. This operation
is straightforward for grid-like data, such as images, but challenging for graph data. The key
difficulty lies in the fact that different graphs typically have different numbers of nodes, and thus
there lacks a node-level correspondence between
graphs. In this work, we propose S-Mixup, a
simple yet effective mixup method for graph classification by soft alignments. Specifically, given
a pair of graphs, we explicitly obtain node-level
correspondence via computing a soft assignment
matrix to match the nodes between two graphs.
Based on the soft assignments, we transform the
adjacency and node feature matrices of one graph,
so that the transformed graph is aligned with the
other graph. In this way, any pair of graphs can be
mixed directly to generate an augmented graph.
We conduct systematic experiments to show that
S-Mixup can improve the performance and generalization of graph neural networks (GNNs) on
various graph classification tasks. In addition,
we show that S-Mixup can increase the robustness of GNNs against noisy labels. Our code
is publicly available as part of the DIG package
(https://github.com/divelab/DIG).

Recently, mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) has been shown to be
an effective method for image data augmentation. In particular, mixup generates new samples and corresponding labels
by performing convex combinations of a pair of original
samples and labels. A key challenge of applying mixup on
graphs lies in the fact that different graphs typically have
different numbers of nodes. Even for graphs with the same
number of nodes, there lacks a node-level correspondence
that is required to perform mixup. Several existing graph
mixup methods (Han et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022; Yoo et al.,
2022; Guo & Mao, 2021) use various tricks to sidestep this
problem. For example, ifMixup (Guo & Mao, 2021) uses a
random node order to align graphs and then interpolate node
feature matrices and adjacency matrices. Han et al. (2022)
proposes to learn a Graphon for each class and performs
mixup in Graphon space. Graph Transplant (Park et al.,
2022) and SubMix (Yoo et al., 2022) connect subgraphs
from different input graphs to generate new graphs. However, none of these methods explicitly models the node-level
correspondence among different graphs and perform mixup
as in the case of images. A natural question is raised: Can
we conduct image-like mixup for graphs with node-level
correspondence to preserve critical information?

1. Introduction
Data augmentations aim at generating new training samples
by applying certain transformations on the original samples.
For example, applying rotations and flipping on images generates new images with the same labels. Many empirical
*

Equal senior contributions 1 Department of Computer Science
& Engineering, Texas A&M University, TX, USA 2 Department
of Engineering Technology & Industrial Distribution, Texas
A&M University, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Shuiwang Ji
<sji@tamu.edu>.

In this work, we provide an affirmative answer to this question and propose S-Mixup, a simple yet effective graph
mixup approach via soft alignments. A key design principle of our method is to explicitly and automatically model
the node-level correspondence (i.e., soft alignment matrix)
between two graphs when performing mixup, thereby avoid-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

