Generating Novel, Designable, and Diverse Protein Structures
by Equivariantly Diffusing Oriented Residue Clouds

Yeqing Lin 1 2 Mohammed AlQuraishi 1 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Proteins play a key role in cellular processes, ranging from
chemical catalysis to molecular transport. Over the course
of evolution, nature has explored a plethora of protein
structures and accordant functions. Yet, relative to the potential size of foldable protein space, evolution has only
explored a small subregion (Huang et al., 2016). This suggests the possibility of designing new proteins unlike any
seen in nature, if suitable methods can model uncharted
parts of fold space. Protein design methods have historically focused on optimizing functional properties of natural
proteins through directed evolution (Dougherty & Arnold,
2009) or through rational design of novel protein sequences
that hew closely to known structural motifs (Kuhlman et al.,
2003). This limited exploration of fold space to regions adjacent to natural proteins. With recent advances in protein
structure prediction methods, new approaches have been
proposed that leverage representations learned by these
methods to more broadly explore structure space. For example, Anishchenko et al. (2021) performed Monte Carlo
sampling in sequence space using trRosetta (Yang et al.,
2020) as a guide and were able to discover novel structures.
One disadvantage of this approach however is the reliance
on sampling, which can be computationally expensive and
difficult to steer toward desirable design goals. Generative
models that capture complex data distributions provide a
new direction for de novo protein design. In lieu of sampling from protein sequence space, new designs could be
discovered by implicitly learning the space of structures.

Proteins power a vast array of functional processes in living cells. The capability to create
new proteins with designed structures and functions would thus enable the engineering of cellular behavior and development of protein-based
therapeutics and materials. Structure-based protein design aims to find structures that are designable (can be realized by a protein sequence),
novel (have dissimilar geometry from natural
proteins), and diverse (span a wide range of geometries). While advances in protein structure
prediction have made it possible to predict structures of novel protein sequences, the combinatorially large space of sequences and structures
limits the practicality of search-based methods.
Generative models provide a compelling alternative, by implicitly learning the low-dimensional
structure of complex data distributions. Here, we
leverage recent advances in denoising diffusion
probabilistic models and equivariant neural networks to develop Genie, a generative model of
protein structures that performs discrete-time diffusion using a cloud of oriented reference frames
in 3D space. Through in silico evaluations, we
demonstrate that Genie generates protein backbones that are more designable, novel, and diverse than existing models. This indicates that
Genie is capturing key aspects of the distribution
of protein structure space and facilitates protein
design with high success rates. Code for generating new proteins and training new versions
of Genie is available at https://github.
com/aqlaboratory/genie.

Generative modeling trilemma
Generative models
generally contend with a trilemma in optimizing between
quality (physicality and designability of protein structures),
mode coverage (novelty and diversity of structures) and
sampling time (Xiao et al., 2022). Multiple modeling
paradigms exist — for example, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
— each making a different trade-off. Recently, denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Ho et al.,
2020; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021) have shown considerable
promise in generating high quality 2D images, as exemplified by DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022). DDPMs consist

1
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New
York, NY, USA 2 Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Mohammed
AlQuraishi <m.alquraishi@columbia.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

