Improving Expert Predictions with Conformal Prediction

Eleni Straitouri 1 Lequn Wang 2 Nastaran Okati 1 Manuel Gomez Rodriguez 1

Abstract

experts solve tasks in a wide range of critical domains, from
medicine (Jiao et al., 2020) and drug discovery (Liu et al.,
2021) to candidate screening (Wang et al., 2022) and criminal justice (Grgić-Hlača et al., 2019), to name a few. Among
them, one of the main focuses has been multiclass classification tasks, where a decision support system uses a classifier
to make label predictions and the experts decide when to
follow the predictions made by the classifier (Bansal et al.,
2019; Lubars & Tan, 2019; Bordt & von Luxburg, 2020).

Automated decision support systems promise to
help human experts solve multiclass classification
tasks more efficiently and accurately. However,
existing systems typically require experts to understand when to cede agency to the system or
when to exercise their own agency. Otherwise, the
experts may be better off solving the classification
tasks on their own. In this work, we develop an automated decision support system that, by design,
does not require experts to understand when to
trust the system to improve performance. Rather
than providing (single) label predictions and letting experts decide when to trust these predictions,
our system provides sets of label predictions constructed using conformal prediction—prediction
sets—and forcefully asks experts to predict labels
from these sets. By using conformal prediction,
our system can precisely trade-off the probability that the true label is not in the prediction set,
which determines how frequently our system will
mislead the experts, and the size of the prediction
set, which determines the difficulty of the classification task the experts need to solve using our
system. In addition, we develop an efficient and
near-optimal search method to find the conformal
predictor under which the experts benefit the most
from using our system. Simulation experiments
using synthetic and real expert predictions demonstrate that our system may help experts make more
accurate predictions and is robust to the accuracy
of the classifier the conformal predictor relies on.

However, these systems typically require human experts to
understand when to trust a prediction made by the classifier. Otherwise, the experts may be better off solving the
classification tasks on their own (Suresh et al., 2020). This
follows from the fact that, in general, the accuracy of a
classifier differs across data samples (Raghu et al., 2019).
In this context, several recent studies have analyzed how
factors such as model confidence, model explanations and
overall model calibration modulate trust (Papenmeier et al.,
2019; Wang & Yin, 2021; Vodrahalli et al., 2022). Unfortunately, it is not yet clear how to make sure that the experts
do not develop a misplaced trust that decreases their performance (Yin et al., 2019; Nourani et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2020). In this work, we develop a decision support system
for multiclass classification tasks that, by design, does not
require experts to understand when to trust the system to
improve their performance.
Our contributions. For each data sample, our decision support system provides a set of label predictions—a prediction
set—and forcefully asks human experts to predict a label
from this set1 . We view this type of decision support system
as more natural since, given a set of alternatives, experts
tend to narrow down their options to a subset of them before making their final decision (Wright & Barbour, 1977;
Beach, 1993; Ben-Akiva & Boccara, 1995). In a way, our
support system helps experts by automatically narrowing
down their options for them, decreasing their cognitive load
and allowing them to focus their attention where it is most
needed. This could be particularly useful when the task is
tedious or requires domain knowledge since it is difficult to
outsource the task, and domain experts are often a scarce

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in developing automated decision support systems to help human
1
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Kaiserslautern,
Germany 2 Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, United States. Correspondence to: Eleni Straitouri
<estraitouri@mpi-sws.org>.

1

There are many systems used everyday by experts (e.g., pilots
flying a plane) that, under normal operation, restrict their choices.
This does not mean that, in extreme circumstances, the expert
should not have the ability to essentially switch off the system.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

