SAM operates far from home: eigenvalue regularization as a dynamical
phenomenon

Atish Agarwala * 1 Yann Dauphin * 1

Abstract

Recently the sharpness aware minimization (SAM) algorithm has emerged as a popular choice for regularizing the
curvature during training (Foret et al., 2022). SAM has the
advantage of being a tractable first-order method; for the
cost of a single extra gradient evaluation, SAM can control
the large eigenvalues of the loss Hessian and often leads
to improved optimization and generalization (Bahri et al.,
2022).

The Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM) optimization algorithm has been shown to control
large eigenvalues of the loss Hessian and provide generalization benefits in a variety of settings. The original motivation for SAM was a
modified loss function which penalized sharp minima; subsequent analyses have also focused on
the behavior near minima. However, our work
reveals that SAM provides a strong regularization
of the eigenvalues throughout the learning trajectory. We show that in a simplified setting, SAM
dynamically induces a stabilization related to the
edge of stability (EOS) phenomenon observed in
large learning rate gradient descent. Our theory
predicts the largest eigenvalue as a function of the
learning rate and SAM radius parameters. Finally,
we show that practical models can also exhibit this
EOS stabilization, and that understanding SAM
must account for these dynamics far away from
any minima.

However, understanding the mechanisms behind the effectiveness of SAM is an open question. The SAM algorithm
itself is a first-order approximation of SGD on a modified
loss function L̃(θ) = max||δ||<ρ L(θ + δ). Part of the
original motivation was that L̃ explicitly penalizes sharp
minima over flatter ones. However the approximation performs as well or better than running gradient descent on L̃
directly. SAM often works better with small batch sizes as
compared to larger ones (Foret et al., 2022; Andriushchenko
& Flammarion, 2022).These stochastic effects suggest that
studying the deterministic gradient flow dynamics on L̃ will
not capture key features of SAM, since small batch size
induces non-trivial differences from gradient flow defined
on the full batch objective (Paquette et al., 2021).
In parallel to the development of SAM, experimental and
theoretical work has uncovered some of the curvaturecontrolling properties of first-order methods due to finite
step size - particularly in the full batch setting. At intermediate learning rates, a wide variety of models and optimizers show a tendency for the largest Hessian eigenvalues
to stabilize near the edge of stability (EOS) for long times
(Lewkowycz et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2022a;b; Jastrzebski
et al., 2020). The EOS is the largest eigenvalue which would
lead to convergence for a quadratic loss landscape. This
effect can be explained in terms of a non-linear feedback
between the large eigenvalue and changes in the parameters
in that eigendirection (Damian et al., 2022; Agarwala et al.,
2022).

1. Introduction
Since the dawn of optimization, much effort has gone into
developing algorithms which use geometric information
about the loss landscape to make optimization more efficient and stable (Nocedal, 1980; Duchi et al., 2011; Lewis
& Overton, 2013). In more modern machine learning, control of the large curvature eigenvalues of the loss landscape
has been a goal in and of itself (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Chaudhari et al., 2019). There is empirical and
theoretical evidence that controlling curvature of the training landscape leads to benefits for generalization (Keskar
et al., 2017; Neyshabur et al., 2017), although in general the
relationship between the two is complex (Dinh et al., 2017).

We will show that these two areas of research are in fact intimately linked: under a variety of conditions, SAM displays
a modified EOS behavior, which leads to stabilization of
the largest eigenvalues at a lower magnitude via non-linear,
discrete dynamics. These effects highlight the dynamical
nature of eigenvalue regularization, and demonstrates that

*

Equal contribution 1 Google DeepMind. Correspondence to:
Atish Agarwala <thetish@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

