Variational Sparse Inverse Cholesky Approximation for Latent Gaussian
Processes via Double Kullback-Leibler Minimization
Jian Cao * 1 Myeongjong Kang * 2 Felix Jimenez 2 Huiyan Sang 2 Florian Schäfer 3 Matthias Katzfuss 1

Abstract

Chan & Dong, 2011). LGPs extend GPs to a large class of
settings, including noisy, categorical, and count data. However, LGP inference is generally analytically intractable and
hence requires approximations. In addition, direct GP inference is prohibitive for large datasets due to cubic scaling
in the data size. There are two main challenges for (L)GPs
in many applications: One is to specify or learn a suitable
kernel for the GP, and the other is carrying out fast inference
for a given kernel. In this paper, we make no contributions
to the former and instead focus on the latter challenge: We
assume that a parametric kernel form is given and propose
an efficient approximation method for LGP inference via
structured variational learning.

To achieve scalable and accurate inference for
latent Gaussian processes, we propose a variational approximation based on a family of Gaussian distributions whose covariance matrices have
sparse inverse Cholesky (SIC) factors. We combine this variational approximation of the posterior with a similar and efficient SIC-restricted
Kullback-Leibler-optimal approximation of the
prior. We then focus on a particular SIC ordering and nearest-neighbor-based sparsity pattern
resulting in highly accurate prior and posterior
approximations. For this setting, our variational
approximation can be computed via stochastic gradient descent in polylogarithmic time per iteration.
We provide numerical comparisons showing that
the proposed double-Kullback-Leibler-optimal
Gaussian-process approximation (DKLGP) can
sometimes be vastly more accurate for stationary kernels than alternative approaches such as
inducing-point and mean-field approximations at
similar computational complexity.

Many approaches to scaling GPs to large datasets were
reviewed in Heaton et al. (2019) and Liu et al. (2020), including low-rank approaches with a small number of pseudo
points that are popular in machine learning. Such low-rank
GP approximations have been combined with variational
inference for GPs (e.g., Titsias, 2009; Hensman et al., 2013)
and LGPs (e.g., Hensman et al., 2015; Leibfried et al., 2020).
A highly promising approach to achieve GP scalability is
given by nearest-neighbor Vecchia approximations from spatial statistics (e.g., Vecchia, 1988; Stein et al., 2004; Datta
et al., 2016; Katzfuss & Guinness, 2021), which are optimal
with respect to forward Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
under the restriction of sparse inverse Cholesky (SIC) factors of the covariance matrix (Schäfer et al., 2021a). Such
SIC approximations have several attractive properties (e.g.,
as reviewed by Katzfuss et al., 2022). They result in a valid
joint density function given by the product of univariate
conditional Gaussians, each of which can be independently
computed in cubic complexity in the number of neighbors.
This allows straightforward mini-batch subsampling with
unbiased gradient estimators (Cao et al., 2022). For the ordering and sparsity pattern used here, the number of neighbors needs to grow only polylogarithmically with the data
size to achieve ϵ-accurate approximations for Matérn-type
kernels up to boundary effects (Schäfer et al., 2021a) due
to the screening effect (Stein, 2011). Many existing GP approximations, including low-rank and partially-independent
conditional approaches, can be viewed as special cases of
SIC approximations corresponding to particular orderings
and sparsity patterns (Katzfuss & Guinness, 2021). SIC

1. Introduction
Gaussian process (GP) priors are popular models for unknown functions in a variety of settings, including geostatistics (e.g., Stein, 1999; Banerjee et al., 2004; Cressie
& Wikle, 2011), computer model emulation (e.g., Sacks
et al., 1989; Kennedy & O’Hagan, 2001; Gramacy, 2020),
and machine learning (e.g., Rasmussen & Williams, 2006;
Deisenroth, 2010). Latent GP (LGP) models, such as generalized GPs, assume a Gaussian or non-Gaussian distribution
for the data conditional on a GP (e.g., Diggle et al., 1998;
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Institute of
Data Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
2
Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX, USA 3 School of Computational Science and Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Correspondence to: Matthias Katzfuss <katzfuss@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

