Vertical Federated Graph Neural Network for Recommender System

Peihua Mai 1 Yan Pang 1

Abstract

(Gao et al., 2022). Besides, the GNN-based model can effectively alleviate the problem of data sparsity by encoding
semi-supervised signals over the graph (Jin et al., 2020).
Benefiting from the above features, GNN-based models
have shown promising results and outperformed previous
methods on the public benchmark datasets (Berg et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2019b;a).

Conventional recommender systems are required
to train the recommendation model using a centralized database. However, due to data privacy
concerns, this is often impractical when multiparties are involved in recommender system training. Federated learning appears as an excellent
solution to the data isolation and privacy problem. Recently, Graph neural network (GNN) is
becoming a promising approach for federated recommender systems. However, a key challenge is
to conduct embedding propagation while preserving the privacy of the graph structure. Few studies
have been conducted on the federated GNN-based
recommender system. Our study proposes the
first vertical federated GNN-based recommender
system, called VerFedGNN. We design a framework to transmit: (i) the summation of neighbor embeddings using random projection, and
(ii) gradients of public parameter perturbed by
ternary quantization mechanism. Empirical studies show that VerFedGNN has competitive prediction accuracy with existing privacy preserving
GNN frameworks while enhanced privacy protection for users’ interaction information.

Instead of training the model based on their own graphs,
organizations could significantly improve the performance
of their recommendation by sharing their user-item interaction data. However, such sharing might be restricted by
commercial competition or privacy concerns, leading to the
problem of data isolation. For example, the data protection agreement might prohibit the vendors from transferring
users’ personal data, including their purchase and clicking
records, to a third party.
Federated learning (FL), a machine learning setting with
data distributed in multiple clients, is a potential solution
to the data isolation problem. It enables multiple parties
to collaboratively train a model without sharing their local
data (Peyré et al., 2019). A challenge in designing the federated GNN-based recommender system is how to perform
neighborhood aggregation while keeping the graph topology
information private. Indeed, each client should obtain the
items their users have interacted with in other organizations
to conduct embedding propagation. However, the user interaction data are supposed to keep confidential in each party,
adding to the difficulty of federated implementation.

1. Introduction
Graph neural network (GNN) has become a new state-of-art
approach for recommender systems. The core idea behind
GNN is an information propagation mechanism, i.e., to
iteratively aggregate feature information from neighbors
in graphs. The neighborhood aggregation mechanism enables GNN to model the correlation among users, items,
and related features. Compared with traditional supervised
learning algorithms, GNN can model high-order connectivity through multiple layers of embedding propagation
and thus capture the similarity of interacted users and items

Few studies have been conducted on the federated implementation of GNN-based recommender systems. To our
best knowledge, FedPerGNN is the first federated GNNbased recommender system on user-item graphs (Wu et al.,
2022a). However, their work considers a horizontal federated setting where each client shares the same items but
with different users. This paper studies the vertical federated setting in which multiple collaborating recommenders
offer different items to the same set of users. In addition,
FedPerGNN expands the local user-item graphs with anonymous neighbouring user nodes to perform embedding propagation, which could leak users’ interaction information (see
Section 4.1).

1

Department of Analytics and Operations, National University
of Singapore, 119077 Singapore. Correspondence to: Yan Pang
<jamespang@nus.edu.sg>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To fill the gap, this paper proposes a vertical federated learning framework for the GNN-based recommender system
1

