Hybrid Energy Based Model in the Feature Space
for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Marc Lafon 1 Elias Ramzi 1 2 Clément Rambour 1 Nicolas Thome 3

Abstract

2020; Sehwag et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022) suitable for real-world purpose, which offers the
possibility to leverage state-of-the-art models for the main
prediction task and to maintain their performances. It also
relaxes the need for very demanding training processes,
which can be prohibitive with huge deep neural nets and
foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021; Radford et al.,
2021; Rombach et al., 2022; Alayrac et al., 2022).

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a critical
requirement for the deployment of deep neural
networks. This paper introduces the HEAT
model, a new post-hoc OOD detection method
estimating the density of in-distribution (ID)
samples using hybrid energy-based models (EBM)
in the feature space of a pre-trained backbone.
HEAT complements prior density estimators of
the ID density, e.g. parametric models like the
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), to provide an
accurate yet robust density estimation. A second
contribution is to leverage the EBM framework
to provide a unified density estimation and
to compose several energy terms. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the significance of the
two contributions. HEAT sets new state-of-the-art
OOD detection results on the CIFAR-10 / CIFAR100 benchmark as well as on the large-scale
Imagenet benchmark. The code is available at:
github.com/MarcLafon/heatood.

Post-hoc methods exploit the feature space of a pre-trained
network and attempt at estimating the density of ID features
to address OOD detection. Existing ID density estimation
methods include Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) (Lee
et al., 2018b; Sehwag et al., 2021), the nearest neighbors
distribution (Sun et al., 2022), or the distribution derived
from the energy logits (EL) (Liu et al., 2020). However, these
approaches tend to detect different types of OOD data: for
instance, GMMs’ density explicitly decreases when moving
away from training data, making them effective for far-OOD1
detection, while EL benefits from the classifier training to obtain strong results on near-OOD samples (Wang et al., 2022).
In this work, we introduce HEAT, a new density-based OOD
detection method which estimate the density of ID samples
using a Hybrid Energy based model in the feATure space
of a fixed pre-trained backbone, which provides strong OOD
detection performances on both near and far-OOD data.
HEAT leverages the energy-based model (EBM) framework
(LeCun et al., 2006) to build a powerful density estimation
method relying on two main components:

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a major safety
requirement for the deployment of deep learning models in
critical applications, e.g. healthcare, autonomous steering,
or defense (Bendale & Boult, 2015; Amodei et al., 2016;
Janai et al., 2020). Deployed machine learning systems must
successfully perform a specific task, e.g. image classification,
or image segmentation while being able to distinguish
in-distribution (ID) from OOD samples, in order to abstain
from making an arbitrary prediction when facing the latter.

1. Energy-based correction of prior OOD detectors (e.g.
GMMs or EL) with a data-driven EBM, providing an
accurate ID density estimation while benefiting from
the strong generalization properties of the priors. The
corrected model is carefully trained such that the prior
and residual terms achieve optimal cooperation.

OOD detection is a challenge for state-of-the-art deep neural
networks. Most recent approaches follow a post-hoc strategy
(Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Liang et al., 2018a; Liu et al.,

2. Hybrid density estimation grounded by a sound energy
functions composition combining several sources to improve OOD detection. The energy composition requires
a single hyper-parameter, and involves no computational
overhead since it is applied at a single layer of the network.

1

Cedric Laboratory, Cnam, Paris, France 2 Coexya 3 Sorbonne
Université, CNRS, ISIR, F-75005 Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Marc Lafon <marc.lafon@lecnam.net>.

1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We denote as far (resp. near) OOD samples with classes that
are semantically distant (resp. close) from the ID classes.

1

