Generalization on the Unseen, Logic Reasoning and Degree Curriculum

Emmanuel Abbe 1 2 Samy Bengio 2 Aryo Lotfi 1 Kevin Rizk 1

Abstract

tasks remain vaguely defined, a list that we consider here
under this class is given by: (1) arithmetic and algebra (Saxton et al., 2019; Lewkowycz et al., 2022), (2) synthetic tasks
such as PVR (Zhang et al., 2021) and LEGO (Zhang et al.,
2022), (3) visual reasoning such as CLEVR (Johnson et al.,
2017), (4) physical reasoning such as Phyre (Bakhtin et al.,
2019), (5) algorithmic data such as CLRS (Veličković et al.,
2022) and reasoning on graphs (Mahdavi et al., 2022).

This paper considers the learning of logical
(Boolean) functions with focus on the generalization on the unseen (GOTU) setting, a strong
case of out-of-distribution generalization. This
is motivated by the fact that the rich combinatorial nature of data in certain reasoning tasks
(e.g., arithmetic/logic) makes representative data
sampling challenging, and learning successfully
under GOTU gives a first vignette of an ‘extrapolating’ or ‘reasoning’ learner. We then study
how different network architectures trained by
(S)GD perform under GOTU and provide both
theoretical and experimental evidence that for a
class of network models including instances of
Transformers, random features models, and diagonal linear networks, a min-degree-interpolator is
learned on the unseen. We also provide evidence
that other instances with larger learning rates or
mean-field networks reach leaky min-degree solutions. These findings lead to two implications:
(1) we provide an explanation to the length generalization problem (e.g., Anil et al. 2022); (2) we
introduce a curriculum learning algorithm called
Degree-Curriculum that learns monomials more
efficiently by incrementing supports.

One common trademark of these tasks is that the input
space is usually of discrete/combinatorial nature, and consequently, the data may not necessarily lay on a low dimensional manifold that is well sampled. In various cases, the
input space may even have a variable length. This combinatorial nature is already present in text, but it is further
amplified in, say, arithmetic since most symbol combinations could a priori represent a valid input (in contrast to
text). Further, the target function in such tasks may rely on
a large composition of logical steps or mathematical operations that require to be jointly learned. Therefore, in such
reasoning tasks, the setting with abundant representative
data seems less prominent. This motivates us to focus on a
strong out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization setting.
For instance, when learning arithmetic or logic functions on
a training set with a bounded length or bounded number of
truth assignments, how would the neural network generalize
on more general input assignments (this is a case of length
generalization)? When training a neural network to learn a
Boolean formula, such as a voting scheme on data from a
polarized cohort of voters, how does the network generalize
to an unpolarized cohort?

1. Introduction
Neural networks trained by stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) have proved to be a powerful learning paradigm
when there is enough representative data about the distribution to be learned, specifically in applications involving
images or text where there is also a good understanding of
the relevant architectures.

We thus consider the problem of learning functions with
a holdout domain where part of the distribution support is
barely/never seen at training, and with target functions that
are Boolean to capture the discrete and combinatorial nature
of various reasoning tasks (e.g., arithmetic, decision trees,
logical circuits). Learning successfully under holdout gives
a first vignette that the learner is operating with a certain
amount of ‘reasoning’ or ‘extrapolation’ since memorization
is voided on the unseen domain.

There is now an increasing interest in tackling tasks involving more ‘reasoning’ components, which depart from
classical perception tasks of images and texts. While such
1
EPFL 2 Apple.
<aryo.lotfi@epfl.ch>.

Correspondence to:

Aryo Lotfi

1.1. Our main contributions

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1. We lay down some basic principles of stronger generalization requirements that rely on the ‘generalization
1

