Lazy Agents: A New Perspective on Solving Sparse Reward Problem
in Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

Boyin Liu 1 2 Zhiqiang Pu 1 2 3 Yi Pan 2 Jianqiang Yi 1 2 Yanyan Liang 4 Du Zhang 4

1. Introduction

Abstract

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is
an active and fast-growing field that has been applied to a
wide range of real-world problems, such as traffic control
(Li, 2020), supply chain management (Fuji et al., 2018),
network routing (Rosenbaum et al., 2017), and robotics
(Perrusquı́a et al., 2021; Lillicrap et al., 2015).

Sparse reward remains a valuable and challenging
problem in multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL). This paper addresses this issue from
a new perspective, i.e., lazy agents. We empirically illustrate how lazy agents damage learning
from both exploration and exploitation. Then,
we propose a novel MARL framework called
Lazy Agents Avoidance through Influencing External States (LAIES). Firstly, we examine the
causes and types of lazy agents in MARL using
a causal graph of the interaction between agents
and their environment. Then, we mathematically
define the concept of fully lazy agents and teams
by calculating the causal effect of their actions
on external states using the do-calculus process.
Based on definitions, we provide two intrinsic
rewards to motivate agents, i.e., individual diligence intrinsic motivation (IDI) and collaborative diligence intrinsic motivation (CDI). IDI and
CDI employ counterfactual reasoning based on
the external states transition model (ESTM) we
developed. Empirical results demonstrate that
our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on various tasks, including the sparsereward version of StarCraft multi-agent challenge
(SMAC) and Google Research Football (GRF).
Our code is open-source and available at https:
//github.com/liuboyin/LAIES.

Centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE)
has been a significant paradigm of cooperative MARL and
can effectively deal with nonstationarity while learning decentralized policies for agents (Foerster et al., 2016; Yang
et al., 2020; Rashid et al., 2020). In CTDE, agents have
access to other agents’ information and the global state, but
during execution, each agent acts independently based on
their policies. Many methods have been proposed following
the paradigm of CTDE, including MADDPG (Lowe et al.,
2017), MAPPO (Yu et al., 2021), VDN (Sunehag et al.,
2017), QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), MAVEN (Connerney
et al., 2015) and QPLEX (Wang et al., 2020a). Among
these methods, QMIX stands out as it represents the joint
action-value using a non-negative function approximator
and achieves superior performance on many MARL benchmarks due to well-designed auxiliary rewards.
Although these MARL approaches progress significantly in
complex cooperative tasks, well-designed auxiliary rewards
are essential in fostering cooperative or competitive behavior
among agents. However, sparse reward scenarios are very
typical in MARL applications in the real world. Designing a
useful reward function is also notoriously difficult (Abbeel
& Ng, 2004), particularly for non-specialists. Sparse reward
problem is especially serious when agents must explore
large and uncertain environments. In such tasks, agents may
not have enough information to develop an optimal behavior
and may learn to exploit suboptimal but easily accessible
solutions (Sutton & Barto, 2018).

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 2 Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,
China 3 Nanjing AIRIA, Jiangning District, Nanjing, 211100,
Jiangsu, China 4 Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau 999078, China. Correspondence to: Zhiqinag Pu
<zhiqiang.pu@ia.ac.cn>.

In this paper, we solve the problem of sparse rewards in
MARL from a new perspective, i.e., lazy agent. In multiagent systems, lazy agents refer to agents that do not actively
participate in the teamwork or do not contribute significantly
to the system’s overall performance. Since the reward structure in a sparse reward environment does not adequately

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

