On the Convergence of SARSA with Linear Function Approximation

Shangtong Zhang 1 Remi Tachet des Combes 2 Romain Laroche 3

Abstract

operator satisfy the “greedy in the limit with infinite exploration” condition. Tabular methods, however, are not
preferred when the state space is large and generalization is
required across states. One possible solution is linear function approximation, which approximates the action values
via the inner product of state-action features and a learnable
weight vector. The behavior of SARSA with linear function
approximation (linear SARSA) is, however, less understood.

SARSA, a classical on-policy control algorithm
for reinforcement learning, is known to chatter
when combined with linear function approximation: SARSA does not diverge but oscillates in a
bounded region. However, little is known about
how fast SARSA converges to that region and
how large the region is. In this paper, we make
progress towards this open problem by showing
the convergence rate of projected SARSA to a
bounded region. Importantly, the region is much
smaller than the region that we project into, provided that the magnitude of the reward is not too
large. Existing works regarding the convergence
of linear SARSA to a fixed point all require the
Lipschitz constant of SARSA’s policy improvement operator to be sufficiently small; our analysis instead applies to arbitrary Lipschitz constants and thus characterizes the behavior of linear
SARSA for a new regime.

Gordon (1996) and Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis (1996) empirically observe that linear SARSA can chatter: the weight
vector does not go to infinity (i.e., it does not diverge) but
oscillates in a bounded region. Importantly, this chattering behavior remains even if a decaying learning rate is
used. Gordon (2001) further proves that trajectory-based
linear SARSA with an ϵ-greedy policy improvement operator converges to a bounded region asymptotically. Unlike
standard linear SARSA, where the policy improvement operator is invoked every step to generate a new policy for action
selection in the next step, trajectory-based linear SARSA
generates a policy at the beginning of each episode and
the policy remains fixed during the episode. Intuitively,
within an episode, trajectory-based linear SARSA is just
linear Temporal Difference (TD, Sutton (1988)) learning
for evaluating action values. It, therefore, converges to an
approximation of the action value function of the policy
generated at the beginning of the episode (Tsitsiklis & Roy,
1996). Since the number of all possible ϵ-greedy policies
is finite in a finite Markov Decision Process with a fixed
ϵ, trajectory-based linear SARSA oscillates among the (approximate) action value functions of those ϵ-greedy policies,
which form a bounded region. Later, Perkins & Precup
(2002) prove the asymptotic convergence of fitted linear
SARSA (a.k.a. model-free approximate policy iteration) to
a fixed point. Similar to trajectory-based SARSA, fitted
SARSA alternates between thorough TD learning for policy
evaluation under a fixed policy and the application of the
policy improvement operator. In other words, it involves bilevel optimization. Then assuming the Lipschitz constant of
the policy improvement operator is sufficiently small such
that the composition of the policy improvement operator
and some other function becomes contractive, convergence
of fitted SARSA is obtained thanks to Banach’s fixed point
theorem. Despite this progress, the asymptotic behavior of
standard linear SARSA, which invokes the policy improve-

1. Introduction
SARSA is a classical on-policy control algorithm for reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto (2018)) dating back
to Rummery & Niranjan (1994). The key idea of SARSA
is to update the estimate for action values with data generated by following an exploratory and greedy policy (e.g., an
ϵ-greedy policy) derived from the estimate itself. In this paper, we refer to the operator used for deriving such a policy
from the action value estimate as the policy improvement
operator.
The study of SARSA begins in the tabular setting, where
the action value estimates are stored in the form of a lookup table. For example, Singh et al. (2000) confirm the
asymptotic convergence of SARSA to the optimal policy
provided that the policies from the policy improvement
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia,
United States 2 AlpacaML 3 Unemployed. Correspondence to:
Shangtong Zhang <shangtong@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

