Improving ℓ1 -Certified Robustness via Randomized Smoothing by Leveraging
Box Constraints
Václav Voráček 1 Matthias Hein 1
1.0

Randomized smoothing is a popular method to
certify robustness of image classifiers to adversarial input perturbations. It is the only certification technique which scales directly to datasets
of higher dimension such as ImageNet. However, current techniques are not able to utilize
the fact that any adversarial example has to lie
in the image space, that is [0, 1]d ; otherwise, one
can trivially detect it. To address this suboptimality, we derive new certification formulae which
lead to significant improvements in the certified
ℓ1 -robustness without the need of adapting the
classifiers or change of smoothing distributions.
Code is released at https://github.com/
vvoracek/L1-smoothing.

0.8

robust accuracy

Abstract

uniform
split
split derandomized
split++
(ours)

0.6

uniform++ (ours)

0.4
0.2
0.0

0

2

4

6

8

10

robust radius
Figure 1: Certified ℓ1 robust accuracies for CIFAR-10
dataset via randomized smoothing for three different types
of noise. The curves uniform++ and split++ use the same
networks and noise as uniform and split respectively, however, with the proposed improved certification we are able to
significantly increase the certified robustness. The reported
curves are pointwise maxima of robustness curves with different noise magnitudes.

1. Introduction
While neural networks have demonstrated excellent performance in a variety of tasks, they are susceptible to small
(adversarial) changes of the input (Szegedy et al., 2014; Biggio et al.). Such behaviour is undesired, especially in the
safety-critical applications. To mitigate the issue, initially
the focus was on constructing empirically robust classifiers,
and then check how the resulting model performs against
adversarial attacks. However, such an approach only gives
an upper bound on the actual robustness of the classifier and
many initially considered promising methods later turned
out to be broken (Athalye et al., 2018; Carlini et al., 2019;
Tramer et al., 2020) due to stronger attacks. The only seemingly working method that does not produce any guarantees
is adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018); but more powerful attacks show that the empirical robustness of classifiers
is lower than originally claimed (Croce & Hein, 2020; Lin
et al., 2022).

Thus, an alternative approach is to certify robustness. Here,
we are no longer interested in whether we can find (or fail to
find) an adversarial example in the neighbourhood (called
threat model), but rather focus on whether we can prove (or
fail to prove) that there is no adversarial example. These
methods roughly fall into three (arguably overlapping) categories:
• Propagate a “nice” set containing the threat model through
the network; see, e.g., (Gowal et al., 2018; Wong et al.,
2018).
• Force the Lipschitz constant of a model to be small; see,
e.g., (Leino et al., 2021; Trockman & Kolter, 2021; Singla
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022a).
• Randomized smoothing; see, e.g., (Lecuyer et al., 2019;
Cohen et al., 2019; Salman et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020).

1

Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen. Correspondence to: Václav Voráček <vaclav.voracek@uni-tuebingen.de>,
Matthias Hein <matthias.hein@uni-tuebingen.de>.

The two approaches discussed yielded either an upper bound
(empirical robustness) or a lower bound (certified robustness) respectively on the actual adversarial robustness and in
general, there are points for which the certification methods

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
th

1

