GC-Flow: A Graph-Based Flow Network for Effective Clustering

Tianchun Wang 1 Farzaneh Mirzazadeh 2 Xiang Zhang 1 Jie Chen 2

Abstract

effective classification. GCN, together with other pioneering
work on parameterized models, have formed a flourishing
literature of graph neural networks (GNNs), which excel at
node classification (Zhou et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021).

Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are discriminative models that directly model the class
posterior p(y|x) for semi-supervised classification of graph data. While being effective, as a
representation learning approach, the node representations extracted from a GCN often miss useful
information for effective clustering, because the
objectives are different. In this work, we design
normalizing flows that replace GCN layers, leading to a generative model that models both the
class conditional likelihood p(x|y) and the class
prior p(y). The resulting neural network, GCFlow, retains the graph convolution operations
while being equipped with a Gaussian mixture
representation space. It enjoys two benefits: it
not only maintains the predictive power of GCN,
but also produces well-separated clusters, due to
the structuring of the representation space. We
demonstrate these benefits on a variety of benchmark data sets. Moreover, we show that additional
parameterization, such as that on the adjacency
matrix used for graph convolutions, yields additional improvement in clustering.

However, driven by the classification task, GCN and other
GNNs may not produce node representations with useful
information for goals different from classification. For example, the representations do not cluster well in some cases.
Such a phenomenon is of no surprise. For instance, when
one treats the penultimate activations as the data representations and uses the last dense layer as a linear classifier,
the representations need only be close to linearly separable
for an accurate classification; they do not necessarily form
well-separated clusters.
This observation leads to a natural question: can one build
a graph representation model that is effective for not only
classification but also clustering? The answer is affirmative. One idea is to, rather than construct a discriminative
model p(y|x) as all GNNs do, build a generative model
p(x|y)p(y) whose class conditional likelihood is defined by
explicitly modeling the representation space, for example
by using a mixture of well-separated unimodal distributions.
Indeed, the recently proposed FlowGMM model (Izmailov
et al., 2020) uses a normalizing flow to map the distribution
of input features to a Gaussian mixture, resulting in wellstructured clusters. This model, however, does not leverage
the graph structure.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (Zhu, 2008) refers to the learning
of a classification model by using typically a small amount
of labeled data with possibly a large amount of unlabeled
data. The presence of the unlabeled data, together with additional assumptions (such as the manifold and smoothness
assumptions), may significantly improve the accuracy of
a classifier learned even with few labeled data. A typical
example of such a model in the recent literature is the graph
convolutional network (GCN) of Kipf & Welling (2017),
which capitalizes on the graph structure (considered as an extension of a discretized manifold) underlying data to achieve

In this work, we present graph convolutional normalizing
flows (GC-Flows), a generative model that not only classifies
well, but also yields node representations that capture the
inherent structure of data, as a result forming high-quality
clusters. We can relate GC-Flows to both GCNs and FlowGMMs. On the one hand, GC-Flows incorporate each GCN
layer with an invertible flow. Such a flow parameterization
allows training a model through maximizing the likelihood
of data representations being a Gaussian mixture, mitigating the poor clustering effect of GCNs. On the other hand,
GC-Flows augment a usual normalizing flow model (such
as FlowGMM) that is trained on independent data, with one
that incorporates graph convolutions as an inductive bias in
the parameterization, boosting the classification accuracy.
In Figure 1, we visualize for a graph data set the nodes in
the representation space. It suggests that GC-Flow inherits

1

Pennsylvania State University 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI
Lab, IBM Research. Correspondence to: Tianchun Wang
<tkw5356@psu.edu>, Jie Chen <chenjie@us.ibm.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

