Bayesian Design Principles for Frequentist Sequential Learning

Yunbei Xu 1 Assaf Zeevi 1

Abstract

action is concerned, while other possible outcomes are not
observed and the underlying state transition dynamics are
unknown. In this paper, we present a unified approach that
applies to bandit problems, RL, and beyond.

We develop a general theory to optimize the frequentist regret for sequential learning problems,
where efficient bandit and reinforcement learning
algorithms can be derived from unified Bayesian
principles. We propose a novel optimization approach to create “algorithmic beliefs” at each
round, and use Bayesian posteriors to make decisions. This is the first approach to make Bayesiantype algorithms prior-free and applicable to adversarial settings, in a generic and optimal manner.
Moreover, the algorithms are simple and often efficient to implement. As a major application, we
present a novel algorithm for multi-armed bandits
that achieves the “best-of-all-worlds” empirical
performance in the stochastic, adversarial, and
non-stationary environments. And we illustrate
how these principles can be used in linear bandits,
convex bandits, and reinforcement learning.

The central challenge for sequential learning with partial
feedback is to determine the optimal trade-off between exploration and exploitation. That is, the agent needs to try
different decisions to learn the environment; at the same
time, she wants to focus on “good” decisions that maximize
her payoff. There are two basic approaches to study such
exploration-exploitation trade-off: frequentist and Bayesian.
One of the most celebrated examples of the frequentist approach is the family of Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)
algorithms (Lai et al., 1985; Auer et al., 2002a). Here,
the agent typically uses sample average or regression to
estimate the mean rewards; and she optimizes the upper
confidence bounds of the mean rewards to make decisions.
Another widely used frequentist algorithm is EXP3 (Auer
et al., 2002b) which was designed for adversarial bandits;
it uses inverse probability weighting (IPW) to estimate the
rewards, and then applies exponential weighting to construct decisions. One of the most celebrated examples of
the Bayesian approach is Thompson Sampling (TS) with
a pre-specifed, fixed prior (Thompson, 1933). Here, the
agent updates the Bayesian posterior at each round to learn
the environment, and she uses draws from that posterior to
optimize decisions.

1. Introduction
1.1. Background
We address a broad class of sequential learning problems in
the presence of partial feedback, which arise in numerous
application areas including personalized recommendation
(Li et al., 2010), game playing (Silver et al., 2016) and
control (Mnih et al., 2015). An agent sequentially chooses
among a set of possible decisions to maximize the cumulative reward. By “partial feedback” we mean the agent is
only able to observe the feedback of her chosen decision,
but does not generally observe what the feedback would
be if she had chosen a different decision. For example, in
multi-armed bandits (MAB), the agent can only observe the
reward of her chosen action, but does not observe the rewards of other actions. In reinforcement learning (RL), the
agent is only able to observe her state insofar as the chosen

The advantage of the frequentist approach is that it does
not require a priori knowledge of the environment. However, it heavily depends on a case-by-case analysis exploiting special structure of a particular problem. For example,
regression-based approaches can not be easily extended to
adversarial problems; and IPW-type estimators are only
known for simple rewards such as discrete and linear. The
advantage of Bayesian approach is that Bayesian posterior
is a generic and often optimal estimator if the prior is known.
However, the Bayesian approach requires knowing the prior
at the inception, which may not be accessible in complex or
adversarial environments. Moreover, maintaining posteriors
is computationally expensive for most priors.

1

Graduate School of Business, Columbia University, New
York, New York, USA. Correspondence to: Yunbei Xu <yunbei.xu@gsb.columbia.edu>.

In essence, frequentist approach requires less information,
but is less principled, or more bottom-up. On the other hand,
the Bayesian approach is more principled, or top-down, but

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

