Posterior Sampling for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Remo Sasso 1 Michelangelo Conserva 1 Paulo Rauber 1

Abstract

of reinforcement learning have attracted significant interest. In particular, the combination of reinforcement learning
with artificial neural networks has led to the best computer
agents that play games such as Chess and Go (Schrittwieser
et al., 2020), Dota 2 (Berner et al., 2019), and StarCraft II
(Vinyals et al., 2019).

Despite remarkable successes, deep reinforcement learning algorithms remain sample inefficient: they require an enormous amount of trial
and error to find good policies. Model-based
algorithms promise sample efficiency by building an environment model that can be used for
planning. Posterior Sampling for Reinforcement
Learning is such a model-based algorithm that
has attracted significant interest due to its performance in the tabular setting. This paper introduces Posterior Sampling for Deep Reinforcement Learning (PSDRL), the first truly scalable
approximation of Posterior Sampling for Reinforcement Learning that retains its model-based
essence. PSDRL combines efficient uncertainty
quantification over latent state space models with
a specially tailored continual planning algorithm
based on value-function approximation. Extensive experiments on the Atari benchmark show
that PSDRL significantly outperforms previous
state-of-the-art attempts at scaling up posterior
sampling while being competitive with a stateof-the-art (model-based) reinforcement learning
method, both in sample efficiency and computational efficiency.

Despite these notable successes, the corresponding reinforcement learning algorithms are remarkably sample inefficient: they require an enormous amount of trial-and-error
to find good policies. In contrast with games and simulations, real-world applications are heavily constrained by the
cost of trial-and-error and available data. As a consequence,
sample inefficiency limits the applicability of reinforcement
learning. This inefficiency is fundamentally linked with the
trade-off between exploring an environment in order to learn
about potentially better sources of reward and exploiting the
well-known sources of reward. In the tabular reinforcement
learning setting, where the number of states is finite, several
(theoretically and often empirically) efficient exploration
methods are well understood (Osband et al., 2013; Agrawal
& Jia, 2017; Azar et al., 2017; Zanette & Brunskill, 2019;
Russo, 2019; Ménard et al., 2021). However, there are no
generally efficient methods that cope with the non-linear
function approximation required in non-tabular settings.
Model-based reinforcement learning methods seek sample
efficiency by building an environment model that enables
predicting how actions affect the state of the environment
and how the states of the environment relate to rewards.
Because such a model can be used for planning (searching
for a good policy without interacting with the environment),
model-based methods have the potential to be substantially
more sample efficient than model-free algorithms (Kaiser
et al., 2019; Janner et al., 2019), which attempt to find good
policies without building a model. Recent work has shown
that learning models in latent state space can significantly reduce the computational cost of model-based reinforcement
learning (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2019b;a;
Schrittwieser et al., 2020), allowing its application in environments with high-dimensional state spaces.

1. Introduction
In a typical reinforcement learning problem, an agent interacts with an environment in a sequence of episodes by observing states and rewards and acting according to a policy
that maps states to actions. A reinforcement learning algorithm seeks a policy that maximizes expected cumulative
rewards. Because many problems in healthcare, robotics, logistics, finance, and advertising can be naturally formulated
as problems of maximizing a measure of success through a
sequence of decisions informed by data, the recent successes
1

School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science,
Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Remo Sasso <r.sasso@qmul.ac.uk>.

Posterior Sampling for Reinforcement Learning is a modelbased algorithm that has attracted significant interest due
to its strong (theoretical and empirical) performance in the
tabular setting (Osband et al., 2013). This algorithm repre-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

