Offline Reinforcement Learning with Closed-Form Policy Improvement
Operators

Jiachen Li * 1 Edwin Zhang * 1 2 Ming Yin 1 Qinxun Bai 3 Yu-Xiang Wang 1 William Yang Wang 1

Abstract

ing (Sallab et al., 2017). To address this issue, offline RL
(a.k.a batch RL) (Levine et al., 2020; Lange et al., 2012) has
been proposed to learn a policy directly from historical data
without environment interaction. However, learning competent policies from a static dataset is challenging. Previous
research has shown that learning a policy without constraining its deviation from the data-generating policies suffers
from significant extrapolation errors, leading to training
divergence (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019).

Behavior constrained policy optimization has
been demonstrated to be a successful paradigm
for tackling Offline Reinforcement Learning. By
exploiting historical transitions, a policy is trained
to maximize a learned value function while constrained by the behavior policy to avoid a significant distributional shift. In this paper, we
propose our closed-form policy improvement operators. We make a novel observation that the
behavior constraint naturally motivates the use
of first-order Taylor approximation, leading to
a linear approximation of the policy objective.
Additionally, as practical datasets are usually
collected by heterogeneous policies, we model
the behavior policies as a Gaussian Mixture and
overcome the induced optimization difficulties
by leveraging the LogSumExp’s lower bound
and Jensen’s Inequality, giving rise to a closedform policy improvement operator. We instantiate both one-step and iterative offline RL algorithms with our novel policy improvement operators and empirically demonstrate their effectiveness over state-of-the-art algorithms on the
standard D4RL benchmark. Our code is available
at https://cfpi-icml23.github.io/.

Current literature has demonstrated two successful
paradigms for managing the trade-off between policy improvement and limiting the distributional shift from the behavior policies. Under the actor-critic framework (Konda &
Tsitsiklis, 1999), behavior constrained policy optimization
(BCPO) (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Wu et al., 2019; Brandfonbrener et al.,
2021; Ghasemipour et al., 2021; Li et al., 2020; Vuong et al.,
2022; Wu et al., 2022) explicitly regularizes the divergence
between learned and behavior policies, while conservative
methods (Kumar et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022; Yu et al.,
2020; 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Lyu et al., 2022) penalize
the value estimate for out-of-distribution (OOD) actions to
avoid overestimation errors. However, most existing modelfree offline RL algorithms use stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) to optimize their policies, which can lead to instability during the training process and require careful tuning
of the number of gradient steps. As highlighted by Fujimoto & Gu 2021, the performance of the offline-trained
policies can be influenced by the specific stopping point
chosen for evaluation, with substantial variations often observed near the final stage of training. This instability poses
a significant challenge in offline RL, given the restricted access to environment interaction makes it difficult to perform
hyper-parameter tuning. In addition to the variations across
different stopping points, our experiment in Table 4 reveals
that using SGD for policy improvement can result in significant performance variations across different random seeds,
a phenomenon well-documented for online RL algorithms
as well (Islam et al., 2017).

1. Introduction
The deployment of Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton &
Barto, 2018) in real-world applications is often hindered by
the large amount of online data it requires. Implementing
an untested policy can be costly and dangerous in fields
such as robotics (Cabi et al., 2019) and autonomous driv*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106
USA, USA 2 Harvard University, USA 3 Horizon Robotics Inc.,
Cupertino, CA, 95014 USA. Correspondence to: Jiachen Li <jiachen li@ucsb.edu>, Edwin Zhang <ete@ucsb.edu>.

In this work, we aim to mitigate the aforementioned learning instabilities of offline RL by designing stable policy
improvement operators. In particular, we take a closer look

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

