GibbsDDRM: A Partially Collapsed Gibbs Sampler for
Solving Blind Inverse Problems with Denoising Diffusion Restoration

Naoki Murata 1 Koichi Saito 1 Chieh-Hsin Lai 1 Yuhta Takida 1 Toshimitsu Uesaka 1 Yuki Mitsufuji 1 2
Stefano Ermon 3

Abstract

(a)

Pre-trained diffusion models have been successfully used as priors in a variety of linear inverse
problems, where the goal is to reconstruct a signal
from noisy linear measurements. However, existing approaches require knowledge of the linear
operator. In this paper, we propose GibbsDDRM,
an extension of Denoising Diffusion Restoration
Models (DDRM) to a blind setting in which the
linear measurement operator is unknown. GibbsDDRM constructs a joint distribution of the data,
measurements, and linear operator by using a pretrained diffusion model for the data prior, and it
solves the problem by posterior sampling with an
efficient variant of a Gibbs sampler. The proposed
method is problem-agnostic, meaning that a pretrained diffusion model can be applied to various
inverse problems without fine-tuning. In experiments, it achieved high performance on both blind
image deblurring and vocal dereverberation tasks,
despite the use of simple generic priors for the
underlying linear operators.

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Blind image deblurring results obtained by GibbsDDRM:
(a) measurement, (b) restored clean images with blur kernels (bottom right insets), and (c) ground truth images and blur kernels.

nal processing, problems such as dereverberation (Nakatani
et al., 2010; Saito et al., 2023) and band extension (Larsen
& Aarts, 2005) are also classic inverse problems. In medical imaging, many problems such as computed tomography
(CT) (Zhu et al., 2018; Song et al., 2021a) also rely on
inverse problem solving.

1. Introduction
Inverse problems are frequently encountered in various science and engineering fields such as image processing, acoustic signal processing, and medical imaging. In an inverse
problem, the goal is to restore a clean data signal from measurements generated by some forward (measurement) process. In image processing, problems such as deblurring (Zhu
et al., 2018; Kupyn et al., 2019; Tu et al., 2022), inpainting (Yeh et al., 2017), and colorization (Larsson et al., 2016)
are naturally formulated as inverse problems. In audio sig-

In general, inverse problems are ill-posed because the information in the original data is lost through the measurement
process (e.g., because of noise); the incorporation of prior
knowledge about the original data is thus critical. In the past,
assumptions such as sparsity (Candès & Wakin, 2008), low
rank (Fazel et al., 2008), and total variation (Candès et al.,
2006) were made for the data distribution to narrow the set
of plausible candidate solutions. A more recent trend has
been to solve inverse problems by using richer deep generative models (Rick Chang et al., 2017; Anirudh et al., 2018;
Kadkhodaie & Simoncelli, 2020; Whang et al., 2021) trained
with a large amount of data as priors. In particular, the evolution of methods related to diffusion models (Kawar et al.,
2021; 2022; Chung et al., 2023b;a) has been significant,
and many such methods are problem-agnostic, meaning that

1
Sony AI, Tokyo, Japan 2 Sony Group Corporation, Tokyo,
Japan 3 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Naoki Murata
<naoki.murata@sony.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

