Team Belief DAG: Generalizing the Sequence Form to Team Games for Fast
Computation of Correlated Team Max-Min Equilibria via Regret Minimization

Brian Hu Zhang 1 Gabriele Farina 2 Tuomas Sandholm 1 3 4 5

Abstract

tree-form) games. In those settings, a classic result by Romanovskii (1962) and Koller et al. (1994) asserts that the
set of strategies set of each player admits a strategically
equivalent and low-dimensional convex description—called
the sequence form—provided that the agent has perfect recall, that is, that the agent never forgets about past actions
or observations. As a result, learning strong strategies for
any perfect-recall agent amounts to a convex optimization
problem with dimension polynomial in the game tree size,
which is typically solved by online learning. Such a template has been used extensively both in the literature and in
the applications of computational game theory.

A classic result in the theory of extensive-form
games asserts that the set of strategies available
to any perfect-recall player is strategically equivalent to a low-dimensional convex polytope, called
the sequence-form polytope. Online convex optimization tools operating on this polytope are the
current state-of-the-art for computing several notions of equilibria in games, and have been crucial
in landmark applications of computational game
theory. However, when optimizing over the joint
strategy space of a team of players, one cannot
use the sequence form to obtain a strategicallyequivalent convex description of the strategy set of
the team. In this paper, we provide new complexity results on the computation of optimal strategies for teams, and propose a new representation, coined team belief DAG (TB-DAG), that describes team strategies as a convex set. The TBDAG enjoys state-of-the-art parameterized complexity bounds, while at the same time enjoying
the advantages of efficient regret minimization
techniques. We show that TB-DAG can be exponentially smaller and can be computed exponentially faster than all other known representations,
and that the converse is never true. Experimentally, we show that the TB-DAG, when paired
with learning techniques, yields state of the art on
a wide variety of benchmark team games.

The study of the computational aspects of strategic decision
making in adversarial team games is relatively newer. If the
team members can privately communicate (for example, a
team of poker players colluding at a table secretly revealing
to each other their private hands), the team as a whole can be
thought of as a single perfect-recall player, and the sequence
form can be used. However, when the team members cannot privately communicate during play, the asymmetry in
the observations of the different team members makes the
sequence form inapplicable. This begs the question of how
teams should optimize their strategy jointly when communication is impossible. Such settings are prevalent in the real
world, and examples include recreational games like bridge
(in which two teams compete adversarially), collusion at
a poker table with no means of communicating privately,
military situations with restricted communications, various
swindling settings, and many other real-world situations.
In general, a polynomially-sized convex description of the
strategy set is unlikely to exist even for a team of two members, as computing optimal strategies in such team games is
known to be NP-hard (Koller & Megiddo, 1992), but the exact complexity has, to our knowledge, not been established.
In this paper, we sharply characterize the complexity of computing optimal team strategies under two common notions,
the correlated team max-min equilibrium (TMECor) and
team max-min equilibrium (TME): they are complete for the
complexity classes ∆P2 and ΣP2 respectively. Here, the result
most similar to ours is from Koller & Megiddo (1992), who
showed that computing a max-min pure strategy for a team
is also ΣP2 -complete.

1. Introduction
In recent years, much research has been concerned with
learning strong strategies for players in extensive-form (i.e.,
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 2 FAIR,
Meta AI 3 Strategy Robot, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, USA
4
Optimized Markets, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, USA 5 Strategic
Machine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Brian
Hu Zhang <bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu>, Gabriele Farina <gfarina@meta.com>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

