Image generation with shortest path diffusion

Ayan Das * 1 Stathi Fotiadis * 1 2 Anil Batra 1 3 Farhang Nabiei 1 FengTing Liao 1 Sattar Vakili 1 Da-shan Shiu 1
Alberto Bernacchia 1

Abstract
The field of image generation has made significant
progress thanks to the introduction of Diffusion
Models, which learn to progressively reverse a
given image corruption. Recently, a few studies
introduced alternative ways of corrupting images
in Diffusion Models, with an emphasis on blurring. However, these studies are purely empirical
and it remains unclear what is the optimal procedure for corrupting an image. In this work, we
hypothesize that the optimal procedure minimizes
the length of the path taken when corrupting an
image towards a given final state. We propose
the Fisher metric for the path length, measured
in the space of probability distributions. We compute the shortest path according to this metric,
and we show that it corresponds to a combination
of image sharpening, rather than blurring, and
noise deblurring. While the corruption was chosen arbitrarily in previous work, our Shortest Path
Diffusion (SPD) determines uniquely the entire
spatiotemporal structure of the corruption. We
show that SPD improves on strong baselines without any hyperparameter tuning, and outperforms
all previous Diffusion Models based on image
blurring. Furthermore, any small deviation from
the shortest path leads to worse performance, suggesting that SPD provides the optimal procedure
to corrupt images. Our work sheds new light on
observations made in recent works and provides
a new approach to improve diffusion models on
images and other types of data.

t=0

Uniform
diffusion

t = 200

400

600

800

1000

Shortest-path
diffusion

Figure 1. Illustration of shortest path. Top: Transformation of
a bivariate Gaussian distribution, parameterized by the variance
along two orthogonal directions, σx2 and σy2 . The initial distribution has σx2 ≪ σy2 (black circle), while the final distribution has
σx2 = σy2 (yellow star, isotropic noise). According to the Fisher
metric, the shortest path between the two distributions is not the
linear path (dashed line), instead is given by the curved path (cyan
curve), in which σy2 decreases first, and σx2 increases later. Bottom: Comparison of shortest path and uniform noising for image
corruption. In uniform noising, the original image dissipates while
uniform noise appears. Instead, the shortest path corresponds to
image sharpening and noise deblurring. Lower frequencies of the
image dissipate before higher frequencies. Similarly, noise appears
at lower frequencies first and higher frequencies later. Figure 3
shows how signal and noise change in time for different frequencies.

*

1
Equal contribution
MediaTek Research, Cambourne,
2
UK Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London, UK 3 School of Informatics, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. Correspondence to: Ayan Das
<ayan.das@mtkresearch.com>.

1. Introduction
The field of image generation has seen rapid progress since
the introduction of algorithms based on deep learning (BondTaylor et al., 2022). A common approach is using a deep
neural network to map input noise into an output image, a
fast process that requires a single forward pass. These methods include Generative Adversarial Networks (Goodfellow

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

