Distance Weighted Supervised Learning for Offline Interaction Data

Joey Hejna 1 Jensen Gao 1 Dorsa Sadigh 1

Abstract

especially true when learning multi-task policies that
operate on high-dimensional image observations, which is
often the case for real-world robotics applications. Training
generalizable robot policies will likely require scaling
dataset size and model capacity, which supervised learning
algorithms have excelled at.

Sequential decision making algorithms often
struggle to leverage different sources of unstructured offline interaction data. Imitation learning
(IL) methods based on supervised learning are
robust, but require optimal demonstrations, which
are hard to collect. Offline goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms promise to
learn from sub-optimal data, but face optimization
challenges especially with high-dimensional data.
To bridge the gap between IL and RL, we introduce Distance Weighted Supervised Learning or
DWSL, a supervised method for learning goalconditioned policies from offline data. DWSL
models the entire distribution of time-steps between states in offline data with only supervised
learning, and uses this distribution to approximate
shortest path distances. To extract a policy, we
weight actions by their reduction in distance estimates. Theoretically, DWSL converges to an
optimal policy constrained to the data distribution,
an attractive property for offline learning, without
any bootstrapping. Across all datasets we test,
DWSL empirically maintains behavior cloning
as a lower bound while still exhibiting policy improvement. In high-dimensional image domains,
DWSL surpasses the performance of both prior
goal-conditioned IL and RL algorithms. Visualizations and code can be found at https://
sites.google.com/view/dwsl/home.

One promising paradigm for scalable robot learning is
offline goal-conditioned learning, where policies are trained
to reach arbitrary goals from interaction data without dense
reward annotation. This can be done via supervised learning
with goal-conditioned imitation learning (IL) (Ghosh et al.,
2021; Emmons et al., 2022), where dataset actions are
cloned by a policy. IL methods tend to excel when given
access to broad data in the form of expert demonstrations
(Jang et al., 2022) or unstructured play (Lynch et al., 2019).
However, collecting vast quantities of this type of data
has proven to be tedious at best (Akgun et al., 2012), and
any sub-optimalities within the data can be detrimentally
materialized by the learned policy.
Value-based offline reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms,
on the other hand, promise to address these challenges by
learning policies that can improve upon the behavior found
in sub-optimal datasets. However, RL methods can be
difficult to get working in practice due the optimization challenges of temporal difference learning, known as the deadly
triad, which consist of function approximation, off-policy
learning, and bootstrapping (Van Hasselt et al., 2018; Sutton
& Barto, 2018). These issues are further exacerbated in
offline image-based settings where additional data cannot be
collected to correct modeling errors, and high-dimensional
visual observations make stitching together distinct
experience difficult. As a result, despite complicated tricks
and careful hyperparameter tuning, the performance of
offline RL methods can vary dramatically from dataset to
dataset. For example, while offline RL algorithms perform
well on data collected by other RL agents, they have been
known to fail on data collected by humans (Mandlekar
et al., 2021) or exploratory strategies (Yarats et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Many advancements in deep learning are underpinned
by a markedly similar formula: collect a large, diverse
dataset and train a model with supervised learning. Thus,
for sequential decision making problems it is naturally
desirable to apply the same formula yet again. This is

Ideally, we want scalable algorithms that perform well on
the widest variety of datasets. To make progress towards
this goal, we propose an offline goal-conditioned algorithm
that maintains the optimization robustness of supervised
learning, but still performs value estimation to improve

1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University. Correspondence to: Joey Hejna <jhejna@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

