Streaming Submodular Maximization with Differential Privacy

Anamay Chaturvedi * 1 Huy L. Nguyen * 1 Thy Nguyen * 1

Abstract

for others. A common metric used to measure the utility
of a set of features is the mutual information between the
chosen set of features and the empirical likelihood of the
diseases of interest under the Naive Bayes assumption. This
function is known to exhibit a diminishing returns property
and is submodular (Krause & Guestrin, 2005b).

In this work, we study the problem of privately
maximizing a submodular function in the streaming setting. Extensive work has been done on
privately maximizing submodular functions in the
general case when the function depends upon the
private data of individuals. However, when the
size of the data stream drawn from the domain of
the objective function is large or arrives very fast,
one must privately optimize the objective within
the constraints of the streaming setting. We establish fundamental differentially private baselines
for this problem and then derive better trade-offs
between privacy and utility for the special case
of decomposable submodular functions. A submodular function is decomposable when it can
be written as a sum of submodular functions; this
structure arises naturally when each summand
function models the utility of an individual and
the goal is to study the total utility of the whole
population as in the well-known Combinatorial
Public Projects Problem. Finally, we complement
our theoretical analysis with experimental corroboration.

Definition 1.1 (Submodular functions). Let V be a finite
set and f a function mapping from 2V to R. For all S ⊂ V ,
we say that f (S) is the utility achieved by set S. For every
element e ∈ V and set S ⊂ V , the marginal utility of e over
S (denoted f (e|S)) is the gain in utility provided by e if we
add it to the set S; i.e. f (e|S) = f ({e} ∪ S) − f (S). The
function f is called submodular if it has the diminishing
returns property, i.e., for every pair of subsets S ⊂ T ⊂ V
and element e not in T , f (e|T ) ≤ f (e|S). A submodular
function is called monotone if for all S ⊂ T ⊂ V , f (S) ≤
f (T ). We let OPT denote any arbitrary utility-maximizing
subset of V , potentially subject to additional constraints.
The problem of maximizing a submodular function subject
to constraints on the subsets of V one is allowed to pick
occurs across domains like computer science, electrical engineering (Narayanan, 1997), and economics (Dobzinski
& Schapira, 2006). In theoretical computer science, submodular maximization is a fundamental instance of combinatorial optimization, generalizing problems like Max-Cut
and Facility Location (Schrijver et al., 2003). On the other
hand, submodular maximization has also been applied concretely to numerous problems in machine learning such
as feature selection for classification (Krause & Guestrin,
2005a), influence maximization in social networks (Kempe
et al., 2003), document and corpus summarization (Lin &
Bilmes, 2011), result diversification in recommender systems (Parambath et al., 2016) and exemplar based clustering
(Dueck & Frey, 2007) – see Mitrovic et al. (2017) and
Chaturvedi et al. (2021) for more references.

1. Introduction
Consider the task of a service provider that trains machine
learning models for a set of users, e.g., platforms such as
Amazon Sagemaker and Microsoft Azure. In many cases,
collecting features can be costly and the service provider
has to select a limited number of features for their models.
For instance, given a data set of health attributes of a number of individuals, different users may want to predict the
likelihood of different diseases, and a subset of features may
be useful for the illnesses of some patients but extraneous

In many of these applications, one must publicly release a
solution to a submodular maximization problem in which
the information used to perform the optimization is private.
Consider the example above where private data of patients is
used to compute the utility of different sets of features. The
solution depends on private information, and may reveal too
much about the private data set. One way this can occur
is when a relatively rare feature is picked, adversaries with

*

Equal contribution 1 Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, USA. Correspondence
to: Anamay Chaturvedi <chaturvedi.a@northeastern.edu>,
Huy L. Nguyen <nguyen.hu@northeastern.edu>, Thy Nguyen
<nguyen.thy2@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

