Self-Attention Amortized Distributional Projection Optimization for Sliced
Wasserstein Point-Cloud Reconstruction
Khai Nguyen * 1 Dang Nguyen * 2 Nhat Ho 1

Abstract

tance is used to explore clusters inside data (Ho et al., 2017),
to transfer knowledge between different domains (Courty
et al., 2016; Damodaran et al., 2018), to learn generative
models (Arjovsky et al., 2017; Tolstikhin et al., 2018), to
extract features from graphs (Vincent-Cuaz et al., 2022), to
compare datasets (Alvarez-Melis & Fusi, 2020), and many
other applications. Despite being effective, Wasserstein
distance is extremely expensive to compute. In particular,
the computational complexity and memory complexity of
Wasserstein distance in the discrete case is O(m3 log m)
and O(m2 ) respectively with m is the number of supports.
The computational problem becomes more severe for applications that require computing the Wasserstein distance
multiple times on different pairs of measures. Some examples can be named: deep generative modeling (Genevay
et al., 2018), deep domain adaptation (Bhushan Damodaran
et al., 2018), comparing datasets (Alvarez-Melis & Fusi,
2020), topic modeling (Huynh et al., 2020), point-cloud
reconstruction (Achlioptas et al., 2018), and so on.

Max sliced Wasserstein (Max-SW) distance has
been widely known as a solution for less discriminative projections of sliced Wasserstein (SW)
distance. In applications that have various independent pairs of probability measures, amortized projection optimization is utilized to predict
the “max” projecting directions given two input
measures instead of using projected gradient ascent multiple times. Despite being efficient, MaxSW and its amortized version cannot guarantee
metricity property due to the sub-optimality of
the projected gradient ascent and the amortization
gap. Therefore, we propose to replace Max-SW
with distributional sliced Wasserstein distance
with von Mises-Fisher (vMF) projecting distribution (v-DSW). Since v-DSW is a metric with any
non-degenerate vMF distribution, its amortized
version can guarantee the metricity when performing amortization. Furthermore, current amortized
models are not permutation invariant and symmetric. To address the issue, we design amortized
models based on self-attention architecture. In
particular, we adopt efficient self-attention architectures to make the computation linear in the
number of supports. With the two improvements,
we derive self-attention amortized distributional
projection optimization and show its appealing
performance in point-cloud reconstruction and its
downstream applications.

By adding entropic regularization (Cuturi, 2013), an εapproximation of Wasserstein distance can be obtained in
O(m2 /ε2 ). However, this approach cannot reduce the memory complexity of O(m2 ) due to the storage of the cost
matrix. A more efficient approach is based on the closedform solution of Wasserstein distance in one dimension
which is known as sliced Wasserstein distance (Bonneel
et al., 2015). Sliced Wasserstein (SW) distance is defined
as the expectation of the Wasserstein distance between random one-dimensional push-forward measures from the two
original measures. Thanks to the closed-form solution, SW
can be solved in O(m log2 m) while having a linear memory complexity O(m). Moreover, SW is also better than
Wasserstein distance in high-dimensional statistical inference. Namely, the sample complexity (statistical estimation
rate) of SW is O(n−1/2 ) compared to O(n−1/d ) of Wasserstein distance with d is the number dimension and n is the
number of data samples. Due to appealing properties, SW is
utilized successfully in various applications e.g., generative
modeling (Deshpande et al., 2018; Nguyen & Ho, 2022b;
Nguyen et al., 2023), domain adaptation (Lee et al., 2019a),
Bayesian inference (Nadjahi et al., 2020; Yi & Liu, 2021),
point-cloud representation learning (Nguyen et al., 2021c;
Naderializadeh et al., 2021), and so on.

1. Introduction
Wasserstein distance (Villani, 2008; Peyré & Cuturi, 2019)
has been widely recognized in the community of machine
learning as an effective tool. For example, Wasserstein dis*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, USA 2 VinAI Research. Correspondence to: Khai Nguyen <khainb@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

