The Numerical Stability of Hyperbolic Representation Learning

Gal Mishne 1 Zhengchao Wan 1 Yusu Wang 1 Sheng Yang 2

Abstract

et al., 2022), with applications in various domains where
hierarchical data is abundant, such as NLP (Zhu et al., 2020;
López et al., 2019; López & Strube, 2020), recommendation
systems (Chamberlain et al., 2019) and neuroscience (Gao
et al., 2020).

The hyperbolic space is widely used for representing hierarchical datasets due to its ability to
embed trees with small distortion. However, this
property comes at a price of numerical instability
such that training hyperbolic learning models will
sometimes lead to catastrophic NaN problems,
encountering unrepresentable values in floating
point arithmetic. In this work, we analyze the limitations of two popular models for the hyperbolic
space, namely, the Poincaré ball and the Lorentz
model. We find that, under the 64 bit arithmetic
system, the Poincaré ball has a relatively larger
capacity than the Lorentz model for correctly representing points. However, the Lorentz model is
superior to the Poincaré ball from the perspective
of optimization, which we theoretically validate.
To address these limitations, we identify one Euclidean parametrization of the hyperbolic space
which can alleviate these issues. We further extend this Euclidean parametrization to hyperbolic
hyperplanes and demonstrate its effectiveness in
improving the performance of hyperbolic SVM.

However, the exponential volume growth property leads to
numerical instability in training hyperbolic learning models. As shown by (Sala et al., 2018), in order to represent
points in the popular Poincaré model (Nickel & Kiela, 2017;
Ganea et al., 2018), one requires a large number of bits to
avoid undesirable rounding errors when dealing with small
numbers. The Lorentz model, a popular alternative for representing the hyperbolic space (Nickel & Kiela, 2018; Law
et al., 2019), suffers an opposite numerical issue in dealing
with large numbers. (Yu & De Sa, 2019) proved that representing Lorentz points using floating number arithmetic
could lead to a huge representation error when the points
are far from the origin. Besides, in terms of optimization
and training, the empirical superiority of the Lorentz model
over the Poincaré model has been often observed in tasks
such as word embeddings (Law et al., 2019; Nickel & Kiela,
2018), however, the reason behind is yet unclear.
It is thus important to theoretically clarify the practical limitations of current hyperbolic models and to explain why
certain models have better empirical performance than others. The goal of this paper is to address these issues and to
provide a new model with better numerical performance.

1. Introduction
The n-dimensional hyperbolic space Hn is the unique
simply-connected Riemannian manifold with a constant sectional curvature −1. A remarkable property of Hn against
the Euclidean space Rn is that the volume of a ball in Hn
grows exponentially with respect to the radius. One can thus
embed finite trees into Hn with arbitrarily small distortion
(Sarkar, 2011). This motivates the study of representation
learning of hierarchical data into hyperbolic space (Nickel
& Kiela, 2017) and, moreover, the design of deep neural
networks in hyperbolic spaces (Ganea et al., 2018; Chen

Our Contributions (1) We are the first to clearly identify
the representation capacity of two popular hyperbolic models, the Lorentz and the Poincaré models, in a geometric
lens under the setting of 64-bit system1 . (2) We provide
a theoretical study of optimization on hyperbolic spaces
from the perspective of the gradient vanishing issue inherent
to hyperbolic models. We confirm theoretically that the
Lorentz model is better than the Poincaré model from this
aspect, which was previously only an empirical observation.
(3) We study a simple yet effective Euclidean parameterization of the hyperbolic space which turns out to alleviate
the numerical issues present in the Lorentz and Poincaré
models. Although this Euclidean parametrization has been

1

Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA 2 Harvard John A. Paulson
School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Zhengchao
Wan <z5wan@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Standard CPU/GPU processors have a max precision of 64
bits, and surpassing this limit requires ticklish custom implementations.

1

