Pre-training for Speech Translation: CTC Meets Optimal Transport

Phuong-Hang Le 1 Hongyu Gong 2 Changhan Wang 2 Juan Pino 2 Benjamin Lecouteux 1 Didier Schwab 1

Abstract

chine translation (MT). This can be achieved through either pre-training (Bérard et al., 2018; Bansal et al., 2019;
Wang et al., 2020e;b; Inaguma et al., 2020; Le et al., 2021)
or multi-task learning (joint-training) approaches (Anastasopoulos & Chiang, 2018; Sperber et al., 2019; Le et al.,
2020; Chuang et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020d; Tang et al.,
2021a;b; Ye et al., 2022). In particular, ASR and MT pretrainings have become arguably the most standard practice
in ST development. Indeed, they have been used to obtain
strong baselines in popular libraries such as ESPnet-ST (Inaguma et al., 2020) and FAIRSEQ-S2T (Wang et al., 2020b),
or in standard benchmarks such as MuST-C (Di Gangi et al.,
2019) and CoVoST (Wang et al., 2020a;c). Furthermore,
they have also been adopted in most of the submissions to
recent IWSLT evaluation campaigns (Anastasopoulos et al.,
2021; 2022), as well as in strong multi-task learning systems (Tang et al., 2021a;b; 2022). Despite such ubiquity,
however, this approach presents a major limitation, namely
the so-called modality gap. Indeed, the ASR encoder is
pre-trained with speech inputs, whereas the MT decoder is
pre-trained with text inputs, thus plugging them together
(for ST fine-tuning) will naturally result in a mismatch. This
explains why simply using a pre-trained MT decoder in
addition to a pre-trained ASR encoder only brings modest
gains (Alinejad & Sarkar, 2020) or sometimes even worsens
the performance (Bahar et al., 2019).

The gap between speech and text modalities is a
major challenge in speech-to-text translation (ST).
Different methods have been proposed to reduce
this gap, but most of them require architectural
changes in ST training. In this work, we propose
to mitigate this issue at the pre-training stage, requiring no change in the ST model. First, we
show that the connectionist temporal classification (CTC) loss can reduce the modality gap
by design. We provide a quantitative comparison with the more common cross-entropy loss,
showing that pre-training with CTC consistently
achieves better final ST accuracy. Nevertheless,
CTC is only a partial solution and thus, in our second contribution, we propose a novel pre-training
method combining CTC and optimal transport to
further reduce this gap. Our method pre-trains a
Siamese-like model composed of two encoders,
one for acoustic inputs and the other for textual inputs, such that they produce representations that are close to each other in the Wasserstein space. Extensive experiments on the standard CoVoST-2 and MuST-C datasets show that
our pre-training method applied to the vanilla
encoder-decoder Transformer achieves state-ofthe-art performance under the no-external-data
setting, and performs on par with recent strong
multi-task learning systems trained with external
data. Finally, our method can also be applied on
top of these multi-task systems, leading to further
improvements for these models.

In this work, we make two major contributions for mitigating the modality gap without requiring any changes in the
ST model. First, we show that CTC (Graves et al., 2006) is
a viable solution to this problem. We advocate through theoretical analysis and extensive experiments the use of CTC
for ASR pre-training over the standard cross-entropy (CE)
loss. Indeed, pre-training with vanilla CTC (i.e., without
additional components such as an external language model)
is not only faster but also yields better final ST results than
pre-training with CE. At first glance, this is rather counterintuitive, given that vanilla CTC generally produces inferior
ASR performance than CE (as already noticed by previous
work (Bahdanau et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2017) and again
confirmed by our experiments); but as we will point out, this
success of CTC may be attributed to the ability of its trained
encoder to align speech input to text output without the need
for a decoder. Even so, however, CTC can only partially
alleviate the modality gap. Therefore, in our second contri-

1. Introduction
Speech-to-text translation (ST) is a challenging task that
often requires training two auxiliary tasks for better performance: automatic speech recognition (ASR) and ma1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000
Grenoble, France 2 Meta AI. Correspondence to: Phuong-Hang Le
<hang.le@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

