The Hessian perspective into the Nature of Convolutional Neural Networks

Sidak Pal Singh 1 Thomas Hofmann 1 Bernhard Schölkopf 2

Abstract
While Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have long been investigated and applied, as well
as theorized, we aim to provide a slightly different perspective into their nature — through the
perspective of their Hessian maps. The reason is
that the loss Hessian captures the pairwise interaction of parameters and therefore forms a natural
ground to probe how the architectural aspects of
CNNs get manifested in their structure and properties. We develop a framework relying on Toeplitz
representation of CNNs, and then utilize it to reveal the Hessian structure and, in particular, its
rank. We prove tight upper bounds (with linear
activations), which closely follow the empirical
trend of the Hessian rank and in practice also hold
for more general settings. Overall, our work generalizes and further establishes the key insight that
the Hessian rank grows as the square root of the
number of parameters, even in CNNs.

Figure 1: A comparison of the number of parameters with the
empirically observed loss Hessian rank for increasing number
of channels m for a 2-hidden layer CNN on CIFAR10. Can we
estimate the precise scaling behaviour of the Hessian rank?

themselves in terms of a property or a phenomenon at hand
— here that of Figure 1, which, among other things, would
precisely indicate the effective dimension of the (local) loss
landscape (MacKay, 1992b; Gur-Ari et al., 2018).

1. Introduction

Of course, when the likes of Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), MLPMixer (Tolstikhin et al.,
2021) and their kind, have ushered in a new wave of architecture design, especially when equipped with heaps of data,
it is tempting to think that studying CNNs might not be
as worthwhile an enterprise. Well, that only time and tide
can tell — but it seems that, at least for now, the concepts
and principles behind CNNs (such as patches, larger strides,
weight sharing, downsampling) continue to be carried along
while designing newer architectures in the 2020s (Liu et al.,
2021; 2022). And, more broadly, if the perspectives and
techniques that help us understand the nature of a given architecture are general enough, they may also be of relevance
when considering another architecture of interest.

Nobody would deny that CNNs (Fukushima, 1980; LeCun
et al., 1995; Krizhevsky et al., 2017), with their baked-in
equivariance to translations, have played a key role in the
practical successes of deep learning and computer vision.
Yet several aspects of their nature are still unclear. Cutting
directly to the chase, for instance, take a look at Figure 1.
As the number of channels in the hidden layers increases,
the number of parameters grows, as expected, quadratically.
But, the rank of the loss Hessian at initialization, measured
as precisely as it gets, grows at a much calmer, linear rate.
How come?
This question lies at the core of our work. Generally speaking, we would like to investigate the inherent ‘nature’ of
CNNs, i.e., how its architectural characteristics manifest

We are inspired by one such account of an intriguing perspective: the extensive redundancy in the parameterization
of fully-connected networks, as measured through the Hessian degeneracy (Sagun et al., 2016), and recently outlined
rigorously in the work of (Singh et al., 2021). We aim to
chart this out in detail for CNNs1 .

1

ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 MPI for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: Sidak Pal Singh
<sidak.singh@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
The corresponding code can be found
https://github.com/sidak/hessian_perspective_cnns.

1

under
Also,

