Hardness of Independent Learning
and Sparse Equilibrium Computation in Markov Games

Dylan J. Foster 1 Noah Golowich 2 Sham M. Kakade 3

1. Introduction

Abstract

The framework of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL),
which describes settings in which multiple agents interact in
a dynamic environment, has played a key role in recent breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, including the development of
agents that approach or surpass human performance in games
such as Go (Silver et al., 2016), Poker (Brown & Sandholm,
2018), Stratego (Perolat et al., 2022), and Diplomacy (Kramár
et al., 2022; Bakhtin et al., 2022). MARL also shows promise
for real-world multi-agent systems, including autonomous
driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016), and cybersecurity
(Malialis & Kudenko, 2015), and economic policy (Zheng
et al., 2022). These applications, where reliability is critical,
necessitate the development of algorithms that are practical and
efficient, yet provide strong formal guarantees and robustness.

We consider the problem of decentralized multiagent reinforcement learning in Markov games. A
key question is whether there are algorithms that,
when run independently by all agents, lead to noregret for each player, analogous to celebrated results
for no-regret learning in normal-form games. While
recent work has shown that such algorithms exist for
restricted settings (e.g., when regret is defined with
respect to deviations to Markov policies), the question of whether independent no-regret learning can
be achieved in the standard Markov game framework
was open. We provide a decisive negative resolution
to this problem, both from a computational and
statistical perspective. We show that:

Multi-agent reinforcement learning is typically studied using the
framework of Markov games (also known as stochastic games)
(Shapley, 1953). In a Markov game, agents interact over a finite
number of steps: at each step, each agent observes the state
of the environment, takes an action, and observes a reward
which depends on the current state as well as the other agents’
actions. Then the environment transitions to a new state as a
function of the current state and the actions taken. An episode
consists of a finite number of such steps, and agents interact
over the course of multiple episodes, progressively learning new
information about their environment. Markov games generalize
the well-known model of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
(Puterman, 1994), which describe the special case in which
there is a single agent acting in a dynamic environment, and we
wish to find a policy that maximizes its reward. By contrast,
for Markov games, we typically aim to find a distribution over
agents’ policies which constitutes some type of equilibrium.

1. Under the assumption that PPAD-hard problems cannot be solved in polynomial time, there
is no polynomial-time algorithm that attains noregret in general-sum Markov games when executed independently by all players, even when
the game is known to the algorithm designer
and the number of players is a small constant.
2. When the game is unknown, no algorithm,
efficient or otherwise, can achieve no-regret
without observing exponentially many
episodes in the number of players.
These results are proven via lower bounds for a simpler problem we refer to as SPARSECCE, in which
the goal is to compute a coarse correlated equilibrium
that is “sparse” in the sense that it can be represented
as a mixture of a small number of product policies.
1

1.1. Decentralized learning
In this paper, we focus on the problem of decentralized (or,
independent) learning in Markov games. In decentralized
MARL, each agent in the Markov game behaves independently,
optimizing their policy myopically while treating the effects of
the other agents as exogenous. Agents observe local information (in particular, their own actions and rewards), but do not
observe the actions of the other agents directly. Decentralized
learning enjoys a number of desirable properties, including

2

Microsoft Research Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Harvard University. Correspondence to: Dylan J. Foster<dylanfoster@microsoft.com>, Noah Golowich<nzg@mit.edu>, Sham M.
Kakade<sham@seas.harvard.edu>.

3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

