Explainable Data-Driven Optimization:
From Context to Decision and Back Again

Alexandre Forel 1 Axel Parmentier 2 Thibaut Vidal 1

Abstract

specific decision optimal, and to what extent a change in the
context leads to changes in the decisions. This is especially
relevant in industrial settings when comparing a new datadriven policy to the existing policy, which might be based
on a mix of expert knowledge and quantitative methods.

Data-driven optimization uses contextual information and machine learning algorithms to find solutions to decision problems with uncertain parameters. While a vast body of work is dedicated to
interpreting machine learning models in the classification setting, explaining decision pipelines involving learning algorithms remains unaddressed.
This lack of interpretability can block the adoption
of data-driven solutions as practitioners may not
understand or trust the recommended decisions.
We bridge this gap by introducing a counterfactual explanation methodology tailored to explain
solutions to data-driven problems. We introduce
two classes of explanations and develop methods
to find nearest explanations of random forest and
nearest-neighbor predictors. We demonstrate our
approach by explaining key problems in operations management such as inventory management
and routing.

To enable explainable data-driven optimization, we revisit
the concept of counterfactual explanation, used extensively
to explain machine learning classifiers (Wachter et al., 2017;
Verma et al., 2020). Thus, we explain a decision by answering the question: In what alternative context would
the previous expert-based solution be better than the
data-driven solution? This alternative context forms a
contrastive explanation, highlighting the main features that
make the data-driven decision optimal. In other words,
we focus on explaining decisions rather than classes or labels, as is typical in explainable AI. A notable difference is
that decision spaces often involve an intractable number of
possible decisions (rather than a few classes), making the
explanation task much harder.

1. Introduction
Data-driven optimization leverages contextual information
to solve problems subject to uncertainty by combining machine learning and optimization methods. Contextual information includes auxiliary data such as prices, temporal information, or meteorological data. While utilizing contextual
information can significantly improve data-driven decisionmaking (Hannah et al., 2010; Bertsimas & Kallus, 2020;
Mišić & Perakis, 2020), the resulting decision pipelines are
often complex and lack transparency. Yet, decisions must be
interpretable to be used in practice. They should allow practitioners to understand what features of the context make a

Figure 1. Shortest path over Los Angeles downtown area: optimal path z ∗ in context xn+1 = {Midday, 57.17, 4, 0, 6.99, 2, 11}
shown in blue, and alternative path z alt shown in green. The alternative path becomes optimal when a single feature of the context is
modified: "Midday" → "AM". The details are given in Section 4.3.

1

CIRRELT & SCALE-AI Chair in Data-Driven Supply Chaims,
Department of Mathematical and Industrial Engineering, Polytechnique Montreal, Montreal, Canada 2 CERMICS, École des Ponts,
Marne-la-Vallée, France. Correspondence to: Alexandre Forel
<alexandre.forel@polymtl.ca>.

To illustrate, consider a shortest-path problem over the Los
Angeles downtown area. Given historical data and contextual information, a data-driven optimization model can
provide a shortest path between two nodes, as shown in blue
in Figure 1. Typically, the number of possible shortest paths
between two points grows exponentially with the size of the

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

