Fighting Fire with Fire: Contrastive Debiasing without Bias-free Data via
Generative Bias-transformation
Yeonsung Jung 1 Hajin Shim 1 June Yong Yang 1 Eunho Yang 1 2

Abstract

in various fields of machine learning, such as computer vision (He et al., 2016), natural language processing (Brown
et al., 2020), reinforcement learning (Mnih et al., 2016) and
more. However, it is also known that the over-parameterized
nature of DNNs not only exposes them to general overfitting but also renders them susceptible to biases present in
collected datasets (Torralba & Efros, 2011), which are detrimental to the generalizability. In supervised learning, neural
networks tend to prefer shortcut solutions based on biases
rather than real signals (Zhu et al., 2017b; Li et al., 2018).
These spurious correlations do not provide task-related information, and DNNs that use these malignant biases, which
are easier to perceive compared to the signal, will ultimately
fail on future data. For instance, a classifier trained to identify car racing images using a dataset dominated by the
track will exploit the track road information. However, the
classifier will fail to perform well on images of off-road rallies. To this end, debiasing is imperative in utilizing DNNs
for real-world applications.

Deep neural networks (DNNs), despite their impressive ability to generalize over-capacity networks, often rely heavily on malignant bias as
shortcuts instead of task-related information for
discriminative tasks. To address this problem, recent studies utilize auxiliary information related
to the bias, which is rarely obtainable in practice,
or sift through a handful of bias-free samples for
debiasing. However, the success of these methods
is not always guaranteed due to the unfulfilled
presumptions. In this paper, we propose a novel
method, Contrastive Debiasing via Generative
Bias-transformation (CDvG), which works without explicit bias labels or bias-free samples. Motivated by our observation that not only discriminative models but also image translation models tend to focus on the malignant bias, CDvG
employs an image translation model to transform one bias mode into another while preserving the task-relevant information. Additionally,
the bias-transformed views are set against each
other through contrastive learning to learn biasinvariant representations. Our method demonstrates superior performance compared to prior
approaches, especially when bias-free samples are
scarce or absent. Furthermore, CDvG can be integrated with the methods that focus on bias-free
samples in a plug-and-play manner for additional
enhancements, as demonstrated by diverse experimental results.

A tautological solution to the bias problem is to construct a
bias-free dataset from the start. However, curating a dataset
devoid of all bias is extremely costly at best and generally
infeasible. A more practical attempt at neutralizing dataset
bias is to fortify a dataset with explicit supervision with
regard to the bias (Kim et al., 2019; Sagawa* et al., 2020).
However, additional expenditure of human labor in procuring such information cannot be avoided, which renders the
option less appealing.
In most cases where such explicit supervision for bias is absent, the following two lines of work are recently proposed.
One line of work mitigates the influence of bias by leveraging the bias type (e.g. texture) (Bahng et al., 2020; Geirhos
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Hong & Yang, 2021) to
design bias-oriented auxiliary models or to augment textureperturbed samples. However, such prior knowledge of bias
is by no means guaranteed, and even with such information, designing bias-oriented architectures is not always
straightforward. The other line of work focuses on bias-free
samples by leveraging the knowledge that malignant biases
are learned faster than task-relevant features (Nam et al.,
2020; Lee et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021). However, these
methods tend to break down in regimes where bias-free
samples are scarce or absent (See Section 3.1).

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have showcased that
DNNs are capable of reaching state-of-the-art performance
1
Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Seoul, South Korea 2 AITRICS,
Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Yeonsung Jung
<ys.jung@kaist.ac.kr>, Eunho Yang <eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

