Properties of the Mallows Model Depending on the Number of Alternatives:
A Warning for an Experimentalist

Niclas Boehmer 1 Piotr Faliszewski 2 Sonja Kraiczy 3

Abstract

we can use the Mallows model to generate a realistic set of
results in a series of contests. Using values of φ close to 0
means that the differences in the strengths of the athletes are
large and it is unlikely that a weaker one would outperform a
stronger one, whereas using values of φ close to 1 means that
their abilities are similar and even the weakest participants
may win some of the contests.

The Mallows model is a popular distribution for
ranked data. We empirically and theoretically
analyze how the properties of rankings sampled
from the Mallows model change when increasing the number of alternatives. We find that realworld data behaves differently from the Mallows
model, yet is in line with its recent variant proposed by Boehmer et al. (2021). As part of our
study, we issue several warnings about using the
classic Mallows model. For instance, we find that
one should be extremely careful when using the
Mallows model to generate data for experiments
with a varying number of alternatives, as observed
trends in such experiments might be due to the
changing nature of the generated data.

This ability to generate realistic data is among the prime
applications of the Mallows model (another one is understanding ranking data by estimating the Mallows parameters
that are most likely to lead to it). While real-life datasets
typically involve fairly small sets of alternatives and contain
limited numbers of rankings, synthetic models can provide
arbitrarily large ranking profiles (i.e., collections of rankings over the same alternatives). This flexibility is useful,
e.g., when evaluating various algorithms, such as those for
aggregating search results (Dwork et al., 2001), analyzing
elections (Betzler et al., 2014), preference learning (Lu &
Boutilier, 2014), distribution testing (Busa-Fekete et al.,
2021), clustering (Busse et al., 2007), and for many other
settings. Yet, preparing synthetic datasets can be tricky. To
illustrate this, let us consider two common scenarios.

All models are wrong. [...]
Since all models are wrong the scientist must be alert
to what is importantly wrong.
George Box

In the first one, we want to evaluate how the results of an
algorithm depend on the number of alternatives. The most
obvious approach here is to use the same, fixed dispersion
parameter for all the generated profiles and numbers of alternatives. This approach is taken, e.g., in the works of Meila
et al. (2007); Ali & Meila (2012); Lu & Boutilier (2014);
Brandt et al. (2019); Ayadi et al. (2019; 2022); Chakraborty
et al. (2021); Busa-Fekete et al. (2021), and others. It is
so natural that it essentially never calls for any justification.
We conjecture that it is based on the following, implicit
assumption (needed to interpret the results).

1. Introduction
The Mallows model (Mallows, 1957) is among the simplest
and the most popular means of generating and explaining
ranking data. Indeed, it is even referred to as the normal
distribution over permutations. The model has two main
components, the central order (of the available alternatives)
and the dispersion parameter φ ∈ [0, 1]. Depending on
the value of φ, it either generates random rankings that are
more concentrated around the central one or are more evenly
spread over the space of all permutations. For example, the
central order may rank the athletes participating in some
competition with respect to their expected performance, and

Assumption 1. Using the Mallows model with a fixed dispersion parameter φ for different numbers of alternatives
produces “structurally similar” ranking profiles.

1
TU Berlin 2 AGH University 3 University of Oxford. Correspondence to: Niclas Boehmer <niclas.boehmer@tu-berlin.de>.

In the second scenario, we assume that there is no prior
knowledge regarding the structure of the ranking profiles
that we want to evaluate our algorithm on. In such a case,
a very common approach is to simply choose the dispersion parameter uniformly at random, either from the [0, 1]

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

