Multi-channel Autobidding with Budget and ROI Constraints

Yuan Deng 1 Negin Golrezaei 2 Patrick Jaillet 2 Jason Cheuk Nam Liang 2 Vahab Mirrokni 1

Abstract

non-profits, etc.) have been embracing an expanding array
of advertising platforms such as search engines, social media platforms, web publisher display, etc., which present
a plenitude of channels for advertisers to procure ad impressions and obtain traffic. In this growing multi-channel
environment, the booming online advertising activities have
fueled extensive research and technological advancements
in attribution analytics to answer questions like which channels are more effective in targeting certain users? Or, which
channels produce more user conversion (e.g. ad clicks) or
return-on-investment (ROI) with the same amount of investments? (see (Kannan et al., 2016) for a comprehensive
survey on attribution analytics). Yet, this area of research
has largely left out a crucial phase in the workflow of advertisers’ creation of a digital ad campaign, namely how
advertisers interact with advertising channels, which is the
physical starting point of a campaign.

In digital online advertising, advertisers procure
ad impressions simultaneously on multiple platforms, or so-called channels, such as Google Ads,
Meta Ads Manager, etc., each of which consists
of numerous ad auctions. We study how an advertiser maximizes total conversion (e.g. ad clicks)
while satisfying aggregate return-on-investment
(ROI) and budget constraints across all channels.
In practice, an advertiser does not have control
over, and thus cannot globally optimize, which
individual ad auctions she participates in for each
channel, and instead authorizes a channel to procure impressions on her behalf: the advertiser can
only utilize two levers on each channel, namely
setting a per-channel budget and per-channel target ROI. In this work, we first analyze the effectiveness of each of these levers for solving the
advertiser’s global multi-channel problem. We
show that when an advertiser only optimizes over
per-channel ROIs, her total conversion can be arbitrarily worse than what she could have obtained
in the global problem. Further, we show that the
advertiser can achieve the global optimal conversion when she only optimizes over per-channel
budgets. In light of this finding, under a bandit
feedback setting that mimics real-world scenarios where advertisers have limited information on
ad auctions in each channels and how channels
procure ads, we present an efficient learning algorithm that produces per-channel budgets whose resulting conversion approximates that of the global
optimal problem.

To illustrate the significance of advertiser-channel interactions, consider for example a small business who is relatively
well-informed through attribution research that Google Ads
and Meta ads are the two most effective channels for its
products. The business instantiates its ad campaigns through
interacting with the platforms’ ad management interfaces
(see Figure 1), on which the business utilizes levers such as
specifying budget and a target ROI1 to control campaigns.
Channels then inputs these specified parameters into their
autobidding procedures, where they procure impressions
on the advertiser’s behalf to procure ads through automated
blackbox algorithms. Eventually, channels report performance metrics such as expenditure and conversion back to
the advertiser once the campaign ends. Therefore, one of the
most important decisions advertisers need to make involves
how to optimize over these levers provided by channels.
Unfortunately, this has rarely been addressed in attribution
analytics and relevant literature. Hence, this works contributes to filling this vacancy by addressing two themes:

1. Introduction

How effective are these channel levers for advertisers to achieve their conversion goals? And how
should advertisers optimize over such levers?

In today’s online advertising world, advertisers (including
but not limited to small businesses, marketing practitioners,
1
Google Research 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Jason Cheuk Nam Liang <jcnliang@mit.edu>.

To answer these questions, we study a setting where an advertiser simultaneously procures ads on multiple channels,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
Target ROI is the numerical inverse of CPA or cost per action
on Google Ads, and cost per result goal in Meta Ads.

1

