Tighter Lower Bounds for Shuffling SGD: Random Permutations and Beyond

Jaeyoung Cha 1 Jaewook Lee 1 Chulhee Yun 1

Abstract

the form xt = xt−1 − ηt ∇fi(t) (xt−1 ), where ηt is a step
size parameter, often set to a fixed constant.

We study convergence lower bounds of withoutreplacement stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
for solving smooth (strongly-)convex finite-sum
minimization problems. Unlike most existing results focusing on final iterate lower bounds in
terms of the number of components n and the
number of epochs K, we seek bounds for arbitrary weighted average iterates that are tight
in all factors including the condition number κ.
For SGD with Random Reshuffling, we present
lower bounds that have tighter κ dependencies
than existing bounds. Our results are the first
to perfectly close the gap between lower and upper bounds for weighted average iterates in both
strongly-convex and convex cases. We also prove
weighted average iterate lower bounds for arbitrary permutation-based SGD, which apply to all
variants that carefully choose the best permutation. Our bounds improve the existing bounds in
factors of n and κ and thereby match the upper
bounds shown for a recently proposed algorithm
called GraB.

Many prior studies on SGD have shown convergence results assuming with-replacement sampling of the component index i(t) (Benaı̈m (1999); Bottou et al. (2018); Bubeck
(2015) and many others), where we independently choose
i(t) from a uniform random distribution over the index set
every time. This uniform sampling makes each step of SGD
an unbiased noisy estimate of vanilla gradient descent (GD).
In real-world applications, however, it is much more common to use without-replacement SGD, where each epoch
runs over the entire shuffled set of n components. Withoutreplacement SGD has gained popularity for both its simplicity and empirical observations of faster convergence
rates (Bottou, 2009; Recht & Ré, 2013; Yun et al., 2021).
However, theoretical analysis on without-replacement SGD
remains quite elusive, especially because of the lack of independence between iterates. Nevertheless, recent works have
managed to successfully deal with without-replacement
SGD in theoretical aspects (Haochen & Sra, 2019; Nagaraj
et al., 2019; Recht & Re, 2012).
A simple and popular method of without-replacement sampling is to randomly shuffle the n components independently
on each epoch, often referred to as Random Reshuffling or
SGD-RR. Some studies show upper bounds of convergence
rates for a certain class of functions (Gürbüzbalaban et al.,
2019; Ahn et al., 2020), while some others present lower
bounds by analyzing a function contained in a certain class
with a slow convergence rate (Safran & Shamir, 2020; Rajput et al., 2020). These preliminary results highlight that
without-replacement SGD is in fact capable of converging
provably faster than its with-replacement counterpart.

1. Introduction
One of the most common frameworks used in machine
learning is the following finite-sum minimization problem,
n

min F (x) =
x

1X
fi (x).
n i=1

(1)

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD), an algorithm first proposed by Robbins & Monro (1951), is highly capable of
numerically solving finite-sum optimization problems. In
the t-th iteration, SGD randomly samples a component index i(t) and computes a gradient-based update equation of

A recent line of work (Rajput et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022b;
Mohtashami et al., 2022) opens a new field of studies on
permutation-based SGD, which covers all cases where the
permutation of the n component functions is chosen according to a certain policy, instead of simple random reshuffling.
The aim of this line of research is to design a policy that
yields faster convergence compared to random permutations.
Indeed, a recent result by Lu et al. (2022a) proposes GraB,
a permutation-based SGD algorithm that uses the gradient
information from previous epochs to manipulate the permutation of the current epoch, and shows that GraB provably

1

Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Seoul,
South Korea.
Correspondence to: Chulhee Yun <chulhee.yun@kaist.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

