System Identification of Neural Systems:
If We Got It Right, Would We Know?

Yena Han 1 Tomaso Poggio 1 Brian Cheung 1

Abstract

Target Neural Network

Artificial neural networks are being proposed as
models of parts of the brain. The networks are
compared to recordings of biological neurons,
and good performance in reproducing neural responses is considered to support the model’s validity. A key question is how much this system identification approach tells us about brain computation. Does it validate one model architecture over
another? We evaluate the most commonly used
comparison techniques, such as a linear encoding
model and centered kernel alignment, to correctly
identify a model by replacing brain recordings
with known ground truth models. System identification performance is quite variable; it also depends significantly on factors independent of the
ground truth architecture, such as stimuli images.
In addition, we show the limitations of using functional similarity scores in identifying higher-level
architectural motifs.

Most Similar
Neural Network
?
?

?
?

?

A

B

C

?
?

Candidate Models

Figure 1. Illustration of the research question: If one of the
candidate models matches the target neural network (brain) closely,
can the current model evaluation methods accurately find that out?

The answer is clearly yes: the “engineering approach” described above ranks models that predict neural responses
better as better models of animal brains. While such rankings may be a good measure of absolute performance in
approximating the neural responses, which on its own is
valuable for various applications (Bashivan et al., 2019), it
is an open question whether they are sufficient. In neuroscience, understanding natural intelligence at the level of the
underlying neural circuits requires developing model systems that reproduce the abilities of their biological analogs
while respecting the constraints provided by biology, including anatomy and biophysics (Marr & Poggio, 1976;
Schaeffer et al., 2022). A model that reproduces neural
responses well but turns out to require connectivity or biophysical mechanisms that are different from the biological
ones is thereby falsified.

1. Introduction
Over the last two decades, the dominant approach for machine learning engineers in search of better performance
has been to use standard benchmarks to rank networks from
most relevant to least relevant. This practice has driven
much of the progress in the machine learning community.
A standard comparison benchmark enables the broad validation of successful ideas. Recently such benchmarks have
found their way into neuroscience with the advent of experimental frameworks like Brain-Score (Schrimpf et al., 2020)
and Algonauts (Cichy et al., 2021), where artificial models
compete to predict recordings from real neurons in animal
brains. Can engineering approaches like this be helpful in
the natural sciences?

Consider the conjecture that the similarity of responses between model units and brain neurons allows us to conclude
that brain activity fits better, for instance, a convolutional
motif rather than a dense architecture. If this were true, it
would mean that functional similarity over large data sets
effectively constrains architecture. Then the need for a separate test of the model at the level of anatomy would become,
at least in part, less critical for model validation. Therefore,
we ask the question: could functional similarity be a reliable
predictor of architectural similarity?

1

Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Correspondence to: Yena Han <yenahan@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

We describe an attempt to benchmark the most popular similarity techniques by replacing the brain recordings with
1

