Near-Optimal Φ-Regret Learning in Extensive-Form Games

Ioannis Anagnostides 1 Gabriele Farina 2 Tuomas Sandholm 1 3 4 5

Abstract

actions. But how do we measure the performance of a
learning agent? A popular metric commonly used is that
of external regret (or simply regret). However, external
regret can be a rather weak benchmark: a no-externalregret agent could still incur substantial regret under simple
in-hindsight “transformations” of its behavior—e.g., consistently switching from an action a to a different action
a′ (Gordon et al., 2008).

In this paper, we establish efficient and uncoupled learning dynamics so that, when employed
by all players in multi-player perfect-recall
imperfect-information extensive-form games,
the trigger regret of each player grows as
O(log T ) after T repetitions of play. This improves exponentially over the prior best known
trigger-regret bound of O(T 1/4 ), and settles a
recent open question by Bai et al. (2022). As
an immediate consequence, we guarantee convergence to the set of extensive-form correlated
equilibria and coarse correlated equilibria at a
near-optimal rate of logT T . Building on prior
work, at the heart of our construction lies a more
general result regarding fixed points deriving
from rational functions with polynomial degree,
a property that we establish for the fixed points
of (coarse) trigger deviation functions. Moreover, our construction leverages a refined regret
circuit for the convex hull, which—unlike prior
guarantees—preserves the RVU property introduced by Syrgkanis et al. (NIPS, 2015); this
observation has an independent interest in establishing near-optimal regret under learning dynamics based on a CFR-type decomposition of
the regret.

A more general metric is Φ regret (Hazan & Kale, 2007;
Rakhlin et al., 2011; Stoltz & Lugosi, 2007; Greenwald &
Jafari, 2003), parameterized by a set deviations Φ. From
a game-theoretic standpoint, the importance of this framework is that different choices of Φ lead to different types
of equilibria (Greenwald & Jafari, 2003; Stoltz & Lugosi,
2007). For example, one such celebrated result guarantees
that no-internal-regret players converge—in terms of empirical frequency of play—to the set of correlated equilibria (CE) (Foster & Vohra, 1997; Hart & Mas-Colell, 2000).
This brings us to the following central question:
What are the best performance guarantees when
no-Φ-regret learners are playing in multi-player
general-sum games?
Special cases of this question have recently received considerable attention in the literature (Daskalakis et al., 2011;
Rakhlin & Sridharan, 2013a;b; Syrgkanis et al., 2015; Foster et al., 2016; Wei & Luo, 2018; Chen & Peng, 2020;
Hsieh et al., 2021; Daskalakis et al., 2021; Daskalakis
& Golowich, 2022; Anagnostides et al., 2022a; Piliouras
et al., 2022b). In particular, Daskalakis et al. (2021) were
the first to establish O(polylog T ) external regret bounds
for normal-form games,1 and subsequent work extended
those results to internal regret (Anagnostides et al., 2022a);
those guarantees, applicable when all players employ specific learning dynamics, improve exponentially over what
is possible when a player is facing a sequence of adversarially produced utilities—the canonical consideration in online learning. However, much less is known about Φ-regret
learning beyond normal-form games.

1. Introduction
A primary objective of artificial intelligence is the design
of agents that can adapt effectively in complex and nonstationary multiagent environments—modeled as generalsum games. Multiagent decision making often occurs in
a decentralized fashion, with each agent only obtaining
information about its own reward function, and the goal
is to learn how to play the game through repeated inter1
Department of computer science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 FAIR, Meta AI 3 Strategy Robot, Inc.
4
Optimized Markets, Inc. 5 Strategic Machine, Inc. Correspondence to: Ioannis Anagnostides <ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu>.

One such important application revolves around learn-

th

1

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

With a slight abuse of notation, we use the O(·) notation in
our introduction to suppress parameters that depend (polynomially) on the natural parameters of the game.

1

