Theoretical Behavior of XAI Methods in the Presence of Suppressor Variables

Rick Wilming 1 Leo Kieslich 1 Benedict Clark 2 Stefan Haufe 1 2 3

Abstract

portance’ score to each feature of an individual test input. It
is commonly agreed that being able to answer this question
is necessary to create trust in and a better understanding of
the behavior of such decision systems (Baehrens et al., 2010;
Ribeiro et al., 2016; Binder et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee,
2017; Fisher et al., 2019). In Haufe et al. (2014) and Wilming et al. (2022), it was shown that features which certain
XAI methods determine to be important, e.g. by inspecting
their corresponding weights of a linear model, may actually
not have any statistical association with the predicted variable. As a result, the provided ‘explanation’ may not agree
with prior domain knowledge of an expert user and might
undermine that user’s trust in the predictive model, even if it
performs optimally. Indeed, a highly accurate model might
exploit so-called suppressor features (Conger, 1974; Friedman & Wall, 2005), which can be statistically independent
of the prediction target yet still lead to increased prediction
performance. On the other hand, incorrect explanations may
implant misconceptions about the data, the model and/or
the relationship between the two into a user’s mind, which
could lead to misguided actions that could be harmful.

In recent years, the community of ‘explainable
artificial intelligence’ (XAI) has created a vast
body of methods to bridge a perceived gap between model ‘complexity’ and ‘interpretability’.
However, a concrete problem to be solved by
XAI methods has not yet been formally stated.
As a result, XAI methods are lacking theoretical and empirical evidence for the ‘correctness’
of their explanations, limiting their potential use
for quality-control and transparency purposes. At
the same time, Haufe et al. (2014) showed, using
simple toy examples, that even standard interpretations of linear models can be highly misleading.
Specifically, high importance may be attributed to
so-called suppressor variables lacking any statistical relation to the prediction target. This behavior
has been confirmed empirically for a large array
of XAI methods in Wilming et al. (2022). Here,
we go one step further by deriving analytical expressions for the behavior of a variety of popular
XAI methods on a simple two-dimensional binary classification problem involving Gaussian
class-conditional distributions. We show that the
majority of the studied approaches will attribute
non-zero importance to a non-class-related suppressor feature in the presence of correlated noise.
This poses important limitations on the interpretations and conclusions that the outputs of these
XAI methods can afford.

While Haufe et al. (2014) have introduced low-dimensional
and well-controlled examples to illustrate the problem of
suppressor variables for model interpretation, Wilming et al.
(2022) showed empirically that the emergence of suppressors indeed poses a problem for a large group of XAI methods and diminishes their ‘explanation performance’. Here,
we go one step further and derive analytical expressions for
commonly used XAI methods for a simple two-dimensional
linear data generation process capable of creating suppressor
variables by parametrically inducing correlations between
features. In particular, we investigate which XAI approaches
attribute non-zero importance to plain suppressor variables
that are by construction independent of the prediction target and thereby violate a data-driven definition of feature
importance recently put forward by Wilming et al. (2022).

1. Introduction
The field of ‘explainable artificial intelligence’ (XAI) is devoted to answering the broad question of why an automatic
decision system put forward a certain prediction. This is
often addressed by techniques that attribute a so-called ‘im-

2. Related Work

1

Technische Universität, Berlin, Germany 2 PhysikalischTechnische Bundesanstalt, Berlin, Germany 3 Charité – Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Stefan Haufe
<haufe@tu-berlin.de>.

XAI methods often analyze ML models in a post-hoc manner (Arrieta et al., 2020), where a trained model deemed
to be ‘non-interpretable’, such as a deep neural network, is
given, while the XAI methods attempt to ‘reverse-engineer’
its decision for a given input sample. A crucial limitation of

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

