Multi-Objective Population Based Training

Arkadiy Dushatskiy 1 Alexander Chebykin 1 Tanja Alderliesten 2 Peter A.N. Bosman 1 3

Abstract

els with different trade-offs between the objectives should
be presented to the user. Finding hyperparameters that result in models with the best trade-offs is a multi-objective
optimization problem.

Population Based Training (PBT) is an efficient hyperparameter optimization algorithm.
PBT is a single-objective algorithm, but many
real-world hyperparameter optimization problems involve two or more conflicting objectives.
In this work, we therefore introduce a multiobjective version of PBT, MO-PBT. Our experiments on diverse multi-objective hyperparameter optimization problems (Precision/Recall, Accuracy/Fairness, Accuracy/Adversarial Robustness) show that MO-PBT outperforms random
search, single-objective PBT, and the state-of-theart multi-objective hyperparameter optimization
algorithm MO-ASHA.

One of the most efficient approaches to single-objective
Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) is Population Based
Training (PBT) (Jaderberg et al., 2017). PBT has two features which ensure its efficiency. Firstly, it is a highly parallelizable, asynchronous algorithm, which means that the
available hardware can be effectively utilized. Secondly, in
contrast to standard optimization techniques which usually
train models from scratch in order to estimate the performance of a particular hyperparameter setting, PBT optimizes hyperparameters during model training. In this work,
we propose to expand Population Based Training (Jaderberg et al., 2017) to Multi-Objective HPO (MO-HPO). The
population of models used in PBT should be especially
well suited for solving Multi-Objective (MO) problems, as
maintaining a population is naturally helpful for finding
a good trade-off front of solutions, which is known from
the Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) literature (Deb, 2001;
Morales-Hernández et al., 2022). EAs such as NSGA-II
(Deb et al., 2002) have been used for efficiently solving
MO optimization problems, including Neural Architecture
Search (Lu et al., 2019).

1. Introduction
The computational complexity of machine learning tasks has
drastically increased in recent years. This has been caused
by larger models (especially, deep neural networks (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020)) and larger available
datasets (Thomee et al., 2016; Byeon et al., 2022). At the
same time, the problem of tuning model hyperparameters
remains crucial for achieving maximal performance (Kadra
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022). Thus, there
is a growing demand for efficient algorithms to do hyperparameter tuning. Moreover, in real-world problems, there
might be more than one objective that a user is interested in.
An example of such a scenario which recently received a lot
of attention from the machine learning community is finding
a trade-off between the predictive accuracy of a classifier
and its fairness (Schmucker et al., 2020; Chuang & Mroueh,
2021). When different objectives are conflicting and the
target trade-off is not known a priori, usually no single best
model (or hyperparameter setting) exists. Thus, many mod-

The main contributions of our work are the following:
1. We expand Population Based Training to MO-HPO scenarios. The overview of the proposed Multi-Objective
PBT (MO-PBT) algorithm is demonstrated in Figure 1.
2. We demonstrate that using single-objective PBT for
MO-HPO by transforming it into a single-objective
problem (via a scalarization technique or simply optimizing one of the objectives) is an inferior approach to
MO-PBT which uses an MO technique of dominationbased selection (Deb et al., 2002).

1

Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands 2 Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands 3 Delft University of Technology, Delft, the
Netherlands.
Correspondence to:
Arkadiy Dushatskiy
<arkadiy.dushatskiy@cwi.nl>.

3. On a set of diverse MO-HPO problems, we demonstrate that MO-PBT outperforms the state-of-the-art
efficient, parallelizable hyperparameter optimization
algorithm, Multi-Objective Asynchronous Successive
Halving (MO-ASHA) (Schmucker et al., 2021).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

