Towards Coherent Image Inpainting Using Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models

Guanhua Zhang * 1 Jiabao Ji * 1 Yang Zhang 2 Mo Yu 3 Tommi Jaakkola 4 Shiyu Chang 1

Abstract
Image inpainting refers to the task of generating a complete, natural image based on a partially revealed reference image. Recently, many
research interests have been focused on addressing this problem using fixed diffusion models.
These approaches typically directly replace the
revealed region of the intermediate or final generated images with that of the reference image
or its variants. However, since the unrevealed regions are not directly modified to match the context, it results in incoherence between revealed
and unrevealed regions. To address the incoherence problem, a small number of methods introduce a rigorous Bayesian framework, but they
tend to introduce mismatches between the generated and the reference images due to the approximation errors in computing the posterior distributions. In this paper, we propose C O PAINT,
which can coherently inpaint the whole image
without introducing mismatches. C O PAINT also
uses the Bayesian framework to jointly modify
both revealed and unrevealed regions, but approximates the posterior distribution in a way
that allows the errors to gradually drop to zero
throughout the denoising steps, thus strongly penalizing any mismatches with the reference image. Our experiments verify that C O PAINT can
outperform the existing diffusion-based methods under both objective and subjective metrics.
The codes are available at https://github.
com/UCSB-NLP-Chang/CoPaint/.

(a) Input

(b) B LENDED

(c) D DRM

(d) C O PAINT

Figure 1. Inpainted images by B LENDED (b), D DRM (c) and our
proposed method C O PAINT-TT (d). Image are generated conditioned on the given masked input (a) with a fixed diffusion model.

image. In recent years, researchers have increasingly focused on using diffusion models, a class of generative models that convert noise images into natural images through a
series of denoising steps, to solve this problem. One popular
approach is to use a fixed, generic diffusion model that has
been pre-trained for image generation. This eliminates the
need for retraining the diffusion model, making the process
more efficient and versatile.
However, despite their promising performance, such methods are susceptible to the incoherence problem. Specifically,
these methods often impose the inpainting constraints based
on some form of replacement operations, e.g., directly replacing the revealed portion of the predicted image with that
of the reference image (Wang et al., 2022), or replacing the
revealed portion of the intermediate denoising results with a
corrupted version of the reference images (Avrahami et al.,
2021; Lugmayr et al., 2022). Yet the pixels of the unrevealed
region, which should also be modified to match the context
of the revealed region, are not directly modified (Trippe
et al., 2022). As a result, these methods can easily lead
to discontinuity or incoherence between the revealed and
unrevealed regions in the generated images. For example,
Figure 1 shows some incoherent inpainting results of a halfmasked portrait image. The result in (b) has unmatched hair
colors and styles between the left and right halves, and the
result in (c) has a clear discontinuity in the middle resulting
from different skin tones.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting refers to the problem of generating a natural, complete image based on a partially revealed reference
*
Equal contribution 1 UC Santa Barbara 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI
Lab 3 IBM Research during the project’s involvement 4 MIT CSAIL.
Correspondence to: Guanhua Zhang <guanhua@ucsb.edu>, Jiabao
Ji <jiabaoji@ucsb.edu>.

To address the incoherence problem, a small number of
methods like D PS (Chung et al., 2022a) and R ESAM PLING (Trippe et al., 2022) use a more rigorous Bayesian
framework, which casts the inpainting problem as sampling
the images from the posterior distributions, conditional on
the inpainting constraint. Since the posterior distribution

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

