Lower Bounds for Learning in Revealing POMDPs

Fan Chen 1 Huan Wang 2 Caiming Xiong 2 Song Mei 3 Yu Bai 2

Abstract

1. Introduction

This paper studies the fundamental limits of reinforcement learning (RL) in the challenging
partially observable setting. While it is wellestablished that learning in Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) requires
exponentially many samples in the worst case, a
surge of recent work shows that polynomial sample complexities are achievable under the revealing condition—A natural condition that requires
the observables to reveal some information about
the unobserved latent states. However, the fundamental limits for learning in revealing POMDPs
are much less understood, with existing lower
bounds being rather preliminary and having substantial gaps from the current best upper bounds.

Partial observability—where the agent can only observe
partial information about the true underlying state of the
system—is ubiquitous in real-world applications of Reinforcement Learning (RL) and constitutes a central challenge
to RL (Kaelbling et al., 1998; Sutton & Barto, 2018). It
is known that learning in the standard model of Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) is much
more challenging than its fully observable counterpart—
Finding a near-optimal policy in long-horizon POMDPs
requires a number of samples at least exponential in the horizon length in the worst-case (Krishnamurthy et al., 2016).
Such an exponential hardness originates from the fact that
the agent may not observe any useful information about
the true underlying state of the system, without further restrictions on the structure of the POMDP. This is in stark
contrast to learning fully observable (tabular) MDPs where
polynomially many samples are necessary and sufficient
without further assumptions (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Jaksch
et al., 2010; Azar et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2018; Zhang et al.,
2020; Domingues et al., 2021).

We establish strong PAC and regret lower bounds
for learning in revealing POMDPs. Our lower
bounds scale polynomially in all relevant problem parameters in a multiplicative fashion, and
achieve significantly smaller gaps against the current best upper bounds, providing a solid starting
point for future studies. In particular, for multistep revealing POMDPs, we show that (1) the
latent state-space dependence is at least ΩpS 1.5 q
in the PAC sample complexity, which is notably
harder than the r
ΘpSq scaling for fully-observable
MDPs; (2) Any polynomial sublinear regret is at
least ΩpT 2{3 q, suggesting its fundamental
?differr
ence from the single-step case where Op T q regret is achievable. Technically, our hard instance
construction adapts techniques in distribution testing, which is new to the RL literature and may be
of independent interest. We also complement our
results with new sharp regret upper bounds for
strongly B-stable PSRs, which include single-step
revealing POMDPs as a special case.

Towards circumventing this hardness result, recent work
seeks additional structural conditions that permit sampleefficient learning. One natural proposal is the revealing
condition (Jin et al., 2020a; Liu et al., 2022a), which at
a high level requires the observables (observations and actions) to reveal some information about the underlying latent
state, thus ruling out the aforementioned worst-case situation where the observables are completely uninformative.
Concretely, the single-step revealing condition (Jin et al.,
2020a) requires the (immediate) emission probabilities of
the latent states to be well-conditioned, in the sense that
different states are probabilistically distinguishable from
their emissions. The multi-step revealing condition (Liu
et al., 2022a) generalizes the single-step case by requiring the well conditioning of the multi-step emission-action
probabilities—the probabilities of observing a sequence of
observations in the next m ě 2 steps, conditioned on taking
a specific sequence of actions at the current latent state.

1

Peking University 2 Salesforce AI Research 3 UC Berkeley.
Correspondence to: Fan Chen <chern@pku.edu.cn>, Song Mei
<songmei@berkeley.edu>, Yu Bai <yu.bai@salesforce.com>.

Sample-efficient algorithms for learning single-step and
multi-step revealing POMDPs are initially designed by Jin
et al. (2020a) and Liu et al. (2022a), and subsequently developed in a surge of recent work (Cai et al., 2022; Wang et al.,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

