Towards Better Graph Representation Learning with Parameterized
Decomposition & Filtering

Mingqi Yang 1 Wenjie Feng 2 Yanming Shen 1 Bryan Hooi 2 3

Abstract

ferent models related to one another? Consequently, when
conducting learning tasks on a graph with these models,
the fundamental questions we aim to address are: how to
construct an effective adaptive matrix representation for the
graph topology, and how to flexibly capture the interactions
between multichannel graph signals.

Proposing an effective and flexible matrix to represent a graph is a fundamental challenge that has
been explored from multiple perspectives, e.g.,
filtering in Graph Fourier Transforms. In this
work, we develop a novel and general framework
which unifies many existing GNN models from
the view of parameterized decomposition and filtering, and show how it helps to enhance the flexibility of GNNs while alleviating the smoothness
and amplification issues of existing models. Essentially, we show that the extensively studied
spectral graph convolutions with learnable polynomial filters are constrained variants of this formulation, and releasing these constraints enables
our model to express the desired decomposition
and filtering simultaneously. Based on this generalized framework, we develop models that are
simple in implementation but achieve significant
improvements and computational efficiency on a
variety of graph learning tasks. Code is available
at https://github.com/qslim/PDF.

Under the paradigm of spectral graph convolution theories, the Laplacian and its variants are used as the matrix
representation of the graph to maintain theoretical consistency (Chung, 1997; Hammond et al., 2011; Shuman et al.,
2013; Defferrard et al., 2016). This induces spectral GNNs,
which have become a popular class of GNNs with performance guarantees, including GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017),
SGC (Wu et al., 2019a), S2 GC (Zhu & Koniusz, 2020), and
others (Klicpera et al., 2019a;b; Ming Chen et al., 2020). All
of them utilize the eigenvectors of the (normalized) Laplacian for Graph Fourier Transform and design different graph
signal filters in the frequency domain.
Beyond spectral models, spatial GNNs have gradually become prominent in the research community, which consider graph convolution within the message-passing framework (Gilmer et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2019b; Corso et al.,
2020; Yang et al., 2020), and the advantage of flexible implementation makes them favorable for the graph-level prediction task. Interestingly, the aggregation design, which
plays a central role in the spatial GNNs, also implicitly corresponds to a specific matrix representation for the graph.

1. Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful and promising technique for representation learning on
graphs and have been widely applied to various applications.
A large number of GNN models have been proposed, including spectral graph convolutions, spatial message-passing,
and even Graph Transformers, for boosting performance or
resolving existing defects, e.g., the oversmoothing issue (Li
et al., 2018; Oono & Suzuki, 2020; Huang et al., 2020) or
expressive power (Xu et al., 2019b; Morris et al., 2019; Sato,
2020). This raises the natural question of: how are these dif-

Recently, transformers have shown promising performance
on molecular property predictions (Ying et al., 2021;
Kreuzer et al., 2021; Bastos et al., 2022; Min et al., 2022;
Rampášek et al., 2022). These models apply transformers
with positional encoding, structural encoding, and other
techniques to graph data, while they actually also refer to
specific matrix representations. Besides, several studies
in the field of graph signal processing also show that the
matrix representation can be flexible as long as it reflects
the topology of the underlying graph (Dong et al., 2016;
Deri & Moura, 2017; Ortega et al., 2018). Graph Shift
Operator (GSO) proposes a group of feasible matrix representations (Sandryhaila & Moura, 2013), and allows GNNs
to obtain better performance for graph learning tasks by
learning matrix representations from a group of GSOs (Da-

1
Dalian University of Technology, China 2 Institute of Data
Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 3 School of
Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yanming Shen <shen@dlut.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

