Margin-based Neural Network Watermarking

Byungjoo Kim 1 Suyoung Lee 2 Seanie Lee 1 Sooel Son 2 Sung Ju Hwang 1

Abstract

As the MLaaS providers put a significant amount of resources for constructing a high-performing model, protecting their intellectual property rights is a crucial problem.
However, DNN models deployed via MLaaS systems are
known to be vulnerable to attacks that aim to steal their
functionalities. Even if the attacker does not have access to
the parameters of the deployed models, the adversary can
extract the functionality of the DNN models with black-box
functionality stealing attacks, for instance, model extraction
attacks (Orekondy et al., 2019). To mitigate the functionality
stealing threat, prior studies (Uchida et al., 2017; Li et al.,
2019; Namba & Sakuma, 2019; Chen et al., 2021; Yang
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2018; Adi et al., 2018; Bansal
et al., 2022) have suggested DNN watermarking methods
that enable the ownership verification of a stolen model.

As Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) platforms become prevalent, deep neural network
(DNN) watermarking techniques are gaining increasing attention, which enables one to verify the
ownership of a target DNN model in a black-box
scenario. Unfortunately, previous watermarking
methods are vulnerable to functionality stealing attacks, thus allowing an adversary to falsely claim
the ownership of a DNN model stolen from its
original owner. In this work, we propose a novel
margin-based DNN watermarking approach that
is robust to the functionality stealing attacks based
on model extraction and distillation. Specifically,
during training, our method maximizes the margins of watermarked samples by using projected
gradient ascent on them so that their predicted
labels cannot change without compromising the
accuracy of the model that the attacker tries to
steal. We validate our method on multiple benchmarks and show that our watermarking method
successfully defends against model extraction attacks, outperforming relevant baselines.

These watermarking methods require either black-box or
white-box access to the suspicious model for ownership
verification. However, in practical scenarios, the model
owners using watermarking method which requires whitebox access to the suspicious model would fail to verify
their ownership because adversaries would not allow direct
access to the parameters of the stolen model. Due to this
limitation, most existing methods use the trigger set based
approach (Adi et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019;
Namba & Sakuma, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a;b; Chen et al.,
2021; Yang et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Maini et al., 2021;
Li et al., 2022; Bansal et al., 2022), which operates in a
black-box setting. For ownership verification, model owners
conduct statistical testing to demonstrate the behavioral
difference between the watermarked and watermark-free
models with a predefined set of samples whose labels are
only known to the owner. When doing so, the model owner
designs the labels or samples used for the query set to have
an atypical distribution to prevent false alarms.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has proven to be a promising strategy
for tackling practical problems from real-world domains
such as computer vision (He et al., 2016), natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020), and speech recognition/synthesis (Baevski et al., 2020). This has led to active
deployments of a deep neural network (DNN) in real-world
applications. A Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS)
platform is a notable example of such a practical system,
which allows users to provide input data and access the
output of the models that are deployed on the cloud.

Despite the numerous attempts for DNN ownership verification, most existing DNN watermarking methods have
failed to demonstrate their robustness against model extraction attacks (Lukas et al., 2022), which aim to copy the
functionality of the target model.

1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST 2 Graduate
School of Information Security, KAIST. Correspondence to:
Byungjoo Kim <byungjoo@kaist.ac.kr>, Sung Ju Hwang <sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr>.

Although several recent studies (Jia et al., 2021; Maini et al.,
2021; Li et al., 2022) have shown their robustness against
model extraction, we believe that the behavioral differences
between the stolen model and the clean model are insuffi-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

