SpENCNN: Orchestrating Encoding and Sparsity for Fast Homomorphically
Encrypted Neural Network Inference

Ran Ran 1 Xinwei Luo 1 Wei Wang 2 Tao Liu 3 Gang Quan 4 Xiaolin Xu 5 Caiwen Ding 6 Wujie Wen 1

Abstract

1. Introduction
For the past decade, we have witnessed the tremendous
progress of machine learning and the great success achieved
in practical applications. Convolution Neural Network
(CNN) (Alex et al., 2014) models, for example, have been
widely used for many cognitive tasks such as medical imaging, face and human action recognition. Meanwhile, there is
a growing interest in deploying machine learning on cloud as
a service (MLaaS) (Varghese & Buyya, 2018; Marston et al.,
2011). While cloud computing has been well recognized as
an attractive solution, especially for computation-intensive
scenarios such as the MLaaS, outsourcing sensitive data and
data processing to the cloud service provider can pose a
severe threat to the client’s privacy.

Homomorphic Encryption (HE) is a promising
technology to protect clients’ data privacy for
Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) on public clouds. However, HE operations can be orders of magnitude slower than their counterparts
for plaintexts and thus result in prohibitively
high inference latency, seriously hindering the
practicality of HE. In this paper, we propose a
HE-based fast neural network (NN) inference
framework–SpENCNN built upon the co-design
of HE operation-aware model sparsity and the
single-instruction-multiple-data (SIMD)-friendly
data packing, to improve NN inference latency. In
particular, we first develop an encryption-aware
HE-group convolution technique that can partition channels among different groups based on
the data size and ciphertext size, and then encode
them into the same ciphertext by novel groupinterleaved encoding, so as to dramatically reduce the number of bottlenecked operations in
HE convolution. We further tailor a HE-friendly
sub-block weight pruning to reduce the costly
HE-based convolution operation. Our experiments show that SpENCNN can achieve overall
speedups of 8.37×, 12.11×, 19.26×, and 1.87×
for LeNet, VGG-5, HEFNet, and ResNet-20 respectively, with negligible accuracy loss. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.
com/ranran0523/SPECNN.

Homomorphic Encryption (HE) (Rivest et al., 1978) is a
promising technology for protecting clients’ privacy when
deploying MLaaS on the cloud. HE allows computations
to be performed on encrypted inputs. The decrypted output matches the corresponding results computed from the
original inputs. Thus, a client can encrypt the sensitive data
locally and send the encrypted ciphertexts to the cloud. The
encrypted results sent from the cloud can be correctly decrypted using the secret key held by the client. While HE
helps maintain the confidentiality of the computation process on the cloud effectively, one major problem is the excessive computational cost associated with the HE operations
over the encrypted data (e.g. HE multiplication, addition,
rotation). In fact, HE operations can be several (i.e., three to
seven) orders of magnitude slower than the corresponding
operations on plaintexts (Jung et al., 2021), becoming the
bottleneck that hinders the popularity of MLaaS.
One of the most effective approaches (e.g. Gilad-Bachrach
et al. (2016); Brutzkus et al. (2019); Dathathri et al. (2019);
Kim et al. (2022); Lee et al. (2022a)) to reduce the HE computational cost is to take advantage of the single-instructionmultiple-data (SIMD) capability, supported by HE schemes,
e.g. Cheon-Kim-Kim-Song (CKKS) (Cheon et al., 2017)
and Brakerski/Fan-Vercauteren (BFV). Smart & Vercauteren
(2010) packs multiple data elements into different “slots” in
the same ciphertext and thus computations for data elements
at the same slot of two encoded messages can be performed
in parallel. The challenge is how to pack data based on the

1

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh University 2 Anonym, Inc. 3 Dept. of Mathematics and Computer
Science, Lawrence Technological University 4 Dept. of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Florida International University 5 Dept.
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
6
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut. Correspondence to: Ran Ran <rar418@lehigh.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

