Semiparametrically Efficient Off-Policy Evaluation in Linear
Markov Decision Processes
Chuhan Xie 1 Wenhao Yang 2 Zhihua Zhang 1

Abstract

The OPE task in reality is challenging, mainly because
of two reasons: 1). the behavior policy, which is used
to generate logged data, is usually different from the target
policy that is of our interest, and the gap between them tends
to increase instability of estimation; 2). the OPE target is an
accumulated long-term reward, while naive OPE approaches
suffer from heavy computation as the time horizon increases.
The latter is also called the “curse of horizon” (Liu et al.,
2018).

We study semiparametrically efficient estimation
in off-policy evaluation (OPE) where the underlying Markov decision process (MDP) is linear
with a known feature map. We characterize the
variance lower bound for regular estimators in
the linear MDP setting and propose an efficient
estimator whose variance achieves that lower
bound. Consistency and asymptotic normality
of our estimator are established under mild conditions, which merely requires the only infinitedimensional nuisance parameter to be estimated
at a n−1/4 convergence rate. We also construct an
asymptotically valid confidence interval for statistical inference and conduct simulation studies
to validate our results. To our knowledge, this is
the first work that concerns efficient estimation in
the presence of a known structure of MDPs in the
OPE literature.

In face of these challenges, there is a major line of works
that aim to improve the sample efficiency of OPE estimators (Jiang & Li, 2016; Liu et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019;
Kallus & Uehara, 2020; 2022). Probably one of the most
remarkable works is (Kallus & Uehara, 2022), which leverages the semiparametric theory to propose a double reinforcement learning (DRL) value estimator that is both
doubly-robust against model misspecification of nuisance
parameters and efficient (i.e., having the minimal variance)
among a wide class of estimators. The proposed DRL estimator is a successful application of statistical theories to
OPE problems due to its statistical nature. Recently, similar approaches have been applied to cases with more complex data generating mechanisms, such as OPE problems in
Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs) (Bennett & Kallus,
2021) and Confounded MDPs (CMDPs) (Shi et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is one of the major tasks in
offline reinforcement learning (Precup, 2000; Mahmood
et al., 2014; Jiang & Li, 2016; Munos et al., 2016; Thomas
& Brunskill, 2016; Xie et al., 2019; Uehara et al., 2022). In
contrast to traditional online reinforcement learning problems, OPE focuses on estimating the expected long-term
rewards of a policy using logged data that is generated in
advance by a potentially different policy. OPE enjoys a
wide range of applications especially when online longterm experimentation may be costly or unethical, such as in
healthcare (Murphy, 2003; Chakraborty & Moodie, 2013;
Luckett et al., 2019), education (Mandel et al., 2014), and
recommendation systems (Chen et al., 2019).

Other than specific data generating mechanisms, all mentioned works implicitly assume no information on the structure of MDPs. This is not always the case, because in certain
problems we may possess information that the underlying
MDP, for example, is linear with a known feature map (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Therefore, a natural question arises:
Is there any efficiency gain from such linear structure of MDPs? If so, how to construct a “best”
value estimator in the OPE problem with linear
MDPs?

1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
China 2 Academy of Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking
University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Zhihua Zhang
<zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn>.

In this paper we conduct a comprehensive analysis on this
question, and finally give a positive answer to it. As far as
we know, our work is for the first time to study efficient OPE
estimation in the presence of a known structure of MDPs.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

The main contributions of this paper are as follows.
1

