Differentially Private Hierarchical Clustering
with Provable Approximation Guarantees

Jacob Imola 1 Alessandro Epasto 2 Mohammad Mahdian 2 Vincent Cohen-Addad 2 Vahab Mirrokni 2

Abstract

widespread use of hierarchical clustering in disparate areas of science, such as social networks analysis (Leskovec
et al., 2014; Mann et al., 2008), bioinformatics (Diez et al.,
2015), phylogenetics (Sneath & Sokal, 1962; Jardine & Sibson, 1968), gene expression analysis (Eisen et al., 1998),
text classification (Steinbach et al., 2000) and finance (Tumminello et al., 2010). Popular hierarchical clustering methods (such as linkage (Jain, 2010)) are commonly available
in standard scientific computing packages (Virtanen et al.,
2020) as well as large-scale production systems (Bateni
et al., 2017; Dhulipala et al., 2022).

Hierarchical Clustering is a popular unsupervised
machine learning method with decades of history and numerous applications. We initiate the
study of differentially private approximation algorithms for hierarchical clustering under the rigorous framework introduced by Dasgupta (2016).
We show strong lower bounds for the problem:
that any -DP algorithm must exhibit O(|V |2 /)additive error for an input dataset V . Then, we
exhibit a polynomial-time approximation algorithm with O(|V |2.5 /)-additive error, and an
exponential-time algorithm that meets the lower
bound. To overcome the lower bound, we focus
on the stochastic block model, a popular model of
graphs, and, with a separation assumption on the
blocks, propose a private 1 + o(1) approximation
algorithm which also recovers the bottom-level
blocks exactly. Finally, we perform an empirical
study of our algorithms and validate their performance.

Despite the fact that many of these applications involve private and sensitive user data, all research on hierarchical clustering (with few exceptions (Kolluri et al., 2021; Xiao et al.,
2014) discussed later) has ignored the problem of defining
privacy-preserving algorithms. In particular, to the best of
our knowledge, no work has provided differentially-private
(DP) (Dwork et al., 2014a) algorithms for hierarchical clustering with provable approximation guarantees.
In this work, we seek to address this limitation by advancing
the study of differentially-private approximation algorithms
for hierarchical clustering under the rigorous optimization
framework introduced by Dasgupta (2016). This celebrated
framework introduces an objective function for hierarchical
clustering (see Section 3 for a formal definition) formalizing
the goal of clustering similar items lower in the tree.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical Clustering is a staple of unsupervised machine
learning with more than 60 years of history (Ward Jr, 1963).
Contrary to flat clustering methods (such as k-means, Jain
(2010)), which provide a single partitioning of the data, hierarchical clustering algorithms produce a recursive refining
of the partitions into increasingly fine-grained clusters. The
clustering process can be described by a tree (or dendrogram), and the objective of the tree is to cluster the most
similar items in the lowest possible clusters, while separating dissimilar items as high as possible.

1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UCSD,
La Jolla, USA. Work partially done while an intern at Google.
2
Google, New York City, USA. Correspondence to: Jacob Imola
<jimola@eng.ucsd.edu>.

Our algorithms are edge-level Differentially Private (DP)
on an input similarity graph, which is relevant when edges
of the input graph represents sensitive user information. Designing an edge-level DP algorithm requires proving that
the algorithm is insensitive to changes to a single edge of
the similarity graph. As we shall see, this is especially challenging for hierarchical clustering. In fact, commonly-used
hierarchical clustering algorithms (such as linkage-based
ones (Jain, 2010)) are deterministically sensitive to a single
edge, thus leaking directly the input edges. Moreover, as
we show, strong inapproximability bounds exist for Dasgupta’s objective under differential privacy, highlighting the
technical difficulty of the problem.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Main contributions First, we show in Section 4 that no
edge-level -DP algorithm (even with exponential time)

The versatility of such methods is apparent from the

1

