When Personalization Harms Performance:
Reconsidering the Use of Group Attributes in Prediction
Vinith M. Suriyakumar 1 Marzyeh Ghassemi 1 * Berk Ustun 2 *

Abstract

sitive (e.g., AIDS as in the SAPS II Score), self-reported (e.g.
sexual_practices as in the Denver HIV Risk Score), or
costly to acquire (e.g., Brief Psychiatry Rating Scale).

Machine learning models are often personalized
with categorical attributes that define groups. In
this work, we show that personalization with
group attributes can inadvertently reduce performance at a group level – i.e., groups may receive
unnecessarily inaccurate predictions by sharing
their personal characteristics. We present formal conditions to ensure the fair use of group
attributes in a prediction task, and describe how
they can be checked by training one additional
model. We characterize how fair use conditions
be violated due to standard practices in model development, and study the prevalence of fair use
violations in clinical prediction tasks. Our results
show that personalization often fails to produce
a tailored performance gain for every group who
reports personal data, and underscore the need
to evaluate fair use when personalizing models
with characteristics that are protected, sensitive,
self-reported, or costly to acquire.

The widespread use of group attributes in modern prediction models reflects a belief that personalization can
only improve performance. In effect, practitioners who develop clinical prediction models include protected attributes
like race because they believe it can only improve performance [53]. Likewise, individuals report sensitive attributes
like sexual_practices to a self-reported screening tool
because they expect to receive more accurate predictions.
In this work, we formalize these expectations through a
principle that we call fair use – i.e., that every person who
reports personal characteristics should expect receive a tailored gain in performance in return. Given a model that
is personalized with group attributes, we then test that it
satisfies these minimal expectations. First, by testing that
every group expects more accurate predictions from a personalized compared to a generic model trained without their
group attributes. Next, by testing that the gains are tailored, meaning that every group prefers their personalized
predictions to predictions personalized for any other group.

1. Introduction

The vast majority of machine learning models are not designed to ensure fair use (see Fig. 1). This result stems
from the fact that standard approaches to empirical risk minimization use group attributes to improve performance at
a population level. As we will show, the resulting models
may assign unnecessarily inaccurate predictions at the group
level due to routine decisions such as model specification
and model selection (see Fig. 2).

Machine learning models are often used to assign predictions to people – be it to predict if a patient has a rare
disease, the risk that a consumer will default on a loan, or
the likelihood that a student will matriculate.
Models in such applications are often personalized to target heterogeneous subgroups. In the most common approach, models are trained with group attributes – i.e.,
categorical attributes that define groups. In consumer finance, credit scores may include group attributes that are
protected such as age_group [21]. In medicine, clinical
prediction models may include group attributes that are sen-

In practice, however, these fair use violations may inflict
harm. In clinical applications, for example, inaccurate predictions lead to worse decisions and health outcomes [88].
More broadly, these effects are silent and avoidable. Silent
as fair use violations would only draw attention if we were
to evaluate the gains of personalization for intersectional
groups. Avoidable because a fair use violation implies that a
group could receive better predictions from a generic model
or a personalized model for another group. Thus, one could
resolve a fair use violation by assigning predictions from
this better-performing model.

*

Equal Supervision 1 MIT 2 UCSD. Correspondence to:
Vinith M. Suriyakumar <vinithms@mit.edu>, Berk Ustun
<berk@ucsd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

