Submodular Order Functions and Assortment Optimization

Rajan Udwani 1

Abstract

Of particular interest to us is the setting of assortment optimization where the objective is not submodular3 . The problem arises widely in many industries including retailing and
online advertising, where given a universe of substitutable
products, the seller wishes to select a subset of products
(called an assortment) with maximum expected revenue.
The effect of substitution between products is captured by
a choice model ϕ : N × 2N → [0, 1]. Given assortment S,
the probability that customer chooses product i ∈ S is given
by ϕ(i, S). Customer may choose
P an outside option that is
not in S with probability 1 − i∈S ϕ(i, S). Given (fixed)
prices (ri )i∈N , the expected revenue is,
X
Rϕ (S) =
ri ϕ(i, S).

We define a new class of set functions that in addition to being monotone and subadditive, also
admit a very limited form of submodularity defined over a permutation of the ground set. We
refer to this permutation as a submodular order.
We give fast algorithms with strong approximation guarantees for maximizing submodular order
functions under a variety of constraints. Applying this new notion to the problem of constrained
assortment optimization in fundamental choice
models, we obtain new algorithms that are both
faster and have stronger approximation guarantees (in some cases, first algorithm with constant
factor guarantee). We also show an intriguing
connection to the maximization of monotone submodular functions in the streaming model, where
we recover best known approximation guarantees
as a corollary of our results.

i∈S

We assume that the choice model is given to us and we
are interested in the problem of finding the revenue optimizing assortment subject to certain types of constraints
that we will discuss shortly4 . Unfortunately, for a general choice model Aouad et al. (2018a) show that even the
unconstrained assortment optimization problem is hard to
approximate. Given this intractability and lack of general
structure, the field of assortment optimization has evolved
through algorithms that are tailored for individual families
of choice models.

1. Introduction
Given a ground set N , the problem of finding a (feasible)
subset S that maximizes a monotone1 and submodular2
set function f : 2N → R, subject to some constraint, has
received significant and continued interest in ML and many
other communities due to a variety of applications, such as,
feature selection (Das & Kempe, 2011; Wei et al., 2015),
sensor placement (Krause et al., 2008b; Leskovec et al.,
2007), influence maximization (Krause et al., 2008a), data
summarization (Badanidiyuru et al., 2014), and many others.
Despite this richness of submodular functions, there are
important subset selection problems where the objective (f )
is not submodular.

Motivated by this, we are interested in finding a unifying
structural property (for set functions) that leads to computationally tractable optimization problems and captures
both monotone submodular functions and assortment optimization problems as special cases. As a starting point,
consider monotone functions that satisfy the following mild
condition,
Subadditivity: f (A) + f (B) ≥ f (A ∪ B) ∀A, B ⊆ N.
Every non-negative submodular function is subadditive and
the revenue function in assortment optimization is also subadditive for a general family of random utility based choice

1

Department of IEOR, University of California, Berkeley, USA.
Correspondence to: Rajan Udwani <rudwani@berkeley.edu>.

3
In fact, the objective is also non-monotone but we can transform it into a monotone function (see Section 3.2).
4
In practice, a choice model can either be estimated from historical data (if available) prior to the assortment decision (Kök et al.,
2008), or, one may implement a bandit algorithm where data is
collected over time and an optimal assortment is computed at each
step based on an evolving estimate of the choice model (Agrawal
et al., 2019).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
A set function f : 2N → R is monotone if f (A) ≥
f (B) ∀B ⊆ A.
2
A set function f : 2N → R is submodular if f (A ∪ {e}) −
f (A) ≤ f (B ∪ {e}) − f (B) ∀B ⊆ A ⊆ N, e ∈ N \A.

1

