Dynamic Regularized Sharpness Aware Minimization in Federated Learning:
Approaching Global Consistency and Smooth Landscape

Yan Sun 1 Li Shen 2 Shixiang Chen 2 Liang Ding 2 Dacheng Tao 1

Abstract

tion exchange during training, a global server is employed
to communicate the intermediate variables and parameters
with the local clients, and to assist them with performing
the joint training. Due to the poor bandwidth throttling especially on the global server, it adopts multiple local training
and partial participation to mitigate the communication bottleneck to a greater extent. With extensive studies of FL,
theoretical analysis reveals that the major influence on limiting the performance of FL is client drifts, whose essence
is that the inconsistent local optima deviate from the global
objective on the heterogeneous dataset (Karimireddy et al.,
2020; Woodworth et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020b; Kairouz
et al., 2021). Yang et al. (2021) theoretically demonstrate
that the performance of the classical FedAvg method suffers from the length of local updates and the number of
partial participation multiplied by the constant upper bound
of the variance of the heterogeneous gradient, which contributes as the dominant term of the convergence rate. This
divergence would be extremely multiplied by both increasing the local interval and reducing the participation ratio.

In federated learning (FL), a cluster of local
clients are chaired under the coordination of the
global server and cooperatively train one model
with privacy protection. Due to the multiple local
updates and the isolated non-iid dataset, clients
are prone to overfit into their own optima, which
extremely deviates from the global objective and
significantly undermines the performance. Most
previous works only focus on enhancing the consistency between the local and global objectives
to alleviate this prejudicial client drifts from the
perspective of the optimization view, whose performance would be prominently deteriorated on
the high heterogeneity. In this work, we propose a
novel and general algorithm FedSMOO by jointly
considering the optimization and generalization
targets to efficiently improve the performance in
FL. Concretely, FedSMOO adopts a dynamic regularizer to guarantee the local optima towards the
global objective, which is meanwhile revised by
the global Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM)
optimizer to search for the consistent flat minima.
Our theoretical analysis indicates that FedSMOO
achieves fast O(1/T ) convergence rate with low
generalization bound. Extensive numerical studies are conducted on the real-world dataset to verify its peerless efficiency and excellent generality.

To address these problems above, spontaneously, most existing works focus on tackling the global consistent objectives from the perspective of optimization view with Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Malinovskiy et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2020b; Charles & Konečnỳ, 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2022). With the process of global training, steady correction to the local objectives based on the
regularization term productively reduces the upper bound
of theoretical convergence rate (Zhang et al., 2021; Acar
et al., 2021). Furthermore, considering the asynchrony, reweighted empirical averages contribute to aggregating more
stable global parameters (Wang et al., 2020a; Huang et al.,
2022). However, in the face of the challenge of a higher
heterogeneous dataset, e.g. for heavy tail, the global solution falling into a sharp landscape may fail to provide solid
estimates and yet overfit to an unreliable minimum with
poor stability (Brownlees et al., 2015; Foret et al., 2020).
Therefore, we need to contemplate the training process comprehensively and completely. More attention must be paid
to the generalization ability under ensuring the optimization
performance in the federated framework.

1. Introduction
FL is a horizontally distributed framework that allows a
mass of edge devices to collaboratively train a global model
on their isolated private dataset (McMahan et al., 2017). To
protect the data privatization and localization, each client
has no direct access to the other dataset. To enable informa1

The University of Sydney, Institute of Engineering, Sydney
NSW, Australia 2 JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Li Shen <mathshenli@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To further approach the consistent stationary state with cred-

1

