Graphically Structured Diffusion Models

Christian Weilbach 1 William Harvey 1 Frank Wood 1

Abstract

isms from Karpathy (2017) like “ Gradient descent can write
better software than you. Sorry!”, appropriate attempts, in
our opinion, to re-brand deep learning as differentiable programming (Baydin et al., 2017), and arguably even a new
industry called “Software 2.0” in which one “programs by
example” (Karpathy, 2017).

We introduce a framework for automatically defining and learning deep generative models with
problem-specific structure. We tackle problem
domains that are more traditionally solved by
algorithms such as sorting, constraint satisfaction for Sudoku, and matrix factorization. Concretely, we train diffusion models with an architecture tailored to the problem specification. This
problem specification should contain a graphical
model describing relationships between variables,
and often benefits from explicit representation of
subcomputations. Permutation invariances can
also be exploited. Across a diverse set of experiments we improve the scaling relationship
between problem dimension and our model’s performance, in terms of both training time and final accuracy. Our code can be found at https:
//github.com/plai-group/gsdm.

There, however, remains a chasm between these two approaches, roughly delineated along the symbolic vs. connectionist divide. Symbolically expressed algorithms can and
often do generalize perfectly across all inputs and exhibit
runtimes that are typically input “size” dependent. Software
2.0 algorithms struggle to generalize outside of their training
data thus are most often deployed in settings where copious
training data is available, the so-called “big-data” regime.
Most such “neural-network algorithms” have runtimes that
are not size dependent and resultingly cannot generalize in
the same fashion as symbolically expressed algorithms.
Efforts to bring these two approaches closer together
(Chaudhuri et al., 2021) often get lumped together under
the moniker “neuro-symbolic” methods. The general shape
of these methods, so to speak, is to impose some aspect of
symbolic reasoning on either the structure or computation
performed by a connectionist architecture. Our work can be
seen as a significantly novel methodological contribution to
this body of work.

1. Introduction
A future in which algorithm development is fully transformed from a challenging and labour intensive task (Cormen, 2009; Marsland, 2009; Russell & Norvig, 2010; Williamson & Shmoys, 2011) into a fully automatable process
is seemingly close at hand. With prompt engineering large
language models like GPT (Brown et al., 2020) and now
ChatGPT have been shown to be capable of code completion
and even full algorithm development from natural language
task descriptions (Chen et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022).

We contribute a generic specification of methodology for
advantageously imposing task specific symbolic structure
into diffusion models and use it to demonstrate algorithm
learning from data in several small-scale but foundational
tasks across the algorithmic complexity spectrum. Specifically, our approach consumes a graphical model “sketch”
that putatively could describe the joint data generative process. This sketch consists only of nodes for variables, edges
between them, and optionally permutation invariances. We
combine this information with an otherwise generic diffusion process (Ho et al., 2020), using the edges to advantageously constrain the transformer attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al., 2017) and permutation invariances to
determine when parameters within our architecture can be
shared. Compared to our neural baselines we improve the
scaling of computational cost with problem dimension in
most cases, and the scaling of problem performance with
dimension in all cases.

At the same time, significant advances in generative deep
learning (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021c; Ho et al., 2022),
AutoML (Hutter et al., 2018), and few-shot learning (Brown
et al., 2020) have made it possible to learn, from data, flexible input-output mappings that generalize from ever smaller
amounts of data. This approach has spawned modern aphor1

Department of Computer Science, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Correspondence to: Christian
Weilbach <weilbach@cs.ubc.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

