Stochastic Gradient Descent under Markovian Sampling Schemes

Mathieu Even 1

Abstract

problems (Bottou et al., 2018). We however consider in
this paper a different setting: we assume the existence of
a Markov chain (vt ) of state space V and stationary distribution π. The optimizer may then use biased stochastic
gradients along the path of this Markov chain to perform
incremental updates. She may for instance use the Markov
chain SGD (MC-SGD) algorithm, defined through the following recursion:

We study a variation of vanilla stochastic gradient
descent where the optimizer only has access to a
“Markovian sampling scheme”. These schemes
encompass applications that range from decentralized optimization with a random walker (token
algorithms), to RL and online system identification problems. We focus on obtaining rates of
convergence under the least restrictive assumptions possible on the underlying Markov chain
and on the functions optimized. We first unveil the
theoretical lower bound for methods that sample
stochastic gradients along the path of a Markov
chain, making appear a dependency in the hitting
time of the underlying Markov chain. We then
study Markov chain SGD (MC-SGD) under much
milder regularity assumptions than prior works.
We finally introduce MC-SAG, an alternative to
MC-SGD with variance reduction, that only depends on the hitting time of the Markov chain,
therefore obtaining a communication-efficient token algorithm.

xt+1 = xt − γ∇fvt (xt ) .

Being “ergodically unbiased”, such iterates should behave
closely to those of vanilla SGD. The analysis is however
notoriously difficult, since in (2), variable xt and the current
state of the Markov chain vt are not independent, so that
E [∇fvt (xt )|xt ] can be arbitrarily far from ∇f (xt ). This
paper focuses on analyzing algorithms that incrementally
sample stochastic gradients alongside the Markov chain
(vt ), motivated by the following applications.
1.1. Token algorithms
Traditional machine learning optimization algorithms require data centralization, raising scalability and privavy
issues, hence the alternative of Federated Learning, where
users’ data is held on device, and the training is orchestrated
at a server level. Decentralized optimization goes further,
by removing the dependency over a central entity, leading
to increased scalability, privacy and robustness to node failures, broadening the range of applications to IoT (Internet
of Things) networks. In decentralized optimization, users
(or agents) are represented as nodes of a connected graph
G = (V, E) over a finite set of users V (of cardinality n).
The problem considered is then the minimization of
1X
f (x) =
fv (x) , x ∈ Rd ,
(3)
n

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider a stochastic optimization problem
that takes root in decentralized optimization, estimation
problems, and Reinforcement Learning. Consider a function
f defined as:
f (x) = Ev∼π [fv (x)] ,

x ∈ Rd ,

(2)

(1)

where π is a probability distribution over a set V, and fv
are smooth functions on Rd for all v in V. Classicaly, this
represents the loss of a model parameterized by x on data
parameterized by v. If i.i.d. samples (vt )t⩾0 of law π and
their corresponding gradient estimates (∇fvt ) were accessible, one could directly apply SGD-like algorithms, that
have proved to be efficient in large scale machine learning

v∈V

where each fv is locally held by user v ∈ V, using only communications between neighboring agents in the graph. There
are several known decentralized algorithmic approaches to
minimize f under these constrains. The prominent one consists in alternating between communications using gossip
matrices (Boyd et al., 2006; Dimakis et al., 2010) and local
gradient computations, until a consensus is reached. These
gossip approaches suffer from a high synchronization cost
(nodes in the graph are required to perform simultaneous

*
Equal contribution 1 Inria - ENS Paris. Correspondence to:
Mathieu Even <mathieu.even@inria.fr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

