SegCLIP: Patch Aggregation with Learnable Centers for Open-Vocabulary
Semantic Segmentation

Huaishao Luo 1 2 Junwei Bao 1 Youzheng Wu 1 Xiaodong He 1 Tianrui Li 2

Abstract
repel

Recently, the contrastive language-image pretraining, e.g., CLIP, has demonstrated promising results on various downstream tasks. The
pre-trained model can capture enriched visual
concepts for images by learning from a large
scale of text-image data. However, transferring
the learned visual knowledge to open-vocabulary
semantic segmentation is still under-explored.
In this paper, we propose a CLIP-based model
named SegCLIP for the topic of open-vocabulary
segmentation in an annotation-free manner. The
SegCLIP achieves segmentation based on ViT
and the main idea is to gather patches with learnable centers to semantic regions through training on text-image pairs. The gathering operation can dynamically capture the semantic groups,
which can be used to generate the final segmentation results. We further propose a reconstruction
loss on masked patches and a superpixel-based
KL loss with pseudo-labels to enhance the visual representation. Experimental results show
that our model achieves comparable or superior
segmentation accuracy on the PASCAL VOC
2012 (+0.3% mIoU), PASCAL Context (+2.3%
mIoU), and COCO (+2.2% mIoU) compared
with baselines. We release the code at https:
//github.com/ArrowLuo/SegCLIP.

attract

images

contrastive
loss

reconstruction
loss

superpixel
based KL loss

train

a beautiful
a waterfall
sailboat
is
little
inside
a
shown…
cactus by
natural
the sea

captions

SegCLIP
inference segmentation
a photo of a
{label name}
person
plant

sheep
sofa
…

prompt

Figure 1. Overview of our problem. The proposed SegCLIP can
achieve open-vocabulary semantic segmentation through training
with image-text pairs.

Zhao et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Wen et al., 2022) and
Transformer-based approaches (Cheng et al., 2021; Zheng
et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2022; Jain et al.,
2022) have achieved impressive performance on this topic.
However, two significant limitations still need exploration:
expensive pixel-level labeling and restricted labeled categories leading to weak generalization (Bucher et al., 2019;
Xian et al., 2019).
Recent works propose to leverage large-scale image-text
pre-trained models to alleviate the above limitations. These
works involve zero-shot or weakly supervised semantic
segmentation because the large image-text pairs are classagnostic. Due to the target being to segment an image with
arbitrary categories instead of fixed labeling vocabularies,
this kind of method is also called open-vocabulary semantic
segmentation (Ghiasi et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022b; Liang
et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022). They can be roughly divided
into two types. The first is the classification-based method,
supervised by the extracted pseudo labels or text features
from a pre-trained model, e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021).
Moreover, this type is usually achieved with a fully convolutional network or carries out prediction based on mask

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, aiming to assign a label to each
pixel of a given image, is an important task and has been researched for a long time. The CNN-based approaches (Long
et al., 2015; Ronneberger et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2015;
1
JD AI Research 2 Southwest Jiaotong University,
Chengdu, China.
Correspondence to: Huaishao Luo
<huaishaoluo@gmail.com>,
Junwei
Bao
<baojunwei001@gmail.com>, Tianrui Li <trli@swjtu.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

