Offline Learning in Markov Games with General Function Approximation

Yuheng Zhang 1 Yu Bai 2 Nan Jiang 1

Abstract

and/or ethically problematic (Levine et al., 2020). While
offline RL has been extensively studied in the single-agent
setting, many real-world applications involve the strategic
interactions between multiple agents. This renders the necessity of bringing in game-theoretic reasoning, often modeled
using Markov games (Shapley, 1953) in the RL theory literature. Markov games can be viewed as the multi-agent
extension of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), where
agents share the same state information and the dynamics is
determined by the joint action of all agents.

We study offline multi-agent reinforcement
learning (RL) in Markov games, where the
goal is to learn an approximate equilibrium—
such as Nash equilibrium and (Coarse) Correlated Equilibrium—from an offline dataset precollected from the game. Existing works consider
relatively restricted tabular or linear models and
handle each equilibria separately. In this work, we
provide the first framework for sample-efficient
offline learning in Markov games under general
function approximation, handling all 3 equilibria
in a unified manner. By using Bellman-consistent
pessimism, we obtain interval estimation for policies’ returns, and use both the upper and the lower
bounds to obtain a relaxation on the gap of a
candidate policy, which becomes our optimization objective. Our results generalize prior works
and provide several additional insights. Importantly, we require a data coverage condition that
improves over the recently proposed “unilateral
concentrability”. Our condition allows selective
coverage of deviation policies that optimally tradeoff between their greediness (as approximate best
responses) and coverage, and we show scenarios
where this leads to significantly better guarantees.
As a new connection, we also show how our algorithmic framework can subsume seemingly different solution concepts designed for the special
case of two-player zero-sum games.

While online RL in Markov games has seen significant developments in recent years (Bai & Jin, 2020; Liu et al.,
2021; Song et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2021b), offline learning
in Markov games has only started to attract attention from
the community. Earlier works (Cui & Du, 2022b; Zhong
et al., 2022) focus on tabular cases or linear function approximation, which cannot handle complex environments
that require advanced function-approximation techniques.
Although there has been a rich literature on single-agent
RL with general function approximation (Jiang et al., 2017;
Jin et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2021),
whether and how they can be extended to offline Markov
games remains largely unclear. In addition, the learning
goal in Markov games is no longer return optimization, but
instead finding an equilibrium. However, there are multiple
popular notions of equilibria, and prior results for the offline
setting mainly focus on one of them (Nash) (Cui & Du,
2022a;b; Zhong et al., 2022). These considerations motivate
us to study the following question:
Can we design sample-efficient algorithms for offline
Markov games with general function approximation, and
handle different equilibria in a unified framework?

1. Introduction

Unified framework In this paper, we provide informationtheoretic results that answer the question in the positive. We
first express the equilibrium gap—the objective we wish
to minimize—in a unified manner for 3 popular notions of
equilibria: Nash Equilibrium (NE), Correlated Equilibrium
(CE), and Coarse Correlated Equilibrium (CCE) (Section 3).
Then, we build on top of the Bellman-consistent pessimism
framework from single-agent offline RL (Xie et al., 2021a),
which allows us to construct confidence sets for policy evaluation and obtain the confidence intervals of policies’ returns.
An important difference is that Xie et al. (2021a) only needs

Offline RL aims to learn a good policy from a pre-collected
historical dataset. It has emerged as an important paradigm
for bringing RL to real-life scenarios due to its noninterative nature, especially in applications where deploying
adaptive algorithms in the real system is financially costly
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Salesforce AI Research. Correspondence to: Nan Jiang <nanjiang@illinois.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

