A Neural PDE Solver with Temporal Stencil Modeling

Zhiqing Sun 1 Yiming Yang 1 Shinjae Yoo 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Complex physical systems described by non-linear partial
differential equations (PDEs) are ubiquitous throughout the
real world, with applications ranging from design problems
in aeronautics (Rhie & Chow, 1983), medicine (Sallam &
Hwang, 1984), to scientific problems of molecular modeling (Lelievre & Stoltz, 2016) and astronomical simulations
(Courant et al., 1967). Solving most equations of importance
is usually computationally intractable with direct numerical
simulations and the finest features in high resolutions.

Numerical simulation of non-linear partial differential equations plays a crucial role in modeling physical science and engineering phenomena, such as weather, climate, and aerodynamics.
Recent Machine Learning (ML) models trained
on low-resolution spatio-temporal signals have
shown new promises in capturing important dynamics in high-resolution signals, under the condition that the models can effectively recover the
missing details. However, this study shows that
significant information is often lost in the lowresolution down-sampled features. To address
such issues, we propose a new approach, namely
Temporal Stencil Modeling (TSM), which combines the strengths of advanced time-series sequence modeling (with the HiPPO features) and
state-of-the-art neural PDE solvers (with learnable stencil modeling). TSM aims to recover
the lost information from the PDE trajectories
and can be regarded as a temporal generalization of classic finite volume methods such as
WENO. Our experimental results show that TSM
achieves the new state-of-the-art simulation accuracy for 2-D incompressible Navier-Stokes turbulent flows: it significantly outperforms the previously reported best results by 19.9% in terms of
the highly-correlated duration time and reduces
the inference latency into 80%. We also show
a strong generalization ability of the proposed
method to various out-of-distribution turbulent
flow settings, as well as lower resolution or 1-D
/ 3-D settings. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Edward-Sun/TSM-PDE.

Recent advances in machine learning-accelerated PDE
solvers (Bar-Sinai et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020c; Kochkov
et al. 2021; Brandstetter et al. 2021, inter alia) have shown
that end-to-end neural solvers can efficiently solve important (mostly temporal) partial differential equations. Unlike
classical finite differences, finite volumes, finite elements,
or pseudo-spectral methods that require a smooth variation
on the high-resolution meshes for guaranteed convergence,
neural solvers do not rely on such conditions and are able
to model the underlying physics with under-resolved low
resolutions and produce high-quality simulations with significantly reduced computational cost.
The power of learnable PDE solvers is usually believed to
come from the super-resolution ability of neural networks,
which means that the machine learning model is capable of
recovering the missing details based on the coarse features
(Bar-Sinai et al., 2019; Kochkov et al., 2021). In this paper, we first empirically verify such capability by explicitly
training a super-resolution model, and then find that since
low-resolution down-sampling of the field can lead to some
information loss, a single coarse feature map used by previous work (Kochkov et al., 2021) is not sufficient enough.
We empirically show that the temporal information in the
trajectories and the temporal feature encoding scheme are
crucial for recovering the super-resolution details faithfully.
Motivated by the above observations, we propose Temporal Stencil Modeling (TSM), which combines the best of
two worlds: stencil learning (i.e., Learned Interpolation in
Kochkov et al. 2021) as that used in a state-of-the-art neural PDE solver for conservation-form PDEs, and HiPPO
(Gu et al., 2020) as a state-of-the-art time series sequence
model. Specifically, in this paper, we focus on trajectoryenhanced high-quality approximation of the convective flux

1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA. Correspondence to: Zhiqing Sun <zhiqings@cs.cmu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

