High-dimensional Clustering onto Hamiltonian Cycle

Tianyi Huang 1 2 Shenghui Cheng 1 2 Stan Z. Li 1 2 Zhengjun Zhang 3 4

Abstract

bioinformatics (Bühlmann & Van De Geer, 2011; Donoho
et al., 2000). Analyzing high-dimensional data is a significant but challenging task (Verleysen et al., 2003). Clustering
is widespread in high-dimensional data analysis (Mccarthy
et al., 2004; Jain et al., 1999). It can group samples so that
the samples within the same cluster are broadly more similar to one another than those in other clusters (Hartigan,
1975; Niu et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2020). Then by simultaneously presenting the clusters, similarities, and outliers,
we can well recognize the insight of high-dimensional data.
For example, in the clustering of community detection, we
can find the topological information between the different
clusters of the community nodes by presenting the similarities between these clusters and thus explain the community
detection result (Fortunato, 2010). However, most of the traditional clustering methods merely generate pseudo labels.
In this case, it is hard to get the knowledge of similarities
and outliers in the clustering.

Clustering aims to group unlabelled samples
based on their similarities and is widespread in
high-dimensional data analysis. However, most of
the clustering methods merely generate pseudo labels and thus are unable to simultaneously present
the similarities between different clusters and outliers. This paper proposes a new framework called
High-dimensional Clustering onto Hamiltonian
Cycle (HCHC) to solve the above problems. First,
HCHC combines global structure with local structure in one objective function for deep clustering,
improving the labels as relative probabilities, to
mine the similarities between different clusters
while keeping the local structure in each cluster.
Then, the anchors of different clusters are sorted
on the optimal Hamiltonian cycle generated by
the cluster similarities and mapped on the circumference of a circle. Finally, a sample with a higher
probability of a cluster will be mapped closer to
the corresponding anchor. In this way, our framework allows us to appreciate three aspects visually
and simultaneously - clusters (formed by samples
with high probabilities), cluster similarities (represented as circular distances), and outliers (recognized as dots far away from all clusters). The
theoretical analysis and experiments illustrate the
superiority of HCHC.

A frequently-used tool to explore the outliers and similarities between the different clusters is the dendrogram in
hierarchical clustering (Guha et al., 1998; Karypis et al.,
1999). But, some critical knowledge for explaining the recognized similar clusters and outliers cannot be presented
in this way. For example, the dendrogram cannot present
the in-between samples of the different clusters to explain
the recognized similar clusters. It also cannot present the
clustering probability distributions of the samples to explain
the recognized outliers. Deep clustering methods, such as
DEC, have been proposed to cluster high-dimensional data
by simultaneously learning clustering probability distributions and the embedded features of the samples (Aljalbout
et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2016). Then, we can extract similarities and outliers in the generated clustering probability
distributions (Li et al., 2020). Unfortunately, there does
not exist an effective way to simultaneously present the
mined knowledge, including clusters, similarities, and outliers. Although some embedding methods, such as MDS
and t-SNE (Kruskal, 1978; Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008;
McInnes et al., 2018), can visualize the distances between
the samples or the local-manifold in each cluster, the visualized result may be inconsistent with the clustering result.
One reason is that it is hard to visualize all of the distinguishing information of high-dimensional in 2D space. The
other one is that these methods may have their limits in the

1. Introduction
High-dimensional data, i.e., the data described by a large
number of features, are widely existing in many research
fields, such as image processing, pattern recognition, and
1

School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou,
China 2 Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Economics and Management, the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 4 School of Computer, Data & Information Sciences, the University of Wisconsin,
Madison, USA. Correspondence to: Shenghui Cheng <Chengshenghui@westlake.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

