Towards a Better Understanding of Representation Dynamics under TD-learning

Yunhao Tang 1 Rémi Munos 1

Abstract

alleviate such issues, in practice, it is now common to perform gradient-based updates on the representations also
with TD-learning. Recently, such an end-to-end approach
to representation learning has led to much empirical success and is the core of many high-performing agents such as
DQN (Mnih et al., 2013). A natural question ensues: can we
characterize the representation learned by such end-to-end
updates?

TD-learning is a foundation reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm for value prediction. Critical
to the accuracy of value predictions is the quality
of state representations. In this work, we consider
the question: how does end-to-end TD-learning
impact the representation over time? Complementary to prior work, we provide a set of analysis
that sheds further light on the representation dynamics under TD-learning. We first show that
when the environments are reversible, end-to-end
TD-learning strictly decreases the value approximation error over time. Under further assumptions on the environments, we can connect the
representation dynamics with spectral decomposition over the transition matrix. This latter finding
establishes fitting multiple value functions from
randomly generated rewards as a useful auxiliary
task for representation learning, as we empirically
validate on both tabular and Atari game suites.

The answer to this question has been attempted by a number
of prior work, including the study of the convergence of endto-end TD-learning under the over-parameterized regimes,
i.e., when the value functions are learned by very wide neural networks (Cai et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Agazzi and
Lu, 2022; Sirignano and Spiliopoulos, 2022); the study of
TD-learning dynamics under smooth homogeneous function
approximation, e.g., with ReLU networks (Brandfonbrener
and Bruna, 2019); the study of representation dynamics under TD-learning with restrictive assumptions on the weight
parameter (Lyle et al., 2021). See Section 6 for an in-depth
discussion about this paper’s relation to prior work.
In this work, we provide a set of analysis complementary
to prior work, which hopefully sheds light on how TDlearning impacts the evolution of representation over time.
We consider the natural extension of the linear TD case
(Sutton, 1988; Tsitsiklis and Van Roy, 1996), where the
value function is parameterized in a bi-linear way

1. Introduction
Temporal difference (TD) learning is a foundational algorithm for predicting value functions in reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton, 1988). In practice, computations of the
value predictions depend on how the state is represented, a
quantity formally known as state representation. In classic
settings such as linear TD, the representations are often human designed and fixed throughout learning. In this case,
the quality of the best possible value predictions depends
critically on the quality of the fixed representations. Good
representations should share useful information across states
that entail accurate value predictions (see, e.g., (Tsitsiklis
and Van Roy, 1996; Munos, 2003; Behzadian et al., 2019)
for some example characterizations).

V = Φw.
Here, Φ is the representation, which is kept fixed in linear
TD. We study the evolution of the representation under the
general TD-learning updates. Our contributions consist in
providing characterizations of the representation dynamics,
through a few angles.
Improving value prediction accuracy over time. When
assuming the Markov chain is reversible, we show that
the value prediction error, as measured by the difference
Φw − V π , strictly decreases over time (Section 4). This
solidifies the intuition that allowing updating representations during TD-learning should improve upon classic TDlearning where representations are fixed.

Any fixed representation is potentially sub-optimal, as it
does not adapt to the underlying learning algorithm. To
1
Google DeepMind. Correspondence to: Yunhao Tang <robintyh@deepmind.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Spectral decomposition of the transition matrix . We
show that when the transition matrix is symmetric and under
1

