Gradient Descent in Neural Networks as Sequential Learning in
Reproducing Kernel Banach Space

Alistair Shilton 1 Sunil Gupta 1 Santu Rana 1 Svetha Venkatesh 1

Abstract

which is why non-convex, massively over-parameterized
networks are able to perform so much better than predicted
by traditional machine learning theory.

The study of Neural Tangent Kernels (NTKs)
has provided much needed insight into convergence and generalization properties of neural networks in the over-parametrized (wide) limit by approximating the network using a first-order Taylor expansion with respect to its weights in the
neighborhood of their initialization values. This
allows neural network training to be analyzed
from the perspective of reproducing kernel Hilbert
spaces (RKHS), which is informative in the overparametrized regime, but a poor approximation
for narrower networks as the weights change more
during training. Our goal is to extend beyond the
limits of NTK toward a more general theory. We
construct an exact power-series representation of
the neural network in a finite neighborhood of
the initial weights as an inner product of two feature maps, respectively from data and weight-step
space, to feature space, allowing neural network
training to be analyzed from the perspective of
reproducing kernel Banach space (RKBS). We
prove that, regardless of width, the training sequence produced by gradient descent can be exactly replicated by regularized sequential learning
in RKBS. Using this, we present novel bound on
uniform convergence where the iterations count
and learning rate play a central role, giving new
theoretical insight into neural network training.

Neural tangent kernels represent an attempt to answer this
question. As per (Jacot et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019b), during training, the evolution of an over-parameterized neural
network follows the kernel gradient of the functional cost
with respect to a neural tangent kernel (NTK). It was shown
that, for a sufficiently wide network with random weight initialization, the NTK is effectively fixed, and results from machine learning in reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)
can thus be brought to bear on the problem. This has led to
a plethora of results analysing the convergence (Du et al.,
2019b; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019a; Zou et al.,
2020; Zou & Gu, 2019) and generalization (Arora et al.,
2019b;a; Cao & Gu, 2019) properties of neural networks.
Despite their successes, NTK models are not without problems. As noted in (Bai & Lee, 2019), the expressive power
of the linear approximation used by NTK is limited to that
of the corresponding, randomized feature space or RKHS,
as evidenced by the observed gap between NTK predictions
and actual performance. To break out of this regime, (Bai &
Lee, 2019) proposed using a second or higher-order approximation of the network. Moreover it is natural to ask how
well a linear approximation of the behaviour, constructed
on the assumption of small weight-steps, will scale to larger
weight steps in narrower networks.
To overcome these difficulties we replace the Taylor approximation used in NTK with an exact power series representation of the neural network in a finite neighbourhood around
the initial weights. We demonstrate that this leads to a representation as an inner product between two feature maps,
from data and weight-step space, respectively. This structure underlies the construction of reproducing kernel Banach
spaces (RKBS, (Lin et al., 2022)), allowing us to go on to
show an equivalence between back-propagation and sequential learning in RKBS, which is similar to NTK but without
the constraints of linearity, allowing us to derive new bounds
on uniform convergence for networks of arbitrary width.

1. Introduction
The remarkable progress made in neural networks in recent
decades has led to an explosion in their adoption in a wide
swathe of applications. However this widespread success
has also left unanswered questions, the most obvious of
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia. Correspondence to: Alistair Shilton
<alistair.shilton@deakin.edu.au>.
1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

