A Model-Based Method for Minimizing CVaR and Beyond

Si Yi Meng 1 2 Robert M. Gower 2

Abstract

loss within a training set (Shalev-Shwartz & Wexler, 2016).
These applications can all be formulated as minimizing the
expectation of the losses that are above some cutoff value,

We develop a variant of the stochastic prox-linear
method for minimizing the Conditional Value-atRisk (CVaR) objective. CVaR is a risk measure
focused on minimizing worst-case performance,
defined as the average of the top quantile of the
losses. In machine learning, such a risk measure
is useful to train more robust models. Although
the stochastic subgradient method (SGM) is a natural choice for minimizing the CVaR objective,
we show that our stochastic prox-linear (SPL+ )
algorithm can better exploit the structure of the objective, while still providing a convenient closed
form update. Our SPL+ method also adapts to
the scaling of the loss function, which allows for
easier tuning. We then specialize a general convergence theorem for SPL+ to our setting, and show
that it allows for a wider selection of step sizes
compared to SGM. We support this theoretical
finding experimentally.

min RCVaR (θ) = Ez∼P [`(θ; z) | `(θ; z) ≥ αβ (θ)] , (2)

θ∈Rd

where αβ (θ) is the upper β–quantile of the losses. For
example, for β = 0.9, the problem in (2) is to minimize the
expectation of the worst 10% of the losses.
In this work, we propose a variant of the stochastic proxlinear (SPL) method pioneered by Burke & Ferris (1995);
Lewis & Wright (2016); Duchi & Ruan (2018) for solving (2). The possibility of applying SPL to CVaR minimization was mentioned in Davis & Drusvyatskiy (2019), but not
explored. We introduce a variant of SPL called SPL+ , that
adapts to the scaling of the loss function, which in turn allows for a default parameter setting. We first derive a closedform update for SPL+ , and show why it is particularly well
suited for minimizing CVaR. We give its convergence rates
for convex and Lipschitz losses by adapting existing results
from Davis & Drusvyatskiy (2019). Through several experiments comparing the stochastic prox-linear method to
stochastic subgradient we show that SPL and SPL+ are
more robust to the choice of step size. We conclude with
a discussion on several future applications for minimizing
CVaR in machine learning.

1. Introduction
The most common approach to fit a model parametrized by
θ ∈ Rd to data, is to minimize the expected loss over the
data distribution, that is
min RERM (θ) = Ez∼P [`(θ; z)].

θ∈Rd

1.1. Background

(1)

The CVaR objective was first introduced in finance as an
alternative measure of risk, also known as the expected shortfall (Artzner et al., 1999; Embrechts et al., 1999). Many
applications in finance can be formulated as CVaR minimization problems, such as portfolio optimization (Krokhmal
et al., 2002; Mansini et al., 2007), insurance (Embrechts
et al., 2013) and credit risk management (Andersson et al.,
2001). The seminal work of Rockafellar & Uryasev (2000)
proposed a variational formulation of the CVaR objective
that is amenable to standard optimization methods. This formulation has since inspired considerable research in applications spanning machine learning and adjacent fields, such as
ν-SVM (Takeda & Sugiyama, 2008; Gotoh & Takeda, 2016),
robust decision making and MDPs (Chow et al., 2015; Chow
& Ghavamzadeh, 2014; Chow et al., 2017; Cardoso & Xu,
2019; Sani et al., 2012), influence maximization and submodular optimization (Maehara, 2015; Ohsaka & Yoshida,

But in many cases, the expected loss may not be the suitable
objective to minimize. When robustness or safety of the
model are concerned, the emphasis should rather be on the
extreme values of the distribution rather than the average
value. For instance, in distributionally robust optimization,
the goal is to optimize the model for the worst case distribution around some fixed distribution (Duchi & Namkoong,
2018). In extreme risk-averse settings, such as when safety
is the top priority, it is desirable to minimize the maximum
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA 2 Center for Computational Mathmatics, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Si Yi Meng
<sm2833@cornell.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

