Fast Inference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding

Yaniv Leviathan * 1 Matan Kalman * 1 Yossi Matias 1

Abstract

developed to make inference from them faster. Some approaches aim to reduce the inference cost for all inputs
equally (e.g. Hinton et al., 2015; Jaszczur et al., 2021;
Hubara et al., 2016; So et al., 2021; Shazeer, 2019). Other
approaches stem from the observation that not all inference steps are born alike - some require a very large model,
while others can be approximated well by more efficient
models. These adaptive computation methods (e.g. Han
et al., 2021; Sukhbaatar et al., 2019; Schuster et al., 2021;
Scardapane et al., 2020; Bapna et al., 2020; Elbayad et al.,
2019; Schwartz et al., 2020) aim to use less compute resources for easier inference steps. While many of these
solutions have proven extremely effective in practice, they
usually require changing the model architecture, changing
the training-procedure and re-training the models, and don’t
maintain identical outputs.

Inference from large autoregressive models like
Transformers is slow - decoding K tokens takes
K serial runs of the model. In this work we introduce speculative decoding - an algorithm to
sample from autoregressive models faster without
any changes to the outputs, by computing several
tokens in parallel. At the heart of our approach lie
the observations that (1) hard language-modeling
tasks often include easier subtasks that can be approximated well by more efficient models, and
(2) using speculative execution and a novel sampling method, we can make exact decoding from
the large models faster, by running them in parallel on the outputs of the approximation models, potentially generating several tokens concurrently, and without changing the distribution. Our
method can accelerate existing off-the-shelf models without retraining or architecture changes. We
demonstrate it on T5-XXL and show a 2X-3X
acceleration compared to the standard T5X implementation, with identical outputs.

The key observation above, that some inference steps are
“harder” and some are “easier”, is also a key motivator for
our work. We additionally observe that inference from large
models is often not bottlenecked on arithmetic operations,
but rather on memory bandwidth and communication, so
additional computation resources might be available. Therefore we suggest increasing concurrency as a complementary approach to using an adaptive amount of computation.
Specifically, we are able to accelerate inference without
changing the model architectures, without changing the
training-procedures or needing to re-train the models, and
without changing the model output distribution. This is
accomplished via speculative execution.

1. Introduction
Large autoregressive models, notably large Transformers
(Vaswani et al., 2017), are much more capable than smaller
models, as is evidenced countless times in recent years e.g.,
in the text or image domains, like GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
2020), LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022), Parti (Yu et al.,
2022), and PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022). Unfortunately,
a single decode step from these larger models is significantly
slower than a step from their smaller counterparts, and making things worse, these steps are done serially - decoding K
tokens takes K serial runs of the model.

Speculative execution (Burton, 1985; Hennessy & Patterson,
2012) is an optimization technique, common in processors,
where a task is performed in parallel to verifying if it’s
actually needed - the payoff being increased concurrency.
A well-known example of speculative execution is branch
prediction. For speculative execution to be effective, we
need an efficient mechanism to suggest tasks to execute
that are likely to be needed. In this work, we generalize
speculative execution to the stochastic setting - where a
task might be needed with some probability. Applying this
to decoding from autoregressive models like Transformers,
we sample generations from more efficient approximation
models as speculative prefixes for the slower target models. With a novel sampling method, speculative sampling,
we maximize the probability of these speculative tasks to

Given the importance of large autoregressive models and
specifically large Transformers, several approaches were
*

1
Equal contribution
Google Research, Mountain
View, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yaniv Leviathan
<leviathan@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

