High Probability Convergence of Stochastic Gradient Methods

Zijian Liu * 1 Ta Duy Nguyen * 2 Thien Hang Nguyen * 3 Alina Ene 2 Huy L. Nguyen 3

Abstract

of the convergence of paradigmatic iterative methods such
as stochastic gradient descent, mirror descent, and accelerated methods for both convex and non-convex optimization.
However, most of these works only establish convergence
guarantees that hold only in expectation. Although very
meaningful, these results do not fully capture the convergence behaviors of the algorithms when we perform only
a small number of runs of the algorithm, as it is typical in
modern machine learning applications where there are significant computational and statistical costs associated with
performing multiple runs of the algorithm (Harvey et al.,
2019; Madden et al., 2020; Davis et al., 2021). Thus an important direction is to establish convergence guarantees for a
single run of the algorithm that hold not only in expectation
but also with high probability.

In this work, we describe a generic approach
to show convergence with high probability for
both stochastic convex and non-convex optimization with sub-Gaussian noise. In previous works
for convex optimization, either the convergence
is only in expectation or the bound depends on
the diameter of the domain. Instead, we show
high probability convergence with bounds depending on the initial distance to the optimal
solution. The algorithms use step sizes analogous to the standard settings and are universal
to Lipschitz functions, smooth functions, and
their linear combinations. The method can be
applied to the non-convex case.√We demonstrate
an O((1+σ 2 log(1/δ))/T +σ/ T ) convergence
rate when the number of iterations
T is known
√
and an O((1 + σ 2 log(T /δ))/ T ) convergence
rate when T is unknown for SGD, where 1 − δ is
the desired success probability. These bounds improve over existing bounds in the literature. We
also revisit AdaGrad-Norm (Ward et al., 2019)
and show a new analysis to obtain a high probability bound that does not require the bounded
gradient assumption made in previous works. The
full version of our paper contains results for the
standard per-coordinate AdaGrad.

Compared to the guarantees that hold in expectation, high
probability guarantees are significantly harder to obtain and
they hold in more limited settings with stronger assumptions
on the problem settings and the stochastic noise distribution.
Most existing works that establish high probability guarantees focus on the setting where the length of the stochastic
noise follows a light-tail (sub-Gaussian) distribution (Juditsky et al., 2011; Lan, 2012; 2020; Li & Orabona, 2020;
Madden et al., 2020; Kavis et al., 2021). Recent works also
study the more challenging heavy-tail setting, notably under
a bounded variance (Nazin et al., 2019; Gorbunov et al.,
2020; Cutkosky & Mehta, 2021) or bounded p-moment assumption (Cutkosky & Mehta, 2021) on the length of the
stochastic noise. Both settings are highly relevant in practice
(Zhang et al., 2020).

1. Introduction

Despite this important progress, the convergence of cornerstone methods is not fully understood even in the more
structured light-tailed noise setting. Specifically, the existing works for both convex and non-convex optimization
with light-tailed noise rely on strong assumptions on the optimization domain and the gradients that significantly limit
their applicability:

Stochastic optimization is a fundamental area with extensive
applications in many domains, ranging from machine learning to algorithm design and beyond. The design and analysis
of iterative methods for stochastic optimization has been the
focus of a long line of work, leading to a rich understanding
*
Equal contribution 1 Stern School of Business, New York
University 2 Department of Computer Science, Boston University 3 Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University. Correspondence to: Zijian Liu <zl3067@nyu.edu>,
Ta Duy Nguyen <taduy@bu.edu>, Thien Hang Nguyen
<nguyen.thien@northeastern.edu>.

The problem domain is restricted to either the unconstrained
domain or a constrained domain with bounded Bregman
diameter. The convergence guarantees established depend
on the Bregman diameter of the domain instead of the initial
distance to the optimum. Even for compact domains, since
the diameter can be much larger than the initial distance,

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

