Graph Inductive Biases in Transformers without Message Passing

Liheng Ma * 1 8 Chen Lin * 2 Derek Lim 3 Adriana Romero-Soriano 4 1 5 6 Puneet K. Dokania 2 7
Mark Coates 1 8 Philip H.S. Torr 2 Ser-Nam Lim 4

Abstract

1. Introduction
Following the success of Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
in different modalities like natural language processing
(NLP) (Vaswani et al., 2017) and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), developing Transformers for graph data
has attracted much interest (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021;
Kreuzer et al., 2021; Ying et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022;
Hussain et al., 2022; Rampášek et al., 2022; Zhang et al.,
2023). A major motivation of Graph Transformers is to alleviate certain known limitations of (local) Message-Passing
Graph Neural Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017),
such as over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018; Oono & Suzuki,
2020), over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2020; Topping et al.,
2022), and expressive power limitations (Xu et al., 2019;
Loukas, 2020; Morris et al., 2019).

Transformers for graph data are increasingly
widely studied and successful in numerous learning tasks. Graph inductive biases are crucial for
Graph Transformers, and previous works incorporate them using message-passing modules and/or
positional encodings. However, Graph Transformers that use message-passing inherit known issues of message-passing, and differ significantly
from Transformers used in other domains, thus
making transfer of research advances more difficult. On the other hand, Graph Transformers
without message-passing often perform poorly on
smaller datasets, where inductive biases are more
important. To bridge this gap, we propose the
Graph Inductive bias Transformer (GRIT) — a
new Graph Transformer that incorporates graph
inductive biases without using message passing.
GRIT is based on several architectural changes
that are each theoretically and empirically justified, including: learned relative positional encodings initialized with random walk probabilities,
a flexible attention mechanism that updates node
and node-pair representations, and injection of
degree information in each layer. We prove that
GRIT is expressive — it can express shortest path
distances and various graph propagation matrices.
GRIT achieves state-of-the-art empirical performance across a variety of graph datasets, thus
showing the power that Graph Transformers without message-passing can deliver.

However, it is known that transformers generally lack strong
inductive biases (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). In the graph
domain, Graph Transformers aggregate information based
on a learned attention matrix, which enjoys a high degree
of freedom; in contrast, MPNNs explicitly aggregate the
information according to the exact topology of the input
graph. This comes with at least two consequences. First,
Graph Transformers may be prone to over-fitting, and thus
they often fail to outperform MPNNs in limited data settings.
Second, learning meaningful attention scores typically requires capturing important positional or structural relationships between nodes, and strong positional encodings are
challenging to design since the structure and symmetries of
graph data are fundamentally different from that of other
(Euclidean) domains (Vaswani et al., 2017; Bronstein et al.,
2021). For instance, there is no ordering or canonical coordinate system for nodes in a graph, whereas words in a
sentence have a sequence structure, and pixels in an image
have a grid structure.
To incorporate graph inductive biases, many of the bestperforming Graph Transformers explicitly integrate local
message-passing mechanisms. For instance, some works incorporate sparse attention on local neighborhoods (Dwivedi
& Bresson, 2021; Kreuzer et al., 2021), or integrate various other types of MPNN modules into their models (Chen
et al., 2022; Rampášek et al., 2022). Thus, such Graph
Transformers may at least partially inherit some of the lim-

*
Equal contribution 1 McGill University 2 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford 3 CSAIL, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology 4 MetaAI 5 Mila - Quebec AI Institute
6
Canada CIFAR AI Chair 7 FiveAI 8 International Laboratory on
Learning Systems (ILLS). Correspondence to: Liheng Ma <liheng.ma@mail.mcgill.ca>, Chen Lin <chen.lin@eng.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

