Training-Free Neural Active Learning with Initialization-Robustness Guarantees

Apivich Hemachandra 1 Zhongxiang Dai 1 Jasraj Singh 2 See-Kiong Ng 1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low 1

Abstract
Output

Existing neural active learning algorithms have
aimed to optimize the predictive performance of
neural networks (NNs) by selecting data for labelling. However, other than a good predictive
performance, being robust against random parameter initializations is also a crucial requirement
in safety-critical applications. To this end, we introduce our expected variance with Gaussian processes (EV-GP) criterion for neural active learning, which is theoretically guaranteed to select
data points which lead to trained NNs with both
(a) good predictive performances and (b) initialization robustness. Importantly, our EV-GP criterion is training-free, i.e., it does not require any
training of the NN during data selection, which
makes it computationally efficient. We empirically demonstrate that our EV-GP criterion is
highly correlated with both initialization robustness and generalization performance, and show
that it consistently outperforms baseline methods
in terms of both desiderata, especially in situations with limited initial data or large batch sizes.

Initialization

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2

1

0
Input

1

"Good" dataset

2

2

1

0
Input

1

"Bad" dataset

2

2

1

0
Input

1

2

Figure 1. Neural networks initialized randomly with different
seeds (left), after training, can give consistent outputs (center)
or highly varying outputs (right) depending on the training data.

tive performance (e.g., generalization performance) of the
trained NNs. However, the output from a neural network is
heavily dependent on its training process, especially on its
initialization (Cyr et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2020). Therefore
in some safety-critical applications, having small variability
in the trained NNs with respect to model initialization is
also a crucial requirement. For example, given a training
set of patient data in a healthcare application (e.g., disease
diagnosis), if the NNs trained using different random initializations have drastically disparate predictions, the resulting
NNs would be too unreliable to be used for clinical diagnosis due to the high-stakes nature of the application (Esteva
et al., 2019). As a simple illustration, Fig. 1 shows that different training sets can indeed result in distinct sensitivities
of the trained NNs to model initialization, and hence a badly
constructed training set (e.g., the rightmost figure in Fig. 1)
can cause the trained NN to be highly variable (and hence
untrustworthy) w.r.t. the model initialization. Therefore, in
these important applications, it is paramount for a neural
active learning algorithm to select data points which lead to
trained NNs with not only (a) good predictive performances
but also (b) initialization robustness.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (NNs) have recently achieved impressive performances in various applications thanks to the
availability of massive amount of labelled data. However, in
some applications, data labelling is so costly that obtaining
large datasets is infeasible. In this regard, a number of works
have used the method of neural active learning to select a
small number of data points to be labelled and subsequently
be used for the training of the NNs (Ren et al., 2021; Sener
& Savarese, 2018; Kirsch et al., 2019; Ash et al., 2020).

To this end, we introduce our Expected Variance with Gaussian Processes (EV-GP) criterion, which is theoretically
shown to select data points which satisfy both criteria.
Specifically, we firstly leverage the theory of neural tangent
kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018) and overparameterized
NNs (Lee et al., 2020) to characterize the predictive distribution of trained NNs (Sec. 3.1) with respect to random model
initialization. This allows us to measure the robustness of
the trained NNs against model initialization via the output
variance, i.e., a smaller output variance indicates a more
initialization-robust NN. Next, we introduce an efficiently
computable approximation of the output variance, and de-

When selecting the data for labelling, existing neural active
learning methods have only aimed to optimize the predic1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore 2 School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Republic of Singapore. Correspondence to: Zhongxiang Dai <dzx@nus.edu.sg>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

