Mirror Sinkhorn: Fast Online Optimization on Transport Polytopes

Marin Ballu 1 Quentin Berthet 2

Abstract

of registering point cloud (Grave et al., 2019) (related to
Gromov-Wasserstein problems (Mémoli, 2011; Solomon
et al., 2016)) and for computing euclidean projection on the
Birkhoff polytope (Li et al., 2020). It appears in statistical inference on random permutations (Birdal & Simsekli,
2019). Inference on random permutations can be obtained
by minimizing various other convex functions (Linderman
et al., 2018). Optimisation on the transport polytope also
arises when trying to both compute and minimize a Wasserstein distance or sum of Wasserstein distances of a set of
parametrized distributions. This applies to the computation of Wasserstein estimators (Ballu et al., 2020; Bassetti
et al., 2006), private learning (Boursier & Perchet, 2019),
Wasserstein barycenters (Rabin et al., 2011; Agueh & Carlier, 2011; Cuturi & Doucet, 2014) and generative models.
In the latter case, the distribution generated by a neural
network is compared to the sample distribution with the
1-Wasserstein distance in WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017)
and Wasserstein autoencoders (Tolstikhin et al., 2017), or
with a regularized version of the Wasserstein distance with
Sinkhorn divergences (Genevay et al., 2018).

Optimal transport is an important tool in machine
learning, allowing to capture geometric properties
of the data through a linear program on transport
polytopes. We present a single-loop optimization
algorithm for minimizing general convex objectives on these domains, utilizing the principles
of Sinkhorn matrix scaling and mirror descent.
The proposed algorithm is robust to noise, and
can be used in an online setting. We provide
theoretical guarantees for convex objectives and
experimental results showcasing it effectiveness
on both synthetic and real-world data.

1. Introduction
Optimal transport is a seminal problem in optimization
(Monge, 1781), and an important topic in analysis (Villani, 2008). The discrete case is a linear program on the set
of nonnegative matrices with fixed row and column sums
(Kantorovich, 1942). This set forms the transport polytope, whose elements can be interpreted as the law of joint
distributions for (X, Y ) with marginal distributions µ, ν.

Several algorithms that have been suggested to solve optimal transport use iterated Bregman projections (Benamou
et al., 2015; Dvurechensky et al., 2018). To minimize general convex functions on transport polytopes, we extend
the approach to a single loop iterated algorithm. Interpretations of Sinkhorn algorithm as mirror descent in the dual
(Mishchenko, 2019) and the primal (Léger, 2021; AubinFrankowski et al., 2022) have been used to derive convergence rates and to extend Sinkhorn to this more general
problem. These extensions are supported by an analysis,
assuming smoothness and strong convexity of the objective.
Streaming iterations of Sinkhorn have been proposed in
(Mensch & Peyré, 2020), focusing solely on minimizing
a regularized optimal transport problem. General convex
optimization algorithms can theoretically achieve the best
asymptotic rates for optimal transport. A ε-close optimal
transport plan can be obtained with accelerated gradient descent schemes (Dvurechensky et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2019;
Guo et al., 2020), or accelerated alternative minimisation
(Guminov et al., 2021). These are only analyzed when given
deterministic gradient updates, and their parameters depend
on an imposed desired level of optimization precision ε.

In machine learning, OT has recently gained in importance
following the work of (Cuturi, 2013), presenting an entropicregularized method and using the Sinkhorn algorithm to
efficiently optimize it; see (Peyré et al., 2019) and references therein for an overview of this topic and its applications. The method can be used to solve the original OT
problem (Altschuler et al., 2017), by setting a regularization parameter that depends on the cost matrix and desired
precision level. We consider here the more general problem of convex optimization of any convex function on the
transport polytope. This comprises several optimization
problems, included but not limited to both optimal transport and its entropic regularized version. The problem for
a quadratic function has been studied both for the purpose
*

Equal contribution 1 University of Cambridge, UK 2 Google
DeepMind, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Quentin Berthet
<qberthet@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Using the Sinkhorn algorithm to solve OT, as studied in
1

