Incentivizing Exploration with Linear Contexts and Combinatorial Actions

Mark Sellke 1
(A(1) , A(2) , . . . , A(T ) ) of actions in A is said to be
Bayesian incentive compatible (BIC) if for each t ∈ [T ]:

Abstract
We advance the study of incentivized bandit
exploration, in which arm choices are viewed
as recommendations and are required to be
Bayesian incentive compatible. Recent work of
(Sellke & Slivkins, 2022) has shown that for the
special case of independent arms, after collecting enough initial samples, the popular Thompson sampling algorithm becomes incentive compatible. This was generalized to the combinatorial semibandit in (Hu et al., 2022). We give an
analog of this result for linear bandits, where the
independence of the prior is replaced by a natural convexity condition. This opens up the possibility of efficient and regret-optimal incentivized
exploration in high-dimensional action spaces.
In the semibandit model, we also improve the
sample complexity for the pre-Thompson sampling phase of initial data collection.

E[µ(A) − µ(A′ ) | A(t) = A] ≥ 0,
∀A, A′ ∈ A such that P[A(t) = A] > 0.

(1.1)

We will often refer to the algorithm as the planner, and
A(t) as a recommendation made to an agent. Here the
agent knows the (source code for the) planner’s algorithm,
and the value of t (i.e. his place in line) but nothing about
the online feedback. (In particular, each agent appears just
once and never “comes back”.) Thus, (1.1) exactly states
that rational agents will follow the planner’s recommendation.
This model was formulated in (Kremer et al., 2014), and
is a multi-stage generalization of the well-studied Bayesian
persuasion problem in information design (Bergemann &
Morris, 2019; Kamenica, 2019). Fundamental results on
feasible explorability and vanishing regret for BIC algorithms were obtained in (Mansour et al., 2020; 2022). In
all cases, the fundamental principle is to use information
asymmetry to guide agent decisions toward exploration.

1. Introduction

Let us remark that averaging over the choice of A(t) shows
that for any BIC algorthm A and fixed time t,

1.1. Problem Formulation and Results
We consider incentivized exploration as introduced in
(Kremer et al., 2014; Mansour et al., 2020). These are bandit problems motivated by the scenario that the t-th action is
a recommendation made to the t-th customer. A planner,
representing a central service such as a major website, observes outcomes of past customers. By contrast, each customer sees only the recommendation they are given and visits the planner only once. Assuming a common Bayesian
prior (and indistinguishability of customers), we would like
our recommendations to be trustworthy, in the sense that a
rational customer will follow our recommendations. We
have the following definition:
Definition 1. Let A be an action set and µ a prior distribution over the mean reward function ℓ∗ : A →
R. A bandit algorithm which recommends a sequence

E[µ(A(t) )] ≥ sup E[µ(A)].
A∈A

That is, the recommended time t action A(t) is always better on average than exploiting according to the prior. Hence
as a special case, BIC algorithms are guaranteed to benefit
all users as compared to naive exploitation without learning. Moreover an agent’s knowledge of the exact time t
only makes the BIC guarantee stronger.
As mentioned, fundamental results on BIC bandit algorithms were obtained in (Mansour et al., 2020; 2022). For
instance, the former work gave “hidden exploration” algorithms which exploit with such high frequency that any
bandit algorithm is BIC on the remaining time-steps given
suitable assumptions on the prior. Unfortunately, all algorithms in these works had to pay exponentially large multiplicative factors in their regret compared to non-BIC bandit
algorithms. This “price of incentives” was studied quantitatively in (Sellke & Slivkins, 2022) in the case of independent arms. They proved the classical Thompson sampling

1
Amazon Core AI. Correspondence to: Mark Sellke <msellke@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

