Latent Traversals in Generative Models as Potential Flows
Yue Song 1 2 Andy Keller 2 Nicu Sebe 1 Max Welling 2

Abstract

spaces that are rich in semantics, whereby traversing latent
codes according to carefully chosen trajectories has the possibility to lead to semantically meaningful transformations
in the generated images. However, without a carefully structured latent space, it is impossible a priori to know how to
precisely construct such trajectories. A significant research
effort has thus emerged to develop methods that are able
to discover semantically meaningful, self-consistent, and
disentangled trajectories in the latent space of pre-trained
generative models. Such traversals would allow for a more
controlled generation of images without needing to alter or
constrain the training process of the generative model itself.
Most straightforwardly, an early set of these approaches
aimed to identify fixed linear directions in latent space and
evolve samples along the discovered directions to create
trajectories (Härkönen et al., 2020; Voynov & Babenko,
2020; Shen & Zhou, 2021). Such efforts developed valuable techniques for unsupervised learning of interpretable
traversal directions but were ultimately limited by their assumption that semantics were structured linearly in latent
space, and thus were prone to yielding less semantically disentangled traversals. More recently, Tzelepis et al. (2021)
proposed to model nonlinear latent traversals using gradients of learned Gaussian Radial Basis Functions (RBFs) to
effectively ‘warp’ the latent space and thereby drive latent
traversals. This integrated non-linearity was demonstrated
to improve the modeling of the semantic structure but again
was limited by its relatively fixed shape and its static nature
over the time-length of the traversal.

Despite the significant recent progress in deep
generative models, the underlying structure of
their latent spaces is still poorly understood,
thereby making the task of performing semantically meaningful latent traversals an open research challenge. Most prior work has aimed to
solve this challenge by modeling latent structures
linearly, and finding corresponding linear directions which result in ‘disentangled’ generations.
In this work, we instead propose to model latent
structures with a learned dynamic potential landscape, thereby performing latent traversals as the
flow of samples down the landscape’s gradient.
Inspired by physics, optimal transport, and neuroscience, these potential landscapes are learned as
physically realistic partial differential equations,
thereby allowing them to flexibly vary over both
space and time. To achieve disentanglement, multiple potentials are learned simultaneously, and
are constrained by a classifier to be distinct and
semantically self-consistent. Experimentally, we
demonstrate that our method achieves both more
qualitatively and quantitatively disentangled trajectories than state-of-the-art baselines. Further,
we demonstrate that our method can be integrated
as a regularization term during training, thereby
acting as an inductive bias towards the learning
of structured representations, ultimately improving model likelihood on similarly structured data.
Code is available at https://github.com/
KingJamesSong/PDETraversal.

In this work, we introduce a more general framework which
encompasses this prior work while simultaneously allowing
for a significantly more flexible learned latent structure. Our
approach is motivated by intuitions from physics, optimal
transport, and neuroscience, and proposes to model latent
traversals as the flow of particles down the gradient of a
latent potential landscape. The challenge of learning a set
of disentangled latent traversals then equates to the problem of learning a set of equivalent disentangled potential
functions which match the semantic structure of the underlying data manifold. Traversals can then be generated by
evolving samples through time following the gradient of
these learned potentials. Importantly, in contrast with prior
work, our framework defines the learned potential functions
as physically realistic Partial Differential Equations (PDEs),
thereby allowing them to vary over both time and space,

1. Introduction
Generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) have latent
1

University of Trento, Italy 2 University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Correspondence to: Yue Song
<yue.song@unitn.it>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

