Privacy-Aware Compression for Federated Learning Through
Numerical Mechanism Design

Chuan Guo 1 Kamalika Chaudhuri 1 Pierre Stock 1 Mike Rabbat 1

Abstract

success is that the amount of communication between the
clients and server should be relatively low. Thus a major
challenge in this space is ensuring a good privacy-accuracycommunication trade-off—in other words, balancing the
predictive accuracy of the model learnt with the privacy
parameter as well as the number of bits transmitted between
the client and server.

In private federated learning (FL), a server aggregates differentially private updates from a large
number of clients in order to train a machine learning model. The main challenge in this setting is
balancing privacy with both classification accuracy of the learnt model as well as the number of
bits communicated between the clients and server.
Prior work has achieved a good trade-off by designing a privacy-aware compression mechanism,
called the minimum variance unbiased (MVU)
mechanism, that numerically solves an optimization problem to determine the parameters of the
mechanism. This paper builds upon it by introducing a new interpolation procedure in the numerical design process that allows for a far more
efficient privacy analysis. The result is the new Interpolated MVU mechanism that is more scalable,
has a better privacy-utility trade-off, and provides
SOTA results on communication-efficient private
FL on a variety of datasets.

Previous work in this area (Kairouz et al., 2021a; Agarwal et al., 2021; Triastcyn et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022b)
abstracted this problem as privacy-aware compression for
distributed mean estimation (DME). Here, the goal is to
design a DP mechanism whose output recovers the input in
expectation (i.e., is unbiased) and can be represented using
a small number of bits. In particular, recent work (Chaudhuri et al., 2022) introduces the minimum variance unbiased
(MVU) mechanism, which solves a numerical optimization
problem to find the parameters of a mechanism that ensures
unbiasedness, privacy and communication efficiency while
minimizing the variance of the output. They also experimentally demonstrate that, for a given bit budget, this can lead
to better privacy-utility trade-offs than many other methods
that independently privatize and then compress.
Unfortunately, a problem with the MVU mechanism (and
many other privacy-aware compression mechanisms such
as Kairouz et al. (2021a); Agarwal et al. (2021)) is that it
does not scale well to high-dimensional vectors. This is
a crucial drawback for its application to private FL since
model updates are often high-dimensional. A major underlying reason for this drawback is the MVU mechanism’s
insistence on unbiasedness. This is achieved using randomized dithering to ensure that the mechanism is unbiased for
all continuous-valued inputs, but leads to inefficiencies in
the mechanism’s computation and privacy accounting for
high-dimensional vectors. Importantly, this drawback is in
fact superficial since unbiasedness is not required for FL,
and prior work has shown that even crude compressors such
as SignSGD (Jin et al., 2020) can perform remarkably well.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL; McMahan et al. (2017)) is a distributed solution for machine learning on sensitive data and
has been the topic of much recent interest. In federated
learning, raw client data resides entirely on the client device, and a server coordinates the collaborative training of
a global model through transmissions of model updates.
Direct transmission of raw updates (pseudo-gradients) can
lead to privacy leaks (Zhu et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2020;
Zhao et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2021; Jeon et al., 2021), and an
effective method is to use a rigorous privacy solution such
as differential privacy (DP; Dwork et al. (2006)) to transmit privacy-preserving updates. Since federated learning
typically involves low-bandwidth clients, a requirement for

In this work, we propose the interpolated MVU (I-MVU)
mechanism, which extends MVU using an interpolation
procedure that relaxes the unbiasedness assumption. By
its discrete nature, the MVU mechanism can be viewed
as sampling from a particular categorical distribution, and

1
Meta AI. Correspondence to: Chuan Guo <chuanguo@meta.com>, Kamalika Chaudhuri <kamalika@meta.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

