Multi-View Masked World Models for Visual Robotic Manipulation

Younggyo Seo * 1 Junsu Kim * 1 Stephen James 2 Kimin Lee 3 Jinwoo Shin 1 Pieter Abbeel 4

Abstract

A notable exception is the work of Sermanet et al. (2018),
which learns view-invariant representations via contrastive
learning. However, enforcing viewpoint invariance assumes
that all viewpoints share similar information and thus requires careful curation of positive and negative pairs, similar
to other contrastive approaches that often depend on complex design choices about sampling such pairs (Arora et al.,
2019). This can make it challenging to learn representations
from diverse multi-view data and limit its applicability to
a narrow distribution of visual robotic manipulation setups.
Instead, we aim to develop a simple multi-view representation learning method effective for more diverse setups.

Visual robotic manipulation research and applications often use multiple cameras, or views, to
better perceive the world. How else can we utilize the richness of multi-view data? In this paper, we investigate how to learn good representations with multi-view data and utilize them for
visual robotic manipulation. Specifically, we train
a multi-view masked autoencoder which reconstructs pixels of randomly masked viewpoints and
then learn a world model operating on the representations from the autoencoder. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in a range
of scenarios, including multi-view control and
single-view control with auxiliary cameras for representation learning. We also show that the multiview masked autoencoder trained with multiple
randomized viewpoints enables training a policy
with strong viewpoint randomization and transferring the policy to solve real-robot tasks without
camera calibration and an adaptation procedure.
Video demonstrations are available at: https:
//sites.google.com/view/mv-mwm.

In this paper, we present Multi-View Masked World Model
(MV-MWM), a reinforcement learning framework that
trains a multi-view masked autoencoder for representation
learning and a world model to solve visual manipulation
tasks. Our autoencoder consists of a synergistic combination of view-masking: which masks viewpoints at random,
and video autoencoding: which reconstructs video frames of
both masked and unmasked viewpoints. We find our autoencoder effectively learns representations that capture useful
information of the current viewpoint but also the cross-view
information from different viewpoints. For behavior learning, we learn a world model on frozen representations from
either single-view or multi-view data, which is particularly
feasible as the autoencoder consists of vision transformer
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) layers that take inputs of variable sizes. We then train actor and critic with imaginary
trajectories from the world model (Hafner et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The camera is a ubiquitous instrument for robot vision that
provides rich information about a workspace from various
viewpoints. Thus it has been a widely-used technique for
roboticists to utilize multiple cameras for solving complex
manipulation tasks (Akkaya et al., 2019; Akinola et al.,
2020; James et al., 2022). However, prior work utilize multiview data naively as inputs and has yet to investigate how
to learn effective multi-view representations. Considering
recent studies have shown the benefit of single-view representation learning for control (Nair et al., 2022; Radosavovic
et al., 2022), it is desirable to explore the potential of multiview representation learning for visual robotic manipulation.

We highlight the main contributions of this paper below:
• We present Multi-View Masked World Model, a reinforcement learning framework that trains a multi-view
masked autoencoder with a view-masking and learns a
world model upon autoencoder representations.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of MV-MWM in various visual robotic manipulation setups. These setups
include (i) a multi-view control where agents operate on
multi-view data, (ii) a single-view control where agents
operate on single-view data but use auxiliary cameras
for representation learning, and (iii) a viewpoint-robust
control where agents operate on single randomized
viewpoint but use multiple randomized viewpoints for
representation learning, as illustrated in Figure 1. Our

*

Equal contribution 1 KAIST 2 Dyson Robot Learning Lab
Google Research 4 UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Younggyo
Seo <younggyo.seo@kaist.ac.kr>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

