Robust and Scalable Bayesian Online Changepoint Detection

Matias Altamirano 1 François-Xavier Briol 1 2 Jeremias Knoblauch 1

Abstract
This paper proposes an online, provably robust,
and scalable Bayesian approach for changepoint
detection. The resulting algorithm has key advantages over previous work: it provides provable
robustness by leveraging the generalised Bayesian
perspective, and also addresses the scalability issues of previous attempts. Specifically, the proposed generalised Bayesian formalism leads to
conjugate posteriors whose parameters are available in closed form by leveraging diffusion score
matching. The resulting algorithm is exact, can
be updated through simple algebra, and is more
than 10 times faster than its closest competitor.

Figure 1. Twitter Flash Crash. The run-length is the time since the
last changepoint (CP). Top: Jow Dones Index with Maximum a
posteriori CPs detected by standard BOCD marked as ▲. Middle
& Bottom: run-length posteriors of Dm -BOCD with most likely
run-length in blue and of standard BOCD in green. Standard
BOCD incorrectly detects a CP, Dm -BOCD does not.

1. Introduction

uncertainty over the most recent time at which the data distribution changed. BOCD has many desirable properties:
it is suitable for multivariate data and has the capacity to
quantify uncertainty. However, it also has a significant flaw
inherited from Bayesian inference: it is not robust under
outliers or model misspecification. This can lead to failures,
where most data points inferred to be CPs are simply mild
heterogeneities in the data. This is a significant problem,
and can causes practitioners to act on safety-critical systems
based upon an erroneously declared CPs.

Changepoint (CP) detection is the task of identifying sudden changes in the statistical properties of a data stream.
The methods to detect CPs are used in applications including systems health monitoring (Stival et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2006), financial data (Kim et al., 2022; Kummerfeld
& Danks, 2013), climate change (Reeves et al., 2007; Itoh
& Kurths, 2010), and cyber security (Hallgren et al., 2022).
Existing approaches include likelihood ratio methods such
as the parametric method CUSUM (Page, 1954) or Change
Finder methods (Kawahara & Sugiyama, 2009), to Bayesian
methods such as in Chib (1998); Fearnhead (2006).

The lack of robustness in Bayesian methods has recently
come to the forefront, and various strategies have been proposed to address it. Arguably the most successful amongst
these have been generalised Bayesian methods (see e.g. Bissiri et al., 2016; Jewson et al., 2018; Knoblauch et al., 2022).
Building on these ideas, Knoblauch et al. (2018) introduced
the first robust version of BOCD using generalised Bayesian
inference based on β-divergences (β-BOCD).

Detecting CPs in an online fashion is an even more challenging task, but can allow practitioners to act on these systems
in real-time. In a Bayesian context, the most popular method
is Bayesian online changepoint detection (BOCD) (Adams
& MacKay, 2007; Fearnhead & Liu, 2007). Here, the data
stream is assumed to come from one of several different
underlying distributions; and the goal is to quantify our

While the resulting algorithm is generally applicable and
provides robustness, it has a major drawback that has
severely impeded its broader use: it is not scalable. This
is mainly due to the intractability of the generalised posterior and predictive distributions, which require multiple
variational approximations to be performed at each time
point. As a result, β-BOCD is practically infeasible if one
is interested in online methods for high-frequency data, or
if one deals with a constrained computational budget.

1

Department of Statistical Science, University College
London, London, United Kingdom 2 The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Matias
Altamirano <matias.altamirano.22@ucl.ac.uk>,
FrançoisXavier Briol <f.briol@ucl.ac.uk>, Jeremias Knoblauch
<j.knoblauch@ucl.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

