State and parameter learning with PARIS particle Gibbs

Gabriel Cardoso 1 2 3 Yazid Janati El Idrissi 4 Sylvain Le Corff 5 Éric Moulines 1 Jimmy Olsson 6

1. Introduction

Abstract
Non-linear state-space models, also known as
general hidden Markov models (HMM), are
ubiquitous in statistical machine learning, being
the most classical generative models for serial
data and sequences. Learning in HMM, either
via Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) or
Markov Score Climbing (MSC) requires the estimation of the smoothing expectation of some
additive functionals. Controlling the bias and
the variance of this estimation is crucial to establish the convergence of learning algorithms.
Our first contribution is to design a novel additive
smoothing algorithm, the Parisian particle Gibbs
(PPG) sampler, which can be viewed as a PARIS
(Olsson & Westerborn, 2017) algorithm driven
by conditional SMC moves, resulting in biasreduced estimates of the targeted quantities. We
substantiate the PPG algorithm with theoretical
results, including new bounds on bias and variance as well as deviation inequalities. We then
establish, in the learning context, and under standard assumptions, non-asymptotic bounds highlighting the value of bias reduction and the implicit Rao–Blackwellization of PPG. These are
the first non-asymptotic results of this kind in this
setting. We illustrate our theoretical results with
numerical experiments supporting our claims.

Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) methods, or particle filters, are simulation-based approaches used for the online
approximation of posterior distributions in the context of
Bayesian inference in state space models. In nonlinear hidden Markov models (HMM), they have been successfully
applied for approximating online the typically intractable
posterior distributions of sequences of unobserved states
(Xs1 , . . . , Xs2 ) given observations (Yt1 , . . . , Yt2 ) for 0 ≤
s1 ≤ s2 and 0 ≤ t1 ≤ t2 . Standard SMC methods use
Monte Carlo samples generated recursively by means of
sequential importance sampling and resampling steps. A
particle filter approximates the flow of marginal posteriors
by a sequence of occupation measures associated with a
sequence {ξti }N
i=1 , t ∈ N, of Monte Carlo samples, each
particle ξti being a random draw in the state space of the
hidden process. Particle filters revolve around two operations: a selection step duplicating/discarding particles with
large/small importance weights, respectively, and a mutation step evolving randomly the selected particles in the
state space. Applying alternatingly and iteratively selection and mutation results in swarms of particles being both
temporally and spatially dependent. The joint state posteriors of an HMM can also be interpreted as laws associated
with a Markovian backward dynamics; this interpretation is
useful, for instance, when designing backward-samplingbased particle algorithms for nonlinear smoothing (Douc
et al., 2011; Del Moral et al., 2010).

Equal contribution 1 CMAP, École Polytechnique, Institut
Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau. 2 Université de Bordeaux,
CRCTB U4045, INSERM, Bordeaux, France 3 IHU Liryc, fondation Bordeaux Université, Pessac, France 4 Samovar, Télécom
SudParis, département CITI, TIPIC, Institut Polytechnique de
Paris, Palaiseau 5 LPSM, Sorbonne Université, UMR CNRS
8001, 4 Place Jussieu, 75005 Paris. 6 Department of Mathematics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.. Correspondence to: Gabriel Cardoso <gabriel.victorinocardoso@polytechnique.edu>, Yazid Janati El Idrissi <janati.yazid@gmail.com>.

Throughout the years, several convergence results as the
number N of particles tends to infinity have been established; see, e.g., (Del Moral, 2004; Douc & Moulines,
2008; Cappé et al., 2005) and the references therein. In
addition, a number of non-asymptotic results have been
established, including time-uniform bounds on the SMC
Lp error and bias as well as bounds describing the propagation of chaos among the particles. Extensions to the
backward-sampling-based particle algorithms can also be
found for instance in (Douc et al., 2011; Del Moral et al.,
2010; Dubarry & Le Corff, 2013).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this paper, we consider the problem of parameter learning with stochastic gradient algorithms. We set the focus on
learning the parameter of a function whose gradient is the

*

1

