Fundamental Tradeoffs in Learning with Prior Information

Anirudha Majumdar 1

Abstract

The learner’s task is to use the dataset to minimize risk (i.e.,
expected loss) for this unknown distribution. The minimax
risk then corresponds to the lowest worst-case risk (over the
family of distributions defined by θ ∈ Θ) achievable by any
learner (see Sec. 2 for a formal definition). In other words,
the minimax risk corresponds to the minimax-optimal value
of the following game: the learner first chooses a particular
learning algorithm, and then an adversary chooses a distribution parameter θ ∈ Θ; the learner’s cost (negative payoff)
is equal to its risk.

We seek to understand fundamental tradeoffs between the accuracy of prior information that a
learner has on a given problem and its learning
performance. We introduce the notion of prioritized risk, which differs from traditional notions of minimax and Bayes risk by allowing us
to study such fundamental tradeoffs in settings
where reality does not necessarily conform to the
learner’s prior. We present a general reductionbased approach for extending classical minimax
lower-bound techniques in order to lower bound
the prioritized risk for statistical estimation problems. We also introduce a novel generalization
of Fano’s inequality (which may be of independent interest) for lower bounding the prioritized
risk in more general settings involving unbounded
losses. We illustrate the ability of our framework
to provide insights into tradeoffs between prior
information and learning performance for problems in estimation, regression, and reinforcement
learning.

The minimax risk does not allow one to take into account
prior information that a learner may have (beyond the weak
prior knowledge that θ belongs to the set Θ). As an alternative, one may assume that the learner is equipped with
prior knowledge of the distribution π that the parameter θ is
drawn from. The Bayes risk then corresponds to the smallest possible average risk assuming that θ is drawn from the
prior distribution π (see Sec. 2 for a formal definition). However, the Bayes risk formulation assumes that the learner is
equipped with nature’s prior, i.e., the true distribution from
which θ is drawn. The Bayes risk formulation thus does
not capture settings where reality does not conform to the
learner’s prior.
Statement of contributions. We seek to address the challenges with using the minimax and Bayes risk for understanding fundamental limits of learning with prior information. To this end, we make the following contributions:

1. Introduction
We are motivated by the problem of understanding fundamental limits and tradeoffs in learning with prior information: how much prior knowledge does one require in order
to learn quickly on a given task? In other words, for a given
problem, is there a fundamental limit on the performance of
a learner in the absence of sufficient prior information?

• We propose a quantity — which we refer to as prioritized risk — for analyzing settings where reality does
not fully conform to the learner’s prior. The key idea is
to consider a version of the minimax risk where the risk
associated with a given distribution Pθ is weighted by
the prior that the learner has on θ. We show that this
quantity allows us to understand fundamental tradeoffs
between the accuracy of prior information and learning
performance (risk) on a given problem: a lower bound
on the prioritized risk allows one to establish a fundamental limit on learning performance in the absence of
sufficient prior information (Sec. 3).
• We provide a general reduction-based strategy for extending classical techniques for lower bounding minimax and Bayes risk — including the methods of LeCam,
Assouad, and Fano (Tsybakov, 2008; Yang & Barron,
1999; Yu et al., 1997) — to obtain lower bounds on the

Fundamental limits in learning are typically formalized via
the classical notions of minimax risk and Bayes risk (Berger,
2013). Consider the standard setting in statistical learning
theory where a learner receives a dataset xn1 := {xi }ni=1
containing n i.i.d. observations of a random variable X.
Suppose that the distribution Pθ of X is defined by a parameter θ ∈ Θ which is a priori unknown to the learner.
1
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Anirudha
Majumdar <ani.majumdar@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

