Discrete-Continuous Optimization Framework for
Simultaneous Clustering and Training in Mixture Models

Parth Sangani * 1 Arjun Kashettiwar * 1 Pritish Chakraborty 1 Bhuvan Reddy 1 Durga Sivasubramanian 1
Ganesh Ramakrishnan 1 Rishabh Iyer 2 Abir De 1

Abstract

2010; Belkin & Sinha, 2010a; Pace & Barry, 1997; Belkin
& Sinha, 2010b; Sanjeev & Kannan, 2001; Hopkins & Li,
2018; Fu & Robles-Kelly, 2008), and find use in a plethora
of applications, e.g., finance, genomics (Dias et al., 2009;
Liesenfeld, 2001; Pan et al., 2003), etc. Existing literature
on mixture models predominately focuses on the design of
estimation algorithms and the analysis of sample complexity for these problems (Faria & Soromenho, 2010; Städler
et al., 2010; Kwon et al., 2019; Yi et al., 2014), and analyzes them theoretically for specific and simple models
such as Gaussians, linear regression, and SVMs. Additionally, erstwhile approaches operate on realizable settings
— they assume specific generative models for the cluster
membership of the instances. Such an assumption can be
restrictive, especially when the choice of the underlying
generative model differs significantly from the hidden data
generative mechanism. Very recently, Pal et al. (2022) consider a linear regression problem in a non-realizable setting, where they do not assume any underlying generative
model for the data. However, their algorithm and analysis
is tailored towards the linear regression task.

We study a new framework of learning mixture
models via automatic clustering called P RESTO,
wherein we optimize a joint objective function on
the model parameters and the partitioning, with
each model tailored to perform well on its specific cluster. In contrast to prior work, we do not
assume any generative model for the data. We
convert our training problem to a joint parameter estimation and a subset selection problem,
subject to a matroid span constraint. This allows us to reduce our problem into a constrained
set function minimization problem, where the
underlying objective is monotone and approximately submodular. We then propose a new
joint discrete-continuous optimization algorithm
which achieves a bounded approximation guarantee for our problem. We show that P RESTO
outperforms several alternative methods. Finally,
we study P RESTO in the context of resource efficient deep learning, where we train smaller resource constrained models on each partition and
show that it outperforms existing data partitioning and model pruning/knowledge distillation approaches, which in contrast to P RESTO, require
large initial (teacher) models.

1.1. Present Work
Responding to the above limitations, we design P RESTO, a
novel data partitioning based framework for learning mixture models. In contrast to prior work, P RESTO is designed
for generic deep learning problems including classification
using nonlinear architectures, rather than only linear models (linear regression or SVMs). Moreover, we do not assume any generative model for the data. We summarize our
contributions as follows.

1. Introduction
In the problem space of learning mixture models, our goal
is to fit a given set of models implicitly to different clusters of the dataset. Mixture models are ubiquitous approaches for prediction tasks on heterogeneous data (Dasgupta, 1999; Achlioptas & McSherry, 2005; Kalai et al.,

Novel framework for training mixture models. At the
outset, we aim to simultaneously partition the instances
into different subsets and build a mixture of models across
these subsets. Here, each model is tailored to perform well
on a specific portion of the instance space. Formally, given
a set of instances and the architectures of K models, we
partition the instances into K disjoint subsets and train a
family of K component models on these subsets, wherein,
each model is assigned to one subset, implictly by the algorithm. Then, we seek to minimize the sum of losses yielded

*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, IIT Bombay. 2 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, UT Dallas.. Correspondence to: Parth Sangani
<parthsangani00@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

