Quantum Ridgelet Transform:
Winning Lottery Ticket of Neural Networks with Quantum Computation

Hayata Yamasaki 1 Sathyawageeswar Subramanian 2 Satoshi Hayakawa 3 Sho Sonoda 4

Abstract

putation in solving various computational tasks (Nielsen &
Chuang, 2011; de Wolf, 2019), such as Shor’s algorithm for
integer factorization (Shor, 1997). QML indeed has advantages in learning data obtained from quantum states (Sweke
et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2021; 2022; Chen et al., 2022a),
yet machine learning commonly deals with classical data
rather than quantum states. For a classical dataset constructed carefully so that its classification reduces to a variant of Shor’s algorithm, QML achieves the classification superpolynomially faster than classical algorithms (Liu et al.,
2021); however, the applicability of such QML to practical
datasets has been unknown. Meanwhile, motivated by the
success of neural networks (Goodfellow et al., 2016), various attempts have been made to apply quantum computation
to more practical tasks for neural networks. For example,
one widely studied approach in QML is to use parameterized quantum circuits, often called “quantum neural networks”, as a potential substitute for conventional classical
neural networks; however, problematically, the parameterized quantum circuits do not successfully emulate essential
components of the neural networks, e.g., perceptrons and
nonlinear activation functions, due to linearity of the transformation implemented by the quantum circuits (Schuld &
Petruccione, 2021). Thus, a significant challenge in QML
has been to develop a novel technique to bridge the gap between quantum computation and classical neural networks,
so as to clarify what advantage QML could offer on top
of the empirically proven merit of the classical neural networks.

A significant challenge in the field of quantum machine learning (QML) is to establish applications
of quantum computation to accelerate common
tasks in machine learning such as those for neural
networks. Ridgelet transform has been a fundamental mathematical tool in the theoretical studies
of neural networks, but the practical applicability
of ridgelet transform to conducting learning tasks
was limited since its numerical implementation by
conventional classical computation requires an exponential runtime exp(O(D)) as data dimension
D increases. To address this problem, we develop
a quantum ridgelet transform (QRT), which implements the ridgelet transform of a quantum state
within a linear runtime O(D) of quantum computation. As an application, we also show that
one can use QRT as a fundamental subroutine
for QML to efficiently find a sparse trainable subnetwork of large shallow wide neural networks
without conducting large-scale optimization of
the original network. This application discovers
an efficient way in this regime to demonstrate the
lottery ticket hypothesis on finding such a sparse
trainable neural network. These results open an
avenue of QML for accelerating learning tasks
with commonly used classical neural networks.

1. Introduction

To address this challenge, we here develop a fundamental
quantum algorithm for making the tasks for classical neural networks more efficient, based on ridgelet transform.
Ridgelet transform, one of the well-studied integral transforms in signal processing, is a fundamental mathematical
tool for studying neural networks in the over-parameterized
regime (Murata, 1996; Candes, 1998; Rubin, 1998; Starck
et al., 2010; Sonoda et al., 2021; 2022a;b). Let f : RD → R
denote a function with D-dimensional input, to be learned
with a neural network. For an activation function g : R → R
such as the rectified linear unit (ReLU), a shallow feedforward neural network
PNwith a single hidden layer is represented by f (x) ≈ n=1 wn g(a>
n x − bn ), where N is
the number of nodes in the hidden layer, and wn is the

Quantum machine learning (QML) is an emerging field of research to take advantage of quantum computation for accelerating machine-learning tasks (Biamonte et al., 2017; Ciliberto et al., 2018; Schuld & Petruccione, 2021). Quantum
computation can achieve significant speedups compared to
the best existing algorithms with conventional classical com1

The University of Tokyo 2 University of Warwick 3 University
of Oxford 4 RIKEN AIP. Correspondence to: Hayata Yamasaki
<hayata.yamasaki@phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

