Mixture Proportion Estimation Beyond Irreducibility

Yilun Zhu 1 Aaron Fjeldsted 2 Darren Holland 3 George Landon 4 Azaree Lintereur 2 Clayton Scott 1 5

Abstract

comments XF (González et al., 2017). MPE is also an important component in solving several domain adaptation and
weakly supervised learning problems, such as learning from
positive and unlabeled examples (LPUE) (Elkan & Noto,
2008; Du Plessis et al., 2014; Kiryo et al., 2017), learning
with noisy labels (Lawrence & Schölkopf, 2001; Natarajan
et al., 2013; Blanchard et al., 2016), multi-instance learning
(Zhang & Goldman, 2001), and anomaly detection (Sanderson & Scott, 2014).

The task of mixture proportion estimation (MPE)
is to estimate the weight of a component distribution in a mixture, given observations from both
the component and mixture. Previous work on
MPE adopts the irreducibility assumption, which
ensures identifiablity of the mixture proportion.
In this paper, we propose a more general sufficient
condition that accommodates several settings of
interest where irreducibility does not hold. We further present a resampling-based meta-algorithm
that takes any existing MPE algorithm designed
to work under irreducibility and adapts it to work
under our more general condition. Our approach
empirically exhibits improved estimation performance relative to baseline methods and to a recently proposed regrouping-based algorithm.

If no assumptions are made on the unobserved component
G, then κ∗ is not identifiable. Blanchard et al. (2010) proposed the irreducibility assumption on G so that κ∗ becomes
identifiable. Up to now, almost all MPE algorithms build
upon the irreducibility assumption (Blanchard et al., 2010;
Scott, 2015; Blanchard et al., 2016; Jain et al., 2016; Ramaswamy et al., 2016; Ivanov, 2020; Bekker & Davis, 2020;
Garg et al., 2021), or some stricter conditions like nonoverlapping support of component distributions (Elkan &
Noto, 2008; Du Plessis & Sugiyama, 2014). However, as
we discuss below, irreducibility can be violated in several
applications, in which case the above methods produce statistically inconsistent estimates. As far as we know, Yao
et al. (2022), discussed in Sec. 5, is the first attempt to move
beyond irreducibility.

1. Introduction
Mixture proportion estimation (MPE) is the problem of estimating the weight of a component distribution in a mixture.
Specifically, let κ∗ ∈ [0, 1] and let F , G, and H be probability distributions such that F = (1 − κ∗ )G + κ∗ H. Given
i.i.d. observations

This work proposes a more general sufficient condition than
irreducibility, and offers a practical algorithm for estimating
κ∗ under this condition. We introduce a meta-algorithm that
takes as input any MPE method that consistently estimates
κ∗ under irreducibility, and removes the bias of that method
whenever irreducibility does not hold but our more general
sufficient condition does. Furthermore, even if our new sufficient condition is not satisfied, our meta-algorithm will
not increase the bias of the underlying MPE method. We
describe several applications and settings where our framework is relevant, and demonstrate the practical relevance of
this framework through extensive experiments. Proofs and
additional details can be found in the appendices.

iid

XH := {x1 , x2 , · · · , xm } ∼ H,
iid

(1)

XF := {xm+1 , xm+2 , · · · , xm+n } ∼ F,
MPE is the problem of estimating κ∗ . A typical application
is given some labeled positive reviews XH , estimate the
proportion of positive comments about a product among all
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Michigan. 2 Ken and Mary Alice Lindquist Department of Nuclear Engineering, Penn State University. 3 Department
of Engineering Physics, Air Force Institute of Technology. 4 School
of Engineering and Computer Science, Cedarville University.
5
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan. Correspondence to: Yilun Zhu <allanzhu@umich.edu>, Clayton Scott
<clayscot@umich.edu>.

2. Problem Setup and Background
Let G and H be probability measures on a measurable space
(X , S), and let F be a mixture of G and H

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

F = (1 − κ∗ )G + κ∗ H,
1

(2)

