XTab: Cross-table Pretraining for Tabular Transformers

Bingzhao Zhu 1 2 * Xingjian Shi 3 † Nick Erickson 4 Mu Li 3 † George Karypis 4 Mahsa Shoaran 1

Abstract

tokens, tables are highly data-specific. Tabular data can
vary in the number and types of columns. This makes it
difficult for tabular deep learning models to transfer the
knowledge learned from one table to another, leading to
poor generalization abilities. Therefore, self-supervised
learning for tabular data (He et al., 2022; Devlin et al., 2018),
particularly one that is able to bootstrap the learning on new
tables, is still an open problem.

The success of self-supervised learning in computer vision and natural language processing has
motivated pretraining methods on tabular data.
However, most existing tabular self-supervised
learning models fail to leverage information
across multiple data tables and cannot generalize to new tables. In this work, we introduce
XTab, a framework for cross-table pretraining
of tabular transformers on datasets from various
domains. We address the challenge of inconsistent column types and quantities among tables
by utilizing independent featurizers and using
federated learning to pretrain the shared component. Tested on 84 tabular prediction tasks from
the OpenML-AutoML Benchmark (AMLB), we
show that (1) XTab consistently boosts the generalizability, learning speed, and performance of
multiple tabular transformers, (2) by pretraining
FT-Transformer via XTab, we achieve superior
performance than other state-of-the-art tabular
deep learning models on various tasks such as
regression, binary, and multiclass classification.

There is an ongoing effort in migrating self-supervised
pretraining techniques from CV (Chen et al., 2020) and
NLP (Devlin et al., 2018) to tabular tasks. With selfsupervised pretraining, tabular deep models have demonstrated improved performance (Ucar et al., 2021; Bahri et al.,
2021; Majmundar et al., 2022). However, existing methods
generally pretrain the tabular model on data from the same
domain as the downstream task. As a result, the data-specific
models cannot generalize to new tables.
Another direction of deep tabular learning aims to leverage Transformers, which drives the recent progress in
NLP (Vaswani et al., 2017) and CV (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020) for tabular tasks. Inspired by the success of the attention mechanism, Transformers were adapted to tabular
data (Gorishniy et al., 2021; Somepalli et al., 2021; Wu et al.,
2021; Wang & Sun, 2022) and demonstrated strong performance (Grinsztajn et al., 2022). The core idea of tabular
transformers is to consider the table columns as tokens, similar to words in a sentence. Therefore, tabular transformers
can process tables with variable numbers of columns, thus
making transferable learning (Wang & Sun, 2022) feasible.

1. Introduction
With the increasing number of datasets represented as tables
with rows and columns, tabular machine learning makes the
foundation of many real-world applications. While deep
learning has achieved tremendous success in the fields of
computer vision (CV) (He et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021)
and natural language processing (NLP) (Devlin et al., 2018;
Vaswani et al., 2017), tabular deep learning models are
not used as commonly as tree-based models (Grinsztajn
et al., 2022; Gijsbers et al., 2022). The primary challenge
of tabular deep learning is the diversity of tabular tasks.
Unlike text, which can be standardized as a sequence of

In this paper, we present XTab, a general framework for
cross-table pretraining of tabular transformers. To resolve
the issue that tables may vary in the number and types
of columns, XTab decomposed the tabular transformers to
two components: data-specific featurization and projection
layers that capture the characteristics of each table, and a
cross-table-shared block that stores the common knowledge.
On a diverse collection of data tables, XTab trains these dataspecific blocks and the shared block jointly via federated
learning (Collins et al., 2022). Once pretrained, XTab can
bootstrap the learning process on a new table by initializing
the shared block with pretrained weights. To verify our
design, we conducted extensive experiments on AutoML
Benchmark (AMLB) (Gijsbers et al., 2022). Our results

∗

Work done as an intern at Amazon Web Services. † Work
done while being at Amazon Web Services. 1 EPFL, Lausanne,
Switzerland 2 Cornell University, Ithaca, USA 3 Boson AI, USA
4
Amazon Web Services, USA. Correspondence to: Bingzhao Zhu
<bz323@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

