Non-autoregressive Conditional Diffusion Models for Time Series Prediction

Lifeng Shen 1 James T. Kwok 2

Abstract

audio (Chen et al., 2020) and text (Gong et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2022a). However, it is still an open question on how
to build a strong diffusion model for time series prediction.
A key challenge is that time series data usually involve
complex dynamics, nonlinear patterns, and long temporal
dependencies. Time series prediction is thus challenging,
especially when the prediction horizon is long (Zhou et al.,
2022a).

Recently, denoising diffusion models have led
to significant breakthroughs in the generation of
images, audio and text. However, it is still an
open question on how to adapt their strong modeling ability to model time series. In this paper,
we propose TimeDiff, a non-autoregressive diffusion model that achieves high-quality time series prediction with the introduction of two novel
conditioning mechanisms: future mixup and autoregressive initialization. Similar to teacher forcing, future mixup allows parts of the ground-truth
future predictions for conditioning, while autoregressive initialization helps better initialize the
model with basic time series patterns such as
short-term trends. Extensive experiments are performed on nine real-world datasets. Results show
that TimeDiff consistently outperforms existing
time series diffusion models, and also achieves the
best overall performance across a variety of the
existing strong baselines (including transformers
and FiLM).

Existing time-series diffusion models can be roughly divided into two categories based on the decoding strategy.
The first one is autoregressive (Rasul et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2022), in which future predictions are generated one by one
over time. However, it has limited long-range prediction
performance due to error accumulation and slow inference
speed. To alleviate these problems, the second category
of diffusion models is non-autoregressive, such as CSDI
(Tashiro et al., 2021) and SSSD (Alcaraz & Strodthoff,
2022). They perform conditioning in the denoising networks’ intermediate layers and introduce inductive bias into
the denoising objective. However, as will be shown empirically in Section 4.2, their long-range prediction performance
is still inferior to other time-series prediction models such as
Fedformer (Zhou et al., 2022b) and NBeats (Oreshkin et al.,
2019). This may be due to that their conditioning strategies are borrowed from image or text data, but not tailored
for time series data. Only using the denoising objective to
introduce inductive bias may not be sufficient to guide the
conditioning network in capturing helpful information from
the lookback window, leading to inaccurate predictions.

1. Introduction
Time series prediction has been applied to many real-world
applications such as economics (Henrique et al., 2019),
transportation (Sapankevych & Sankar, 2009), and energy (Wang et al., 2011). As time series prediction can
be regarded as a conditional generation task, it is natural
to use diffusion models (Rasul et al., 2021). By generating
data through iterative denoising, diffusion models present
a strong ability for data generation and have led to breakthroughs in synthesizing images (Rombach et al., 2022),

In this paper, we propose TimeDiff, a conditional nonautoregressive diffusion model that is effective for long
time series prediction. Unlike CSDI and SSSD, it introduces additional inductive bias in the conditioning module
that is tailor-made for time series. Specifically, TimeDiff
introduces two conditioning mechanisms: (i) future mixup,
which randomly reveals parts of the ground-truth future predictions during training, and (ii) autoregressive initialization,
which better initializes the model with basic components
in the time series. Experimental results on nine real-world
datasets demonstrate superiority of TimeDiff over existing
time series diffusion models and other recent strong baselines (such as time series transformers (Nie et al., 2023;
Zhou et al., 2022b; Wu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021; Zhou
et al., 2021), DLinear (Zeng et al., 2023) and FiLM (Zhou

1

Division of Emerging Interdisciplinary Areas, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay,
Hong Kong. 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong.
Correspondence
to: Lifeng Shen <lshenae@connect.ust.hk>, James T. Kwok
<jamesk@cse.ust.hk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

