Generated Graph Detection

Yihan Ma 1 Zhikun Zhang 1 2 Ning Yu 3 Xinlei He 1 Michael Backes 1 Yun Shen 4 Yang Zhang 1

Abstract

models have witnessed significant advancement in the past
5 years (Stoyanovich et al., 2020; Liao et al., 2019; Kipf &
Welling, 2016; You et al., 2018a).

Graph generative models become increasingly effective for data distribution approximation and
data augmentation. While they have aroused public concerns about their malicious misuses or misinformation broadcasts, just as what Deepfake
visual and auditory media has been delivering to
society. Hence it is essential to regulate the prevalence of generated graphs. To tackle this problem,
we pioneer the formulation of the generated graph
detection problem to distinguish generated graphs
from real ones. We propose the first framework
to systematically investigate a set of sophisticated
models and their performance in four classification scenarios. Each scenario switches between
seen and unseen datasets/generators during testing
to get closer to real-world settings and progressively challenge the classifiers. Extensive experiments evidence that all the models are qualified
for generated graph detection, with specific models having advantages in specific scenarios. Resulting from the validated generality and oblivion
of the classifiers to unseen datasets/generators,
we draw a safe conclusion that our solution can
sustain for a decent while to curb generated graph
misuses.1

However, a coin has two sides. There is a concern that
synthetic graphs can be misused. For example, molecular
graphs are used to design new drugs (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2018; You et al., 2018a). The generated graphs
can be misused in this process (e.g., leading to unresolved
protein-ligand binding (Walters & Murcko, 2020; Bian &
Xie, 2021; Zeng et al., 2022)), hence it is essential for the
pharmaceutical factory to vet the authenticity of the molecular graphs. Also, synthetic graphs make deep graph learning
models more vulnerable to well-designed attacks. Existing
graph-level backdoor attacks (Xi et al., 2021) and membership inference attacks (Wu et al., 2021a) require the attackers to train their local models using the same or similar
distribution data as those for the target models. Adversarial graph generation enables attackers to generate graphs
that are close to the real graphs. It facilitates the attackers
to build better attack models locally hence keeping those
attacks more stealthy (since the attackers can minimize the
interaction with the target models). This advantage also
applies to the latest graph attacks such as the property inference attack (Zhang et al., 2022) and GNN model stealing
attack (Shen et al., 2022).
As a result, it is essential to regulate the prevalence of generated graphs. In this paper, we propose to target the generated
graph detection problem, i.e., to study whether generated
graphs can be differentiated from real graphs with machine
learning classifiers.

1. Introduction
Graph generative models aim to learn the distributions of
real graphs and generate synthetic ones (Xie et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021b). Generated graphs have
found applications in numerous domains, such as social
networks (Qiu et al., 2018), e-commerce (Li et al., 2020),
chemoinformatics (Kearnes et al., 2016), etc. In particular,
with the development of deep learning, graph generative

To detect generated graphs, we train graph neural network
(GNN)-based classifiers and show their effectiveness in encoding and classifying graphs (Zhang et al., 2020; Kipf &
Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017). Figure 2 (in Appendix A) illustrates the general pipeline of the generated
graph detection. To evaluate their accuracy and generalizability, we test graphs from varying datasets and/or varying
generators that are progressively extended toward the unseen
during training. The seen concept in dataset or generator
means that the graphs used in the training and testing stage
are from the same dataset or generated by the same generator, respectively. That is to say, they share the same or
similar distribution. And the unseen concept represents the

1

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security 2 Stanford
University 3 Salesforce Research 4 NetApp. Correspondence to:
Yihan Ma <yihan.ma@cispa.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/
Yvonnemamama/GGD

1

