NNSplitter: An Active Defense Solution for DNN Model via Automated Weight
Obfuscation
Tong Zhou 1 Yukui Luo 1 Shaolei Ren 2 Xiaolin Xu 1

Abstract

Requirements

Definitions

As a type of valuable intellectual property (IP),
deep neural network (DNN) models have been
protected by techniques like watermarking. However, such passive model protection cannot fully
prevent model abuse. In this work, we propose
an active model IP protection scheme, namely
NNSplitter, which actively protects the model by
splitting it into two parts: the obfuscated model
that performs poorly due to weight obfuscation,
and the model secrets consisting of the indexes
and original values of the obfuscated weights,
which can only be accessed by authorized users
with the support of the trusted execution environment. Experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of NNSplitter, e.g., by only modifying 275 out of over 11 million (i.e., 0.002%)
weights, the accuracy of the obfuscated ResNet18 model on CIFAR-10 can drop to 10%. Moreover, NNSplitter is stealthy and resilient against
norm clipping and fine-tuning attacks, making it
an appealing solution for DNN model protection.
The code is available at: https://github.
com/Tongzhou0101/NNSplitter.

Effectiveness

The obfuscated model exhibits poor performance (e.g., random-guess accuracy).

Efficiency

The number of model secrets stored in
the secure space should be minimized.

Integrity

The functionality of the model is
preserved for the legitimate users.

Resilience

The obfuscated model should be
resilient against potential attack surfaces.

Stealthiness

The obfuscated weights should be
indistinguishable from normal weights.

Table 1. The design requirements for an efficient model protection
scheme, and the guidance for our proposed NNSplitter.

ML models are vulnerable to model IP attacks (Sun et al.,
2021), wherein the attacker can extract the model and deploy
it on unauthorized devices. Such unauthorized usage leads
to significant financial losses for the model owners.
Several studies have addressed the issue of DNN model
protection, which can be broadly classified into two categories: passive protection (after IP infringement) and active
protection (before IP infringement). Although passive protection techniques, e.g., watermarking, help model owners
declare the ownership and guard their rights (Yang et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2018), they cannot effectively prevent
unauthorized usage as the model can perform very well in
most cases. Thus, attackers are still motivated to steal the
well-performed model and use it without the knowledge of
the model owner.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in
various applications (Duong et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018),
building a DNN model with high accuracy is costly, i.e.,
requiring a large number of labeled samples and massive
computational resources (Jiang et al., 2020). As a result, a
high-performance DNN model presents valuable intellectual
property (IP) of the model owner, which should naturally
be adequately protected against potential attacks. However,
recent studies have demonstrated that millions of on-device

In contrast, active protection only allows legitimate users to
use the well-performed model, while intentionally degrading the model functionality for attackers, thus protecting the
interests of the model owner (Chakraborty et al., 2020; Fan
et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2022). Nonetheless, such an advantage of the active protection methods is not free, which
either requires hardware support, e.g., a hardware root-oftrust (Chakraborty et al., 2020), or introduces extra model
parameters (Fan et al., 2019). Moreover, the existing active protection approaches are not generic, i.e., they require
special training strategies for model protection, rendering

1

Northeastern University, Boston, MA 2 UC Riverside, Riverside, CA. Correspondence to:
Xiaolin Xu
<x.xu@northeastern.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

