Accelerated Stochastic Optimization Methods under Quasar-convexity

Qiang Fu 1 Dongchu Xu 2 Ashia Wilson 3

Abstract

chine learning applications rely on non-convex optimization.
Unfortunately, the theoretically guaranteed improvement
for convex functions that accelerated algorithms have do
not apply to many real-world scenarios. For many smooth
non-convex optimization problems, we only have guarantees for finding stationary points instead of the global minimizer. However, some non-convex functions involved in
several popular optimization problems such as low-rank
matrix problems, deep learning and reinforcement learning,
have special structure and exhibit convex-like properties (Ge
et al., 2016; Bartlett et al., 2018; Mei et al., 2020), which
makes it possible to find approximate global minimizers of
these structured non-convex functions.

Non-convex optimization plays a key role in a
growing number of machine learning applications.
This motivates the identification of specialized
structure that enables sharper theoretical analysis.
One such identified structure is quasar-convexity,
a non-convex generalization of convexity that
subsumes convex functions. Existing algorithms
for minimizing quasar-convex functions in the
stochastic setting have either high complexity or
slow convergence, which prompts us to derive a
new class of stochastic methods for optimizing
smooth quasar-convex functions. We demonstrate
that our algorithms have fast convergence and outperform existing algorithms on several examples,
including the classical problem of learning linear dynamical systems. We also present a unified
analysis of our newly proposed algorithms and a
previously studied deterministic algorithm.

In this paper, we develop two accelerated stochastic optimization methods for optimizing quasar-convex functions.
A quasar-convex function is parameterized by a constant γ ∈
(0, 1]. γ = 1 implies the function is star-convex, which is a
relaxation of convexity (Nesterov & Polyak, 2006). Quasarconvexity was first proposed in Hardt et al. (2016). They
prove that the objective of learning linear dynamical systems
is quasar-convex under several mild assumptions. Zhou et al.
(2019) and Kleinberg et al. (2018) also provide evidence to
suggest that loss function of neural networks may conform
to star-convexity in large neighborhoods of the minimizers. Several recent papers propose effective deterministic
methods for minimizing L-smooth and γ-quasar-convex
functions. While gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) need O(γ −1 ϵ−1 ) and O(γ −2 ϵ−2 ) iterations to yield an ϵ-approximate solution Guminov & Gasnikov 2017; Gower et al. 2021, the algorithms developed
by Guminov & Gasnikov (2017) and Hinder et al. (2020)
need O(γ −1 ϵ−1/2 ) iterations and the algorithm developed
by Nesterov et al. (2018) needs O(γ −3/2 ϵ−1/2 ) iterations.
Hinder et al. (2020) also introduce a new metric in terms
of the total number of function and gradient evaluations. In
order to compute an ϵ-approximate solution, the method
of Hinder et al. (2020) requires O(γ −1 ϵ−1/2 log(γ −1 ϵ−1 ))
total evaluations for γ-quasar-convex functions and
O(γ −1 κ1/2 log(γ −1 κ) log(γ −1 ϵ−1 ))1 total evaluations for
µ-strongly γ-quasar-convex functions.

1. Introduction
Momentum is one of the most widely used techniques for
speeding up the convergence rate of optimization methods.
Many deterministic and stochastic momentum based algorithms have been proposed for optimizing (strongly) convex
functions, e.g. accelerated gradient descent (AGD) (Nesterov, 1983; 2003; Beck & Teboulle, 2009), accelerated
stochastic gradient descent (ASGD) (Ghadimi & Lan, 2012;
2016; Kulunchakov & Mairal, 2020), accelerated stochastic variance reduced gradient (ASVRG) methods and their
related variants (Nitanda, 2016; Allen-Zhu, 2017; Kulunchakov & Mairal, 2020).
While much of our understanding of modern optimization
algorithms relies on the ability to leverage the convexity of
the objective function, a growing number of modern ma1
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 2 Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Qiang Fu <fuqiang7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn>, Ashia
Wilson <ashia07@mit.edu>.

Many optimization problems in machine learning can be
1

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

κ ≜ L/µ is the condition number.

