ReLOAD: Reinforcement Learning with Optimistic Ascent-Descent
for Last-Iterate Convergence in Constrained MDPs

Ted Moskovitz * 1 Brendan O’Donoghue 2 Vivek Veeriah 2
Sebastian Flennerhag 2 Satinder Singh 2 Tom Zahavy 2

Abstract

training a robot to run while avoiding placing too much
torque on its joints, to video compression (Mandhane et al.,
2022), to maximizing the efficiency of commercial cooling
systems under stability constraints (Luo et al., 2022).

In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has
been applied to real-world problems with increasing success. Such applications often require to put
constraints on the agent’s behavior. Existing algorithms for constrained RL (CRL) rely on gradient
descent-ascent, but this approach comes with a
caveat. While these algorithms are guaranteed
to converge on average, they do not guarantee
last-iterate convergence, i.e., the current policy of
the agent may never converge to the optimal solution. In practice, it is often observed that the policy alternates between satisfying the constraints
and maximizing the reward, rarely accomplishing
both objectives simultaneously. Here, we address
this problem by introducing Reinforcement Learning with Optimistic Ascent-Descent (ReLOAD),
a principled CRL method with guaranteed lastiterate convergence. We demonstrate its empirical
effectiveness on a wide variety of CRL problems
including discrete MDPs and continuous control.
In the process we establish a benchmark of challenging CRL problems.

A natural question, then, is how to solve such constrained
tasks. In standard RL, we often look to the Reward Hypothesis, which postulates that all goals and purposes of
an intelligent agent can be achieved by maximization of
a scalar reward (Sutton, 2004). Szepesvári (2020) studied
the implications of this hypothesis to CRL. Accordingly,
constrained RL problems can be solved by integrating the
constraints and task reward into a single, non-stationary reward signal (Altman, 1999). However, this approach carries
a subtle but important challenge that can be easily overlooked: gradient-based optimization for such constrained
problems only guarantees that the average of the agent’s
behavior over the course of training converges to an optimal
solution, with no assurances for the final policy.
Unfortunately, simple solutions like averaging model parameters are ineffective when the policy is implemented as
a deep neural network. While this problem has been studied
in the context of GANs (Daskalakis et al., 2018; Balduzzi
et al., 2018), it has not been addressed within CRL, which
brings additional complications. As an illustration, consider
the problem of training an agent in the Walker domain in
DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018) to walk subject
to varying upper limits on its height. In Fig. 1a, learning
looks stable due to averaging across multiple seeds, but in
Fig. 1b, we can see dramatic oscillations over the course of
a single training run, with the agent either simply walking
normally or lying on the ground.

1. Introduction
From navigating stratospheric balloons through the atmosphere to coordinating plasma control for nuclear fusion research, reinforcement learning (RL; Sutton & Barto, 2018)
has proved increasingly effective at solving real-world problems (Bellemare et al., 2020; Degrave et al., 2022). In RL,
an agent interacts with an environment over a series of time
steps with the goal of maximizing its expected cumulative
reward. When developing intelligent systems which must
learn and act in the real world, it’s often the case that constraints are placed on agents to ensure that certain safety or
efficiency requirements are satisfied. Examples range from

In this work, we address this issue, introducing Reinforcement Learning with Optimistic Ascent-Descent (ReLOAD),
a principled CRL method for last-iterate convergence (LIC).
Specifically, we make the following contributions: (1) We
analyze several existing methods for CRL and show that
they fail to achieve LIC (Lemma 3.1, Lemma 3.2). We
then prove LIC for a generalized form of optimistic mirror
descent (Theorem 3.6). (2) Building on these theoretical insights, we introduce ReLOAD (Section 4) and demonstrate
empirically that it achieves LIC in both the tabular and
function approximation settings (Section 5). Furthermore,
ReLOAD improves the performance of strong baseline al-

*
1
Work done as an intern at DeepMind.
Gatsby
Unit, UCL 2 DeepMind. Correspondence to: Ted Moskovitz
<ted@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

