Constrained Efficient Global Optimization of Expensive Black-box Functions

Wenjie Xu 1 2 Yuning Jiang 1 Bratislav Svetozarevic 2 Colin N. Jones 1

Abstract

2011; Frazier & Wang, 2016) can all be formulated as blackbox optimization problems.

We study the problem of constrained efficient
global optimization, where both the objective and
constraints are expensive black-box functions that
can be learned with Gaussian processes. We propose CONFIG (CONstrained efFIcient Global
Optimization), a simple and effective algorithm to
solve it. Under certain regularity assumptions, we
show that our algorithm enjoys the same cumulative regret bound as that in the unconstrained case
and similar cumulative constraint violation upper
bounds. For commonly used Mátern and Squared
Exponential kernels, our bounds are sublinear and
allow us to derive a convergence rate to the optimal solution of the original constrained problem. In addition, our method naturally provides a
scheme to declare infeasibility when the original
black-box optimization problem is infeasible. Numerical experiments on sampled instances from
the Gaussian process, artificial numerical problems, and a black-box building controller tuning
problem all demonstrate the competitive performance of our algorithm. Compared to the other
state-of-the-art methods, our algorithm significantly improves the theoretical guarantees while
achieving competitive empirical performance.

In these applications, we typically know little about the
shape of the black-box functions, which can be non-convex
and multi-modal. As a result, a global optimization method
is needed. In many applications, e.g., tuning the hyperparameters of a deep neural network, each function evaluation
can take a large number of resources such as energy, time, or
GPU computation, so we want to use as few function evaluations as possible. Standard global optimization methods,
such as genetic algorithms or simulated annealing (Pardalos & Romeijn, 2013), typically require a large number of
samples and thus can not be applied to the optimization
of expensive black-box functions. Therefore, Gaussian
process based efficient global optimization1 (Jones et al.,
1998; Shahriari et al., 2015), as a sample-efficient method
to solve black-box optimization problems (Xu et al., 2022a),
has recently been becoming more and more popular. The
general idea of efficient global optimization is to build a
surrogate model, typically by Gaussian process regression,
of the black box function from samples and then to choose
a search direction using this model. This problem, when
formulated as a (kernelized) multi-armed bandit problem, is
widely studied in the literatures (Audibert et al., 2010; Srinivas et al., 2012; Soare et al., 2014; Chowdhury & Gopalan,
2017a; Amani et al., 2019; Zhou & Ji, 2022).
A key challenge in many applications is black-box constraints. For example, when tuning the temperature controller parameters of a building, we need to minimize the
energy consumption while keeping the occupants’ comfort
at user-defined levels, where both the energy and the comfort are black-box functions of the controller parameters.
To handle the unknown black-box constraints, a variety of
efficient global optimization methods with constraints have
been developed. Intuitively, there is a non-trivial tradeoff
over optimization, learning and violations. We can roughly
classify the existing methods into different groups based
on whether constraint violations are allowed during the
optimization process. For the setting where no constraint
violations are tolerated, a group of safe optimization meth-

1. Introduction
Global optimization of expensive black-box functions is a
pervasive problem in science and engineering. In black-box
optimization problems, we typically need to evaluate different candidate solutions sequentially to find the optimal one
without explicit gradient information. For example, hyperparameter tuning for machine learning models (Bergstra &
Bengio, 2012; Snoek et al., 2015), control system performance optimization (Bansal et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2022b)
and drug discovery or materials design (Negoescu et al.,
1

Automatic Control Laboratory, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
Urban Energy Systems Laboratory, Empa, Zurich, Switzerland.
Correspondence to: Yuning Jiang <yuning.jiang@ieee.org>.
2

1

Also known as Gaussian process optimization (e.g., in (Srinivas et al., 2012)), Bayesian optimization (e.g., in (Frazier, 2018;
Hernández-Lobato et al., 2016)) or kriging (e.g., in (Jeong et al.,
2005)).

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

