Unlocking Slot Attention by Changing Optimal Transport Costs
Yan Zhang * 1 David W. Zhang * 2 Simon Lacoste-Julien 1 3 4 Gertjan J. Burghouts 5 Cees G. M. Snoek 2

Abstract

has especially been a problem in the video domain due to occlusions and new objects appearing (Kipf et al., 2022). For
example, Wu et al. (2022) observe in experiments that when
there are two objects but five “slots” (equivalent to queries
in the previous example), the three slots that do not have a
specific object to model become nearly identical. Once that
has happened, the “cat problem” from before applies: these
very similar slots (queries) must receive essentially the same
information. Consequently, if multiple new objects appear
in the video, these three slots can—at best—all bind to only
a single object, which is clearly undesirable.

Slot attention is a powerful method for objectcentric modeling in images and videos. However,
its set-equivariance limits its ability to handle
videos with a dynamic number of objects because
it cannot break ties. To overcome this limitation,
we first establish a connection between slot attention and optimal transport. Based on this new perspective we propose MESH (Minimize Entropy
of Sinkhorn): a cross-attention module that combines the tiebreaking properties of unregularized
optimal transport with the speed of regularized optimal transport. We evaluate slot attention using
MESH on multiple object-centric learning benchmarks and find significant improvements over slot
attention in every setting.

This issue is present because cross-attention is setequivariant, a property traditionally considered desirable.
However, Zhang et al. (2022) show that set-equivariance
is too restrictive when applied to multisets: sets with repeated elements allowed, which are prevalent in deep learning (background in Section 2). This manifests itself in two
related problems:

1. Introduction

1. Soft assignments. The model tends to mix several
inputs into each slot (query) rather than making a hard
decision of one slot corresponding to exactly one input.
This leads to difficulties when the information from
each input must be kept distinct.

Suppose we have an image containing two cats and one dog.
Given a query like [cat, cat, dog], our task is to provide
instance-specific information for each query element, such
as their positions in the image. When constructing a neural
network to solve this problem, cross-attention is a natural
choice to relate the queries to our image (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Wei et al., 2020). With such a model, the dog can be
located perfectly, but our two queries for the cats inevitably
end up with an undesirable result: the average of the two
cats’ positions. The problem is that with our model, multiple
copies of the same query element must have the same result
(Zhang et al., 2022); it is impossible to receive different
answers for the same query, even if the context makes it
obvious what is desired.

2. Lack of tiebreaking. Similar slots are processed similarly, so they will likely contain similar information.
Multiple similar slots prefer to capture an average of
the relevant inputs rather than each slot capturing a
different input, which leads to the problem described
earlier where two cats cannot be localized individually.
To avoid these issues, a property called exclusive multisetequivariance is necessary (Zhang et al., 2022). So far,
only models from the Deep Set Prediction Networks family
(Zhang et al., 2019; 2022) are known to have this property.
However, they lack the object-centric inductive bias useful
for object-centric learning tasks where the set-equivariant
slot attention (Locatello et al., 2020) shines. Fortunately,
introducing even a single exclusively multiset-equivariant
module in a model is enough to give the entire model this
property. In this paper, we develop a module that enhances
cross-attention in order to make the object-centric slot attention exclusively multiset-equivariant, thereby addressing
the problems of soft assignments and tiebreaking.

Models that rely on cross-attention, such as slot attention
(Locatello et al., 2020), can run into this issue when trying to
extract objects from images and other data modalities. This
*
Equal contribution 1 Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal
University of Amsterdam 3 Mila, Université de Montreal 4 Canada
CIFAR AI Chair 5 TNO. Correspondence to: Yan Zhang
<yan@cyan.zone>, David W. Zhang <w.d.zhang@uva.nl>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

