Weighted Flow Diffusion for Local Graph Clustering with Node Attributes:
an Algorithm and Statistical Guarantees

Shenghao Yang 1 Kimon Fountoulakis 1

Abstract

yet are rich in small-scale local structures (Leskovec et al.,
2009; Jeub et al., 2015), local graph clustering has become
an important scalable tool for probing large-scale graph
datasets with a wide range of applications in machine learning and data analytics (Gleich, 2015; Fountoulakis et al.,
2020; Macgregor & Sun, 2021).

Local graph clustering methods aim to detect
small clusters in very large graphs without the
need to process the whole graph. They are fundamental and scalable tools for a wide range of tasks
such as local community detection, node ranking
and node embedding. While prior work on local
graph clustering mainly focuses on graphs without
node attributes, modern real-world graph datasets
typically come with node attributes that provide
valuable additional information. We present a
simple local graph clustering algorithm for graphs
with node attributes, based on the idea of diffusing mass locally in the graph while accounting for
both structural and attribute proximities. Using
high-dimensional concentration results, we provide statistical guarantees on the performance of
the algorithm for the recovery of a target cluster
with a single seed node. We give conditions under which a target cluster generated from a fairly
general contextual random graph model, which
includes both the stochastic block model and the
planted cluster model as special cases, can be
fully recovered with bounded false positives. Empirically, we validate all theoretical claims using
synthetic data, and we show that incorporating
node attributes leads to superior local clustering
performances using real-world graph datasets.

Traditional local graph clustering algorithms primarily focus
on the structural properties of a graph dataset, i.e. nodes and
edges, and consequently the analyses of these algorithms
are often concerned with the combinatorial properties of the
output cluster. For example, in most previous studies one is
interested in the conductance of a cluster and defines a good
cluster as one that has low conductance (Andersen et al.,
2006; Reid & Yuval, 2009; Spielman & Teng, 2013; AllenZhu et al., 2013; Andersen et al., 2016; Shi et al., 2017;
Wang et al., 2017; Fountoulakis et al., 2020; Liu & Gleich,
2020). In this case, the objective of local graph clustering
is thus detecting a low conductance cluster around the seed.
With the increasing availability of multi-modal datasets, it is
now very common for a graph dataset to contain additional
sources of information such as node attributes, which may
prove to be crucial for correctly identifying clusters with
rather noisy edge connections. However, nearly all existing
local graph clustering algorithms do not work with attributed
graphs. Moreover, in the presence of node attributes, the
objective and analysis of a local graph clustering algorithm
should also adjust to take into account both sources of information (i.e. graph structure and attributes) as opposed to
focusing solely on the combinatorial notion of conductance.

1. Introduction

1.1. Our contributions

Given a graph G and a seed node in that graph, a local graph
clustering algorithm finds a good small cluster that contains
the seed node without looking at the whole graph (Andersen
et al., 2006; Spielman & Teng, 2013). Because the graphs
arising from modern applications are massive in size and
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. Correspondence to: Shenghao Yang
<shenghao.yang@uwaterloo.ca>.

We propose a simple local graph clustering algorithm which
simultaneously considers both graph structural and node
attribute information. We analyze the performance of the
proposed algorithm from a statistical perspective where we
assume that the target cluster and the node attributes have
been generated from a random data model. We provide
conditions under which the algorithm is guaranteed to fully
recover the target cluster with bounded false positives.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our local graph clustering algorithm uses the recently proposed flow diffusion model on graphs (Fountoulakis et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2022). The original flow diffusion was

1

1

