Rotation and Translation Invariant Representation Learning
with Implicit Neural Representations

Sehyun Kwon 1 Joo Young Choi 2 Ernest K. Ryu 1 2

Abstract

inference of the semantic meaning of the image. Therefore,
it is desirable to obtain semantic representations that are not
dependent on such nuisance parameters.

In many computer vision applications, images
are acquired with arbitrary or random rotations
and translations, and in such setups, it is desirable to obtain semantic representations disentangled from the image orientation. Examples of
such applications include semiconductor wafer
defect inspection, plankton microscope images,
and inference on single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) micro-graphs. In this work,
we propose Invariant Representation Learning
with Implicit Neural Representation (IRL-INR),
which uses an implicit neural representation (INR)
with a hypernetwork to obtain semantic representations disentangled from the orientation of the
image. We show that IRL-INR can effectively
learn disentangled semantic representations on
more complex images compared to those considered in prior works and show that these semantic representations synergize well with SCAN
to produce state-of-the-art unsupervised clustering results. Code: https://github.com/
sehyunkwon/IRL-INR.

Obtaining low-dimensional “disentangled” representations
is an active area of research in the area of representation
learning. Prior works such as β-VAE (Higgins et al., 2017)
and Info-GAN (Chen et al., 2016) propose general methods for disentangling latent representations so that components correspond to semantically independent factors.
However, such fully general approaches are limited in the
extent of disentanglement that they can accomplish. Alternatively, Spatial-VAE (Bepler et al., 2019) and TARGET-VAE
(Nasiri & Bepler, 2022) explicitly, and therefore much more
effectively, disentangle nuisance parameters from the semantic representation using an encoder with a so-called
spatial generator. However, we find that these prior methods are difficult to train on more complex datasets such as
semiconductor wafer maps or plankton microscope images,
as we demonstrate in Section 3.4. We also find that the
learned representations do not synergize well with modern
deep-learning-based unsupervised clustering methods, as
we demonstrate in Section 4.3.
In this work, we propose Invariant Representation Learning
with Implicit Neural Representation (IRL-INR), which uses
an implicit neural representation (INR) with a hypernetwork
to obtain semantic representations disentangled from the
orientation of the image. Through our experiments, we
show that IRL-INR can learn disentangled semantic representations on more complex images. We also show that
these semantic representations synergize well with SCAN
(Van Gansbeke et al., 2020) to produce state-of-the-art clustering results. Finally, we show a scaling phenomenon in
which the clustering performance improves as the dimension
of the semantic representation increases.

1. Introduction
In many computer vision applications, images are acquired
with arbitrary or random rotations and translations. Examples of such applications include semiconductor wafer
defect inspection (Wang, 2008; Wang & Chen, 2019; 2020),
plankton microscope images (Zhao et al., 2009), and inference on single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM)
micrographs (Zhong et al., 2021). In such applications, the
rotation and translation of images serve as nuisance parameters (Cox & Hinkley, 1979, §7.3) that may interfere with the

2. Related Works

1

Interdisciplinary Program in Articifial Intelligence, Seoul
National University 2 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Seoul National University. Correspondence to: Ernest K. Ryu
<ernestryu@snu.ac.kr>.

Disentangled representation learning. Finding disentangled latent representations corresponding to semantically
independent factors is a classical problem in machine learning (Comon, 1994; Hyvärinen & Oja, 2000; Shakunaga &
Shigenari, 2001). Recently, generative models have been

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

