Chemically Transferable Generative Backmapping of Coarse-Grained Proteins

Soojung Yang 1 Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli 2

Abstract

ML for prediction of protein structure, research on conformational ensembles started to accelerate only recently,
mainly because data were scarce. Very flexible proteins
(intrinsically disordered proteins, IDPs) or protein regions
are better understood as conformational ensembles rather
than static structures. Experimental structure determination
methods observed either one frozen structure or the average
of the conformational ensemble and thus are not suitable for
describing individual dynamic states (Miller & Phillips Jr.,
2021). Conformational ensembles are thus mainly generated using simulations such as Molecular Dynamics (MD)
simulations or statistical sampling. Following the simulation, a representative subset can be selected from the pool of
sampled conformers to match the properties and constraints
derived from experimental measurements (Orellana, 2019;
Salvatella, 2014).

Coarse-graining (CG) accelerates molecular simulations of protein dynamics by simulating sets of
atoms as singular beads. Backmapping is the opposite operation of bringing lost atomistic details
back from the CG representation. While machine
learning (ML) has produced accurate and efficient CG simulations of proteins, fast and reliable
backmapping remains a challenge. Rule-based
methods produce poor all-atom geometries, needing computationally costly refinement through
additional simulations. Recently proposed ML
approaches outperform traditional baselines but
are not transferable between proteins and sometimes generate unphysical atom placements with
steric clashes and implausible torsion angles. This
work addresses both issues to build a fast, transferable, and reliable generative backmapping tool
for CG protein representations. We achieve generalization and reliability through a combined set
of innovations: representation based on internal
coordinates; an equivariant encoder/prior; a custom loss function that helps ensure local structure,
global structure, and physical constraints; and expert curation of high-quality out-of-equilibrium
protein data for training. Our results pave the way
for out-of-the-box backmapping of coarse-grained
simulations for arbitrary proteins.

Atomistic simulations are often too computationally expensive for the time and length scale of protein dynamics. An effective way to overcome these limitations is to
use coarse-grained (CG) simulations with simplified particles. Representing systems in a reduced number of degrees
of freedom provides access to much larger spatiotemporal scales (Kmiecik et al., 2016). However, the speedup
comes at the cost of atomistic details, which are essential
in determining protein biochemical functions. For example,
identifying specific atom-level contacts at a protein-protein
interaction surface or a ligand binding pocket is crucial to
understand molecular recognition, signaling, or ligand binding (Badaczewska-Dawid et al., 2020). Thus, backmapping,
or restoring all-atom structures from CG structures, can
be required to get a complete picture of protein function,
especially for drug and protein design practices (Śledź &
Caflisch, 2018; Huang et al., 2016).

1. Introduction
Protein dynamics ranges from large microsecond-scale
movements of protein domains to small fast fluctuations
of side chain atoms within protein pockets, and is connected
to essential biological functions such as signaling, enzyme
catalysis, and molecular machines (Salvatella, 2014). Despite the importance of dynamics and the large success of

Current popular backmapping methods involve two steps: 1)
the generation of initial structures based on a set of geometric rules (Lombardi et al., 2016), libraries of protein fragments (Heath et al., 2007), or random placements (Rzepiela
et al., 2010), 2) the refinement of the generated structures
by Monte Carlo relaxation or MD simulations. The second
step is necessary because these rule-based sampling methods usually result in poor initial structures (Roel-Touris &
Bonvin, 2020). However, the optimization step requires
of an exhaustive computation and can be biased towards
the choice of the scoring function and relaxation methods

1
Computational and Systems Biology, MIT, Cambridge, MA,
United States 2 Department of Material Science and Engineering,
MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States. Correspondence to: Rafael
Gómez-Bombarelli <rafagb@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

