AudioLDM: Text-to-Audio Generation with Latent Diffusion Models
Haohe Liu * 1 Zehua Chen * 2 Yi Yuan 1 Xinhao Mei 1 Xubo Liu 1 Danilo Mandic 2
Wenwu Wang 1 Mark D. Plumbley 1

Abstract

ative models (Oord et al., 2016; Ho et al., 2020; Song
et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2022), either unconditional or conditioned on other modalities (Kreuk et al., 2022; Żelaszczyk
& MaÂndziuk, 2022), have revolutionized this task. Previous studies primarily worked on the label-to-sound setting
with a small set of labels (Liu et al., 2021b; Pascual et al.,
2022) such as the ten sound classes in the UrbanSound8K
dataset (Salamon et al., 2014). In comparison, natural language is considerably more flexible than labels as they can
include fine-grained descriptions of audio signals, such as
pitch, acoustic environment, and temporal order. The task
of generating audio prompted with natural language descriptions is known as text-to-audio (TTA) generation.

Text-to-audio (TTA) systems have recently gained
attention for their ability to synthesize general audio based on text descriptions. However, previous studies in TTA have limited generation quality with high computational costs. In this study,
we propose AudioLDM, a TTA system that is
built on a latent space to learn continuous audio
representations from contrastive language-audio
pretraining (CLAP) embeddings. The pretrained
CLAP models enable us to train LDMs with audio embeddings while providing text embeddings
as the condition during sampling. By learning
the latent representations of audio signals without modelling the cross-modal relationship, AudioLDM improves both generation quality and
computational efficiency. Trained on AudioCaps
with a single GPU, AudioLDM achieves stateof-the-art TTA performance compared to other
open-sourced systems, measured by both objective and subjective metrics. AudioLDM is also
the first TTA system that enables various textguided audio manipulations (e.g., style transfer)
in a zero-shot fashion. Our implementation and
demos are available at https://audioldm.
github.io.

TTA systems are designed to generate a wide range of highdimensional audio signals. To efficiently model the data, we
adopt a similar approach as DiffSound (Yang et al., 2022)
by employing a learned discrete representation to efficiently
model high-dimensional audio signals. We also draw inspiration from the recent advancements in autoregressive
modelling of discrete representation learnt on the waveform,
such as AudioGen (Kreuk et al., 2022), which has surpassed
the capabilities of DiffSound. Building on the success of
StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), which uses latent
diffusion models (LDMs) for high-quality image generation, we extend previous TTA approaches to continuous
latent representations, instead of learning discrete representations. Additionally, as audio manipulations, such as style
transfer (Engel et al., 2020; Pascual et al., 2022), are desired for some applications such as games, we explore and
achieve various zero-shot text-guided audio manipulations
with LDMs, which have not been demonstrated before.

1. Introduction
Generating sound effects, music, or speech according to personalized requirements is important for applications such
as augmented and virtual reality, game development, and
video editing. Traditionally, audio generation has been
achieved through signal processing techniques (Andresen,
1979; Karplus & Strong, 1983). In recent years, gener-

For previous TTA works, a potential limitation for generation quality is the requirement of large-scale high-quality
audio-text data pairs, which are usually not readily available, and where they are available, are of limited quality and
quantity (Liu et al., 2022f). To better utilize the low-quality
data, several methods for text preprocessing have been proposed (Kreuk et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022). However,
these preprocessing steps limit generation performances by
overlooking the relations of sound events (e.g., a dog is
barking at the bark is transformed into dog bark park). By
comparison, our proposed method only requires audio data
for generative model training, circumvents the challenge of

*

Equal contribution 1 Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
2
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial
College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Haohe Liu
<haohe.liu@surrey.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

