GeCoNeRF: Few-Shot Neural Radiance Fields via Geometric Consistency

Min-Seop Kwak * 1 Jiuhn Song * 1 Seungryong Kim 1

Abstract

priors. Specifically, previous works attempted to solve this
by utilizing a semantic feature (Jain et al., 2021), entropy
minimization (Kim et al., 2022), SfM depth priors (Deng
et al., 2022) or normalizing flow (Niemeyer et al., 2022),
but their necessity for handcrafted methods or inability to
extract local and fine structures limited their performance.

We present a novel framework to regularize Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) in a few-shot setting
with a geometric consistency regularization. The
proposed approach leverages a rendered depth
map at unobserved viewpoint to warp sparse input
images to the unobserved viewpoint and impose
them as pseudo ground truths to facilitate learning
of NeRF. By encouraging such geometric consistency at a feature-level instead of using pixel-level
reconstruction loss, we regularize the NeRF at semantic and structural levels while allowing for
modeling view-dependent radiance to account for
color variations across viewpoints. We also propose an effective method to filter out erroneous
warped solutions, along with training strategies to
stabilize training during optimization. We show
that our model achieves competitive results compared to state-of-the-art few-shot NeRF models.

To alleviate these issues, we propose a novel regularization technique that enforces a geometric consistency across
different views with a depth-guided warping and a geometryaware consistency modeling. Based on these, we propose
a novel framework, called Neural Radiance Fields with
Geometric Consistency (GeCoNeRF), for training neural
radiance fields in a few-shot setting. Our key insight is
that we can leverage a depth rendered by NeRF to warp
sparse input images to novel viewpoints, and use them as
pseudo ground truths to facilitate learning of fine details and
high-frequency features by NeRF. By encouraging images
rendered at novel views to model warped images with a consistency loss, we can successfully constrain both geometry
and appearance to boost fidelity of neural radiance fields
even in highly under-constrained few-shot setting. Taking
into consideration non-Lambertian nature of given datasets,
we propose feature-level regularization loss that captures
contextual and structural information while largely ignoring individual color differences. We also present a method
to generate a consistency mask to prevent inconsistently
warped information from harming the network. Finally, we
provide coarse-to-fine training strategies for sampling and
pose generation to stabilize optimization of the model.

1. Introduction
Recently, representing a 3D scene as a Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) has proven to be
a powerful approach for novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction (Barron et al., 2021; Jain et al., 2021; Chen
et al., 2021). However, despite its impressive performance,
NeRF requires a large number of densely, well distributed
calibrated images for optimization, which limits its applicability. When limited to sparse observations, NeRF easily
overfits to the input view images and is unable to reconstruct
correct geometry (Zhang et al., 2020).

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on synthetic
and real datasets (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Jensen et al.,
2014). Experimental results prove the effectiveness of the
proposed model over the latest methods for few-shot novel
view synthesis.

The task that directly addresses this problem, also called a
few-shot NeRF, aims to optimize high-fidelity neural radiance field in such sparse scenarios (Jain et al., 2021; Kim
et al., 2022; Niemeyer et al., 2022), countering the underconstrained nature of said problem by introducing additional
*

2. Related Work
Neural radiance fields. Among the most notable of approaches regarding the task of novel view synthesis and 3D
reconstruction is Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020), where photo-realistic images are rendered
by a simple MLP architecture. Sparked by its impressive performance, a variety of follow-up studies based on
its continuous neural volumetric representation have been

1

Equal contribution Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to:
Seungryong Kim <seungryong kim@korea.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

