Generalization Bounds using Data-Dependent Fractal Dimensions

Benjamin Dupuis 1 2 3 George Deligiannidis 4 5 Umut Şimşekli 1 2 3 6

1. Introduction

Abstract

Understanding the generalization properties of modern neural networks has been one of the major challenges in statistical learning theory over the last decade. In a classical
supervised learning setting, this task boils down to understanding the so-called generalization error, which arises
from the population risk minimization problem, given as
follows:
n
o
min R(w) := E [ℓ(w, z)] := E [L(hw (x), y)] ,

Providing generalization guarantees for modern
neural networks has been a crucial task in statistical learning. Recently, several studies have
attempted to analyze the generalization error in
such settings by using tools from fractal geometry. While these works have successfully introduced new mathematical tools to apprehend
generalization, they heavily rely on a Lipschitz
continuity assumption, which in general does not
hold for neural networks and might make the
bounds vacuous. In this work, we address this
issue and prove fractal geometry-based generalization bounds without requiring any Lipschitz
assumption. To achieve this goal, we build up on
a classical covering argument in learning theory
and introduce a data-dependent fractal dimension.
Despite introducing a significant amount of technical complications, this new notion lets us control
the generalization error (over either fixed or random hypothesis spaces) along with certain mutual
information (MI) terms. To provide a clearer interpretation to the newly introduced MI terms, as
a next step, we introduce a notion of ‘geometric
stability’ and link our bounds to the prior art. Finally, we make a rigorous connection between the
proposed data-dependent dimension and topological data analysis tools, which then enables us to
compute the dimension in a numerically efficient
way. We support our theory with experiments
conducted on various settings.

w∈Rd

z∼µz

(x,y)∼µz

where x ∈ X denotes the features, y ∈ Y denotes the
labels, Z = X × Y denotes the data space endowed with
an unknown probability measure µz , referred to as the data
distribution, hw : X −→ Y denotes a parametric predictor
with w ∈ Rd being its parameter vector, L : Y × Y −→
R denotes the loss function, and ℓ is the composition of
the loss and the predictor, i.e. ℓ(w, z) = ℓ(w, (x, y)) =
L(hw (x), y), which will also be referred to as ‘loss’, with a
slight abuse of notation. As µz is unknown, in practice one
resorts to the minimization of the empirical risk, given as
follows:
n
1X
R̂S (w) :=
ℓ(w, zi ),
(1)
n i=1
where S := (zi )1≤i≤n ∼ µ⊗n
is a set of independent and
z
identically distributed (i.i.d.) data points. Then, our goal is
to bound the worst-case generalization error that is defined
as the gap between the population and empirical risk over a
(potentially random) hypothesis set W ⊂ Rd :

G(S) := sup R(w) − R̂S (w) .
(2)
w∈W

In the context of neural networks, one peculiar observation has been that, even when a network contains millions
of parameters (i.e., d ≫ 1), it might still generalize well
(Zhang et al., 2017),
p despite accepted wisdom suggesting
that typically G ≈ d/n (Anthony & Barlett, 1999).

*
Equal contribution 1 Inria 2 Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris,
France 3 PSL Research University, Paris, France 4 Department of
Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 5 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK 6 CNRS. Correspondence to: Benjamin Dupuis <benjamin.dupuis@inria.fr>, Umut Şimşekli
<umut.simsekli@inria.fr>.

To provide a theoretical understanding for this behavior,
several directions have been explored, such as compressionbased approaches (Arora et al., 2018; Suzuki et al., 2020;
Barsbey et al., 2021) and the approaches focusing on the
double-descent phenomenon (Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2019). Recently, there has been an increasing

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

