HOPE: High-order Graph ODE For Modeling Interacting Dynamics

Xiao Luo 1 Jingyang Yuan 2 Zijie Huang 1 Huiyu Jiang 3 Yifang Qin 2 Wei Ju 2 Ming Zhang 2 Yizhou Sun 1

Abstract

ing an evolving graph structure. For example, the spread of
COVID-19 can be regarded as a dynamical system where
each node represents a state with an evolving daily death rate
and these nodes are connected according to their geographical distances. Consequently, modeling and understanding
the intricate dynamics of complex relational systems has
become a major area of research with various downstream
tasks (Hsieh et al., 2021; Wang & Yu, 2021; Hackl et al.,
2021; Groß et al., 2019).

Leading graph ordinary differential equation
(ODE) models have offered generalized strategies to model interacting multi-agent dynamical
systems in a data-driven approach. They typically
consist of a temporal graph encoder to get the
initial states and a neural ODE-based generative
model to model the evolution of dynamical systems. However, existing methods have severe deficiencies in capacity and efficiency due to the failure to model high-order correlations in long-term
temporal trends. To tackle this, in this paper, we
propose a novel model named High-Order graPh
ODE (HOPE) for learning from dynamic interaction data, which can be naturally represented as a
graph. It first adopts a twin graph encoder to initialize the latent state representations of nodes and
edges, which consists of two branches to capture
spatio-temporal correlations in complementary
manners. More importantly, our HOPE utilizes
a second-order graph ODE function which models the dynamics for both nodes and edges in the
latent space respectively, which enables efficient
learning of long-term dependencies from complex
dynamical systems. Experiment results on a variety of datasets demonstrate both the effectiveness
and efficiency of our proposed method.

In literature, a range of deep neural network approaches
have been proposed for modeling dynamic interaction systems (Battaglia et al., 2016; Kipf et al., 2018; Veličković
et al., 2018). Typically, they use graph neural networks
(GNNs) to learn node representations at each timestamp and
predict their future trends. However, these discrete models
cannot deal with irregular-sampled observations and require
the observation of each node to be accessible at every timestamp (Huang et al., 2020; 2021). In contrast, neural ordinary
differential equation (ODE) methods are effective to model
system dynamics with missing data (Chen et al., 2018). Recent efforts (Poli et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020; 2021;
Gupta et al., 2022) have extended this technique into modeling interacting dynamical systems. Generally speaking,
these methods usually combine GNNs with neural ODE
models to capture spatio-temporal relationships in dynamical systems. In particular, they first utilize GNNs to initialize
state representations and then develop a neural ODE model
for both nodes and edges, which drives the evolution of the
dynamical system. In the end, a decoder is adopted to output
the prediction and the whole generative model is optimized
through variational inference.

1. Introduction
Dynamic interacting systems are ubiquitous in the real
world, such as social networks (Hafiene et al., 2020; Huang
et al., 2019; Liao et al., 2021) and moving planets (Cranmer
et al., 2020). In these systems, a set of agents are connected and exhibit complicated behaviors over time, form-

However, existing graph ODE approaches fail to model complex high-order correlations from two perspectives, which
results in inferior performance in reality. On the one hand, in
the graph encoder, these methods (Huang et al., 2020; 2021)
usually construct a temporal graph and then utilize a spatialbased GNN to learn node representations. However, spatialbased GNNs could miss the high-order non-neighborhood
semantics embedded in graph spectrum, which may fail
to provide proper initialization of latent state representations. On the other hand, in the generative ODE model,
they typically involve the first-order derivatives. However,
second-order laws are indispensable in abundant dynamical
systems of physical science (Aydin & Coban, 2022; Hao

1
Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA 2 National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University 3 Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, University
of California, Santa Barbara, USA. Correspondence to: Xiao Luo
<xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

