Data Representations’ Study of Latent Image Manifolds

Ilya Kaufman 1 Omri Azencot 1

Abstract

from real-world information. Particularly successful in several challenging tasks such as classification (Krizhevsky
et al., 2017) and recognition (Girshick et al., 2014) are deep
learning approaches which manipulate data via nonlinear
neural networks. Unfortunately, the inner mechanisms of
deep models are not well understood at large.

Deep neural networks have been demonstrated to
achieve phenomenal success in many domains,
and yet their inner mechanisms are not well understood. In this paper, we investigate the curvature of image manifolds, i.e., the manifold deviation from being flat in its principal directions.
We find that state-of-the-art trained convolutional
neural networks for image classification have a
characteristic curvature profile along layers: an
initial steep increase, followed by a long phase
of a plateau, and followed by another increase.
In contrast, this behavior does not appear in untrained networks in which the curvature flattens.
We also show that the curvature gap between the
last two layers has a strong correlation with the
generalization capability of the network. Moreover, we find that the intrinsic dimension of latent
codes is not necessarily indicative of curvature.
Finally, we observe that common regularization
methods such as mixup yield flatter representations when compared to other methods. Our experiments show consistent results over a variety
of deep learning architectures and multiple data
sets. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/azencot-group/CRLM

Motivated by the manifold hypothesis and more generally,
manifold learning (Belkin & Niyogi, 2003), several recent
approaches proposed to analyze deep models by their latent
representations. A manifold is a topological space locally
similar to a Euclidean domain at each of its points (Lee,
2013). A key property of a manifold is its intrinsic dimension, defined as the dimension of the related Euclidean
domain. Recent studies estimated the intrinsic dimension
(ID) along layers of trained neural networks using neighborhood information (Ansuini et al., 2019) and topological data
analysis (Birdal et al., 2021). Remarkably, it has been shown
that the ID admits a characteristic “hunchback” profile (Ansuini et al., 2019), i.e., it increases in the first layers and
then it decreases progressively. Moreover, the ID was found
to be strongly correlated with the network performance.
Still, the intrinsic dimension is only a single measure, providing limited knowledge of the manifold. To consider
other properties, the manifold has to be equipped with an
additional structure. In this work, we focus on Riemannian manifolds which are differentiable manifolds with an
inner product (Lee, 2006). Riemannian manifolds can be
described using properties such as angles, distances, and
curvatures. For instance, the curvature in two dimensions
is the amount by which a surface deviates from being a
plane, which is completely flat. Ansuini et al. (2019) conjectured that while the intrinsic dimension decreases with
network depth, the underlying manifold is highly curved.
Our study confirms the latter conjecture empirically by estimating the principal curvatures of latent representations of
popular deep convolutional classification models trained on
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Real-world data arising from scientific and engineering problems is often high-dimensional and complex. Using such
data for downstream tasks may seem hopeless at first glance.
Nevertheless, the widely accepted manifold hypothesis (Cayton, 2005) stating that complex high-dimensional data is intrinsically low-dimensional, suggests that not all hope is lost.
Indeed, significant efforts in machine learning (Khalid et al.,
2014; Bengio et al., 2013) have been dedicated to developing
tools for extracting meaningful low-dimensional features

Previously, curvature estimates were used in the analysis
of trained deep models to compare between two neural networks (Yu et al., 2018), and to explore the decision boundary profile of classification models (Kaul & Lall, 2019).
However, there has not been an extensive and systematic
investigation that characterizes the curvature profile of data

1

Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. Correspondence to: Ilya Kaufman
<ilyakau@post.bgu.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

