Continual Learning in Linear Classification on Separable Data

Itay Evron 1

Edward Moroshko 1
Gon Buzaglo 1
Maroun Khriesh 1
2
Nathan Srebro
Daniel Soudry 1

Abstract

Badea Marjieh 1

We theoretically study the continual learning of a linear
classification model on separable data with binary classes.
Even though this is a fundamental setup to consider, there
are still very few analytic results on it, since most of the
continual learning theory thus far has focused on regression settings (e.g., Bennani et al. (2020); Doan et al. (2021);
Asanuma et al. (2021); Lee et al. (2021); Evron et al. (2022);
Goldfarb & Hand (2023); Li et al. (2023)). Even in the
broader deep learning scope, theoreticians often start from
very simple models and use them to gain insight into phenomena arising in more practical models (e.g., Belkin et al.
(2018); Woodworth et al. (2020)).

We analyze continual learning on a sequence
of separable linear classification tasks with binary labels. We show theoretically that learning with weak regularization reduces to solving
a sequential max-margin problem, corresponding
to a special case of the Projection Onto Convex
Sets (POCS) framework. We then develop upper bounds on the forgetting and other quantities
of interest under various settings with recurring
tasks, including cyclic and random orderings of
tasks. We discuss several practical implications
to popular training practices like regularization
scheduling and weighting. We point out several
theoretical differences between our continual classification setting and a recently studied continual
regression setting.

Our paper reveals a surprising algorithmic bias of linear
classifiers trained continually to minimize the exponential
loss on separable data with weak regularization. Specifically,
we prove that the weights converge in the same direction
as the iterates of a Sequential Max-Margin scheme. This
creates a bridge between the popular regularization methods
for continual learning (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zenke et al.,
2017) and the well-studied POCS framework – Projections
Onto Convex Sets (also known as the convex feasibility
problem or successive projections).

1. Introduction
Continual learning deals with learning settings where distributions, or tasks, change over time, breaking traditional
i.i.d. assumptions. While models trained sequentially are
expected to accumulate knowledge and improve over time,
practically they suffer from catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Goodfellow et al., 2013), i.e., their
performance on previously seen tasks deteriorates over time.

Our results complement those of a recent paper (Evron et al.,
2022) that analyzed the worst-case performance of continual linear regression. That paper showed that continually
learning linear regression tasks with vanilla SGD, implicitly
performs sequential projections onto closed subspaces, and
connected that regime to the area of Alternating Projections
(Von Neumann, 1949; Halperin, 1962). In our paper, we
draw comparisons between our continual classification setting and their continual regression setting (summarized in
App. A). We point out inherent differences between these
two settings, emphasizing the need for a proper and thorough analytical understanding dedicated to continual classification settings.

Much research in continual learning has focused on heuristic
approaches to remedying forgetting. Recent approaches
achieve impressive empirical performance, but often require
storing examples from previous tasks (e.g., Robins (1995);
Rolnick et al. (2019)), iteratively expanding the learned
models (e.g., Yoon et al. (2018)), or lessening the plasticity
of these models and harming their performance on new tasks
(e.g., Kirkpatrick et al. (2017)).

Our Contributions Our analysis reveals the following:

1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Technion, Haifa, Israel 2 Toyota Technological Institute at
Chicago, Chicago IL, USA. Correspondence to: Itay Evron
<itay@evron.me>.

• Explicit regularization methods for continual learning of
linear classification models are linked to the framework
of Projections Onto Convex Sets (POCS).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

• Each learned task brings the learner closer to an “offline”
feasible solution solving all tasks. However, there exist
1

