Dropout Reduces Underfitting

Zhuang Liu * 1 Zhiqiu Xu * 2 Joseph Jin 2 Zhiqiang Shen 3 Trevor Darrell 2

Abstract

birthday in 2022: AlexNet employed dropout to substantially reduce its overfitting, which played a critical role in
its victory at the ILSVRC 2012 competition. Without the
invention of dropout, the advancements we currently see in
deep learning might have been delayed by years.

Introduced by Hinton et al. in 2012, dropout has
stood the test of time as a regularizer for preventing overfitting in neural networks. In this
study, we demonstrate that dropout can also mitigate underfitting when used at the start of training. During the early phase, we find dropout reduces the directional variance of gradients across
mini-batches and helps align the mini-batch gradients with the entire dataset’s gradient. This
helps counteract the stochasticity of SGD and
limit the influence of individual batches on model
training. Our findings lead us to a solution for
improving performance in underfitting models early dropout: dropout is applied only during
the initial phases of training, and turned off afterwards. Models equipped with early dropout
achieve lower final training loss compared to their
counterparts without dropout. Additionally, we
explore a symmetric technique for regularizing
overfitting models - late dropout, where dropout
is not used in the early iterations and is only
activated later in training. Experiments on ImageNet and various vision tasks demonstrate that
our methods consistently improve generalization
accuracy. Our results encourage more research on
understanding regularization in deep learning and
our methods can be useful tools for future neural
network training, especially in the era of large
data. Code is available at https://github.
com/facebookresearch/dropout.

Dropout has since become widely adopted as a regularizer to mitigate overfitting in neural networks. It randomly
deactivates each neuron with probability p, preventing different features from co-adapting with each other (Hinton
et al., 2012; Srivastava et al., 2014). After applying dropout,
training loss typically increases, while test error decreases,
narrowing the model’s generalization gap.
Deep learning evolves at an incredible speed. Novel techniques and architectures are continuously introduced, applications expand, benchmarks shift, and even convolution can
be gone (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) – but dropout has stayed.
It continues to function in the latest AI achievements, including AlphaFold’s protein structure prediction (Jumper
et al., 2021), and DALL-E 2’s image generation (Ramesh
et al., 2022), demonstrating its versatility and effectiveness.
Despite the sustained popularity of dropout, its strength,
represented by the drop rate p, has generally been decreasing
over the years. In the original dropout work (Hinton et al.,
2012), a default drop rate of 0.5 was used. However, lower
drop rates, such as 0.1, have been frequently adopted in
recent years. Examples include training BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018) and Vision Transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).
The primary driver for this trend is the exploding growth
of available training data, making it increasingly difficult
to overfit. In addition, advancements in data augmentation
techniques (Zhang et al., 2018; Cubuk et al., 2020) and
algorithms for learning with unlabeled or weakly-labeled
data (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2021; He et al.,
2021) have provided even more data to train on than the
model can fit to. As a result, we may soon be confronting
more problems with underfitting instead of overfitting.

1. Introduction
The year 2022 marks a full decade since AlexNet’s pivotal “ImageNet moment” (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), which
launched a new era in deep learning. It is no coincidence
that dropout (Hinton et al., 2012) also celebrates its tenth

Would dropout lose its relevance should such a situation
arise? In this study, we demonstrate an alternative use of
dropout for tackling underfitting. We begin our investigation into dropout training dynamics by making an intriguing
observation on gradient norms, which then leads us to a
key empirical finding: during the initial stages of train-

*

Equal contribution 1 FAIR, Meta AI 2 UC Berkeley 3 MBZUAI.
Correspondence to: Zhuang Liu <zhuangl@meta.com>, Zhiqiu
Xu <oscar.xzq@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

