One-sided Matrix Completion from Two Observations Per Row

Steven Cao 1 Percy Liang 1 Gregory Valiant 1

Abstract

2009; Keshavan et al., 2009, inter alia). However, most
of our understanding is restricted to settings where each
row and each column have more observations than the rank
of the underlying matrix. It is natural that past work operated under this assumption because full matrix completion is impossible without it: for a rank-r matrix X with
shape m × d, one can show that estimating the matrix is
impossible with o(r(m + d)) observations. Nonetheless,
many important applications do not satisfy this assumption: for example, in low-coverage genotype imputation (Li
et al., 2009), we might sequence d = 2,000 people for
10,000 genetic variants each, out of the m = 10,000,000
genetic variants in humans. Represented as a matrix, we
have a 10,000,000 × 2,000 matrix with 2,000 ∗ 10,000 =
20,000,000 total observations, or about two observations
per row on average, which is certainly much less than the
rank of the matrix. Given too few observed entries to fully
complete the matrix, what other aspects of the underlying
matrix can be reliably recovered?

Given only a few observed entries from a lowrank matrix X, matrix completion is the problem
of imputing the missing entries, and it formalizes a wide range of real-world settings that involve estimating missing data. However, when
there are too few observed entries to complete
the matrix, what other aspects of the underlying
matrix can be reliably recovered? We study one
such problem setting, that of “one-sided” matrix completion, where our goal is to recover the
right singular vectors of X, even in the regime
where recovering the left singular vectors is impossible, which arises when there are more rows
than columns and very few observations. We propose a natural algorithm that involves imputing
the missing values of the matrix X T X and show
that even with only two observations per row in
X, we can provably recover X T X as long as we
have at least Ω(r2 d log d) rows, where r is the
rank and d is the number of columns. We evaluate our algorithm on one-sided recovery of synthetic data and low-coverage genome sequencing. In these settings, our algorithm substantially
outperforms standard matrix completion and a
variety of direct factorization methods.

In this paper, we study settings like these and show that
even with just two entries per row, as long as there are sufficiently many rows, we can perform “one-sided” recovery
and estimate the right singular vectors Q ∈ Rd×r . In the
aforementioned genomics example, this means recovering
the r underlying genotype variation factors for each of the
d people (e.g. ethnicity, sex, and so on; see Figure 1). This
result is despite the fact that we have close to no information about the left singular vectors P ∈ Rm×r .

1. Introduction

This result might seem counterintuitive due to how illposed the recovery problem is. In particular, let X = U V T
denote the ground truth rank-r matrix with factors U ∈
Rm×r and V ∈ Rd×r . Then, given fewer than r observations per row, for any Ṽ ∈ Rd×r for which every subset of
r rows is linearly independent, we can find a Ũ ∈ Rm×r
using linear inversion such that X̃ = Ũ Ṽ T agrees with
the observations.1 In other words, regardless of how many
rows we have, observing two entries per row is not enough

Matrix completion, the problem of recovering a low-rank
matrix after observing only a subset of its entries, formalizes a wide range of real-world settings that involve estimating missing data, including recommending movies to
users (Koren et al., 2009), reducing MRI scan time via parallel imaging (Shin et al., 2014), and quantifying annotator disagreement in dataset crowdsourcing (Gordon et al.,
2021). Over the years, a flurry of research has produced
a robust understanding of the problem (Candès & Recht,
1
Stanford University.
<shcao@stanford.edu>.

Correspondence to:

1

For example, suppose we are given exactly two observations
per row Xi,a(i) and Xi,b(i) , where i is the row index and a(i), b(i)
are the two observed locations. Then, given any pairwise linearly
independent set of rank-2 vectors v1 , ..., vd ∈ R2 , we can choose
each u1 , ..., um ∈ R2 by inverting the constraints ⟨ui , va(i) ⟩ =
Xi,a(i) and ⟨ui , vb(i) ⟩ = Xi,b(i) . Then, stacking the ui ’s and
vi ’s, we have a matrix X̃ = Ũ Ṽ T that agrees with the data.

Steven Cao

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

