Target-based Surrogates for Stochastic Optimization

Jonathan Wilder Lavington * 1 Sharan Vaswani * 2 Reza Babanezhad 3 Mark Schmidt 1 4 Nicolas Le Roux 5 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro,
1951) and its variants (Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma and
Ba, 2015) are ubiquitous optimization methods in machine
learning (ML). For supervised learning, iterative first-order
methods require computing the gradient over individual
mini-batches of examples, and that cost of computing the
gradient often dominates the total computational cost of
these algorithms. For example, in reinforcement learning
(RL) (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al., 2000) or online imitation learning (IL) (Ross et al., 2011), policy optimization
requires gathering data via potentially expensive interactions
with a real or simulated environment.

We consider minimizing functions for which it
is expensive to compute the (possibly stochastic)
gradient. Such functions are prevalent in reinforcement learning, imitation learning and adversarial training. Our target optimization framework
uses the (expensive) gradient computation to construct surrogate functions in a target space (e.g.
the logits output by a linear model for classification) that can be minimized efficiently. This allows for multiple parameter updates to the model,
amortizing the cost of gradient computation. In
the full-batch setting, we prove that our surrogate is a global upper-bound on the loss, and can
be (locally) minimized using a black-box optimization algorithm. We prove that the resulting
majorization-minimization algorithm ensures convergence to a stationary point of the loss. Next,
we instantiate our framework in the stochastic setting and propose the SSO algorithm, which can
be viewed as projected stochastic gradient descent
in the target space. This connection enables us to
prove theoretical guarantees for SSO when minimizing convex functions. Our framework allows
the use of standard stochastic optimization algorithms to construct surrogates which can be minimized by any deterministic optimization method.
To evaluate our framework, we consider a suite of
supervised learning and imitation learning problems. Our experiments indicate the benefits of
target optimization and the effectiveness of SSO.

We focus on algorithms that access the expensive gradient oracle to construct a sequence of surrogate functions.
Typically, these surrogates are chosen to be global upperbounds on the underlying function and hence minimizing
the surrogate allows for iterative minimization of the original function. Algorithmically, these surrogate functions can
be minimized efficiently without additional accesses to the
gradient oracle, making this technique advantageous for the
applications of interest. The technique of incrementally constructing and minimizing surrogate functions is commonly
referred to as majorization-minimization and includes the
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster et al.,
1977) as an example. In RL, common algorithms (Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017) also rely on minimizing surrogates.
Typically, surrogate functions are constructed by using
the convexity and/or smoothness properties of the underlying function. Such surrogates have been used in the
stochastic setting (Mairal, 2013; 2015). The prox-linear
algorithm (Drusvyatskiy, 2017) for instance, uses the composition structure of the loss function and constructs surrogate functions in the parametric space. Unlike these
existing works, we construct surrogate functions over a
well-chosen target space rather than the parametric space,
leveraging the composition structure of the loss functions
prevalent in ML to build better surrogates. For example,
in supervised learning, typical loss functions are of the
form h(θ) = ℓ(f (θ)), where ℓ is (usually) a convex loss
(e.g. the squared loss for regression or the logistic loss
for classification), while f corresponds to a transformation (e.g. linear or high-dimensional, non-convex as in

*
Equal contribution 1 University of British Columbia 2 Simon
Fraser University 3 Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal 4
Canada CIFAR AI Chair (Amii) 5 Microsoft Research 6 Canada
CIFAR AI Chair (MILA). Correspondence to: Jonathan
Wilder Lavington <wilderlavington@gmail.com>, Sharan Vaswani
<vaswani.sharan@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

