Unconstrained Online Learning with Unbounded Losses

Andrew Jacobsen 1 2 Ashok Cutkosky 3

Abstract

unknown benchmark point u ∈ W :

Algorithms for online learning typically require
one or more boundedness assumptions: that the
domain is bounded, that the losses are Lipschitz,
or both. In this paper, we develop a new setting for online learning with unbounded domains
and non-Lipschitz losses. For this setting we provide an algorithm
which
√ guarantees RT (u) ≤
√
e
T +Lkuk2 T ) regret on any problem
O(Gkuk
where the subgradients satisfy kgt k ≤ G+Lkwt k,
and show that this bound is unimprovable without
further assumptions. We leverage this algorithm
to develop new saddle-point optimization algorithms that converge in duality gap in unbounded
domains, even in the absence of meaningful curvature. Finally, we provide the first algorithm
achieving non-trivial dynamic regret in an unbounded domain for non-Lipschitz losses, as well
as a matching lower bound. The regret of our
dynamic regret algorithm automatically improves
to a novel L∗ bound when the losses are smooth.

RT (u) =

T
X

`t (wt ) − `t (u).

t=1

In many applications of interest the appropriate baseline is
not any fixed comparator, but rather a trajectory of points.
This is often the case in true streaming settings, wherein
the losses are generated from a data distribution that may
be slowly shifting over time. To better model settings such
as these, dynamic regret measures the total loss relative to
that of a benchmark sequence of points u = (u1 , . . . , uT )
in W :
RT (u) =

T
X

`t (wt ) − `t (ut ).

t=1

Our goal in this work is to develop algorithms that achieve
favorable regret and dynamic regret guarantees when both
the domain W and range of `t may be unbounded.
To illustrate the difficulty of our goal, let us consider the
special case where the loss functions are linear functions,
`t (w) = hgt , wi. Clearly, if both kgt k and kwk are allowed
to be arbitrarily large then the adversary can always ensure
that the learner takes an arbitrarily large loss on each round.
To alleviate this difficulty, prior works assume that one has
access to a bound D ≥ kuk (usually by assuming that
the domain is bounded with D ≥ supx,y∈W kx − yk), that
the subgradients are bounded GT ≥ maxt kgt k, that the
losses map to a bounded range `t : W → [a, b], or some
combination thereof.

1. Online Learning
This paper introduces new techniques for online convex
optimization (OCO), a standard framework used to model
learning from a stream of data (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi,
2006; Shalev-Shwartz, 2011; Hazan, 2016; Orabona, 2019).
Formally, consider T rounds of interaction between an algorithm and an environment. In each round, the algorithm
chooses a wt in some convex subset W of a Hilbert space,
after which the environment chooses a convex loss function
`t : W → R. The standard performance metric in this
setting is regret RT (u), the cumulative loss relative to an

In the simplest case, when one has access to both a bound
D ≥ kuk and a bound on the subgradients GT ≥ kgt k for
all t, classic methods based on Mirror Descent and Follow
the Regularized Leader
√ achieve minimax optimal regret of
RT (u) ≤ O DGT T using a strongly convex regularizer
(Hazan et al., 2007; Duchi et al., 2010; McMahan & Streeter,
2010). When D is available but not the Lipschitz bound GT ,
it is still possible to match this guarantee up to constant factors, in which case the algorithm is said to be Lipschitz adaptive (Orabona & Pál, 2018; Mayo et al., 2022; Cutkosky,
2019). When the losses are L-smooth, q
these bounds can

PT
2
be improved to RT (u) ≤ O LD + D L t=1 `t (u)
— referred to as an L∗ bound — though prior works still

1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii),
Edmonton, Canada 3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, Massachussetts. Correspondence to: Andrew Jacobsen <ajjacobs@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

