STEERING: Stein Information Directed Exploration for Model-Based
Reinforcement Learning

Souradip Chakraborty 1 Amrit Singh Bedi 1 Alec Koppel 2 Mengdi Wang 3 Furong Huang 1 Dinesh Manocha 1

Abstract
Directed Exploration is a crucial challenge in reinforcement learning (RL), especially when rewards
are sparse. Information-directed sampling (IDS),
which optimizes the information ratio, seeks to
do so by augmenting regret with information gain.
However, estimating information gain is computationally intractable or relies on restrictive assumptions which prohibit its use in many practical instances. In this work, we posit an alternative exploration incentive in terms of the integral probability metric (IPM) between a current estimate of the transition model and the unknown optimal, which under suitable conditions,
can be computed in closed form with the kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD). Based on KSD, we
develop a novel algorithm STEERING: STEin information dirEcted exploration for model-based
Reinforcement LearnING. To enable its derivation, we develop fundamentally new variants of
KSD for discrete conditional distributions. We
further establish that STEERING archives sublinear Bayesian regret, improving upon prior learning rates of information-augmented MBRL. Experimentally, we show that the proposed algorithm is computationally affordable and outperforms several prior approaches.

Figure 1. (Directed exploration) This figure illustrates that
information-directed sampling (IDS) focuses on the distance between the current sample at episode k and the mean of the posterior.
In contrast, we focus on the distance to the true model.

with intrinsic curiosity (Pathak et al., 2017a; Burda et al.,
2018b; Pathak et al., 2019) has offered a potential solution, but its theoretical understanding is relatively immature. On the other hand, posterior sampling reinforcement
learning (PSRL) offers an efficient framework for balancing exploration and exploitation that is conceptually wellsubstantiated (Osband et al., 2013; Osband & Van Roy,
2014). However, PSRL may struggle in scenarios where
many trajectories are uninformative, due to, e.g., reward
sparsity (Russo & Van Roy, 2014a).
To incentivize exploration in MBRL, Lu & Van Roy (2019)
proposed a design principle of information directed sampling (IDS), which optimizes the tradeoff between regret
and information. Tight information-theoretic Bayesian regret bounds for IDS are derived in (Lu & Van Roy, 2019;
Lu et al., 2021), under the specific choice of Dirichlet priors
for the transition model, inspired by earlier work on bandits
(Russo & Van Roy, 2014b). Recently, Hao & Lattimore
(2022) alleviated any requirements on the prior based upon
the development of a surrogate environment estimation procedure via rate-distortion theory.

1. Introduction
Exploring effectively is a major challenge in reinforcement
learning (RL), particularly when the rewards are sparse
(Rengarajan et al., 2022; Achiam & Sastry, 2017). Recent
research using model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL)

Unfortunately, the existing IDS approaches face two main
challenges (1) they are computationally intractable due to
the need to estimate the information gain, (2) they do not induce exploration directed towards the optimal true transition
dynamics. By directed exploration, we mean the algorithm
moves in a direction toward the optimal transition dynamics
rather than collecting all the information about the underlying environment, which is the focus of information gainbased exploration in IDS. The first challenge can be partially

1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA. 2 JP Morgan Chase AI Research,
USA. 3 Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University/Deepmind, Princeton, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Souradip
Chakraborty <schakra3@umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

