What do CNNs Learn in the First Layer and Why? A Linear Systems Perspective

Rhea Chowers 1 Yair Weiss 1

Abstract

this representation is somewhat easier than studying more
general representation learning for the simple reason that
the output of this layer is a linear function of its input. Thus
we can use the perspective of linear systems whereby a system based on convolutions can be fully characterized by
its frequency response. In this paper, we adopt the linear
systems perspective and consider the first layer as a filter
bank and measure the sensitivity of the bank to different
spatial frequencies. As we show in Section 2, this profile of sensitivities (which we call the ”energy profile”) is
highly consistent for different initializations, architectures
and training sets and is very different from the profile of the
initial random weights. The filter bank’s sensitivity peaks at
intermediate spatial frequencies, while being insensitive to
very high and low spatial frequencies.

It has previously been reported that the representation that is learned in the first layer of deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) is highly
consistent across initializations and architectures.
In this work, we quantify this consistency by considering the first layer as a filter bank and measuring its energy distribution. We find that the energy
distribution is very different from that of the initial weights and is remarkably consistent across
random initializations, datasets, architectures and
even when the CNNs are trained with random
labels. In order to explain this consistency, we derive an analytical formula for the energy profile of
linear CNNs and show that this profile is mostly
dictated by the second order statistics of image
patches in the training set and it will approach a
whitening transformation when the number of iterations goes to infinity. Finally, we show that this
formula for linear CNNs also gives an excellent fit
for the energy profiles learned by commonly used
nonlinear CNNs such as ResNet and VGG, and
that the first layer of these CNNs indeed performs
approximate whitening of their inputs.

The linear systems perspective has been used in the past to
analyze biological neural networks (Atick & Redlich, 1990)
where it has been argued based on first principles that the
first layer of a neural network should perform ”redundancy
reduction” (Barlow, 1989). For example, in the case of
images, the pixel representation is highly redundant since
neighboring pixel values are highly correlated. Under the
redundancy reduction hypothesis, the goal of early layers
is to ”disentangle” the input and remove these correlations
to facilitate downstream learning. When this hypothesis
is formalized, the resulting optimal transformation takes
the form of ”whitening”: the sensitivity of the first layer to
a particular frequency should be inversely proportional to
the variance of the input signal at that frequency (provided
that the input variance is much larger than the noise). Such
”whitening” transformations have been observed experimentally in different biological systems (Hyvärinen et al., 2009),
and several authors have recently argued that whitening
should be enforced in the different layers of CNNs (Huang
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) on a wide variety of image recognition tasks is often
attributed to the fact that they learn a good representation
of images. Support for this view comes from the fact that
very different CNNs tend to learn similar representations
and that features of CNNs that are trained for one task are
often useful in very different tasks (Yosinski et al., 2014;
Gidaris et al., 2018a; Doimo et al., 2020).

If CNNs were trained with an explicit ”redundancy reduction” loss function, we would therefore expect their energy
profiles to be consistent for different architectures and random initializations, but why does this consistency occur
when the networks are trained to minimize a classification
loss on the training set? A possible explanation is that these
filters are optimal in some sense for solving the recognition
task. Thus, the networks have simply learned that in order
to minimize the training loss, the first layer of deep CNNs

A natural starting point for investigating representation
learning in deep CNNs is the very first layer. Studying
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel. Correspondence to: Rhea Chowers
<rhea.chowers@mail.huji.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

