Slot-VAE: Object-Centric Scene Generation with Slot Attention

Yanbo Wang 1 Letao Liu 2 Justin Dauwels 1

Abstract

(Mambelli et al., 2022). To that end, most of the recent
models resort to the variational autoencoder (VAE) framework (Kingma & Welling, 2013) (Rezende et al., 2014) for
the purpose of joint object-centric representation inference
and image generation. Depending on how to model the
compositionality of images, existing works can be roughly
categorized as spatial attention-based generative models and
scene-mixture-based generative models.

Slot attention has shown remarkable objectcentric representation learning performance in
computer vision tasks without requiring any supervision. Despite its object-centric binding ability
brought by compositional modelling, as a deterministic module, slot attention lacks the ability
to generate novel scenes. In this paper, we propose the Slot-VAE, a generative model that integrates slot attention with the hierarchical VAE
framework for object-centric structured scene generation. For each image, the model simultaneously infers a global scene representation to capture high-level scene structure and object-centric
slot representations to embed individual object
components. During generation, slot representations are generated from the global scene representation to ensure coherent scene structures.
Our extensive evaluation of the scene generation
ability indicates that Slot-VAE outperforms slot
representation-based generative baselines in terms
of sample quality and scene structure accuracy.

Spatial attention-based generative models infer objectcentric representations by extracting a bounding box for
each individual object (Eslami et al., 2016) (Crawford &
Pineau, 2019) (Lin et al., 2020) (Jiang et al., 2019) (Jiang
& Ahn, 2020). Such bounding boxes explicitly represent
the position and size of object components enabling interpretable object manipulation. However, this type of model
was pointed out to struggle to segment objects with extensively varied scales because the size of objects is, to some
extent, presumed (Engelcke et al., 2021) (Emami et al.,
2022). Moreover, rectangular bounding boxes are also not
flexible enough to model image components of complex
morphology (Lin et al., 2020). In contrast, scene-mixture
generative models decompose a visual scene into imagesized components (also known as slots), and infer slot representations corresponding to individual objects (Burgess
et al., 2019) (Greff et al., 2019) (Engelcke et al., 2019) (Engelcke et al., 2021). Such models segment objects with
masks and are flexible enough to capture complex object
components. Recent advances in scene-mixture models
have shown remarkable object segmentation performance
(Engelcke et al., 2019) (Engelcke et al., 2021). However,
although the design of such models advocates autoregressive priors for the purpose of generating coherent scenes,
they are still unable to model object relationships in highly
structured images and the generated samples are very blurry.

1. Introduction
Human intelligence is capable of visually segmenting objects out of natural scenes, implicitly learning abstract object
concepts, and creatively imagining novel scenes (Yuille &
Kersten, 2006) (Frankland & Greene, 2020). Equipping
machines with such capabilities in an unsupervised way has
been a desideratum for a long time (Johnson-Laird, 1983)
(Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018) (Wu et al., 2021) (Schölkopf
et al., 2021), since this can facilitate intelligent agents understanding scenes, reasoning about object relationships, and
performing tasks efficiently (Battaglia et al., 2013) (Lake
et al., 2017) (Geiger et al., 2012) (Cordts et al., 2016) (Santoro et al., 2017) (Devin et al., 2018) (Greff et al., 2020)

In this paper, we propose an object-centric generative model
termed Slot-VAE that integrates slot attention with the hierarchical VAE framework for joint slot representation inference and structured image generation. In the proposed
model, object-centric representation inference is achieved
with the slot attention module (Locatello et al., 2020). Although slot attention has shown very impressive unsupervised segmentation performance, it is a deterministic module
without the ability to generate novel scenes. If we naı̈vely
combine slot attention with vanilla VAE for multi-object

1
Department of EEMCS, Delft University of Technology,
Delft, Netherlands 2 School of EEE, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. Correspondence to: Yanbo Wang <y.wang27@tudelft.nl>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

