Are Random Decompositions all we need in High Dimensional Bayesian
Optimisation?

Juliusz Ziomek 1 Haitham Bou-Ammar 1

Abstract

Ramos, 2012; Shahriari et al., 2015; Kandasamy et al., 2017;
2018; Grosnit et al., 2022), scaling BO to high-dimensional
and expensive to evaluate black-box functions has proved
challenging. Among the many proposed approaches ranging from linear to non-linear projections (Wang et al., 2016;
Rana et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Tripp et al., 2020; Moriconi et al., 2020; Eriksson & Jankowiak, 2021; Grosnit
et al., 2021b; Wan et al., 2021), decomposition methods
that assume additively structured black-boxes emerged as a
promising direction for high-dimensional BO (Kandasamy
et al., 2015; Rolland et al., 2018; Han et al., 2021).

Learning decompositions of expensive-toevaluate black-box functions promises to scale
Bayesian optimisation (BO) to high-dimensional
problems. However, the success of these techniques depends on finding proper decompositions
that accurately represent the black-box. While
previous works learn those decompositions based
on data, we investigate data-independent decomposition sampling rules in this paper. We find
that data-driven learners of decompositions can
be easily misled towards local decompositions
that do not hold globally across the search space.
Then, we formally show that a random tree-based
decomposition sampler exhibits favourable
theoretical guarantees that effectively trade
off maximal information gain and functional
mismatch between the actual black-box and its
surrogate as provided by the decomposition.
Those results motivate the development of the
random decomposition upper-confidence bound
algorithm (RDUCB) that is straightforward
to implement - (almost) plug-and-play - and,
surprisingly, yields significant empirical gains
compared to the previous state-of-the-art on a
comprehensive set of benchmarks. We also confirm the plug-and-play nature of our modelling
component by integrating our method with HEBO
(Cowen-Rivers et al., 2022), showing improved
practical gains in the highest dimensional tasks
from the Bayesmark problem suite.

Given a decomposition in the dimensions of the problem,
those techniques utilise additive kernel Gaussian processes
(GPs) as surrogate models to trade off exploration and exploitation when suggesting novel queries to evaluate. Additive techniques uncover new inputs by maximising an acquisition function that is additive under the provided decomposition. Although first and second-order methods (Wilson
et al., 2017) can be used to maximise acquisition functions,
we adopt message-passing optimisers that can better exploit
additive acquisition structures (Rolland et al., 2018).
The success of additive methods in high-dimensional BO
depends on the correct choice of decompositions that must
accurately mimic the inter-dimensional dependencies of the
actual black-box function. Prior art empirically demonstrated that tree-structured decompositions (i.e., cycle-free
pair-wise dimensional interactions) could effectively represent many black-box functions. The Tree algorithm (Han
et al., 2021) discovers the best tree decomposition for the
black-box based on the data collected during BO, by maximising a new GP marginal that includes decomposition
parameters (encoding sparsity) and length scales.
At first glance, learning decompositions based on data and
marginal likelihood is plausible and can yield promising
optimisation results. While this is true when given a fixed
dataset, dynamically acquired data during BO provides, at
best, local (within the probed regions) function information,
making it challenging to extrapolate dimensional interdependencies across the search space. In other words, such
agents are easily misled by modifying the black-box function’s factorisation based on regions of the search space (for
example see Section 3).

1. Introduction
Although Bayesian optimisation (BO) demonstrated impressive successes in low-dimensional domains (Marchant &
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, London, UK. Correspondence to:
Haitham Bou-Ammar <haitham [dot] ammmar (at) huawei {dot}
com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

