Generalized Implicit Follow-The-Regularized-Leader

Keyi Chen 1 Francesco Orabona 1

Abstract

any arbitrary comparator u ∈ V :

We propose a new class of online learning
algorithms, generalized implicit Follow-TheRegularized-Leader (FTRL), that expands the
scope of FTRL framework. Generalized implicit
FTRL can recover known algorithms, such as
FTRL with linearized losses and implicit FTRL,
and it allows the design of new update rules, as extensions of aProx and Mirror-Prox to FTRL. Our
theory is constructive in the sense that it provides
a simple unifying framework to design updates
that directly improve the worst-case upper bound
on the regret. The key idea is substituting the
linearization of the losses with a Fenchel-Young
inequality. We show the flexibility of the framework by proving that some known algorithms,
like the Mirror-Prox updates, are instantiations of
the generalized implicit FTRL. Finally, the new
framework allows us to recover the temporal variation bound of implicit OMD, with the same computational complexity.

RegretT (u) ,

T
X
t=1

`t (xt ) −

T
X

`t (u) .

t=1

In particular, a successful online learning algorithm must
guarantee a regret that grows sublinearly in time for any
u ∈ V . In this way, its average performance approaches the
one of the best comparator in hindsight.
There are two families of online learning algorithms: Online
Mirror Descent (OMD) (Nemirovskij & Yudin, 1983; Warmuth & Jagota, 1997) and Follow-the-Regularized-Leader
(FTRL) (Shalev-Shwartz, 2007; Abernethy et al., 2008;
Hazan & Kale, 2008). They stem from two similar but
complementary approaches: the update of OMD aims at
minimizing a linearization of the current loss without going too far from its previous prediction xt , while FTRL
minimizes the sum of all the losses (or their linear approximation) plus a regularization term. On the contrary to the
first approaches in online learning that focused on specific
algorithms (e.g., the Winnow algorithm (Littlestone, 1988)),
the theory of these two frameworks is particularly interesting because it allows both the design and the analysis of
generic online learning algorithms.
While FTRL and OMD provide similar bounds in most situations, they are not completely equivalent. For example,
FTRL has an advantage over OMD in unbounded domains,
where it allows to use time-varying regularizers. In fact,
OMD allows the use of time-varying stepsizes only in domains where its associated Bregman divergence is bounded.
On the other hand, in the cases where we can use timevarying stepsizes, OMD can achieve a superior adaption to
the gradients (see, e.g., Theorem 2 in Streeter & McMahan
(2010) versus Theorem 2 in Orabona & Pál (2015)). In this
view, these two frameworks are complementary.1 Moreover,
there exists another orthogonal axis on the use of the actual
loss functions or a linear surrogate for both frameworks. We
summarize all the variants of OMD and FTRL in Table 1.

1. Introduction
Online learning is a setting where the learner receives an
arbitrary sequence of loss functions, selects points before
knowing the loss functions, and is evaluated on the values
of the loss functions on the points it selects (Cesa-Bianchi
& Lugosi, 2006; Orabona, 2019; Cesa-Bianchi & Orabona,
2021). More in detail, at round t the learner outputs a point
xt in a feasible set V ⊆ Rd . Then, it receives a loss function
`t : V → R and it pays the value `t (xt ). Given the arbitrary
nature of the losses, the learner
cannot guarantee to have
PT
a small cumulative loss, t=1 `t (xt ). On the other hand,
it is possible to minimize the regret, that is the difference
between the cumulative loss of the algorithm and the one of

Our motivation stems from the fact that in practical cases,
all the variants that use full losses offer a big advantage
in terms of empirical performance at the cost of a higher

1

Boston University, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Keyi Chen <keyichen@bu.edu>, Francesco Orabona
<francesco@orabona.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

See also the blog post on this topic by Tim van
Erven
at
https://www.timvanerven.nl/blog/
ftrl-vs-omd/.

1

