Automatically Auditing Large Language Models via Discrete Optimization

Erik Jones 1 Anca Dragan 1 Aditi Raghunathan 2 Jacob Steinhardt 1

Abstract

all computer files or wiping bank accounts.
Unfortunately, developing reliable auditing methods,
i.e. methods that uncover instances of these kinds of failures, poses many challenges. Some behaviors are rare with
respect to the training distribution (e.g. wiping bank accounts), but are high-impact, and can arise at deployment
due to scale or distribution shifts. Instances of salient behaviors can be also counterintuitive, and thus challenging for
humans to produce by hand. And auditing methods must be
easily adaptable to different new behaviors; since there are
possible undesired behaviors we want to test for, methods
that require behavior-specific templates, manual searches,
or fine-tuned models can be prohibitively expensive.

Auditing large language models for unexpected
behaviors is critical to preempt catastrophic deployments, yet remains challenging. In this work,
we cast auditing as an optimization problem,
where we automatically search for input-output
pairs that match a desired target behavior. For example, we might aim to find a non-toxic input that
starts with “Barack Obama” that a model maps to
a toxic output. This optimization problem is difficult to solve as the set of feasible points is sparse,
the space is discrete, and the language models
we audit are non-linear and high-dimensional. To
combat these challenges, we introduce a discrete
optimization algorithm, ARCA, that jointly and
efficiently optimizes over inputs and outputs. Our
approach automatically uncovers derogatory completions about celebrities (e.g. “Barack Obama
is a legalized unborn” → “child murderer”), produces French inputs that complete to English outputs, and finds inputs that generate a specific
name. Our work offers a promising new tool
to uncover models’ failure-modes before deployment. Content Warning: This paper contains
examples that may be offensive in nature.

In this work, we audit models by specifying and solving
a discrete optimization problem. Specifically, we search
for a prompt x and output o with a high auditing objective
value, ϕ(x, o), such that o is the greedy completion of x
under the LLM. We design the auditing objective to capture some target behavior; for instance, ϕ might measure
whether the prompt is French and output is English (i.e. a
surprising, unhelpful completion), or whether the prompt is
non-toxic and contains “Barack Obama”, while the output
is toxic (Table 1). This formulation addresses many challenges posed by auditing; solving the optimization problem
can uncover rare behaviors and counterintuitive examples,
while specifying objectives allows for easy adaptation to
new behaviors.

1. Introduction

However, solving this optimization problem is computationally challenging: the set of prompts that produce a behavior
is sparse, the space is discrete, and the language model itself
is non-linear and high-dimensional. In addition, querying
a language model once is expensive, so large numbers of
sequential queries are prohibitive. Even producing an auditing objective that is faithful to the target behavior can be
difficult.

Autoregressive large language models (LLMs) are currently
used to complete code (Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022b),
summarize books (Stiennon et al., 2020), and engage in
dialog (Thoppilan et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022), to name a
few of their many capabilities. However, LLMs can unexpectedly produce undesired behaviors; they generate toxic
outputs (Gehman et al., 2020; Perez et al., 2022), exacerbate stereotypes (Sheng et al., 2019; Abid et al., 2021), and
reveal private information (Carlini et al., 2020). Future systems could fail even more catastrophically, e.g. by deleting

We combat these challenges with a new optimization algorithm, ARCA. ARCA is a coordinate ascent algorithm; it
iteratively maximizes an objective by updating a token in
the prompt or output, while keeping the remaining tokens
fixed. To make coordinate ascent efficient while preserving its fidelity, ARCA uses a novel approximation of the
objective that sums two expressions: log probabilities that
can be exactly computed via a transformer forward pass,

1
UC Berkeley 2 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence
to: Erik Jones <erjones@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

