Learning the Dynamics of Sparsely Observed Interacting Systems

Linus Bleistein * 1 2 3 Adeline Fermanian * 4 5 6 7 Anne-Sophie Jannot 1 8 Agathe Guilloux 1 2

Abstract

time. Mathematically, one wishes to model the evolution
of a quantity yt ∈ Rp , p ≥ 1, as a function of some time
evolving features xt ∈ Rd , d ≥ 1, for t ∈ [0, 1]. In other
words, the goal is to learn the dynamics that link the target
to the features.

We address the problem of learning the dynamics of an unknown non-parametric system linking a target and a feature time series. The feature
time series is measured on a sparse and irregular
grid, while we have access to only a few points
of the target time series. Once learned, we can
use these dynamics to predict values of the target
from the previous values of the feature time series. We frame this task as learning the solution
map of a controlled differential equation (CDE).
By leveraging the rich theory of signatures, we
are able to cast this non-linear problem as a highdimensional linear regression. We provide an oracle bound on the prediction error which exhibits
explicit dependencies on the individual-specific
sampling schemes. Our theoretical results are
illustrated by simulations which show that our
method outperforms existing algorithms for recovering the full time series while being computationally cheap. We conclude by demonstrating
its potential on real-world epidemiological data.

Such an interaction is typically modelled via differential
equations, which are a common choice of model in natural
sciences (Zwillinger, 1989). In this article, we assume that
there exists a function G : Rp × Rd → Rp such that
Z t
yt = y0 +
G(ys , xs )ds
(1)
0

or equivalently
dyt = G(yt , xt )dt,

y0 ∈ Rp .

The value yt depends on the trajectory of the features time
series xs up to time t. Learning the dynamics of the system
can be framed as learning the solution map of (1), i.e., a
function Ψ which, given a time t, an initial point y0 ∈ Rp ,
and the history of the path up to time t, denoted by x[0,t] =
(xs )s∈[0,t] , outputs the value of y at time t.
If we know Ψ, we gain access to the values of y at any
point in time provided we know the values of x up to this
point ; this encompasses many tasks such as forecasting or
interpolating between points of y. We specifically have in
mind applications where we have an easy access to x but a
limited one to y.

1. Introduction
Time series are ubiquitous in many areas such as finance,
economics, robotics, agriculture, and healthcare. One is
typically interested in modelling the evolution of a target
quantity through time, which is known to be affected by a
set of time-evolving features. For example, pollution levels in a city are driven by quantities such as temperature,
pressure, traffic, or economic activity measured through

This problem is extremely common in healthcare. For example, in obstetrics, the lactic acidosis (LA) of the fetus,
which is a proxy for fetal distress, is a quantity of high
medical interest for predicting complications in the first
hours after birth. This biomarker cannot be measured during pregnancy but only at birth because the measurement
is highly invasive. Some vitals such as heart rate and fetal
movement are however easy to measure during pregnancy.
In this case, x is the non-invasive measurements made during pregnancy, while y is the invasive measurement of LA
at birth. Predicting the value of y at any time t (both before
and at birth) would allow for early diagnosis. Similarly,
after surgery, patients are often monitored to detect hemorrhage. While some vitals such as heart rate of saturation
are monitored in continuous time, haemoglobin—which
is highly predictive of hemorrhage—is only measured by

*
Equal contribution 1 Inria Paris, F-75015 Paris, France
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM, Université de
Paris, Sorbonne Université, F-75006 Paris, France 3 LaMME,
UEVE and UMR 8071, Paris Saclay University, F-91042, Evry,
France 4 MINES ParisTech, PSL Research University, CBIO, F75006 Paris, France 5 Institut Curie, PSL Research University,
F-75005 Paris, France 6 INSERM, U900, F-75005 Paris, France
7
LOPF, Califrais’ Machine Learning Lab, Paris, France 8 APHP, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Linus Bleistein <linus.bleistein@inria.fr>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

