Extrapolated Random Tree for Regression

Yuchao Cai * 1 Yuheng Ma * 1 Yiwei Dong 1 Hanfang Yang 1 2

Abstract

methods. That is, the wide applicability of tree methods
due to weak distributional assumption on data, the computational efficiency, as well as the interpretability after we
build the model.

In this paper, we propose a novel tree-based algorithm named Extrapolated Random Tree for Regression (ERTR) that adapts to arbitrary smoothness of the regression function while maintaining the interpretability of the tree. We first put
forward the homothetic random tree for regression (HRTR) that converges to the target function
as the homothetic ratio approaches zero. Then
ERTR uses a linear regression model to extrapolate HRTR estimations with different ratios to
the ratio zero. From the theoretical perspective,
we for the first time establish the optimal convergence rates for ERTR when the target function resides in the general Hölder space C k,α for k ∈ N,
whereas the lower bound of the convergence rate
of the random tree for regression (RTR) is strictly
slower than ERTR in the space C k,α for k ≥ 1.
This shows that ERTR outperforms RTR for the
target function with high-order smoothness due to
the extrapolation. In the experiments, we compare
ERTR with state-of-the-art tree algorithms on real
datasets to show the superior performance of our
model. Moreover, promising improvements are
brought by using the extrapolated trees as base
learners in the extension of ERTR to ensemble
methods.

Despite their empirical success, the merit of regression trees
is also addressed from theoretical perspectives. For instance,
Gao & Zhou (2020) considered the convergence rate for
random trees which attains a mini-max optimal rate for
Lipschitz functions. Mourtada et al. (2020) derived similar results for Mondrian trees. As another line of work,
bayesian additive regression trees (Chipman et al., 2010) impose prior distribution on the parameters of the partitioning
process and are shown to achieve optimal convergence rate
for Lipschitz functions (Ročková & Saha, 2019; Ročková
& van der Pas, 2020). These works imply that standard
regression trees, which are based on piece-wise constant
functions, can only adapt to functions that are at most Lipschitz smooth. Therefore, they may be difficult to adapt to
the high-order smoothness of the target function.
To overcome this issue, researchers seek to improve regression trees. Most works focus on employing smooth
estimations, which are achieved by attributing data by soft
assignment instead of hard assignment. Several closely related works, including Suárez & Lutsko (1999); Da Rosa
et al. (2008); Irsoy et al. (2012); Frosst & Hinton (2017);
Alkhoury et al. (2020), assign each data point to all leaves
with a certain class membership, and the final prediction
is a smooth combination of the prediction at each node.
Despite their contribution from the methodology perspective, none of the works above managed to explain how their
smooth/flexible tree structures facilitate adaption to highorder smoothness theoretically. A recent work (Linero &
Yang, 2018) on Bayesian additive regression tree utilized
the soft tree ensembles and derived mini-max rate for arbitrary smoothness. However, its Bayesian nature yields a
heavy computational burden. Besides, the choice of priors
is strongly restricted to achieve theoretical optimality and
computation efficiency.

1. Introduction
Ensemble of trees methods (Breiman, 2001; Friedman,
2002; Chen & Guestrin, 2016) are powerful and well-known
methods that are successfully adopted for regression problems in many applications and machine learning competitions (Yu et al., 2021; Basak et al., 2022; Künzel et al.,
2022; Amini et al., 2022). In fact, the success of ensemble
methods stems from the advantages inherited from the tree
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Statistics, Renmin University of
China 2 Center for Applied Statistics, School of Statistics, Renmin University of China. Correspondence to: Hanfang Yang
<hyang@ruc.edu.cn>.

Under such background, borrowing the extrapolation techniques from Brezinski & Zaglia (2013); Okuno & Shimodaira (2020), we propose a novel tree-based algorithm
called Extrapolated Random Tree for Regression (ERTR)
that is adaptive to high order smoothness of the target func-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

