A Connection between One-Step RL and
Critic Regularization in Reinforcement Learning

Benjamin Eysenbach 1 2 Matthieu Geist 1 Sergey Levine 1 3 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 2
critic
regularization

Abstract
As with any machine learning problem with limited data, effective offline RL algorithms require
careful regularization to avoid overfitting. One
class of methods, known as one-step RL, perform
just one step of policy improvement. These methods, which include advantage-weighted regression and conditional behavioral cloning, are thus
simple and stable, but can have limited asymptotic
performance. A second class of methods, known
as critic regularization, perform many steps of
policy improvement with a regularized objective.
These methods typically require more compute
but have appealing lower-bound guarantees. In
this paper, we draw a connection between these
methods: applying a multi-step critic regularization method with a regularization coefficient of 1
yields the same policy as one-step RL. While our
theoretical results require assumptions (e.g., deterministic dynamics), our experiments nevertheless
show that our analysis makes accurate, testable
predictions about practical offline RL methods
(CQL and one-step RL) with commonly-used hyperparameters.

n-step RL
more regularization

…

less regularization

Figure 1: Both n-step RL and critic regularization can interpolate between behavioral cloning (left) and un-regularized
RL (right) by varying the regularization parameter. Endpoints of these regularization paths are the same. We prove
that these methods also obtain the same policy for an intermediate degree of regularization.
distribution action) and value regularization (penalizing the
critic for making large predictions). Research on these sorts
of regularization has grown significantly in recent years, yet
theoretical work studying the tradeoffs between regularization methods remains limited (Vieillard et al., 2020).
Many RL methods perform regularization and can be classified by whether they perform one or many steps of policy improvement. One-step RL methods (Brandfonbrener
et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2019; Peters & Schaal, 2007; Peters
et al., 2010) perform one step of policy iteration, updating
the policy to choose actions the are best according to the
Q-function of the behavioral policy. The policy is often
regularized to not deviate far from the behavioral policy.
In theory, policy iteration can take a large number of iterations (Õ(|S||A|/(1 − γ)) (Scherrer, 2013)) to converge, so
one-step RL (one step of policy iteration) fails to find the
optimal policy on most tasks. Empirically, policy iteration
often converges in a smaller number of iterations (Sutton
& Barto, 2018, Sec. 4.3), and the policy after just a single
iteration can sometimes achieve performance comparable
to multi-step RL methods (Brandfonbrener et al., 2021).
Critic regularization methods modify the training of the
value function such that it predicts smaller returns for unseen actions (Kumar et al., 2020; Chebotar et al., 2021;
Yu et al., 2021; Hatch et al., 2022; Nachum et al., 2019;
An et al., 2021; Bai et al.; Buckman et al., 2021). Intuitively, such critic regularization causes the policy to avoid
sampling unseen actions. In this paper, we will use “critic
regularization” to specifically refer to multi-step methods
that use critic regularization; multi-step methods that do not
utilize critic regularization (e.g., KL control (Ziebart, 2010),

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms tend to perform better when regularized, especially when given access to only
limited data, and especially in batch (i.e., offline) settings
where the agent is unable to collect new experience. While
RL algorithms can be regularized using the same tools as in
supervised learning (e.g., weight decay, dropout), we will
use “regularization” to refer to those techniques unique to
the RL setting. Such regularization methods include policy
regularization (penalizing the policy for sampling out-of1

Google Research 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 UC
Berkeley. Correspondence to: Benjamin Eysenbach <beysenba@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

