Robust One-Class Classification with Signed Distance Function
using 1-Lipschitz Neural Networks

Louis Béthune * 1 Paul Novello * 2 Guillaume Coiffier 3 Thibaut Boissin 2 Mathieu Serrurier 1
Quentin Vincenot 4 Andres Troya-Galvis 4

Abstract

ever, OCC algorithms suffer from limitations such as the
lack of negative data, and robustness issues (Azizmalayeri
et al., 2022), the latter being an under-explored topic in the
OCC spectrum. Even though some algorithms do not use
negative examples, many work cope with the lack of negative data with Negative Sampling, either artificially (Sipple,
2020) or using outlier exposure (Hendrycks and Dietterich,
2019; Fort et al., 2021). However, such samplings are often
biased or heuristic. As for robustness, although some works
design robust algorithms (Goyal et al., 2020; Lo et al., 2022),
it is always only empirically demonstrated (Hendrycks and
Dietterich, 2019).

We propose a new method, dubbed One Class
Signed Distance Function (OCSDF), to perform
One Class Classification (OCC) by provably learning the Signed Distance Function (SDF) to the
boundary of the support of any distribution. The
distance to the support can be interpreted as a
normality score, and its approximation using 1Lipschitz neural networks provides robustness
bounds against l2 adversarial attacks, an underexplored weakness of deep learning-based OCC
algorithms. As a result, OCSDF comes with a
new metric, certified AUROC, that can be computed at the same cost as any classical AUROC.
We show that OCSDF is competitive against concurrent methods on tabular and image data while
being way more robust to adversarial attacks, illustrating its theoretical properties. Finally, as exploratory research perspectives, we theoretically
and empirically show how OCSDF connects OCC
with image generation and implicit neural surface
parametrization.

In this paper, we introduce a new framework to perform
OCC based on the Signed Distance Function (SDF), a function traditionally used in computer graphics. Assume the
positive samples are independently and identically obtained
from a distribution PX with compact support X ⊂ Rd .
Let ∂X = X /X̊ be the boundary of the distribution. The
Signed Distance Function is the function S : Rd → R:
(
d(x, ∂X )
if x ∈ X ,
S(x) =
(1)
−d(x, ∂X ) otherwise,
where d(x, ∂X ) = inf z∈∂X ∥x − z∥2 . The idea of our algorithm, which we call One Class Signed Distance Function
(OCSDF) is to learn the SDF to the boundary of the positive
data distribution and use it as a normality score. We show
that the Hinge Kantorovich-Rubinstein (HKR) loss introduced by (Serrurier et al., 2021) allows provably learning
the SDF with a 1-Lipschitz network.

1. Introduction
One class classification (OCC) is an instance of binary classification where all the points of the dataset at hand belong
to the same (positive) class. The challenge of this task
is to construct a decision boundary without using points
from the other (negative) class. It has various safety-critical
applications in anomaly detection, for instance to detect
banking fraud, cyber-intrusion or industrial defect, in outof-distribution detection, to prevent wrong decisions of Machine Learning models, or in Open-Set-Recognition. How-

SDF exhibits desirable properties. First, by implicitly
parametrizing the domain X , it allows efficiently sampling
points outside of X and performing principled Negative
Sampling. Second, the SDF fulfils the Eikonal equation:
∥∇x S(x)∥ = 1. In particular, S is 1-Lipschitz with respect
to l2-nom : ∀x, z ∈ Rd , ∥S(x) − S(z)∥2 ≤ ∥x − z∥2 . This
property provides exact robustness certificates for OCSDF
in the form of a certified AUROC that can be computed at
the same cost as AUROC. This regularity translates into
solid empirical robustness as compared to other OCC baselines. In other words, OCSDF alleviates the lack of negative
data and the robustness issue. We go further and highlight

*
Equal contribution 1 IRIT, Université Paul Sabatier 2 DEEL,
IRT Saint Exupéry 3 Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA 4 Thales Alénia Space. Correspondence to: Louis Bethune
<louis.bethune@univ-toulouse.fr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

