Learning Instance–Specific Augmentations by Capturing Local Invariances

Ning Miao 1 Tom Rainforth 1 Emile Mathieu 1 Yann Dubois 2 Yee Whye Teh 1 Adam Foster 3 Hyunjik Kim 4

Abstract
We introduce InstaAug, a method for automatically learning input-specific augmentations from
data. Previous methods for learning augmentations have typically assumed independence between the original input and the transformation applied to that input. This can be highly restrictive,
as the invariances we hope our augmentation will
capture are themselves often highly input dependent. InstaAug instead introduces a learnable invariance module that maps from inputs to tailored
transformation parameters, allowing local invariances to be captured. This can be simultaneously
trained alongside the downstream model in a fully
end-to-end manner, or separately learned for a
pre-trained model. We empirically demonstrate
that InstaAug learns meaningful input-dependent
augmentations for a wide range of transformation
classes, which in turn provides better performance
on both supervised and self-supervised tasks.

(a) Color jittering (red line indicates class boundary)

(b) Cropping

Figure 1: Different inputs require different augmentations.
In (a), a leaf is invariant to color change from yellow to
green, but the same transformation changes a lemon to a
lime. In (b), the same effect is shown for cropping. Solid
rectangles represent the patches that preserve the labels of
the original images ([left] grass, [right] cattle), while dashed
rectangles represent patches with different labels.

1. Introduction
stream model. These transformations are resampled each
time the data point is used (e.g. at each training epoch), effectively populating the training set with additional samples.
Augmentation is also sometimes used at test time by ensembling predictions from multiple transformations of the input.
A particular augmentation is defined by the choice of the
transformation distribution p(τ ), whose construction forms
the key design choice. Good transformation distributions
induce substantial and wide-ranging changes to the input,
while preserving the information needed for prediction.

Data augmentation is an important tool in deep learning (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019). It allows one to incorporate inductive biases and invariances into models (Chen
et al., 2019; Lyle et al., 2020), providing an effective regularization technique that aids generalization (Goodfellow et al.,
2016). It has proved particularly successful for computer vision tasks, forming an essential component of many modern
supervised (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Perez & Wang, 2017;
Mikołajczyk & Grochowski, 2018; Cubuk et al., 2020) and
self-supervised (Bachman et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020;
Tian et al., 2020; Foster et al., 2021) approaches.

To try and ensure a good augmentation scheme, previous
work has looked to learn this transformation distribution
from data (Cubuk et al., 2018; Lim et al., 2019; Benton
et al., 2020). However, existing approaches typically assume
independence between the input x and the transformation
distribution p(τ ). As such, they are only able to learn global
invariances, severely limiting their flexibility and potential
impact. For example, when using color jittering, changing
the color of a leaf from yellow to green would preserve its
label, but the same transformation would change a lemon to
a lime (see Figure 1a). This transformation cannot, therefore,

Algorithmically, data augmentations apply a random transformation τ : X → X , τ ∼ p(τ ), to each input data point
x ∈ X , before feeding this augmented data into the down1

Dept. of Statistics, University of Oxford 2 Stanford University
Microsoft Research 4 DeepMind, UK. Correspondence to: Ning
Miao <ning.miao@stats.ox.ac.uk>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

