Learning noisy-OR Bayesian Networks with Max-Product Belief Propagation

Antoine Dedieu 1 Guangyao Zhou 1 Dileep George 1 Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla 1

Abstract

tions about its hidden structure. Learning and inference
algorithms let us analyze data under those assumptions and
recover the hidden structure that best explains our observations. However, performing exact inference in complex
PGMs is often intractable. To mitigate this problem, several
techniques have been proposed for approximate inference,
among which a popular one is variational inference (VI)
(Wainwright et al., 2008; Bishop & Nasrabadi, 2006).

Noisy-OR Bayesian Networks (BNs) are a family
of probabilistic graphical models which express
rich statistical dependencies in binary data. Variational inference (VI) has been the main method
proposed to learn noisy-OR BNs with complex
latent structures (Jaakkola & Jordan, 1999; Ji
et al., 2020; Buhai et al., 2020). However, the
proposed VI approaches either (a) use a recognition network with standard amortized inference
that cannot induce “explaining-away”; or (b) assume a simple mean-field (MF) posterior which
is vulnerable to bad local optima. Existing MF
VI methods also update the MF parameters sequentially which makes them inherently slow. In
this paper, we propose parallel max-product as
an alternative algorithm for learning noisy-OR
BNs with complex latent structures and we derive
a fast stochastic training scheme that scales to
large datasets. We evaluate both approaches on
several benchmarks where VI is the state-of-theart and show that our method (a) achieves better
test performance than Ji et al. (2020) for learning
noisy-OR BNs with hierarchical latent structures
on large sparse real datasets; (b) recovers a higher
number of ground truth parameters than Buhai
et al. (2020) from cluttered synthetic scenes; and
(c) solves the 2D blind deconvolution problem
from Lazaro-Gredilla et al. (2021) and variants—
including binary matrix factorization—while VI
catastrophically fails and is up to two orders of
magnitude slower.

In this paper, we consider directed acyclic PGMs—also
named Bayesian networks (BNs)—with binary variables
and noisy-OR conditional distribution (Pearl, 1988). The
resulting noisy-OR BNs have been used for medical diagnosis (Jaakkola & Jordan, 1999), data compression (Šingliar
& Hauskrecht, 2006), text mining (Liu et al., 2016), and
more recently overparametrized learning (Buhai et al., 2020)
and topic modeling on large sparse datasets (Ji et al., 2020).
Noisy-OR BNs have an intractable posterior: most of the
aforementioned applications rely on VI for approximate
inference. Some existing VI methods (Buhai et al., 2020)
use a recognition network and amortize the approximate
inference via a single forward pass, which cannot induce
“explaining-away” (see Section 2). In contrast, Jaakkola &
Jordan (1999); Šingliar & Hauskrecht (2006); Ji et al. (2020)
assume a mean-field (MF) posterior, which is vulnerable to
bad local optima. These existing MF methods also update
the MF parameters sequentially—i.e. one by one—which is
prohibitively slow. To scale MF VI, Ji et al. (2020) propose
a local heuristic that updates fewer MF parameters (see Section 3). However, their approach only applies to large sparse
datasets (i.e. most of the observations are 0s).
In this work, we propose a fast and efficient stochastic
scheme for learning noisy-OR BNs that use the parallel maxproduct (MP) algorithm (Pearl, 1988; Murphy et al., 2013)
as an alternative to VI. We scale MP to very large noisy-OR
BNs by reducing the max-product updates complexity for a
noisy-OR factor from exponential to linear in the number
of variables. We accelerate MP on Graphics Processing
Units (GPUs) using a recent open-sourced package (Zhou
et al., 2022). Similar to Ji et al. (2020), our method supports
multi-layered noisy-OR networks and relies on stochastic
optimization (Robbins & Monro, 1951) for scaling. However, (a) contrary to Ji et al. (2020), our approach runs in
parallel which allows it to scale to large dense datasets; and
(b) in contrast with Buhai et al. (2020), our method induces

1. Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) propose a rigorous
and elegant way to represent the full joint probability density
function of high-dimensional data and to express assump1
DeepMind.
Correspondence to:
<adedieu@deepmind.com>.

Antoine Dedieu

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

