Gaussian Processes at the Helm(holtz): A More Fluid Model for Ocean Currents

Renato Berlinghieri 1 Brian L. Trippe 2 David R. Burt 1 Ryan Giordano 1 Kaushik Srinivasan 3
Tamay Özgökmen 4 Junfei Xia 4 Tamara Broderick 1
vergences in the current vector field. Reconstructing ocean
currents accurately can facilitate weather forecasting, maritime navigation, and forecasting of oil spill dispersion. And
current divergences are important to identify since they are
responsible for the transport of biomass, carbon, and nutrients – with implications for ecosystem management, climate,
and the fishing industry (D’Asaro et al., 2018). With these
tasks in mind, researchers release and track GPS-tagged
buoys in the ocean (Özgökmen, 2012; D’Asaro et al., 2017).

Abstract
Given sparse observations of buoy velocities,
oceanographers are interested in reconstructing
ocean currents away from the buoys and identifying divergences in a current vector field. As a first
and modular step, we focus on the time-stationary
case – for instance, by restricting to short time
periods. Since we expect current velocity to be a
continuous but highly non-linear function of spatial location, Gaussian processes (GPs) offer an
attractive model. But we show that applying a
GP with a standard stationary kernel directly to
buoy data can struggle at both current reconstruction and divergence identification, due to some
physically unrealistic prior assumptions. To better
reflect known physical properties of currents, we
propose to instead put a standard stationary kernel on the divergence and curl-free components
of a vector field obtained through a Helmholtz
decomposition. We show that, because this decomposition relates to the original vector field just
via mixed partial derivatives, we can still perform
inference given the original data with only a small
constant multiple of additional computational expense. We illustrate the benefits of our method
with theory and experiments on synthetic and real
ocean data.

It remains to choose an appropriate method to reconstruct
currents and their divergences from buoy data. Gonçalves
et al. (2019) and Lodise et al. (2020) proposed modeling
buoy velocities in the latitude and longitude directions according to independent Gaussian processes (GPs) with standard spatiotemporal kernels (e.g., squared exponential kernels). In our work, we focus on the spatial aspects of this
task and assume the velocity field is stationary in time. Even
under this simplification, an independent spatial GP prior
on the velocities is a natural choice due to its ability to handle the sparsity of buoy observations on the ocean surface
and its assumption that currents vary continuously but in a
nonlinear fashion. We call such a model the velocity GP.
However, in what follows, we show that there remains substantial room for improvement. In simulated cases where
we have access to ground truth, we observe that the velocity
GP approach can fail to complete vortices or fail to connect
currents when buoys are observed sparsely. And while we
show how to derive divergence estimates for the velocity
GP, we also find that these estimates often fail to capture the
true divergence when it is known in simulations or real data.

1. Introduction
Ocean currents are key to the global distribution of water,
heat, and nutrients. To better understand ocean currents,
scientists are interested in two tasks: (1) reconstructing
ocean currents at different locations and (2) identifying di-

To address these issues, we propose to more directly model
known behaviors from fluid dynamics. Scientists know
that the motion of a volume element of a continuous fluid
medium in two dimensions consists of (i) expansion or contraction in two orthogonal directions, (ii) rotation about an
instantaneous axis, and (iii) translation. A Helmholtz decomposition (Bhatia et al., 2013; Arfken & Weber, 1999) from
fluid dynamics lets us decompose the vector field of ocean
currents into a divergent component (or curl-free, measuring expansion, contraction, and translation) and a rotational
component (or divergence-free, measuring rotation).1

1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Department of Statistics,
Columbia University 3 Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic
Sciences, UCLA 4 Department of Ocean Sciences, Rosenstiel
School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami. Correspondence to: Renato Berlinghieri <renb@mit.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

The divergent component is called curl-free and the rotational

