HETAL: Efficient Privacy-preserving Transfer Learning with Homomorphic
Encryption

Seewoo Lee 1 † Garam Lee 2 Jung Woo Kim 2 Junbum Shin 2 Mun-Kyu Lee 3

Abstract

grant a client (data owner) access to a pre-trained model to
extract features, and the client can then send the extracted
features to the server for fine-tuning. Here, however, sensitive client data can be leaked to the server because the
extracted features may contain significant information about
the original raw data. For example, it is well-known that a facial image can be reconstructed from its feature vector (Mai
et al., 2019). There exist other recent studies demonstrating
that feature reversion attacks pose severe threats against
neural network-based face image recognition. For example,
even SOTA face recognition systems, such as ArcFace and
ElasticFace, are vulnerable to reversion attacks (Shahreza
et al., 2022). A recent study achieved a successful attack
rate of 99.33% against ArcFace features (Dong et al., 2023).
In natural language processing (NLP), BERT embeddings
can be inverted to recover up to 50–70% of the original
input words because of their semantic richness (Song &
Raghunathan, 2020). Therefore, a method to protect the
transmitted features is critical to protect the client’s private
data. Data privacy has become a worldwide concern (Walch
et al., 2022), with many countries having enacted privacy
laws, such as the EU General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) (EU, 2016).

Transfer learning is a de facto standard method for
efficiently training machine learning models for
data-scarce problems by adding and fine-tuning
new classification layers to a model pre-trained
on large datasets. Although numerous previous
studies proposed to use homomorphic encryption
to resolve the data privacy issue in transfer learning in the machine learning as a service setting,
most of them only focused on encrypted inference. In this study, we present HETAL, an efficient Homomorphic Encryption based Transfer
Learning algorithm, that protects the client’s privacy in training tasks by encrypting the client
data using the CKKS homomorphic encryption
scheme. HETAL is the first practical scheme
that strictly provides encrypted training, adopting
validation-based early stopping and achieving the
accuracy of nonencrypted training. We propose
an efficient encrypted matrix multiplication algorithm, which is 1.8 to 323 times faster than prior
methods, and a highly precise softmax approximation algorithm with increased coverage. The experimental results for five well-known benchmark
datasets show total training times of 567–3442
seconds, which is less than an hour. *

To address this data privacy issue, extensive research has
been conducted on privacy-preserving machine learning,
some of which can be applied to TL. Most studies used
cryptographic primitives such as secure multi-party computation (SMPC) (Kantarcioglu & Clifton, 2004; Wan et al.,
2007; Nikolaenko et al., 2013; Wagh et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2020), differential privacy (DP) (Wang et al., 2019; Zhu
et al., 2022), and homomorphic encryption (HE) (Walch
et al., 2022; van Elsloo et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2020). Some
previous studies have combined SMPC and HE (Nikolaenko
et al., 2013; Mohassel & Zhang, 2017; Lehmkuhl et al.,
2021; Chandran et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2022). However,
SMPC-based solutions require significant communication
between the client and server and DP-based solutions can
reduce the accuracy. Although HE-based approaches can
address these issues, they require extensive computations.
Therefore, it is crucial to optimize HE operations to achieve
practical performance.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning (TL) (Pan & Yang, 2010) is a de facto
standard method used to enhance the model performance by
adding and fine-tuning new client-specific classification layers to a generic model pre-trained on large datasets. In the
machine learning as a service (MLaaS) setting, a server may
†
This work was done when the first author was at CryptoLab
Inc. 1 University of California, Berkeley, US 2 CryptoLab Inc.,
Seoul, South Korea 3 Inha University, Incheon, South Korea . Correspondence to: Mun-Kyu Lee <mklee@inha.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
* Our
codes for the experiments are available at
https://github.com/CryptoLabInc/HETAL.

SecureML (Mohassel & Zhang, 2017) was the first efficient

1

