Bidirectional Adaptation for Robust Semi-Supervised Learning
with Inconsistent Data Distributions
Lin-Han Jia 1 Lan-Zhe Guo 1 Zhi Zhou 1 Jie-Jing Shao 1 Yu-Ke Xiang 2 Yu-Feng Li 1

Abstract

object detection (Jeong et al., 2019), semantic segmentation (Souly et al., 2017), and text classification (Miyato
et al., 2017), among others. It is expected that, when labeled data are limited, the use of unlabeled data will help
improve the performance. However, it has been found that
SSL algorithms perform even worse than using only labeled
data (Ben-David et al., 2008; Li & Zhou, 2014; Li et al.,
2021). Especially when unlabeled data are sampled from a
different distribution than labeled data and target data, SSL
algorithms will suffer from severe performance degradation (Oliver et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020;
Huang et al., 2021). Unfortunately, inconsistent distributions are a common challenge in real-world applications.
For example, labeled and unlabeled data are collected from
different sources; labeled data are real samples while unlabeled data are synthetic ones (Peng et al., 2018); labeled data
are obtained through prioritized manual labeling, possibly
from the parts of unlabeled data that are more likely to contribute to the learning objective (Shao et al., 2022b;a).The
scope and value of SSL will be greatly enhanced if unlabeled
data from other distributions can be effectively utilized. In
this paper, we focus on SSL where the distributions of labeled and unlabeled data are inconsistent. Due to the lack of
labels, we can only observe covariate shift pL (x) ̸= pU (x).
In fact, when the learning target p(y|x) remains constant,
covariate shift is equivalent to the combination of label distribution shift pL (y) ̸= pU (y) and intra-class feature distribution shift pL (x|y) ̸= pU (x|y) which cannot be observed
independently (as shown in Figure 1).

Semi-supervised learning (SSL) suffers from severe performance degradation when labeled and
unlabeled data come from inconsistent data distributions. However, there is still a lack of sufficient theoretical guidance on how to alleviate
this problem. In this paper, we propose a general theoretical framework that demonstrates how
distribution discrepancies caused by pseudo-label
predictions and target predictions can lead to severe generalization errors. Through theoretical
analysis, we identify three main reasons why previous SSL algorithms cannot perform well with
inconsistent distributions: coupling between the
pseudo-label predictor and the target predictor, biased pseudo labels, and restricted sample weights.
To address these challenges, we introduce a practical framework called Bidirectional Adaptation
that can adapt to the distribution of unlabeled data
for debiased pseudo-label prediction and to the
target distribution for debiased target prediction,
thereby mitigating these shortcomings. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a promising learning
paradigm that seeks to overcome the scarcity of labeled data
by leveraging an abundance of unlabeled data (Chapelle
et al., 2006; Oliver et al., 2018). In recent years, SSL research has received extensive attention and made significant
progress. Thanks to its ability to handle both labeled and
unlabeled data, SSL has found successful applications in various tasks, such as image classification (Sohn et al., 2020),

It is evident that neither classical SSL nor Domain Adaptation (DA) can tackle this problem well. Classical SSL
typically assumes that all samples are drawn from the same
distribution. From a theoretical point of view, various works
formalize the idea of using unlabeled data and subsequently
investigate situations where unlabeled data cannot help or
where it can (Leskes, 2005; Ben-David et al., 2008; Balcan
& Blum, 2010; Peters et al., 2017), but they are limited
in scope to provide practical guidance for designing algorithms to address the problem of inconsistent distributions.
From a practical point of view, there have been some works
related to the problem of inconsistent distributions (Oliver
et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Huang et al.,
2021), but most of them only focus on label distributions

1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China 2 Consumer BG, Huawei
Technologies, Shenzhen, China. Correspondence to: Yu-Feng Li
<liyf@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

