DualHSIC: HSIC-Bottleneck and Alignment for Continual Learning

Zifeng Wang * 1 Zheng Zhan * 1 Yifan Gong 1 Yucai Shao 2 Stratis Ioannidis 1 Yanzhi Wang 1 Jennifer Dy 1

80
Average Accuracy

Abstract
Rehearsal-based approaches are a mainstay of
continual learning (CL). They mitigate the catastrophic forgetting problem by maintaining a small
fixed-size buffer with a subset of data from past
tasks. While most rehearsal-based approaches exploit the knowledge from buffered past data, little
attention is paid to inter-task relationships and
to critical task-specific and task-invariant knowledge. By appropriately leveraging inter-task relationships, we propose a novel CL method, named
DualHSIC, to boost the performance of existing
rehearsal-based methods in a simple yet effective way. DualHSIC consists of two complementary components that stem from the so-called
Hilbert Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC):
HSIC-Bottleneck for Rehearsal (HBR) lessens
the inter-task interference and HSIC Alignment
(HA) promotes task-invariant knowledge sharing.
Extensive experiments show that DualHSIC can
be seamlessly plugged into existing rehearsalbased methods for consistent performance improvements, outperforming recent state-of-the-art
regularization-enhanced rehearsal methods.

70

Method
DER++
+LiDER
+DualHSIC

60
50
40

50
100 200 500
Rehearsal Buffer Size

Figure 1. Comparison between DualHSIC, and two representative
SOTA CL methods, LiDER and DER++. Both DualHSIC and
LiDER are built upon DER++. DualHSIC achieves especially
better performance with smaller buffer sizes.

The core idea of rehearsal is to maintain a small fix-sized
memory buffer to save a subset of data from past tasks.
When training on the current task, the model also revisits
the buffered data to consolidate learned knowledge. Given
the limited buffer size, it is challenging to keep generally
discriminative representations for old tasks, because of overfitting (Verwimp et al., 2021). Existing methods mainly
focus on data augmentation (Buzzega et al., 2020; Cha
et al., 2021) and importance-based buffer example selection (Aljundi et al., 2019; Yoon et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

*
Equal contribution 1 Northeastern University 2 University
of California, Los Angeles.
Correspondence to:
Zifeng Wang <zifengwang@ece.neu.edu>, Zheng Zhan
<zhan.zhe@northeastern.edu>.

Despite state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, these approaches mostly consider how to better exploit knowledge
from the buffered past data. It is notable that the intertask relationship is also important yet under-investigated
in rehearsal-based work: How does learning the current
task affect the consolidation of past knowledge? To answer this question, we are inspired by the Complementary
Learning Systems (CLS) (Kumaran et al., 2016; McClelland
et al., 1995) theory and CLS-based CL methods (Pham et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2022b), which suggest that task-specific
and task-invariant knowledge are critical for CL. Therefore, when learning the current task, we have to prevent the
current task-specific knowledge from interfering with past
knowledge, and leverage task-invariant knowledge to better
consolidate the past.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

A straightforward approach is to directly combine CLSbased methods with a rehearsal buffer. Although such an
approach has proved effective, major components such as an

Continual learning (CL) aims at enabling a single model
to learn a sequence of tasks without catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989) - the central problem of
CL that models are prone to performance deterioration on
previously seen tasks. A large body of work attempts to address CL from different perspectives (Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017; Mallya & Lazebnik, 2018; Aljundi et al., 2018).
Rehearsal-based methods (Aljundi et al., 2018; Chaudhry
et al., 2019; Buzzega et al., 2020) have gained popularity
due to their simplicity, effectiveness, and generality.

1

