Bayesian Neural Networks Avoid Encoding Complex and
Perturbation-Sensitive Concepts

Qihan Ren * 1 Huiqi Deng * 1 Yunuo Chen 1 Siyu Lou 1 Quanshi Zhang 1 2

Abstract

perspective to investigate the representation capacity of
BNNs, i.e., we discover and theoretically prove that BNNs
are less likely to encode complex and perturbation-sensitive
concepts than standard DNNs. In fact, such a property
brings specific advantages to feature representations of
BNNs. To be precise, we limit our study to the scope
of mean-field variational BNNs (Blundell et al., 2015),
which is one of the most commonly used BNNs. Thus, in
this paper, we just use the term BNN to refer to mean-field
variational BNNs.

In this paper, we focus on mean-field variational
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) and explore
the representation capacity of such BNNs by investigating which types of concepts are less likely
to be encoded by the BNN. It has been observed
and studied that a relatively small set of interactive concepts usually emerge in the knowledge
representation of a sufficiently-trained neural network, and such concepts can faithfully explain
the network output. Based on this, our study
proves that compared to standard deep neural
networks (DNNs), it is less likely for BNNs to
encode complex concepts. Experiments verify
our theoretical proofs. Note that the tendency to
encode less complex concepts does not necessarily imply weak representation power, considering
that complex concepts exhibit low generalization
power and high adversarial vulnerability. The
code is available at https://github.com/
sjtu-xai-lab/BNN-concepts.

Common phenomenon of concept emergence in various
neural networks. Although it is well-known that a neural
network does not explicitly encode concepts like graphical
models, recent studies have discovered (Ren et al., 2023a; Li
& Zhang, 2023) and theoretically proved (Ren et al., 2023c)
a common concept-emerging phenomenon that neural networks usually implicitly encode a small number of interactive concepts for inference, which have been observed
in different neural networks for various tasks. Specifically,
each interactive concept represents an AND relationship
among a set of input variables.
For example, we can use I(S = {eyes, nose, mouth}) = US ·
exist(eyes) · exist(nose) · exist(mouth) to illustrate the AND

1. Introduction

relationship for the face concept in image classification. If
any image patch in the set S = {eyes, nose, mouth} is masked,
then the face concept will be deactivated, and the numerical
effect of this concept is removed (I(S) = 0) and no longer
influences the network output.

Unlike standard deep neural networks (DNNs), Bayesian
neural networks (BNNs) represent network weights as probability distributions. Therefore, BNNs exhibit distinctive
representation capacities from standard DNNs. Existing
studies (Blundell et al., 2015; Gal & Smith, 2018; Kristiadi
et al., 2020; Carbone et al., 2020; Wenzel et al., 2020; Krishnan et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022) usually analyzed BNNs
in terms of generalization power, adversarial robustness, and
optimization.

More importantly, interactive concepts can be considered as
faithful inference patterns encoded by the neural network.
It is because Ren et al. (2023a) has proved that people can
use a relatively small number of interactive concepts to well
mimic the inference logic of the neural network on a certain
input sample. That is, numerical effects of these concepts
always well predict diverse network outputs, no matter how
the input sample is masked.

In contrast to the above studies, this paper proposes a new
*

Equal contribution 1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China 2 Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the John
Hopcroft Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.
Correspondence to: Quanshi Zhang <zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn>.

BNNs ignore complex and perturbation-sensitive concepts. Based on the interactive concepts, we discover and
theoretically prove that compared to standard DNNs, it is
more difficult for a neural network to encode complex interactive concepts, as long as it has weight uncertainty. The

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

