Model-based Offline Reinforcement Learning with Count-based Conservatism

Byeongchan Kim 1 Min-hwan Oh 1

Abstract

2017), autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021), and healthcare (Yu et al., 2021a). Furthermore, even when direct intervention is viable, each interaction between the agent and the
environment often incurs cost. Thus, if conditions permit, it
would be advantageous for the agent to learn from readily
available offline datasets, thereby negating the necessity for
direct experimentation.

In this paper, we propose a model-based offline reinforcement learning method that integrates countbased conservatism, named Count-MORL. Our
method utilizes the count estimates of state-action
pairs to quantify model estimation error, marking
the first algorithm of demonstrating the efficacy of
count-based conservatism in model-based offline
deep RL to the best of our knowledge. For our proposed method, we first show that the estimation
error is inversely proportional to the frequency
of state-action pairs. Secondly, we demonstrate
that the learned policy under the count-based
conservative model offers near-optimality performance guarantees. Through extensive numerical
experiments, we validate that Count-MORL with
hash code implementation significantly outperforms existing offline RL algorithms on the D4RL
benchmark datasets. The code is accessible at
https://github.com/oh-lab/Count-MORL.

Offline RL, also referred to as batch RL, is a subfield of
the RL framework that relies solely on previously acquired
static datasets. In this framework, the agent is given a collection of experiences that a behavior policy gathered and
subsequently utilizes for policy learning without any additional interactions with the environment. Despite its advantages of learning from an offline dataset, offline RL also
presents unique challenges (Levine et al., 2020). Among
these, striking a balance between enhancing generalization
capabilities and circumventing undesired out-of-distribution
(OOD) behaviors remains prominent. The crux of finding
such a balance pivots around managing distributional shift.
During policy evaluation, the application of Bellman updates to value functions involves querying the values of
OOD state-action pairs. This can potentially lead to an accumulation of extrapolation errors. The issue becomes even
more intricate due to the widespread use of high-capacity
function approximators, such as neural networks, which
further complicates its complexity.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a paradigm in which
an agent learns sequential actions within uncertain environments, all while aiming to maximize cumulative rewards.
The empirical effectiveness of RL has been validated across
diverse domains, underlining its capability to learn complex
tasks (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; 2017; Fawzi
et al., 2022). A defining feature of RL, which distinguishes
it from other machine learning paradigms, is its inherent
necessity for active information acquisition, in which the
agent collects data through firsthand experimentation with
the environment. This subfield of RL, characterized by
direct interaction, is commonly referred to as online RL.

To address this issue with OOD actions, various offline RL
algorithms adapt conservatism in estimated values by inducing some form of pessimism. These methods include both
model-free (Kumar et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2022) and modelbased (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020; Rafailov et al.,
2021; Lu et al., 2022; Rigter et al., 2022) approaches. Recent
model-based offline RL methods aim to harness conservative value estimates by using analytical performance bounds
(Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020; Rafailov et al., 2021).
These methods adjust the estimated MDP model learned
from the offline dataset to elicit conservative behavior by
imposing a penalty on the policy or rewards when the policy
visits states where the estimated model’s accuracy is likely
low. If the learned policy takes actions in states where the
accuracy of model prediction is high, it is plausible that the
estimated value of the policy is likely to retain a high level
of accuracy. Specifically, many existing model-based offline RL algorithms incorporate conservatism by estimating

Nevertheless, this approach with direct experimentation is
often infeasible or potentially unsafe in many real-world
applications, including but not limited to robotics (Gu et al.,
1
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Min-hwan Oh <minoh@snu.ac.kr>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

