On the Robustness of Text Vectorizers
Rémi Catellier 1 2 Samuel Vaiter 1 3 Damien Garreau 1 2

Abstract

a tremendous interest into the robustness of models with
respect to small changes in the input. In this paper, we focus
on the robustness of the vectorization NLP pipelines: the
transformation of the input document into a vector representation. We will consider documents as ordered sequences
of tokens, not necessarily corresponding to words. For
instance, GPT 2 uses Byte Pair encoding (Gage, 1994; Sennrich et al., 2016), which relies on tokens corresponding to
sub-words.

A fundamental issue in machine learning is the
robustness of the model with respect to changes in
the input. In natural language processing, models
typically contain a first embedding layer, transforming a sequence of tokens into vector representations. While the robustness with respect to
changes of continuous inputs is well-understood,
the situation is less clear when considering discrete changes, for instance replacing a word by
another in an input sentence. Our work formally proves that popular embedding schemes,
such as concatenation, TF-IDF, and Paragraph
Vector (a.k.a. doc2vec), exhibit robustness in
the Hölder or Lipschitz sense with respect to
the Hamming distance. We provide quantitative
bounds for these schemes and demonstrate how
the constants involved are affected by the length
of the document. These findings are exemplified
through a series of numerical examples.

As far as we reckon, there are essentially three main schools
of thought when it comes to vectorization:
(i) concatenation of vectors corresponding to each token
of the document. These vectors are often called word vectors when the tokens are individual words. They can either be one-hot representations of the tokens, or obtained
by a mapping learned from data. A celebrated approach
to produce word vectors is word2vec (Mikolov et al.,
2013a;b), which transports semantic properties to the embedding space. Many other methods exist, such as GloVe
(Pennington et al., 2014), EMF (Li et al., 2015), WordPiece
(Wu et al., 2016), FastText (Bojanowski et al., 2017), and
ELMo (Peters et al., 2018). Positional information is typically added to the token embeddings.
(ii) TF-IDF (term frequency - inverse document frequency), taking words as tokens and simply considering the
frequencies of each individual word in the document. These
frequencies are reweighted by an overall importance term to
take into account the lesser importance of frequently appearing words such as articles. This is the historical approach to
text vectorization (Luhn, 1957; Jones, 1972).
(iii) ad hoc approaches. Notably, Paragraph Vector (also
known as doc2vec (Le & Mikolov, 2014)) extends the
ideas of word2vec. Although we will focus on doc2vec
in this work, we emphasize that there exists other ad hoc approaches, such as skip-thought vectors (Kiros et al., 2015),
quick-thought (Logeswaran & Lee, 2018), or universal sentence encoder (Cer et al., 2018).

1. Introduction
Recent advances in natural language processing (NLP) have
exceeded all expectations. In particular, the advent of large
language models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) and
GPT (Brown et al., 2020) are transforming radically the
way we interact with computers. They typically rely on a
deep neural network (DNN) architecture and are trained on
a variety of tasks such as sentiment analysis, translation,
and text summarization.
A known issue with DNNs is the existence of adversarial
examples: examples modified in order to radically change
the output of the model. Initially popularized in the context
of image classification (Szegedy et al., 2014), such examples also exist in NLP and a flourishing literature exists on
this topic (Zhang et al., 2020). This problem has sparked
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, LJAD, France 2 Inria,
France 3 CNRS, France. Correspondence to: Damien Garreau
<damien.garreau@unice.fr>.

A priori, vectorizers are not designed to be robust to small
changes. Even when modifying a single word of the input
document, the embedding could change drastically. Thus,
we ask the following question:

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Are text vectorizers provably robust with respect
to modifying a small subset of the document?

1

1

