Synergies between Disentanglement and Sparsity:
Generalization and Identiﬁability in Multi-Task Learning

Sébastien Lachapelle * 1 Tristan Deleu * 1 Divyat Mahajan 1 Ioannis Mitliagkas 1 2 Yoshua Bengio 1 2
Simon Lacoste-Julien 1 2 Quentin Bertrand 1

Abstract

conditioned image generation (Ramesh et al., 2022). However, preliminary assessments of the latter have highlighted
shortcomings related to compositionality (Marcus et al.,
2022), suggesting new algorithmic innovations are needed.

Although disentangled representations are often
said to be beneﬁcial for downstream tasks, current empirical and theoretical understanding is
limited. In this work, we provide evidence that
disentangled representations coupled with sparse
task-speciﬁc predictors improve generalization.
In the context of multi-task learning, we prove
a new identiﬁability result that provides conditions under which maximally sparse predictors
yield disentangled representations. Motivated
by this theoretical result, we propose a practical approach to learn disentangled representations based on a sparsity-promoting bi-level optimization problem. Finally, we explore a metalearning version of this algorithm based on group
Lasso multiclass SVM predictors, for which we
derive a tractable dual formulation. It obtains
competitive results on standard few-shot classiﬁcation benchmarks, while each task is using only
a fraction of the learned representations.

Another line of work has argued for the integration of
ideas from causality to make progress towards more robust
and transferable machine learning systems (Pearl, 2019;
Schölkopf, 2019; Goyal & Bengio, 2022). Causal representation learning has emerged recently as a ﬁeld aiming
to deﬁne and learn representations suited for causal reasoning (Schölkopf et al., 2021). This set of ideas is strongly
related to learning disentangled representations (Bengio
et al., 2013). Informally, a representation is considered
disentangled when its components are in one-to-one correspondence with natural and interpretable factors of variations, such as object positions, colors or shapes. Although
a plethora of works have investigated theoretically under
which conditions disentanglement is possible through the
lens of identiﬁability (Hyvärinen & Morioka, 2016; 2017;
Hyvärinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020a; Locatello et al., 2020a; Klindt et al., 2021; Von Kügelgen
et al., 2021; Gresele et al., 2021; Lachapelle et al., 2022;
Lippe et al., 2022b; Ahuja et al., 2022c), fewer works have
tackled how a disentangled representation could be beneﬁcial for downstream tasks. Those who did mainly provide
empirical rather than theoretical evidence for or against
its usefulness (Locatello et al., 2019; van Steenkiste et al.,
2019; Miladinovi et al., 2019; Dittadi et al., 2021; Montero
et al., 2021). We believe our work can bring some theoretical insights as to when and why disentanglement can help.

1. Introduction
The recent literature on self-supervised learning has provided evidence that learning a representation on large corpuses of data can yield strong performances on a wide variety of downstream tasks (Devlin et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2020), especially in few-shot learning scenarios where the
training data for these tasks is limited (Brown et al., 2020b;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021). Beyond
transferring across multiple tasks, these learned representations also lead to improved robustness against distribution shifts (Wortsman et al., 2022) as well as stunning text-

In this work, we explore synergies between disentanglement and sparse task-speciﬁc predictors in the context of
multi-task learning. At the heart of our contributions is the
assumption that only a small subset of all factors of variations are useful for each downstream task, and this subset
might change from one task to another. We will refer to
such tasks as sparse tasks, and their corresponding sets of
useful factors as their supports. This assumption was initially suggested by Bengio et al. (2013, Section 3.5): “the
feature set being trained may be destined to be used in
multiple tasks that may have distinct [and unknown] sub-

*
Equal contribution 1 Mila & DIRO, Université de Montréal 2 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Sébastien
Lachapelle <lachaseb@mila.quebec>, Tristan Deleu <deleutri@mila.quebec>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

