Long-Term Rhythmic Video Soundtracker

Jiashuo Yu 1 Yaohui Wang 1 Xinyuan Chen 1 Xiao Sun 1 Yu Qiao 1

Abstract

LORIS

We consider the problem of generating musical
soundtracks in sync with rhythmic visual cues.
Most existing works rely on pre-defined music representations, leading to the incompetence
of generative flexibility and complexity. Other
methods directly generating video-conditioned
waveforms suffer from limited scenarios, short
lengths, and unstable generation quality. To
this end, we present Long-Term Rhythmic Video
Soundtracker (LORIS), a novel framework to synthesize long-term conditional waveforms. Specifically, our framework consists of a latent conditional diffusion probabilistic model to perform
waveform synthesis. Furthermore, a series of
context-aware conditioning encoders are proposed to take temporal information into consideration for a long-term generation. Notably, we extend our model’s applicability from dances to multiple sports scenarios such as floor exercise and
figure skating. To perform comprehensive evaluations, we establish a benchmark for rhythmic
video soundtracks including the pre-processed
dataset, improved evaluation metrics, and robust
generative baselines. Extensive experiments show
that our model generates long-term soundtracks
with state-of-the-art musical quality and rhythmic
correspondence. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/OpenGVLab/LORIS.

Rhythmic Videos
Floor Exercise

Figure Skating

Long-Term Waveforms

Benchmark
Dance

Evaluation Metrics

BCS, BHS, F1,
MOS, CSD, HSD..

Figure 1. Overview of the approach. We tackle the task of generating long-term soundtracks based on given rhythmic videos.
The LORIS framework is first proposed to generate long-term
rhythm-correlated waveforms. We then establish a novel benchmark, including a large-scale dataset varying from dancing to
sports and a set of improved metrics for long-term soundtracks.

have been made to drive machines interactively generating
melodious music steered by given conditionings such as
genre, tempo, and style. In this paper, we work on a tightlycoupled conditioning scenario, that is, video-conditioned
music generation (a.k.a. video soundtracks) which is more
challenging than other conditional music generation tasks
due to its cross-modality and temporal-correlated nature.
Rhythmic video soundtracks require the model to consider
the intrinsic correlations between human movements and
music rhythms, and further leverage such temporal alignments as guidance for a conditional generation. To date
in the literature, some works (Gan et al., 2020; Di et al.,
2021; Su et al., 2020a;b; 2021) investigate cross-modality
soundtracks by using pre-defined symbolic musical representations such as MIDI, REMI, and piano-roll that can be
autoregressively generated. However, this kind of representation is not expressive enough to cover the diverse range of
sounds we hear in typical soundtracks, which hinders the
model from synthesizing complex and diverse music. Recently, some advances (Zhu et al., 2022a;b) directly generate
waveforms in a non-autoregressive manner, yet these works
heavily rely on the computationally-expensive pre-trained
music encoder (Dhariwal et al., 2020), thereby resulting
in the short-length (2∼6s) and low-quality consequences.
Moreover, owing to the insufficiency of paired music-video
data, video soundtracks are limited to the dancing scenarios, which severely restrains the model’s generalizability for

1. Introduction
Automatic music generation has always been regarded as an
iconic step towards a creative AI-generated content system.
Continuous efforts (Dhariwal et al., 2020; Pasini & Schlüter,
2022; Caillon & Esling, 2021; Kumar et al., 2019; Huang
et al., 2018; von Rütte et al., 2022; Roberts et al., 2018;
Ren et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2022; Mittal et al., 2021)
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Correspondence
to: Yu Qiao <qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

