Subequivariant Graph Reinforcement Learning in 3D Environments

Runfa Chen * 1 Jiaqi Han * 1 Fuchun Sun 1 2 Wenbing Huang 3 4
𝑧

Abstract

𝑥

𝑜

Learning a shared policy that guides the locomotion of different agents is of core interest in Reinforcement Learning (RL), which leads to the study
of morphology-agnostic RL. However, existing
benchmarks are highly restrictive in the choice of
starting point and target point, constraining the
movement of the agents within 2D space. In this
work, we propose a novel setup for morphologyagnostic RL, dubbed Subequivariant Graph RL
in 3D environments (3D-SGRL). Specifically, we
first introduce a new set of more practical yet
challenging benchmarks in 3D space that allows
the agent to have full Degree-of-Freedoms to explore in arbitrary directions starting from arbitrary configurations. Moreover, to optimize the
policy over the enlarged state-action space, we
propose to inject geometric symmetry, i.e., subequivariance, into the modeling of the policy and
Q-function such that the policy can generalize to
all directions, improving exploration efficiency.
This goal is achieved by a novel SubEquivariant
Transformer (S ET) that permits expressive message exchange. Finally, we evaluate the proposed
method on the proposed benchmarks, where our
method consistently and significantly outperforms
existing approaches on single-task, multi-task,
and zero-shot generalization scenarios. Extensive
ablations are also conducted to verify our design.

(a) 2D Planar Locomotion Environments
𝑧

𝑦
𝑥

𝑜

𝒅

𝒈

𝒅

𝒅

𝒅

(b) 3D Subequivariant Locomotion Environments

Figure 1. Illustrative comparison between previous 2D planar
setting and our 3D subequivariant formulation. Notably, the
agents in (b) are equipped with more DoFs to allow 3D movement. Code and videos are available on our project page:
https://alpc91.github.io/SGRL/.

gent agents. Impressive breakthrough has been made towards realizing such intelligence thanks to the emergence
of deep reinforcement learning (RL) (Mnih et al., 2015;
Silver et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017;
Fujimoto et al., 2018), where the policy of the agent is acquired through interactions with the environment. More
recently, by getting insight into the morphology of the
agent, morphology-agnostic RL (Wang et al., 2018; Pathak
et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020; Kurin et al., 2020; Hong
et al., 2021; Dong et al., 2022; Trabucco et al., 2022; Gupta
et al., 2022; Furuta et al., 2023) has been proposed with
the paradigm of learning a local and shared policy for all
agents and the tasks involved, offering enhanced performance and transferability, especially in the multi-task scenario. It is usually fulfilled by leveraging Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) (Battaglia et al., 2018) or even Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) to derive the policy through
passing and fusing the state information on the morphological graphs of the agents.

1. Introduction
Learning to locomote, navigate, and explore in the 3D world
is a fundamental task in the pathway of building intelli*

Equal contribution 1 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University 2 THU-Bosch
JCML Center 3 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China 4 Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data
Management and Analysis Methods. Correspondence to: Fuchun
Sun <fcsun@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>.

In spite of the fruitful progress by morphology-agnostic RL,
in this work, we identify several critical setups that have
been over-simplified in existing benchmarks, giving rise to
a limited state/action space such that the obtained policy
is unable to explore the entire 3D space. In particular, the
agents are assigned a fixed starting point and restricted to
moving towards a single direction along the x-axis, leading

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

