Behavior Contrastive Learning for Unsupervised Skill Discovery

Rushuai Yang 1 2 Chenjia Bai 1 Hongyi Guo 3 Siyuan Li 2 Bin Zhao 1 4 Zhen Wang 4 Peng Liu 2 Xuelong Li 1 4

Abstract

can learn diverse and meaningful skills by exploring the
environment without specific rewards, and then use these
discovered skills to solve complex downstream tasks. Inspired by the human intelligence, unsupervised RL (Laskin
et al., 2021) has recently become an important tool to address the generalization problem through skill discovery.

In reinforcement learning, unsupervised skill discovery aims to learn diverse skills without extrinsic rewards. Previous methods discover skills
by maximizing the mutual information (MI) between states and skills. However, such an MI
objective tends to learn simple and static skills
and may hinder exploration. In this paper, we propose a novel unsupervised skill discovery method
through contrastive learning among behaviors,
which makes the agent produce similar behaviors
for the same skill and diverse behaviors for different skills. Under mild assumptions, our objective
maximizes the MI between different behaviors
based on the same skill, which serves as an upper
bound of the previous MI objective. Meanwhile,
our method implicitly increases the state entropy
to obtain better state coverage. We evaluate our
method on challenging mazes and continuous control tasks. The results show that our method generates diverse and far-reaching skills, and also
obtains competitive performance in downstream
tasks compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

Existing methods perform unsupervised skill discovery by
maximizing the MI between states and skills. Specifically,
the agent uses the discriminability and diversity of skill
behaviors as an intrinsic reward, and then trains a skillconditional policy by maximizing such a reward (Gregor
et al., 2016). The discovered skills can serve as primitives
to solve downstream tasks. Although these methods have
shown promising results in discovering useful skills, a key
limitation is that they often learn simple and static skills that
lead to poor state coverage, which has also been observed
in recent works (Campos et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2022).
For instance, in locomotion tasks, the MI objective tends to
learn static ‘posing’ skills rather than dynamic skills. We
find it is mainly caused by the much smaller skill label
space compared to the state space, which makes the MI
objective easily achieve its maximum even with static skills.
Specifically, the states visited by different skills can only
have slight differences for distinguishing skills but not necessarily learn semantically meaningful or far-reaching skills.
Increasing skill dimensions (Laskin et al., 2022) or enforcing exploration (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b; Campos et al., 2020;
Park et al., 2022) partially addresses this problem, while
they require additional estimator or training techniques.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) shows
promising performance in a variety of challenging tasks, including game playing (Mnih et al., 2015; Schrittwieser et al.,
2020), quadrupedal locomotion (Lee et al., 2020; Miki et al.,
2022), and robotic manipulation (Kalashnikov et al., 2021;
Wu et al., 2022). In most tasks, the policy is trained by optimizing a specific reward function with RL algorithms. One
limitation of such a framework is that the learned policy is
restricted to the training task and cannot generalize to other
downstream tasks (Cobbe et al., 2020). In contrast, humans

In this study, we propose a novel method for unsupervised skill discovery, named Behavior Contrastive Learning
(BeCL). We consider skill discovery from a multi-view perspective, where different trajectories condition on the same
skill are different views. Specifically, we use the MI between different states generated by the same skill as an
intrinsic rewards and train a policy to maximize it. Intuitively, BeCL encourages the agent to perform similarly
condition on the same skill, and performs diversely among
different skills. Under the redundancy condition, our MI
objective serves as an upper bound of the previous MI objective, which means that BeCL also learns discriminating
skills implicitly. Moreover, our method implicitly increases
the state visitation entropy to encourage a better coverage
of the environment, which prevents the agent from learning

1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China 2 Harbin
Institute of Technology, China 3 Northwestern University, USA
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China. Correspondence
to: Chenjia Bai <baichenjia@pjlab.org.cn>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

