SMURF-THP: Score Matching-based UnceRtainty quantiFication for
Transformer Hawkes Process
Zichong Li 1 Yanbo Xu 2 Simiao Zuo 2 Haoming Jiang 3 Chao Zhang 2 Tuo Zhao 2 Hongyuan Zha 4

Abstract

2015), and personalized treatments (Wang et al., 2018).
A common question to ask is: Given the observations of
the past events, when and what type of event will happen
next? Temporal point process such as the Hawkes process
(Hawkes, 1971) uses an intensity function to model the arrival time of events. A conventional Hawkes process defines
a parametric form of the intensity function, which assumes
that the influence of past events on the current event decreases over time. Such a simplified assumption limits the
model’s expressivity and fails to capture complex dynamics in modern intricate datasets. Recently, neural Hawkes
process models parameterize the intensity function using
recurrent neural networks (Du et al., 2016; Mei & Eisner,
2017) and Transformer (Zuo et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020).
These models have shown to be successful in capturing complicated event dependencies.

Transformer Hawkes process models have shown
to be successful in modeling event sequence data.
However, most of the existing training methods rely on maximizing the likelihood of event
sequences, which involves calculating some intractable integral. Moreover, the existing methods fail to provide uncertainty quantification for
model predictions, e.g., confidence intervals for
the predicted event’s arrival time. To address these
issues, we propose SMURF-THP, a score-based
method for learning Transformer Hawkes process
and quantifying prediction uncertainty. Specifically, SMURF-THP learns the score function of
events’ arrival time based on a score-matching
objective that avoids the intractable computation.
With such a learned score function, we can sample
arrival time of events from the predictive distribution. This naturally allows for the quantification
of uncertainty by computing confidence intervals
over the generated samples. We conduct extensive experiments in both event type prediction and
uncertainty quantification of arrival time. In all
the experiments, SMURF-THP outperforms existing likelihood-based methods in confidence calibration while exhibiting comparable prediction
accuracy.

However, there are two major drawbacks with existing training methods for neural Hawkes process models. First, they
mainly focus on maximizing the log-likelihood of the events’
arrival time and types. To calculate such likelihood, we need
to compute the integral of the intensity function over time,
which is usually computationally challenging, and therefore
numerical approximations are often applied. As a result, not
only is the computation complex, but the estimation of the
intensity function can still be inaccurate in these likelihoodbased methods. Second, the arrival time of events often
follows a long tail distribution, such that point estimates
of the arrival time are unreliable and insufficient. Thus,
confidence intervals that can quantify model uncertainty
are necessary. However, calculating the confidence interval
directly from density is computationally challenging. This
is because we need to compute the coverage probability,
which is essentially another integral of the intensity function
(recall that the intensity is an infinitesimal probability).

1. Introduction
Sequences of discrete events in continuous time are routinely generated in many domains such as social media
(Yang et al., 2011), financial transactions (Bacry et al.,
1

University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China 2 Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
USA 3 Amazon.com Inc., Palo Alto, USA 4 The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, China.
Correspondence to:
Zichong Li <lzc123@mail.ustc.edu.cn>,
Tuo Zhao <tourzhao@gatech.edu>,
Hongyuan Zha
<zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn>.

To overcome the above two challenges, we propose
SMURF-THP, a score-based method for learning Transformer Hawkes process models and quantifying the uncertainty of the models’ predicted arrival time. The scorebased objective in SMURF-THP, originally introduced by
Hyvärinen & Dayan (2005), is to match the derivative of
the log-likelihood (known as score) of the observed events’
arrival time to the derivative of the log-density of the empirical (unknown) distribution. Note that calculating scores

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

