Simple Embodied Language Learning as a
Byproduct of Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Evan Zheran Liu 1 Sahaana Suri 1 Tong Mu 1 Allan Zhou 1 Chelsea Finn 1
This Work

Abstract
Whereas machine learning models typically learn
language by directly training on language tasks
(e.g., next-word prediction), language emerges in
human children as a byproduct of solving nonlanguage tasks (e.g., acquiring food). Motivated
by this observation, we ask: can embodied reinforcement learning (RL) agents also indirectly
learn language from non-language tasks? Learning to associate language with its meaning requires a dynamic environment with varied language. Therefore, we investigate this question
in a multi-task environment with language that
varies across the different tasks. Specifically, we
design an office navigation environment, where
the agent’s goal is to find a particular office, and
office locations differ in different buildings (i.e.,
tasks). Each building includes a floor plan with a
simple language description of the goal office’s
location, which can be visually read as an RGB
image when visited. We find RL agents indeed are
able to indirectly learn language. Agents trained
with current meta-RL algorithms successfully generalize to reading floor plans with held-out layouts
and language phrases, and quickly navigate to the
correct office, despite receiving no direct language
supervision.

Traditional ML
Task: Next
Word Prediction

Humans
Task:
Satisfy Hunger

RL Agent
Task:
Find Ofﬁce

Direct Language Learning

Emergent Language Learning

Emergent Language Learning

x: Golden fried __, yum!
y: Potatoes

mil!

“ﬁrst room
from left”

✗

x: People like eating __
y: Food
x: Monkeys like ________
y: Bananas
x: Children like _______
y: Milk
x: Robots like _________
y: Finding Offices

Language is directly
related to the task, and
the model is given direct
language supervision

Read the sign!

Language is not directly
related to the task, but
the child learns to speak
to help get milk faster

Language is not directly
related to the task, but
the agent learns to read
to ﬁnd the ofﬁce quicker

Figure 1. Machine learning models learn language by directly training on language tasks, whereas children learn language as a byproduct of solving tasks that do not explicitly relate to language. We
ask if embodied reinforcement learning agents can learn language
in a similarly indirect manner.

learn words that alert parents to their needs (e.g., being
hungry or thirsty) from vocalizations (e.g., crying) to more
effective words and sentences (e.g., “I’m hungry”).
Indirectly learning language can be desirable as it is directly
tied to real-world observations, which yields language understanding that is grounded and consistent with reality. In
contrast, standard, directly-trained models can output linguistically correct, but factually incorrect sentences (Lin
et al., 2021b). Motivated by this observation, we investigate
if embodied ML agents situated in simple 3D environments
can start to learn language via indirect mechanisms similar
to humans (Figure 1).

1. Introduction
The standard paradigm for learning language with machine
learning (ML) models is to train directly on language tasks,
such as next-word prediction (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford
et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020). In contrast, humans indirectly learn language as a byproduct of fulfilling nonlanguage objectives. For instance, children incrementally

Our investigation builds on two directions of prior work.
First, numerous studies incorporate language into reinforcement learning (RL) agents, e.g., by training them to associate language with objects (Hill et al., 2020b), follow
language instructions (Misra et al., 2017; Hill et al., 2020a),
and learn from language feedback (Ling & Fidler, 2017).
We similarly seek agents with language skills, but differ in
the learning mechanism: whereas the task objective either
provides language supervision or directly requires language
learning in the aforementioned line of work, we instead
investigate whether RL agents can learn language indirectly

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Correspondence to: Evan Z. Liu
<evanliu@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

