A Reinforcement Learning Framework for Dynamic Mediation Analysis

Lin Ge 1 Jitao Wang 2 Chengchun Shi 3 Zhenke Wu 2 Rui Song 1

Abstract

et al., 2022), economics (Celli, 2022) and neuroscience (Li
et al., 2022; Shi & Li, 2022).

Mediation analysis learns the causal effect transmitted via mediator variables between treatments
and outcomes, and receives increasing attention
in various scientific domains to elucidate causal
relations. Most existing works focus on pointexposure studies where each subject only receives
one treatment at a single time point. However,
there are a number of applications (e.g., mobile health) where the treatments are sequentially assigned over time and the dynamic mediation effects are of primary interest. Proposing a reinforcement learning (RL) framework,
we are the first to evaluate dynamic mediation
effects in settings with infinite horizons. We
decompose the average treatment effect into an
immediate direct effect, an immediate mediation effect, a delayed direct effect, and a delayed mediation effect. Upon the identification
of each effect component, we further develop robust and semi-parametrically efficient estimators
under the RL framework to infer these causal effects. The superior performance of the proposed
method is demonstrated through extensive numerical studies, theoretical results, and an analysis
of a mobile health dataset. A Python implementation of the proposed procedure is available at
https://github.com/linlinlin97/MediationRL.

Our paper is motivated by the need to learn the dynamic
mediation effects in sequential decision making. One motivating example is given by the Intern Health Study (IHS,
NeCamp et al., 2020), which focuses on sequential mobile
health interventions to help improve the mental health of
medical interns who work in stressful environments. Participants were randomly assigned to receive notifications
(e.g., tips and insights) throughout the study. For example, some notifications remind participants to take a break
or enjoy a tasty treat, while others summarize the trends
of recent physical activity and sleep. All the notifications
are designed to improve participants’ mood scores (selfreported via a custom-made study App) either directly or
indirectly through increased activity or sleep hours. In addition, it is essential to note that participants’ recent behavior
will not only influence their proximal mood but will also
influence their behavior and mood scores in the following
days. To design a more effective intervention policy in IHS,
it is necessary to understand how mobile prompts impact
mood scores. In particular, the mobile prompts may directly
impact the mood scores or encourage more physical activity
and sleep, which may then impact the mood scores. In addition, an individual’s past treatment sequence and behavior
trajectory may impact the mood score. Teasing out these
distinct sources of causal impacts on mood scores and their
relative magnitudes needs new definitions, identification
results, and inferential methods.

1. Introduction

A fundamental question considered in this paper is how to
infer the dynamic mediation effects in the aforementioned
applications. Solving this question raises at least three challenges. First, the mediator at a given time affects both the
current and future outcomes, inducing temporal carryover
effects. As demonstrated in the case study in Section 8, the
delayed direct effect (DDE) and the delayed mediator effect
(DME) are significant and dominate the average treatment
effect for the intervention policy used in the IHS (Sen et al.,
2010; NeCamp et al., 2020). In contrast, the immediate
direct effect (IDE) and immediate mediator effect (IME)
are both insignificant. Nonetheless, most existing mediation analyses focus on estimating the indirect effect on the
immediate reward and are hence inappropriate to our application. Second, the horizon (e.g., number of decision

Mediation analysis aims to understand the causal pathway
from an exposure (e.g., treatment or action) to an outcome
variable of interest. It is gaining increasing popularity recently and has been frequently employed in a number of
domains including epidemiology (Richiardi et al., 2013; Rijnhart et al., 2021), psychology (Rucker et al., 2011), genetics (Chakrabortty et al., 2018; Zeng et al., 2021; Djordjilović
1

North Carolina State University 2 University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor 3 London School of Economics and Political Science. Correspondence to: Rui Song <rsong@ncsu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

