Nonparametric Extensions of Randomized Response for Private Confidence Sets

Ian Waudby-Smith 1 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1

Abstract

or an IT company aims to understand whether a redesigned
homepage will lead to the average user spending more time
on it. Both problems can be framed as estimating the mean
of some (potentially large) population, but it may be infeasible to query every single household or all possible website
users. Fortunately, a sample mean can still be used to estimate the population mean with some degree of precision.
For example, a city may randomly choose households to
query, or the technology company may show 10% of users
the redesigned webpage at random. This is often referred to
as “A/B testing”, and we expand on this application under
privacy constraints in Section 4. When making decisions,
however, it is crucial to both calculate sample means and
quantify the uncertainty in those estimates (e.g. using confidence intervals, reviewed in Section 1.2). However, calculating confidence intervals under local differential privacy
constraints (defined in Section 1.1) poses a unique statistical
challenge, because these intervals must incorporate both
the uncertainty introduced from random sampling and from
the privacy mechanism. This paper studies and provides a
nonparametric solution to precisely this challenge.

This work derives methods for performing nonparametric, nonasymptotic statistical inference
for population means under the constraint of local
differential privacy (LDP). Given bounded observations pX1 , . . . , Xn q with mean µ‹ that are
privatized into pZ1 , . . . , Zn q, we present confidence intervals (CI) and time-uniform confidence
sequences (CS) for µ‹ when only given access
to the privatized data. To achieve this, we introduce a nonparametric and sequentially interactive
generalization of Warner’s famous “randomized
response” mechanism, satisfying LDP for arbitrary bounded random variables, and then provide
CIs and CSs for their means given access to the
resulting privatized observations. For example,
our results yield private analogues of Hoeffding’s
inequality in both fixed-time and time-uniform
regimes. We extend these Hoeffding-type CSs to
capture time-varying (non-stationary) means, and
conclude by illustrating how these methods can
be used to conduct private online A/B tests.

1.1. Background I: Local Differential Privacy
There are two main models of privacy within the DP framework: central and local DP (LDP) (Dwork et al., 2006;
Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011; Dwork & Roth, 2014). The
former involves a centralized data aggregator that is trusted
with constructing privatized output from raw data, while
the latter performs privatization at the “local” or “personal”
level (e.g. on an individual’s smartphone before leaving the
device) so that trust need not be placed in any data collector.
Both models have their advantages and disadvantages: LDP
is a more restrictive model of privacy and thus in general
requires more noise to be added. On the other hand, the
stronger privacy guarantees that do not require a trusted
central aggregator make LDP an attractive framework in
practice. This paper deals exclusively with LDP.

1. Introduction
It is easier than ever for mobile apps and web browsers to
collect massive amounts of sensitive data about individuals.
Differential privacy (DP) provides a framework that leverages statistical noise to limit the risk of sensitive information
disclosure (Dwork et al., 2006). The goal of private data
analysis is to extract meaningful population-level information from the data (whether in the form of machine learning
model training, statistical inference, etc.) while preserving
the privacy of individuals via DP. In particular, this paper
will focus on statistical inference (e.g. confidence intervals
and p-values) for population means under DP constraints.
As motivating examples, suppose a city wishes to survey
households to calculate the approval rating of their mayor,

Making our setup more precise, suppose X1 , X2 , . . . is
a (potentially infinite) sequence of r0, 1s-valued random
variables. We could instead have assumed boundedness
on any known interval ra, bs since we can always translate and scale the interval to r0, 1s via the transformation
x ÞÑ px ´ aq{pb ´ aq. We will refer to pXt q8
t“1 as the
“raw” or “sensitive” data that are yet to be privatized. Fol-

1
Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Ian WaudbySmith <ianws@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

