PWSHAP: A Path-Wise Explanation Model for Targeted Variables

Lucile Ter-Minassian * 1 Oscar Clivio * 1 Karla Diaz-Ordaz 2 Robin J. Evans 1 Chris Holmes 1 3

Abstract

ployment in the future. In many scenarios, their attention
focuses on assessing the importance of a specific predictor
variable such as a treatment in a clinical model, or ethnicity
with regards to model fairness. Ultimately, as humans naturally have a causal approach to model explainability, users
may want to understand how the treatment1 causally impacts the outcome i.e. through what mechanisms and if this
matches their prior assumptions on the causal relationships
in the data. Here, we focus on the following question: in
the presence of a general black-box ML model, how can we
compute feature attributions according to the causal beliefs
encapsulated by the posited DAG? We provide a framework
for locally explaining a treatment’s effect in such settings,
with the following goals: reliability, safety, interpretability
and high resolution.

Predictive black-box models can exhibit highaccuracy but their opaque nature hinders their uptake in safety-critical deployment environments.
Explanation methods (XAI) can provide confidence for decision-making through increased
transparency. However, existing XAI methods are
not tailored towards models in sensitive domains
where one predictor is of special interest, such as a
treatment effect in a clinical model, or ethnicity in
policy models. We introduce Path-Wise Shapley
effects (PWSHAP), a framework for assessing the
targeted effect of a binary (e.g. treatment) variable
from a complex outcome model. Our approach
augments the predictive model with a user-defined
directed acyclic graph (DAG). The method then
uses the graph alongside on-manifold Shapley
values to identify effects along causal pathways
whilst maintaining robustness to adversarial attacks. We establish error bounds for the identified
path-wise Shapley effects and for Shapley values.
We show PWSHAP can perform local bias and
mediation analyses with faithfulness to the model.
Further, if the targeted variable is randomised
we can quantify local effect modification. We
demonstrate the resolution, interpretability and
true locality of our approach on examples and a
real-world experiment.

Reliability, safety, interpretability in XAI An XAI model
should aim at generating explanations that are reliable, safe
and interpretable. Reliability, also known as being “true
to the model”, implies that the explanations do reveal the
functional dependence of the model and are robust to distributional shifts. Safety relates to the ability to protect the
framework from hazard, in particular attempts to fool models with deceptive data, also known as adversarial attacks.
As defined in (Miller, 2019), interpretability is the degree to
which a human can understand the cause of a decision.
High resolution for safety-critical XAI In addition to the
XAI goals cited above, resolution is often necessary when
explaining a model to ensure its fairness. Following (Chiappa, 2019), we illustrate our point using a simple causal
structure inspired by the Berkeley admissions dataset. Consider a predictive model for college entry with three features:
sex, exam results and department. The sensitive attribute,
sex, potentially impacts the predicted admission through
both fair and unfair causal pathways. Sex may indirectly
and fairly impact admission due to some individuals applying to more competitive departments. However, there may
also be an effect through an unfair direct path, representing
prejudice on the part of the admissions officer. This motivates path-specific measures of feature importance, instead
of an overall single score that groups all paths together.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen an increase in the demand for transparency on machine learning-based decisions. In safetysensitive settings particularly, practitioners need to understand how a model reasons in order to ensure its safe de*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK 2 Department of Statistical Science,
University College London, London, UK 3 The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK. Correspondence to: Lucile TerMinassian <lucile.ter-minassian@stats.ox.ac.uk>, Oscar Clivio
<oscar.clivio@stats.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
We use the example of “treatment” in clinical models as illustrative of a central binary predictor variable.

1

