New metrics and search algorithms for weighted causal DAGs

Davin Choo * 1 Kirankumar Shiragur * 2

Abstract

up to its Markov equivalence class (MEC) and additional
assumptions or interventional data is required for the recovery of the ground truth causal graph. Here, we focus our
attention on causal discovery using interventions.

Recovering causal relationships from data is an
important problem. Using observational data, one
can typically only recover causal graphs up to a
Markov equivalence class and additional assumptions or interventional data are needed for complete recovery. In this work, under some standard
assumptions, we study causal graph discovery via
adaptive interventions with node-dependent interventional costs. For this setting, we show that
no algorithm can achieve an approximation guarantee that is asymptotically better than linear in
the number of vertices with respect to the verification number; a well-established benchmark
for adaptive search algorithms. Motivated by this
negative result, we define a new benchmark that
captures the worst-case interventional cost for any
search algorithm. Furthermore, with respect to
this new benchmark, we provide adaptive search
algorithms that achieve logarithmic approximations under various settings: atomic, bounded size
interventions and generalized cost objectives.

There is a rich literature on causal discovery from interventional data, which can be broadly classified into two
categories: adaptive (Shanmugam et al., 2015; Greenewald
et al., 2019; Squires et al., 2020; Choo et al., 2022; Choo
& Shiragur, 2023) versus non-adaptive (Eberhardt et al.,
2005; 2006; Eberhardt, 2010; Hu et al., 2014) approaches.
Given an essential graph, non-adaptive algorithms have to
decide beforehand a collection of interventions such that any
plausible causal graph can be recovered while adaptive algorithms can decide on interventions sequentially while using
information gleaned from past interventions. Adaptive algorithms are powerful and in some cases, the interventional
cost of an optimal adaptive algorithm is exponentially better
than any non-adaptive algorithms1 . While the non-adaptive
setting is pretty well understood even in the most general
setting of node dependent vertex costs, researchers have
only recently made progress on the adaptive front in the
special case of unit vertex costs. Unfortunately, unit vertex costs fail to capture many real world scenarios where
performing interventions can have varying costs (e.g. it is
less costly to force someone to sleep eight hours than to
force someone to run ten miles), are unethical (e.g. force
someone to smoke), or even practically impossible. See
(King et al., 2004; Sverchkov & Craven, 2017; Ness et al.,
2018; Lindgren et al., 2018) for more applications of causal
learning in settings where interventions have different costs.

1. Introduction
Causal discovery is a fundamental problem that has found
applications in a wide range of fields, including biology/medicine/genetics (King et al., 2004; Cho et al., 2016;
Tian, 2016; Sverchkov & Craven, 2017; Rotmensch et al.,
2017; Pingault et al., 2018; de Campos et al., 2019), epidemiology, philosophy (Reichenbach, 1956; Woodward, 2005;
Eberhardt & Scheines, 2007), and econometrics (Hoover,
1990; Rubin & Waterman, 2006). In most of these applications, directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) are used to represent
the causal relationships and the goal is to recover the underlying causal graph from data. It is well known that using
observational data, the causal structure can only be learned

Problem setup Motivated by the power of adaptivity and
broad applicability of varying costs, in this work, we study
causal discovery via adaptive interventions with the goal of
recovering the true underlying causal graph given the observational MEC while minimizing the total interventional
cost when vertices may have differing interventional cost.
Under standard assumptions of causal sufficiency, faithfulness and infinite sample regime, in addition to the search
problem defined above, recent works (Squires et al., 2020;
Choo et al., 2022; Choo & Shiragur, 2023) have also stud-

*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, National University
of Singapore 2 Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard. Correspondence to: Davin Choo <davin@u.nus.edu>, Kirankumar Shiragur
<shiragur@stanford.edu>.

1
For tree causal graphs, an adaptive algorithm only needs
O(log n) interventions to recover it while non-adaptive algorithms
require Ω(n) interventions in some cases. See Appendix A.1.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

