Differentially Private Episodic Reinforcement Learning
with Heavy-tailed Rewards

Yulian Wu 1 2 Xingyu Zhou 3 Sayak Ray Chowdhury 4 Di Wang 1 2

Abstract

imize its long-term reward from interacting with an environment, has been widely applied in various fields such as
finance(Xu & Wang, 2022), healthcare (Gottesman et al.,
2019), transportation (Li et al., 2019) and online recommendations (Zong et al., 2016). However, in these applications,
there are some privacy issues as they always involve sensitive data (Pan et al., 2019). And users are less willing
to disclose information and are more concerned about how
their personal data are used (Das et al., 2021). These privacy
concerns in RL require us to design some reinforcement
learning algorithms that achieve good performance while
can also protect the training environment’s privacy.

In this paper, we study the problem of (finite horizon tabular) Markov decision processes (MDPs)
with heavy-tailed rewards under the constraint of
differential privacy (DP). Compared with the previous studies for private reinforcement learning
that typically assume rewards are sampled from
some bounded or sub-Gaussian distributions to
ensure DP, we consider the setting where reward
distributions have only finite (1 + v)-th moments
with some v ∈ (0, 1]. By resorting to robust
mean estimators for rewards, we first propose two
frameworks for heavy-tailed MDPs, i.e., one is
for value iteration and another is for policy optimization. Under each framework, we consider
both joint differential privacy (JDP) and local differential privacy (LDP) models. Based on our
frameworks, we provide regret upper bounds for
both JDP and LDP cases and show that the moment of distribution and privacy budget both have
significant impacts on regrets. Finally, we establish a lower bound of regret minimization for
heavy-tailed MDPs in JDP model by reducing it
to the instance-independent lower bound of heavytailed multi-armed bandits in DP model. We also
show the lower bound for the problem in LDP
by adopting some private minimax methods. Our
results reveal that there are fundamental differences between the problem of private RL with
sub-Gaussian and that with heavy-tailed rewards.

In order to protect the information of sensitive data, differential privacy (DP)(Dwork et al., 2006) has become a de facto
technique for private data analysis. Over the past decade,
differentially private reinforcement learning (DP-RL) has
been extensively studied for various settings, including full
information RL (Jain et al., 2012) and partial information
RL, e.g., Mishra & Thakurta (2015); Chowdhury & Zhou
(2022b;a); Vietri et al. (2020). For private RL problems, it is
natural to first consider achieving privacy protection in the
standard DP model in Dwork et al. (2006) where we treat
each episode as a specific user and the agent collects the
raw data of users and aims to achieve privacy protection for
history trajectories. However, Shariff & Sheffet (2018) and
Dubey (2021) show that the standard differential privacy
provably incurs linear regret in contextual bandits (hence
in RL as well) and such linear dependency is unavoidable.
Therefore, for general DP-RL, it is more reasonable to consider a relaxation of DP, namely joint differential privacy
(JDP) (Kearns et al., 2014), in which for each user i, knowledge of the other users does not reveal much about user i’s
data. Moreover, in some situations, users are unwilling to
share their data with the agent, so it is also common to consider another DP model, local differential privacy (LDP),
which perturbs users’ data locally before sending them to
the central server so that only the data owners can access
the original data.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental paradigm in decision-making problems,
reinforcement learning (RL), where an agent aims to max1
Provable Responsible AI and Data Analytics Lab 2 King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
3
Wayne State University, USA 4 Microsoft Research, India. Correspondence to: Di Wang <di.wang@kaust.edu.sa>.

As we mentioned above, sensitive information is contained
in the states and rewards of trajectories for RL. Several
methods of preserving the privacy of rewards have been
proposed in the past few years. However, these methods

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

