Expectation-Complete Graph Representations with Homomorphisms

Pascal Welke * 1 2 Maximilian Thiessen * 2 Fabian Jogl 2 3 Thomas Gärtner 2

Abstract

Our approach to achieve an expectation-complete graph
embedding is based on homomorphism counts. These are
known to determine various properties of graphs important
for learning, such as the degree sequence or the eigenspectrum (Hoang & Maehara, 2020). Furthermore, homomorphism counts are related to the Weisfeiler-Leman hierarchy
(Dvořák, 2010; Dell et al., 2018), which is the standard measure for expressiveness on graphs (Morris et al., 2019). They
also determine subgraph counts (Curticapean et al., 2017)
and the distance induced by the homomophism counts is
asymptotically equivalent to the cut distance, which Grohe
(2020) and Klopp & Verzelen (2019) motivated as an appropriate graph similarity for graph learning tasks.

We investigate novel random graph embeddings
that can be computed in expected polynomial time
and that are able to distinguish all non-isomorphic
graphs in expectation. Previous graph embeddings have limited expressiveness and either cannot distinguish all graphs or cannot be computed
efficiently for every graph. To be able to approximate arbitrary functions on graphs, we are interested in efficient alternatives that become arbitrarily expressive with increasing resources. Our
approach is based on Lovász’ characterisation
of graph isomorphism through an infinite dimensional vector of homomorphism counts. Our empirical evaluation shows competitive results on
several benchmark graph learning tasks.

In Section 2 we introduce the required concepts. In Section 3 we discuss that general expectation-complete embeddings can eventually distinguish all pairs of non-isomorphic
graphs (Lemma 3), which leads to a universal representation
(Theorem 4). Then we propose our expectation-complete
embedding based on sampling entries from the Lovász vector (Theorem 7) and bound the number of samples required
to provably get as close as desired to the full Lovász vector
(Theorem 8). In Section 4, we show how to compute our
embedding efficiently in expected polynomial time (Theorem 14). In Section 5, we show how to combine our embedding with graph neural networks. Finally, we discuss related
work in Section 6 and show competitive results on benchmark datasets in Section 7 before Section 8 concludes.

1. Introduction
We study novel efficient and expressive graph embeddings
motivated by Lovász’ characterisation of graph isomorphism through homomorphism counts. While most graph
embeddings drop completeness—the ability to distinguish
all pairs of non-isomorphic graphs—in favour of runtime,
we devise efficient embeddings that retain completeness
in expectation. The specific way in which we sample a
fixed number of pattern graphs guarantees an expectationcomplete embedding in expected polynomial time. In this
way, repeated sampling will eventually allow us to distinguish all pairs of non-isomorphic graphs, a property that no
efficiently computable deterministic embedding can guarantee. In comparison, most recent graph neural networks
are inherently limited by the expressiveness of some kdimensional Weisfeiler-Leman isomorphism test (Morris
et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019).

2. Background and Notation
We start by defining the required concepts and notation. A
graph G = (V, E) consists of a set V = V (G) of vertices
and a set E = E(G) ⊆ {e ⊆ V | |e| = 2} of edges. In this
work we only consider undirected graphs. The size v(G)
of a graph G is the number of its vertices and by Gn we
denote the set of all graphs with size at most n ∈ N. In
the following F and G denote graphs, where F represents a
pattern graph and G a graph in our training set. A homomorphism Φ : V (F ) → V (G) is a map that preserves edges,
i.e. {v, w} ∈ E(F ) ⇒ {Φ(v), Φ(w)} ∈ E(G). Note
that homomorphisms, unlike subgraph isomorphisms, allow
non-injectivity: multiple vertices of F can be mapped to the
same vertex of G, see Figure 1. Let hom(F, G) denote the
number of homomorphisms from F to G and let φG (G) =
(hom(F, G))F ∈G denote the vector of homomorphism

*
Equal contribution 1 Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence Lab, University of Bonn, Germany 2 Research Unit Machine
Learning, TU Wien, Austria 3 Center for Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning, TU Wien, Austria. Correspondence to: Pascal Welke <pascal.welke@tuwien.ac.at>, Maximilian Thiessen
<maximilian.thiessen@tuwien.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

