Multi-task Representation Learning for Pure Exploration in Linear Bandits

Yihan Du 1 Longbo Huang 1 Wen Sun 2

Abstract

Recently, an emerging number of works (Yang et al., 2021;
2022; Hu et al., 2021; Cella et al., 2022b) investigate representation learning for sequential decision making, and show
that if all tasks share a joint low-rank representation, then
by leveraging such a joint representation, it is possible to
learn faster than treating each task independently. Despite
the accomplishments of these works, they mainly focus on
the regret minimization setting, where the performance is
measured by the cumulative reward gap between the optimal
option and the actually chosen options.

Despite the recent success of representation learning in sequential decision making, the study of
the pure exploration scenario (i.e., identify the
best option and minimize the sample complexity) is still limited. In this paper, we study multitask representation learning for best arm identification in linear bandits (RepBAI-LB) and best
policy identification in contextual linear bandits
(RepBPI-CLB), two popular pure exploration settings with wide applications, e.g., clinical trials
and web content optimization. In these two problems, all tasks share a common low-dimensional
linear representation, and our goal is to leverage
this feature to accelerate the best arm (policy)
identification process for all tasks. For these problems, we design computationally and sample efficient algorithms DouExpDes and C-DouExpDes,
which perform double experimental designs to
plan optimal sample allocations for learning the
global representation. We show that by learning
the common representation among tasks, our sample complexity is significantly better than that of
the native approach which solves tasks independently. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work to demonstrate the benefits of representation learning for multi-task pure exploration.

However, in real-world applications where obtaining a
sample is expensive and time-consuming, e.g., clinical
trails (Zhang et al., 2012), it is often desirable to identify
the optimal option using as few samples as possible, i.e., we
face the pure exploration scenario rather than regret minimization. Moreover, in many decision-making applications,
we often need to tackle multiple related tasks, e.g., treatment
planning for different diseases (Bragman et al., 2018) and
content optimization for multiple websites (Agarwal et al.,
2009), and there usually exists a common representation
among these tasks, e.g., the features of drugs and the
representations of website items. Thus, we desire to exploit
the shared representation among tasks to expedite learning.
For example, in clinical treatment planning, we want to
identify the optimal treatment for multiple diseases, and
there exists a joint representation of treatments. In this case,
since conducting a clinical trial and collecting a sample
is time-consuming, we desire to make use of the shared
representation and reduce the number of samples required.

1. Introduction

Motivated by the above fact, in this paper, we study representation learning for multi-task pure exploration in sequential
decision making. Following prior works (Yang et al., 2021;
2022; Hu et al., 2021), we consider the linear bandit setting, which is one of the most popular settings in sequential
decision making and has various applications such as clinical trials and recommendation systems. Specifically, we
investigate two pure exploration problems, i.e., representation learning for best arm identification in linear bandits
(RepBAI-LB) and best policy identification in contextual
linear bandits (RepBPI-CLB).

Multi-task representation learning (Caruana, 1997) is an
important problem which aims to learn a common lowdimensional representation from multiple related tasks. Representation learning has received extensive attention in both
empirical applications (Ando et al., 2005; Bengio et al.,
2013; Li et al., 2014) and theoretical study (Maurer et al.,
2016; Du et al., 2021a; Tripuraneni et al., 2021).
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Cornell University. Correspondence to: Yihan Du <duyh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn>,
Longbo Huang <longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn>, Wen Sun
<ws455@cornell.edu>.

In RepBAI-LB, an agent is given a confidence parameter
δ, an arm set X := {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊆ Rd and M tasks. For
each task m ∈ [M ], the expected reward of each arm x ∈ X

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

