LookupFFN: Making Transformers Compute-lite for CPU inference

Zhanpeng Zeng 1 Michael Davies 1 Pranav Pulijala 1 Karthikeyan Sankaralingam 1 2 Vikas Singh 1

Abstract

Intel; Nassif et al., 2022; AMD; Bhat) and academic efforts (Liu et al., 2019b; Mittal et al., 2022; Nori et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2019). Some of the technical and business motivations include latency, security, privacy and the fact that
modern data-intensive workloads have AI tasks embedded in
a pipeline of non-AI tasks. Further, CPUs are a generic platform common across servers and clients faithfully serving
the compute needs of businesses, which makes it attractive.
And finally – it comes down to the cost of running the full
workload. Unfortunately, CPU chips lack the computational
intensity of raw-FLOPS compared to GPUs. On the positive
side, CPUs provide tremendously large caches in the range
of 128MB to 192MB, and even larger (Burd et al., 2022),
which is currently under-utilized. Furthermore, such caches
made out of SRAMs are more than an order of magnitude
more energy efficient to access compared to DRAMs (DDR,
GDDR, or HBM) (Jouppi et al., 2021; Horowitz, 2014),
while providing 4× access bandwidth increase 1 . In this
context, this paper revisits one of the fundamental building
blocks of modern deep-learning: the Feed Forward Network
(FFN), to examine algorithmic reformulations to make it
FLOP-lite and CPU friendly.

While GPU clusters are the de facto choice for
training large deep neural network (DNN) models
today, several reasons including ease of workflow, security and cost have led to efforts investigating whether CPUs may be viable for inference in routine use in many sectors of the industry. But the imbalance between the compute
capabilities of GPUs and CPUs is huge. Motivated by these considerations, we study a module which is a workhorse within modern DNN
architectures, GEMM based Feed Forward Networks (FFNs), and assess the extent to which it
can be made compute- (or FLOP-) lite. Specifically, we propose an alternative formulation (we
call it LookupFFN) to GEMM based FFNs inspired by the recent studies of using Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) to approximate FFNs. Our
formulation recasts most essential operations as a
memory look-up, leveraging the trade-off between
the two resources on any platform: compute and
memory (since CPUs offer it in abundance). For
RoBERTa language model pretraining, our formulation achieves similar performance compared to
GEMM based FFNs, while dramatically reducing the required FLOP. Our development is complemented with a detailed hardware profiling of
strategies that will maximize efficiency – not just
on contemporary hardware but on products that
will be offered in the near/medium term future.
Code is avaiable at https://github.com/
mlpen/LookupFFN.

FFNs are essential components in almost all deep neural
networks, such as convolutional networks (Howard et al.,
2017) or Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). They heavily
rely on General Matrix Multiply (GEMM), which is extremely compute intensive, especially for large scale models
common in the community today. Many alternatives (Chen
et al., 2020; 2021; Fedus et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2018;
Moczulski et al., 2016) have been proposed to reduce the
FLOP needs of FFNs. In the context of inference, one may
use generic pruning/quantization techniques (Dong & Yang,
2019; Lee et al., 2019; Jacob et al., 2018; Zafrir et al., 2019;
Kim et al., 2021), after training has concluded. This strategy
is typically agnostic of specific modules in the architecture,
and is applied to the entire model. Notice that if modulespecific FLOP reduction is accomplished somehow, the full
model will still benefit from a scheme like pruning, prior to
deployment. Since such an idea would complement any reformulation of FFNs, it is more meaningful to instead focus
the discussion on existing ideas that targets FLOP reduction
further upstream.

1. Introduction
CPU-based inference in the data-center is growing in importance as evidenced by recent server chip announcements
from IBM, Intel, AMD and ARM (Lichtenau et al., 2022;
1
University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA 2 NVIDIA Research.
Correspondence to: Zhanpeng Zeng <zzeng38@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
AMD Zen2 for example, allows 64 bytes per cycle into each
core: with 32 cores running 3.2 GHz that amounts to 6 TB/sec.

1

