Brauer’s Group Equivariant Neural Networks

Edward Pearce–Crump 1

Abstract

There are two approaches that are typically used for constructing group equivariant neural networks. The first employs a universal approximation theorem to learn functions
that are approximately equivariant, such as in (Kumagai &
Sannai, 2020). The second involves decomposing tensor
product representations of the symmetry group in question
into irreducible representations. For example, neural networks that are equivariant to the special orthogonal group
SO(3) (Kondor et al., 2018), the special Euclidean group
SE (3) (Weiler et al., 2018), and the proper orthochronous
Lorentz group SO+ (1, 3) (Bogatskiy et al., 2020) all use
irreducible decompositions and the resulting change of basis
transformations into Fourier space in their implementations.
However, for most groups, finding this irreducible decomposition is not trivial, since the relevant Clebsch–Gordan
coefficients are typically unknown. Furthermore, even if
such a decomposition can be found, the resulting neural
networks are often inefficient since forward and backward
Fourier transforms are usually required to perform the calculations, which come with a high computational cost.

We provide a full characterisation of all of the
possible group equivariant neural networks whose
layers are some tensor power of Rn for three symmetry groups that are missing from the machine
learning literature: O(n), the orthogonal group;
SO(n), the special orthogonal group; and Sp(n),
the symplectic group. In particular, we find a
spanning set of matrices for the learnable, linear,
equivariant layer functions between such tensor
power spaces in the standard basis of Rn when the
group is O(n) or SO(n), and in the symplectic
basis of Rn when the group is Sp(n).

1. Introduction
Finding neural network architectures that are equivariant
to a symmetry group has been an active area of research
ever since it was first shown how convolutional neural networks, which are equivariant to translations, could be used
to learn from images. Unlike with multilayer perceptrons,
however, the requirement for the overall network to be equivariant to the symmetry group typically restricts the form of
the network itself. Moreover, since these networks exhibit
parameter sharing within each layer, ordinarily far fewer
parameters appear in these networks than in multilayer perceptrons. This usually results in simpler, more interpretable
models that generalise better to unseen data.

In this paper, we take an entirely different approach, one
which results in a full characterisation of all of the possible
group equivariant neural networks whose layers are some
tensor power of Rn for the following three symmetry groups:
O(n), the orthogonal group; SO(n), the special orthogonal
group; and Sp(n), the symplectic group. Our approach is
motivated by a mathematical concept that, to the best of our
knowledge, has not appeared in any of the machine learning
literature to date, other than in (Pearce-Crump, 2022). In
that paper, they use that the symmetric group is in Schur–
Weyl duality with the partition algebra to provide a full
characterisation of all of the possible permutation equivariant neural networks whose layers are some tensor power of
Rn . In this paper, we use as our motivation the results given
in On Algebras Which are Connected with the Semisimple
Continuous Groups (Brauer, 1937). Brauer showed that the
orthogonal group is in Schur–Weyl duality with an algebra
called the Brauer algebra; that the symplectic group is also
in Schur–Weyl duality with the Brauer algebra, and that the
special orthogonal group is in Schur–Weyl duality with an
algebra which we have termed the Brauer–Grood algebra.
By adapting the combinatorial diagrams that form a basis for
these algebras, we are able to find a spanning set of matrices
for the learnable, linear, equivariant layer functions between

Symmetry groups naturally appear in problems coming from
physics, where the data that is generated by a physical process often comes with a certain type of symmetry that is
baked into the data itself. The data is typically high dimensional, and it can often be represented in the form of a high
order tensor so that complex relationships can be captured
between different features in the data. Consequently, it is
important to be able to construct neural networks that can
learn efficiently from such data.
1

Department of Computing, Imperial College London,
United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Edward Pearce–Crump
<ep1011@ic.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

