Compressed Decentralized Proximal Stochastic Gradient Method for Nonconvex
Composite Problems with Heterogeneous Data

Yonggui Yan 1 Jie Chen 2 Pin-Yu Chen 3 Xiaodong Cui 3 Songtao Lu 2 3 Yangyang Xu 1

Abstract

nected graph G, and each Fi (·, ξi ) can only be accessed by
the i-th worker. We are interested in problems that satisfy
the following structural assumption.

We first propose a decentralized proximal stochastic gradient tracking method (DProxSGT) for nonconvex stochastic composite problems, with data
heterogeneously distributed on multiple workers
in a decentralized connected network. To save
communication cost, we then extend DProxSGT
to a compressed method by compressing the communicated information. Both methods need only
O(1) samples per worker for each proximal update, which is important to achieve good generalization performance on training deep neural
networks. With a smoothness condition on the
expected loss function (but not on each sample
function), the proposed methods can achieve an
optimal sample complexity result to produce a
near-stationary point. Numerical experiments on
training neural networks demonstrate the significantly better generalization performance of our
methods over large-batch training methods and
momentum variance-reduction methods and also,
the ability of handling heterogeneous data by the
gradient tracking scheme.

Assumption 1 (Problem structure). We assume that
(i) r is closed convex and possibly nondifferentiable.
(ii) Each fi is L-smooth in dom(r), i.e., ∥∇fi (x) −
∇fi (y)∥ ≤ L∥x − y∥, for any x, y ∈ dom(r).
(iii) ϕ is lower bounded, i.e., ϕ∗ ≜ minx ϕ(x) > −∞.
Let N = {1, 2, . . . , n} be the set of nodes of G and E the
set of edges. For each i ∈ N , denote Ni as the neighbors of
worker i and itself, i.e., Ni = {j : (i, j) ∈ E} ∪ {i}. Every
worker can only communicate with its neighbors. To solve
(1) collaboratively, each worker i maintains a copy, denoted
as xi , of the variable x. With these notations, (1) can be
formulated equivalently to
n

1X
ϕi (xi ), with ϕi (xi ) ≜ fi (xi ) + r(xi ),
min
X∈Rd×n n
(2)
i=1
s.t.

Problems with a nonsmooth regularizer, i.e., in the form
of (1), appear in many applications such as ℓ1 -regularized
signal recovery (Eldar & Mendelson, 2014; Duchi & Ruan,
2019), online nonnegative matrix factorization (Guan et al.,
2012), and training sparse neural networks (Scardapane
et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020). When data involved in these
applications are distributed onto (or collected by workers
on) a decentralized network, it necessitates the design of
decentralized algorithms.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider to solve nonconvex stochastic
composite problems in a decentralized setting:
min ϕ(x) = f (x) + r(x),

Although decentralized optimization has attracted a lot of research interests in recent years, most existing works focus on
strongly convex problems (Scaman et al., 2017; Koloskova
et al., 2019b) or convex problems (Tsianos et al., 2012;
Taheri et al., 2020) or smooth nonconvex problems (Bianchi
& Jakubowicz, 2012; Di Lorenzo & Scutari, 2016; Wai et al.,
2017; Lian et al., 2017; Zeng & Yin, 2018). Few works have
studied nonsmooth nonconvex decentralized stochastic optimization like (2) that we consider. (Chen et al., 2021b;
Xin et al., 2021a; Mancino-Ball et al., 2022) are among
the exceptions. However, they either require to take many
data samples for each update or assume a so-called meansquared smoothness condition, which is stronger than the
smoothness condition in Assumption 1(ii), in order to per-

x∈Rd

with f (x) =

n
1X

n i=1

fi (x), fi (x) = Eξi ∼Di [Fi (x, ξi )].

xi = xj , ∀ j ∈ Ni , ∀ i = 1, . . . , n.

(1)

Here, {Di }ni=1 are possibly non-i.i.d data distributions on
n machines/workers that can be viewed as nodes of a con1

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, USA 2 MIT IBM-Watson AI Lab, IBM
Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 Thomas J. Watson Research
Center, IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Yangyang Xu <xuy21@rpi.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

