CrossSplit: Mitigating Label Noise Memorization through Data Splitting

Jihye Kim 1 2 Aristide Baratin 3 Yan Zhang 3 Simon Lacoste-Julien 3 4 5

Abstract

et al., 2017). An important issue in the field is therefore to
adapt the training process to improve robustness under label
noise.

We approach the problem of improving robustness of deep learning algorithms in the presence
of label noise. Building upon existing label correction and co-teaching methods, we propose a novel
training procedure to mitigate the memorization
of noisy labels, called CrossSplit, which uses a
pair of neural networks trained on two disjoint
parts of the labeled dataset. CrossSplit combines
two main ingredients: (i) Cross-split label correction. The idea is that, since the model trained on
one part of the data cannot memorize examplelabel pairs from the other part, the training labels presented to each network can be smoothly
adjusted by using the predictions of its peer network; (ii) Cross-split semi-supervised training.
A network trained on one part of the data also
uses the unlabeled inputs of the other part. Extensive experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, TinyImageNet and mini-WebVision datasets demonstrate that our method can outperform the current
state-of-the-art in a wide range of noise ratios.
The project page is at https://rlawlgul.github.io/.

This problem has been addressed in various ways in the
recent literature. Two common approaches are label correction and sample selection. The first one focuses on correcting the noisy labels during training, e.g. by using soft labels
defined as convex combinations of the assigned label and the
model prediction (Reed et al., 2015; Arazo et al., 2019; Lu
& He, 2022). Another common approach uses sample selection mechanisms, which separate clean examples from noisy
ones during training (Li et al., 2020; Karim et al., 2022; Han
et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019), e.g. using a small-loss criterion
(Li et al., 2019). Current state-of-the-art methods (Li et al.,
2020; Karim et al., 2022) combine epoch-wise sample selection with a co-teaching procedure (Han et al., 2018; Yu
et al., 2019) where two networks are trained simultaneously,
each of them using the sample selection of the other so as to
mitigate confirmation bias. Semi-supervised learning (SSL)
techniques are then used where the selected noisy examples
are treated as unlabeled data.
Despite the popularity and success of these methods, they
are not exempt from drawbacks. Existing label correction
methods define soft target labels in terms of their own prediction, which may become unreliable as training progresses
and memorization occurs (Lu & He, 2022). Sample selection procedures rely on criteria to filter out noisy examples
which are subject to selection errors – in fact, making an
accurate distinction between mislabeled and inherently difficult examples is a notoriously challenging problem (D’souza
et al., 2021; Pleiss et al., 2020; Baldock et al., 2021).

1. Introduction
A large part of the success of deep learning algorithms relies on the availability of massive amounts of labeled data,
via e.g. web crawling (Li et al., 2017a) or crowd-sourcing
platforms (Song et al., 2019). However, while these datacollection methods enable to bypass cost-prohibitive human
annotations, they inherently yield a lot of mislabeled samples (Xiao et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017a). This leads to a
degradation of the performance, especially considering that
deep neural networks have enough capacity to fully memorize noisy labels (Zhang et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020; Arpit

The goal of this paper is to propose a novel robust training
scheme that addresses some of these drawbacks. The idea
is to bypass the sample selection process by using a random
splitting of the data into two disjoints parts, and to train
a separate network on each of these splits. The rationale
is that the model trained on one part of the data cannot
memorize input-label pairs from the other part. We propose
to correct the labels presented to each network by using a
combination of the assigned label and the prediction of the
peer network. This procedure allows us to avoid the memorization of examples without significantly degrading the
learning of difficult examples. Cross-split semi-supervised

1

Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), Suwon,
South Korea 2 Work done as a visiting researcher at SAIT AI Lab,
Montreal, Canada 3 SAIT AI Lab, Montreal, Canada 4 Mila, Université de Montreal, Canada 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondence to: Jihye Kim <jihye32.kim@samsung.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

