Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs

Arthur Kosmala 1 2 3 Johannes Gasteiger 4 2 Nicholas Gao 2 Stephan Günnemann 2
despite recent success in understanding theoretically universal models (Gasteiger et al., 2021; Dym & Maron, 2021),
computational constraints still hamper GNNs in learning
long-ranged physical interactions between atoms: the standard notion of a molecular graph (if no hand-crafted bond
information is used) treats atoms as vertices and connects
them by an edge if their 3D distance is within a cutoff
hyperparameter (Schütt et al., 2018). This can be a problem if more remote atom interactions contribute to a target:
they are long-ranged also on the graph, potentially relating
vertices many edges apart. There is ample empirical and
theoretical evidence of limited GNN performance in this
case, e.g., due to over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021).

Abstract
Neural architectures that learn potential energy
surfaces from molecular data have undergone fast
improvement in recent years. A key driver of this
success is the Message Passing Neural Network
(MPNN) paradigm. Its favorable scaling with system size partly relies upon a spatial distance limit
on messages. While this focus on locality is a useful inductive bias, it also impedes the learning of
long-range interactions such as electrostatics and
van der Waals forces. To address this drawback,
we propose Ewald message passing: a nonlocal
Fourier space scheme which limits interactions
via a cutoff on frequency instead of distance, and
is theoretically well-founded in the Ewald summation method. It can serve as an augmentation
on top of existing MPNN architectures as it is
computationally inexpensive and agnostic to architectural details. We test the approach with four
baseline models and two datasets containing diverse periodic (OC20) and aperiodic structures
(OE62). We observe robust improvements in energy mean absolute errors across all models and
datasets, averaging 10 % on OC20 and 16 % on
OE62. Our analysis shows an outsize impact of
these improvements on structures with high longrange contributions to the ground truth energy.

The GNN status quo is in sharp contrast to the reality in
molecular dynamics, where long-range interactions are an
elementary ingredient. A task at the heart of the field (and
of this work in particular) is to predict the potential energy
E(x1 , . . . , xN ) based on the atom positions {x1 , . . . , xN }
in a molecule. Hand-crafted parametrizations of this map,
known as empirical force fields, distinguish between bonded
and non-bonded energy terms, E = E b +E nb (Leach, 2001).
The bonded terms model the short-ranged nature of covalent
bonding with its complex, but highly local interactions. The
non-bonded terms, however, capture interactions with heavytailed (typically power-law) decay in distance. An example
of such a term is the electrostatic interaction,
X
E es =
qi qj ∥xi − xj ∥−1 ,
(1)
i<j

1. Introduction

where the partial charges qi quantify net electric charge
around atom i. Their attraction or repulsion decays inversely
with distance, and the energy is the sum of all atom pair
interactions. Due to its scale-free decay, simply truncating
such a power law with a distance cutoff can induce severe
artifacts in measurable thermochemical predictions, even
at outsized cutoffs (Wells & Chaffee, 2015). Instead, the
interactions of all atom pairs have to be included in the
sum. The technique of Ewald summation achieves this
efficiently. It decomposes the actual physical interaction
into a short-range and long-range part. The short-range part
can be summed directly with a distance cutoff; the longrange part, while slowly decaying in distance, has a quickly
decaying Fourier transform and can be efficiently evaluated
as a Fourier space sum with a frequency cutoff (cf. Fig. 1).

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown great promise
in learning molecular properties from quantum chemical reference data, speeding up inference times by several orders
of magnitude (Gilmer et al., 2017) while often preserving
the accuracy of their ground truth method. Unfortunately,
1
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light & FriedrichAlexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany 2 Department
of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical
University of Munich, Germany 3 Department of Physics, LudwigMaximilians-Universität München, Germany 4 Google Research.
Correspondence to: Arthur Kosmala <arthur.kosmala@tum.de>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

