A Flexible Diffusion Model
Weitao Du * 1 He Zhang * 2 Tao Yang * 2 Yuanqi Du * 3

Abstract

tion to practical applications of various diffusion generative
models, it is also desirable to analyze them in an appropriate
and flexible framework, by which novel improvements can
be further developed.

Denoising diffusion (score-based) generative
models have become a popular choice for modeling complex data. Recently, a deep connection
between forward-backward stochastic differential equations (SDEs) and diffusion-based models has been established, leading to the development of new SDE variants such as sub-VP and
critically-damped Langevin. Despite the empirical success of some hand-crafted forward SDEs,
many potentially promising forward SDEs remain
unexplored. In this work, we propose a general
framework for parameterizing diffusion models,
particularly the spatial part of forward SDEs, by
leveraging the symplectic and Riemannian geometry of the data manifold. We introduce a systematic formalism with theoretical guarantees and
connect it with previous diffusion models. Finally, we demonstrate the theoretical advantages
of our method from a variational optimization
perspective. We present numerical experiments
on synthetic datasets, MNIST and CIFAR10 to
validate the effectiveness of our framework.

Currently, one of the promising formal frameworks for unifying different types of diffusion models is to utilize the
stochastic differential equations (SDEs), as proposed in
(Song et al., 2020c). Under this formalism, a diffusion
model consists of a forward (noising) process and a backward (denoising) process. The forward process keeps adding
noise to the real data, and the backward (generative) process
can be viewed as reversing the forward process in terms of
probability. Furthermore, with the help of the Feynman-Kac
formula and Girsanov transform (Da Prato, 2014), the scorematching training scheme has been proved to be equivalent
to certain log-likelihood (ELBO) training in the infinitedimensional path space (Huang et al., 2021).
From the variational optimization point of view, although
the ELBO optimization function of diffusion models explicitly contains both the forward and backward ingredients, the
forward (noising) process is usually hand-crafted and set
to be fixed throughout the training process (Huang et al.,
2021). If we treat the forward-backward processes as an
encoder-decoder pair, then there exists an obvious mismatch
between the current training framework of diffusion models
and other log-likelihood based models (e.g., Hierarchical
VAE (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020)) which also optimize the encoder. Moreover, since the reverse (generative) process is
uniquely determined by the forward process, the total flexibility of the model actually lies in parameterizing the forward process. Given the fact that different noising schedules
have proven to affect the empirical performances (e.g., the
different forward processes including VE, VP, sub-VP (Song
et al., 2020c) and damped Langevin diffusion (Dockhorn
et al., 2022) displayed distinct generation performances),
freezing the forward process is both theoretical and practical
incomplete. Therefore, the main research question of this
paper is: Can we introduce a theoretically grounded parameterization for the forward process, so that the diffusion
model can automatically optimize it from data?

1. Introduction
Denoising diffusion (score-based) models, which are originated from non-equilibrium statistical physics, have recently shown impressive success on sample generations of a
wide range of modalities, including images (Ho et al., 2020;
Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021; Song et al., 2020c; Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021; Rombach et al., 2022), 3D point clouds (Luo
& Hu, 2021; Du et al., 2021), audio (Kong et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2021), and biomolecules generation (Xu et al., 2022;
Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Schneuing et al., 2022). In addi*
Equal contribution 1 Academy of Mathematics and Systems
Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Cornell University. Correspondence to: Weitao Du, He Zhang, Tao Yang, Yuanqi
Du <duweitao@amss.ac.cn, mao736488798@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
yt14212@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yd392@cornell.edu>.

To address this problem, it is crucial to incorporate flexible parameterized forward processes into the general SDE
framework in (Song et al., 2020c). Though the idea of training the forward process is intuitively reasonable, the imple-

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

