Online Prototype Alignment for Few-shot Policy Transfer

Qi Yi 1 2 3 Rui Zhang 2 Shaohui Peng 2 4 3 Jiaming Guo 2 4 3 Yunkai Gao 1 2 3 Kaizhao Yuan 2 4 3 Ruizhi Chen 5
Siming Lan 1 2 3 Xing Hu 2 Zidong Du 2 Xishan Zhang 2 3 Qi Guo 2 Yunji Chen 2 4

Abstract
Domain adaptation in reinforcement learning
(RL) mainly deals with the changes of observation
when transferring the policy to a new environment.
Many traditional approaches of domain adaptation in RL manage to learn a mapping function
between the source and target domain in explicit
or implicit ways. However, they typically require
access to abundant data from the target domain.
Besides, they often rely on visual clues to learn the
mapping function and may fail when the source
domain looks quite different from the target domain. To address these problems, we propose
a novel framework Online Prototype Alignment
(OPA) to learn the mapping function based on the
functional similarity of elements and is able to
achieve the few-shot policy transfer within only
several episodes. The key insight of OPA is to
introduce an exploration mechanism that can interact with the unseen elements of the target domain
in an efficient and purposeful manner, and then
connect them with the seen elements in the source
domain according to their functionalities (instead
of visual clues). Experimental results show that
when the target domain looks visually different
from the source domain, OPA can achieve better
transfer performance even with much fewer samples from the target domain, outperforming prior
methods.

(a) Case A: Source

(b) Case A: Target

(c) Case B: Source

(d) Case B: Target

Figure 1. The source and target domain for cases A (Xing et al.,
2021) and B (considered in this work). Case B is more difficult
than case A because we can not solely rely on visual clues to learn
the mapping function between the source and target domain.

algorithms typically require many interactions with the environment (François-Lavet et al., 2018). Besides, the learned
policy can easily be over-fitted to the source domain where
it is trained and may collapse if faced with slight changes
in the target domain (Cobbe et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2023).
Therefore, it is essential to investigate how a policy can be
transferred to a new environment.
When trying to achieve such transfer, one of the most critical problems is dealing with the changes to the observation
distribution, also known as domain adaptation in RL (Higgins et al., 2017; Li et al., 2021). Many previous works try
to solve this problem by learning a mapping function between the target and source domain. For example, (Gamrian
& Goldberg, 2018a; Tzeng et al., 2015; You et al., 2017)
learn an image-to-image translation model that can map the
observations from the target domain back into the source domain, and therefore the policy trained in the source domain
is directly applicable when equipped with such translation.
Some works (Xing et al., 2021; Higgins et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2021) also learn such a mapping indirectly, in which
the observations from the source and target domain are

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning has achieved impressive results in many domains, such as Atari (Mnih et al., 2013)
and Mujoco (Lillicrap et al., 2015). However, traditional RL
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS 3 Cambricon
Technologies 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
5
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences. Correspondence to: Yunji Chen <cyj@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

