Neural Continuous-Discrete State Space Models
for Irregularly-Sampled Time Series

Abdul Fatir Ansari 1 † Alvin Heng 2 Andre Lim 2 Harold Soh 2 3

Abstract
Learning accurate predictive models of real-world
dynamic phenomena (e.g., climate, biological)
remains a challenging task. One key issue is
that the data generated by both natural and artificial processes often comprise time series that
are irregularly sampled and/or contain missing
observations. In this work, we propose the
Neural Continuous-Discrete State Space Model
(NCDSSM) for continuous-time modeling of
time series through discrete-time observations.
NCDSSM employs auxiliary variables to disentangle recognition from dynamics, thus requiring
amortized inference only for the auxiliary variables. Leveraging techniques from continuousdiscrete filtering theory, we demonstrate how to
perform accurate Bayesian inference for the dynamic states. We propose three flexible parameterizations of the latent dynamics and an efficient
training objective that marginalizes the dynamic
states during inference. Empirical results on multiple benchmark datasets across various domains
show improved imputation and forecasting performance of NCDSSM over existing models.

Figure 1. (Top) Generative model of Neural Continuous-Discrete
State Space Model. The bold red arrows indicate that the state,
zt , evolves continuously in time. The auxiliary variables, ak ,
and observations, yk , are emitted at arbitrary discrete timesteps
tk ∈ {t0 , t1 , . . . , tT }. (Bottom) Amortized inference for auxiliary
variables and continuous-discrete Bayesian inference for states.
Samples from the amortized variational distribution over auxiliary
variables are used as pseudo-observations to condition and perform
inference in the continuous-discrete SSM at the bottom.

1. Introduction
State space models (SSMs) provide an elegant framework
for modeling time series data. Combinations of SSMs with
neural networks have proven effective for various time series
tasks such as segmentation, imputation, and forecasting (Krishnan et al., 2015; Fraccaro et al., 2017; Rangapuram et al.,
2018; Kurle et al., 2020; Ansari et al., 2021). However, most
existing models are limited to the discrete time (i.e., uniformly sampled) setting, whereas data from various physical (Menne et al., 2010), biological (Goldberger et al., 2000),
and business (Turkmen et al., 2019) systems in the real

world are sometimes only available at irregular intervals.
Such systems are best modeled as continuous-time latent
processes with irregularly-sampled discrete-time observations. Desirable features of such a time series model include
modeling of stochasticity (uncertainty) in the system, and
efficient and accurate inference of the system state from potentially high-dimensional observations (e.g., video frames).

†
Work done while at National University of Singapore, prior to
joining Amazon. 1 AWS AI Labs 2 School of Computing, National
University of Singapore (NUS) 3 Smart Systems Institute, NUS.
Correspondence to: Abdul Fatir Ansari <abdulfatir@u.nus.edu>.

Recently, latent variable models based on neural differential
equations have gained popularity for continuous-time modeling of time series (Chen et al., 2018; Rubanova et al., 2019;
Yildiz et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Solin
et al., 2021). However, these models suffer from limitations.
The ordinary differential equation (ODE)-based models em-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

