Automatically Marginalized MCMC in Probabilistic Programming

Jinlin Lai 1 Javier Burroni 1 Hui Guan 1 Daniel Sheldon 1

Abstract

Despite their promise, the barrier between users and inference in PPLs is often blurred. There may be different ways
to write a model, with inference performance depending
critically on the specific choice, such that users again need
specialized knowledge. One issue is the main focus of this
paper: it is often possible to analytically marginalize some
variables from the model so the inference method operates
on a smaller model, which can lead to substantial performance gains. For example, this idea is used in collapsed
Gibbs sampling (Liu, 1994). However, such reformulations
are almost always done manually and place a significant
burden on the user (see examples in Figure 1 and Section 2).

Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is a powerful algorithm to sample latent variables from Bayesian
models. The advent of probabilistic programming
languages (PPLs) frees users from writing inference algorithms and lets users focus on modeling.
However, many models are difficult for HMC to
solve directly, and often require tricks like model
reparameterization. We are motivated by the fact
that many of those models could be simplified
by marginalization. We propose to use automatic
marginalization as part of the sampling process
using HMC in a graphical model extracted from a
PPL, which substantially improves sampling from
real-world hierarchical models.

We develop a method to automatically marginalize variables
in a user-specified probabilistic program for inference with
HMC. Our method works by first compiling a probabilistic
program into a graphical model. Although most HMC-based
PPLs compile directly to a log-density, we use the programtracing features of JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) to extract
a graphical-model representation of programs written in
NumPyro. In the graphical model, we identify local conjugacy relationships that allow edges to be reversed. Then we
manipulate the graphical model to create unobserved leaf
variables, such that they can be marginalized. HMC is run
on the reduced model, and the marginalized variables are
recovered by direct sampling conditional on the variables
sampled by HMC. For models that have no conjugacy relationships, our method reduces to vanilla HMC. Importantly,
the interface between the user and the PPL does not change.

1. Introduction
Probabilistic programming languages (PPLs) promise to
automate Bayesian reasoning. A user specifies a probabilistic model and provides data, and the PPL automatically
performs inference to approximate the posterior distribution. The user derives scientific insights without highly specialized expertise in probabilistic inference (van de Meent
et al., 2018). Through tools like BUGS (Lunn et al., 2009),
JAGS (Hornik et al., 2003), and Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017),
this paradigm has had tremendous impact in the applied sciences, and there has been considerable research in computer
science to advance the foundations of PPLs (Goodman et al.,
2008; Wood et al., 2014; Goodman & Stuhlmüller, 2014;
Cusumano-Towner et al., 2019; Minka et al., 2018).

Experiments show that our methods can substantially improve the effectiveness of samples from hierarchical partial
pooling models and hierarchical linear regression models
and significantly outperforms model reparameterization (Betancourt & Girolami, 2015) in those models where both
apply. Our implementation is limited to scalar and elementwise array operations and may require user input
to avoid excessive JAX compilation times, though these
limitations are not fundamental. Our code is available
at https://github.com/lll6924/automatically-marginalizedMCMC.

PPLs vary in many dimensions, including the distributions
they can represent and their primary inference approach.
We focus on a setting that has had large impact in practice,
where the program corresponds to a graphical model and is
compiled to a differentiable log-density function for inference by a variant of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Duane et al., 1987; Neal, 1996).
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst. Correspondence to:
Jinlin Lai <jinlinlai@cs.umass.edu>.

1.1. Scope and relation to prior work

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

As stated above, we focus on the restricted class of probabilistic programs for which we can extract a graphical

1

