Restoration based Generative Models
Jaemoo Choi * 1 Yesom Park * 1 Myungjoo Kang 1

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models (DDMs) have recently attracted increasing attention by showing
impressive synthesis quality. DDMs are built
on a diffusion process that pushes data to the
noise distribution and the models learn to denoise.
In this paper, we establish the interpretation of
DDMs in terms of image restoration (IR). Integrating IR literature allows us to use an alternative objective and diverse forward processes, not
confining to the diffusion process. By imposing
prior knowledge on the loss function grounded on
MAP-based estimation, we eliminate the need for
the expensive sampling of DDMs. Also, we propose a multi-scale training, which improves the
performance compared to the diffusion process,
by taking advantage of the flexibility of the forward process. Experimental results demonstrate
that our model improves the quality and efficiency
of both training and inference. Furthermore, we
show the applicability of our model to inverse
problems. We believe that our framework paves
the way for designing a new type of flexible general generative model. The code is available at
https://github.com/Jae-Moo/RGM/.

Figure 1: Conceptual comparison of RGMs and DDMs.
Here, x is the original data, y is the degradation of x with
noise ξ ∼ N (0, σ 2 I), and x̂ is the reconstruction of y.
2022a) have drawn considerable attention by demonstrating remarkable results. DDMs rely on a forward diffusion
process that progressively transforms the data into Gaussian
noise, and they learn to reverse the noising process. Albeit
their enormous successes, their gradual denoising generative
process gives rise to low inference efficiency. To pull latent
variables back to the data distribution, the denoising process often requires hundreds or even thousands of network
evaluations to sample a single instance. Many follow-up
studies consider enhancing inference speed (Song et al.,
2021a; Tachibana et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022) or grafting
with other generative models (Xiao et al., 2021a; Vahdat
et al., 2021; Zhang & Chen, 2021; Pandey et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Generative modeling is a prolific machine learning task that
the models learn to describe how a dataset is distributed
and generate new samples from the distribution. The most
widely used generative models primarily differ in their
choice of bridging the data distribution to a tractable latent
distribution (Goodfellow et al., 2020; Kingma & Welling,
2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015;
Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2022). In recent
years, denoising diffusion models (DDMs) (Ho et al., 2020;
Song & Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021b; Dockhorn et al.,

In this study, we focus on a different perspective. We interpret the DDMs through the lens of image restoration
(IR), which is a family of inverse problems for recovering the original images from corrupted ones (Castleman,
1996; Gunturk & Li, 2018). The corruption arises in various forms, including noising (Rudin et al., 1992; Buades
et al., 2005) and downsampling (Farsiu et al., 2004). IR has
been a long-standing problem because of its high practical
value in various applications (Besag et al., 1991; Banham &

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Mathematical Sciences,
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence
to: Myungjoo Kang <mkang@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

