Graph Reinforcement Learning for Network Control
via Bi-Level Optimization

Daniele Gammelli 1 James Harrison 2 Kaidi Yang 3 Marco Pavone 1 Filipe Rodrigues 4 Francisco C. Pereira 4

Abstract

munication networks (Jakobson & Weissman, 1995; Flood,
1997; Popovskij et al., 2011); and many other systems can
be cast as controlling flows of products, vehicles, or other
quantities on graph-structured environments.

Optimization problems over dynamic networks
have been extensively studied and widely used
in the past decades to formulate numerous
real-world problems. However, (1) traditional
optimization-based approaches do not scale to
large networks, and (2) the design of good heuristics or approximation algorithms often requires
significant manual trial-and-error. In this work,
we argue that data-driven strategies can automate
this process and learn efficient algorithms without
compromising optimality. To do so, we present
network control problems through the lens of reinforcement learning and propose a graph networkbased framework to handle a broad class of problems. Instead of naively computing actions over
high-dimensional graph elements, e.g., edges, we
propose a bi-level formulation where we (1) specify a desired next state via RL, and (2) solve a
convex program to best achieve it, leading to drastically improved scalability and performance. We
further highlight a collection of desirable features
to system designers, investigate design decisions,
and present experiments on real-world control
problems showing the utility, scalability, and flexibility of our framework.

A collection of highly effective solution strategies exist for
versions of these problems. Some of the earliest applications
of linear programming were network optimization problems
(Dantzig, 1982), including examples such as maximum flow
(Hillier & Lieberman, 1995; Sarimveis et al., 2008; Ford &
Fulkerson, 1956). Within this context, handling multi-stage
decision-making is typically addressed via time expansion
techniques (Ford & Fulkerson, 1958; 1962). However, despite their broad applicability, these approaches are limited
in their ability to handle several classes of problems efficiently. Large-scale time-expanded networks may be prohibitively expensive, as are stochastic systems that require
sampling realizations of random variables (Birge & Louveaux, 2011; Shapiro et al., 2014). Moreover, nonlinearities
may result in intractable optimization problems.
In this paper, we propose a strategy for simultaneously exploiting the tried-and-true optimization toolkit associated
with network control problems while also handling the difficulties associated with stochastic, nonlinear, multi-stage
decision-making. To do so, we present dynamic network
problems through the lens of reinforcement learning and formalize a problem that is largely scattered across the control,
management science, and optimization literature. Specifically, we propose a learning-based framework to handle
a broad class of network problems by exploiting the main
strengths of graph representation learning, reinforcement
learning, and classical operations research tools (Figure 1).

1. Introduction
Many economically-critical real-world systems are well
framed through the lens of control on graphs. For instance,
the system-level coordination of power generation systems
(Dommel & Tinney, 1968; Huneault & Galiana, 1991; Bienstock et al., 2014); road, rail, and air transportation systems
(Wang et al., 2018; Gammelli et al., 2021); complex manufacturing systems, supply chain, and distribution networks
(Sarimveis et al., 2008; Bellamy & Basole, 2013); telecom-

The contributions of this paper are threefold1 :
• We present a graph network-based bi-level, RL approach that leverages the specific strengths of direct
optimization and reinforcement learning.
• We investigate architectural components and design
decisions within our framework, such as the choice of
graph aggregation function, action parameterization,
how exploration should be achieved, and their impact
on system performance.

1

Stanford University 2 Google Research, Brain Team 3 National
University of Singapore 4 Technical University of Denmark. Correspondence to: Daniele Gammelli <gammelli@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

Code available at: https://github.com/DanieleGa
mmelli/graph-rl-for-network-optimization

1

