Computationally Efficient PAC RL in POMDPs with Latent Determinism and
Conditional Embeddings

Masatoshi Uehara 1 Ayush Sekhari 1 Jason D. Lee 2 Nathan Kallus 1 Wen Sun 1

Abstract

to be NP-hard (Papadimitriou & Tsitsiklis, 1987). From a
statistical perspective, an exponential dependence on horizon in sample complexity is not avoidable without further
assumptions (Jin et al., 2020a).

We study reinforcement learning with function approximation for large-scale Partially Observable
Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) where the
state space and observation space are large or
even continuous. Particularly, we consider Hilbert
space embeddings of POMDP where the feature
of latent states and the feature of observations admit a conditional Hilbert space embedding of the
observation emission process, and the latent state
transition is deterministic. Under the function approximation setup where the optimal latent stateaction Q-function is linear in the state feature,
and the optimal Q-function has a gap in actions,
we provide a computationally and statistically
efficient algorithm for finding the exact optimal
policy. We show our algorithm’s computational
and statistical complexities scale polynomially
with respect to the horizon and the intrinsic dimension of the feature on the observation space.
Furthermore, we show both the deterministic latent transitions and gap assumptions are necessary
to avoid statistical complexity exponential in horizon or dimension. Since our guarantee does not
have an explicit dependence on the size of the
state and observation spaces, our algorithm provably scales to large-scale POMDPs.

We consider computationally and statistically efficient learning on large-scale POMDPs with deterministic transitions
(but stochastic emissions). Here large-scale means that the
POMDP might have large or even continuous state and observation spaces, but they can be modeled using conditional
embeddings. Deterministic transitions and stochastic emissions is a very practically-relevant setting. For example, in
robotic control, the dynamics of the robot itself is often deterministic but the observation of its current state is distorted by
noise on the sensors (Platt Jr et al., 2010; Platt et al., 2017).
In human-robot-interaction, the robots’ dynamics is often
deterministic, while human’s actions can be modeled as uncertain observations emitted from a distribution conditioned
on robot’s state and human’s pre-fixed goal (Javdani et al.,
2015). For autonomous driving, the dynamics of the car in
the 2d space is deterministic under normal road conditions,
while the sensory data (e.g. GPS, IMU data, and Lidar scans)
is modeled as stochastic. Besse & Chaib-Draa (2009) offers further practical examples such as diagnosis of systems
(Pattipati & Alexandridis, 1990) and sensor management
(Ji et al., 2007). With known deterministic transitions, we
can obtain positive results from computational perspectives
for optimal planning (Littman, 1996; Bonet, 2012). However, when transitions are unknown, learning algorithms
that enjoy both computation and statistical efficiency are
still limited to the tabular setting (Jin et al., 2020a).

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning (RL), we often encounter partial
observability of states (Kaelbling et al., 1998). Partial observability poses a serious challenge in RL from both computational and statistical aspects since observations are no
longer Markovian. From a computational perspective, even
if we know the dynamics, planning problems in POMDPs
(partially observable Markov decision process) are known

To design provably efficient RL algorithms for POMDPs
with large state and observation spaces, we need to leverage
function approximation. The key question that we aim
to answer here is, under what structural conditions of the
POMDPs, can we perform RL with function approximation
with both statistical and computational efficiency? Specifically, we consider Hilbert space embeddings of POMDPs
(HSE-POMDPs), where both features on the observations
and latent states live in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
(RKHSs), which are equipped with conditional embedding
operators and the operators have non-zero singular values
(Boots et al., 2011). This assumption is similarly used in

*

Equal contribution 1 Cornell University 2 Princeton University.
Correspondence to: Masatoshi Uehara <ueharamasatoshi136@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

