NeuralStagger: Accelerating Physics-constrained Neural PDE Solver with
Spatial-temporal Decomposition

Xinquan Huang * 1 Wenlei Shi * 2 Qi Meng 2 Yue Wang 2 Xiaotian Gao 2 Jia Zhang 2 Tie-Yan Liu 2

1. Introduction

Abstract

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are the critical parts of
scientific research, describing vast categories of physical and
chemical phenomena, e.g. sound, heat, diffusion, electrostatics, electrodynamics, thermodynamics, fluid dynamics,
elasticity, and so on. In the era of artificial intelligence,
neural PDE solvers, in some works called neural operators,
are widely studied as a promising technology to solve PDEs
(Guo et al., 2016; Zhu & Zabaras, 2018; Hsieh et al., 2019;
Bhatnagar et al., 2019; Bar-Sinai et al., 2019; Berner et al.,
2020; Li et al., 2020b;a; Um et al., 2020; Pfaff et al., 2020;
Lu et al., 2021b; Wang et al., 2021; Kochkov et al., 2021).
Once the neural solver is trained, it can solve unseen PDEs
with only an inference step, multiple magnitudes faster than
that with traditional numerical solvers. Recently, several
works have introduced physics constraints in training the
neural PDE solvers in order to reduce the use of costly
data and improve the generalization ability. They define
the physics-constrained loss with certain finite dimensional
approximations to transform the PDEs into algebraic equations, which are further used to define the loss function (Zhu
et al., 2019; Geneva & Zabaras, 2020; Wandel et al., 2020;
Shi et al., 2022). However, to ensure stability and accuracy,
they must define the loss in a relatively high resolution to
resolve the smallest-scale physics in the PDE, resulting in
huge input and output as well as increased neural network
size. The solution by the neural network inference might
still be slow, but it seems impossible to get further accelerations as the bottleneck comes from the input and output
complexity.

Neural networks have shown great potential in accelerating the solution of partial differential equations (PDEs). Recently, there has been a growing
interest in introducing physics constraints into
training neural PDE solvers to reduce the use of
costly data and improve the generalization ability.
However, these physics constraints, based on certain finite dimensional approximations over the
function space, must resolve the smallest scaled
physics to ensure the accuracy and stability of
the simulation, resulting in high computational
costs from large input, output, and neural networks. This paper proposes a general acceleration
methodology called NeuralStagger by spatially
and temporally decomposing the original learning tasks into several coarser-resolution subtasks.
We define a coarse-resolution neural solver for
each subtask, which requires fewer computational
resources, and jointly train them with the vanilla
physics-constrained loss by simply arranging their
outputs to reconstruct the original solution. Due to
the perfect parallelism between them, the solution
is achieved as fast as a coarse-resolution neural
solver. In addition, the trained solvers bring the
flexibility of simulating with multiple levels of
resolution. We demonstrate the successful application of NeuralStagger on 2D and 3D fluid dynamics simulations, which leads to an additional
10 ∼ 100× speed-up. Moreover, the experiment
also shows that the learned model could be well
used for optimal control.

In this paper, we propose a simple methodology called NeuralStagger to jump out of the dilemma. The basic idea
is to decompose the original physical fields into several
coarser-resolution fields evenly. Then we jointly train a
lightweight neural network to predict the solution in each
coarse-resolution field respectively, which can be naturally
a coarse-resolution neural solver to the original PDE. We
design the decomposition rules so that the outputs of these
lightweight networks can reconstruct the solutions in the
original field with simple arrangements. For ease of reading, here and also in most parts of the paper, we illustrate
the decomposition methodology in the 2-dimensional exam-

*

Equal contribution 1 King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology, work done during an internship at Microsoft Research
AI4Science 2 Microsoft Research AI4Science. Correspondence
to: Xinquan Huang <xinquan.huang@kaust.edu.sa>, Wenlei Shi
<wenlei.shi@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

