Graph Ladling: Shockingly Simple Parallel GNN Training
without Intermediate Communication
Ajay Jaiswal 1 Shiwei Liu 1 Tianlong Chen 1 Ying Ding 1 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract

1. Introduction

Graphs are omnipresent and GNNs are a powerful
family of neural networks for learning over graphs.
Despite their popularity, scaling GNNs either by
deepening or widening suffers from prevalent issues of unhealthy gradients, over-smoothening,
information squashing, which often lead to substandard performance. In this work, we are interested in exploring a principled way to scale
GNNs capacity without deepening or widening,
which can improve its performance across multiple small and large graphs. Motivated by the
recent intriguing phenomenon of model soups,
which suggest that fine-tuned weights of multiple
large-language pre-trained models can be merged
to a better minima, we argue to exploit the fundamentals of model soups to mitigate the aforementioned issues of memory bottleneck and trainability during GNNs scaling. More specifically,
we propose not to deepen or widen current GNNs,
but instead present a data-centric perspective
of model soups tailored for GNNs, i.e., to build
powerful GNNs by dividing giant graph data to
build independently and parallelly trained multiple comparatively weaker GNNs without any intermediate communication, and combining their
strength using a greedy interpolation soup procedure to achieve state-of-the-art performance.
Moreover, we provide a wide variety of model
soup preparation techniques by leveraging stateof-the-art graph sampling and graph partitioning
approaches that can handle large graph data structures. Our extensive experiments across many
real-world small and large graphs, illustrate the
effectiveness of our approach and point towards
a promising orthogonal direction for GNN scaling. Codes are available at: https://github.
com/VITA-Group/graph_ladling.

Graphs are well-known data structures that model pairwise
relationships using a set of vertices and edges and represent
a myriad of real-world data from social networks, knowledge graphs, gene expression networks, etc. Graph neural
networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Defferrard et al.,
2016; Veličković et al., 2017; You et al., 2020; Gao et al.,
2018; Chiang et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2021b; Chen et al.,
2018; Duan et al., 2022; Thekumparampil et al., 2018),
which use message passing (MP) strategy at their core for
aggregating knowledge from neighbors, have been widely
accepted as powerful algorithmic tools for learning over
graphs. Although message passing provides GNNs superior
performance over traditional MLPs, the nature of evolving
massive topological structures prevents MP-based GNNs
from scaling to industrial-grade graph applications, and the
majority of state-of-the-art GNNs are only tested on small
graph datasets. Additionally, due to the prevalent issues
of unhealthy gradients, over-smoothening, and information
squashing (Li et al., 2018; NT & Maehara, 2019; Alon &
Yahav, 2021; Jaiswal et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021) while
training GNNs, increasing model capacity either by deepening (stacking more layers) or widening (increasing neighborhood coverage) often lead to sub-standard performance.
Previously, conforming to the empirical scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020), where the final model quality has been
found to have a power-law relationship with the amount
of data, model size, and compute time; several works (Li
et al., 2021; Jaiswal et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2021b) have
attempted to scale GNNs (up to 1000 layers) assuming that
processing larger graphs would likely benefit from more
parameters. Unlike conventional deep neural networks,
exploiting scale to revamp information absorption is not
straight-forward for GNNs, and numerous existing works
rely on architectural changes, regularization & normalization, better initialization (Li et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020; Rong et al., 2020; Huang et al.,
2020; Zhao & Akoglu, 2020; Zhou et al., 2021a; Jaiswal
et al., 2022) for improving the trainability and try to overcome astonishingly high memory footprints by mini-batch
training, i.e. sampling a smaller set of nodes or partitioning
large graphs (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Zou

*
Equal contribution 1 University of Texas at Austin. Correspondence to: Ajay Jaiswal <ajayjaiswal@utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

