A Kernel Stein Test of Goodness of Fit for Sequential Models

Jerome Baum * 1 Heishiro Kanagawa * 2 3 Arthur Gretton 2

Abstract

model and computing a sample-based discrepancy measure,
such as the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton
et al., 2012; Lloyd & Ghahramani, 2015). A disadvantage
of this approach is that it potentially requires many samples
to see the departure of the model from the data. For example, if a sequence model misspecifies a particular transition
from a given history, we would need to generate sequences
sharing this history to observe the disparity. Unfortunately,
the MMD approach becomes less efficient as the state space
enlarges or the length of the history grows, necessitating
repeated sampling. This observation motivates using a measure that exploits information provided by the model, such
as dependence relations between different time points.

We propose a goodness-of-fit measure for probability densities modeling observations with varying dimensionality, such as text documents of differing lengths or variable-length sequences. The
proposed measure is an instance of the kernel
Stein discrepancy (KSD), which has been used
to construct goodness-of-fit tests for unnormalized densities. The KSD is defined by its Stein
operator: current operators used in testing apply to fixed-dimensional spaces. As our main
contribution, we extend the KSD to the variabledimension setting by identifying appropriate Stein
operators, and propose a novel KSD goodness-offit test. As with the previous variants, the proposed KSD does not require the density to be normalized, allowing the evaluation of a large class
of models. Our test is shown to perform well in
practice on discrete sequential data benchmarks.

A model-dependent measure may be derived based on
Stein’s method (Stein, 1972), a technique from probability theory developed originally to obtain explicit rates of
convergence to normality. The key construct from Stein’s
method is a distribution-specific operator called a Stein operator that modifies a function to have zero expectation under
the distribution. A model-specific Stein operator AP may
be defined to construct a zero-expectation function AP f ;
its expectation EX∼Q [AP f (X)] under the sample distribution serves as a discrepancy measure, since a non-zero
expectation indicates the deviation from the model. One
may generalize this idea to a family of functions F, and the
resulting worst-case summary supf ∈F |EX∼Q [AP f (X)]| is
called a Stein discrepancy, proposed by Gorham & Mackey
(2015). An appropriate choice of the operator and the function class yields a computable Stein discrepancy. This paper
focuses on an instance called the kernel Stein discrepancy
(KSD) (Oates et al., 2016; Chwialkowski et al., 2016; Liu
et al., 2016; Gorham & Mackey, 2017), where functions
from a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) are used.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of evaluating a probabilistic model for observations with variable dimensionality.
This problem commonly arises in sequential data analysis, where sequences of different lengths are observed, and
generative models (e.g., Markov models) are used to draw
inferences. Our problem setting also concerns a scenario
where a data point is a collection of observations that may
not be sequentially ordered, as in the topic modeling of
text documents. Our task is formalized as follows: given a
sample {Xi }ni=1 from a distribution Q on a sample space X
(e.g., the set of all possible sequences), we aim to quantify
the discrepancy of distribution P modeling Q.

The KSD is a versatile framework for designing goodnessof-fit measures. Given a Stein operator and a reproducing kernel, the KSD is expressed by an expectation of a
Stein-modified kernel, leading to tractable estimators only
involving sample evaluations of the modified kernel. This
feature allows us to use a wealth of kernels from the literature: by designing a Stein operator, one can adapt the kernel
to the model and define a bespoke discrepancy measure.
Based on the zero-mean kernel theory by Oates et al. (2016),
Chwialkowski et al. (2016) and Liu et al. (2016) originated
this line of work, where they combined the Langevin Stein

One approach to this problem is generating samples from the
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science,
University College London, UK 2 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL 3 School of Mathematics, Statistics
and Physics, Newcastle University, UK. Correspondence to:
Jerome Baum <jerome@jeromebaum.com>, Heishiro Kanagawa
<heishiro.kanagawa@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

