Learning Neural PDE Solvers with Parameter-Guided Channel Attention

Makoto Takamoto 1 Francesco Alesiani 1 Mathias Niepert 1 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Many real-world phenomena, ranging from weather forecasts to molecular dynamics and quantum systems, can be
modeled with partial differential equations (PDEs). While
for some problems the mathematical description of these
equations is available, finding its solutions is complex and
usually needs some numerical approximations. Numerical
simulation methods have been developed for many years
and have achieved a high level of accuracy in solving these
equations. However, numerical methods are resource intensive and time-consuming even when run on larger supercomputers to obtain sufficiently accurate results. Especially
high-resolution and high-dimensional hydrodynamic-type
field equations are computationally demanding. Even more
challenging are simulations with various PDE parameters
since a numerical simulation is required for each of the
initial conditions and for each of the PDE parameter’s configurations.

Scientific Machine Learning (SciML) is concerned with the development of learned emulators
of physical systems governed by partial differential equations (PDE). In application domains
such as weather forecasting, molecular dynamics,
and inverse design, ML-based surrogate models
are increasingly used to augment or replace inefficient and often non-differentiable numerical
simulation algorithms. While a number of MLbased methods for approximating the solutions of
PDEs have been proposed in recent years, they
typically do not adapt to the parameters of the
PDEs, making it difficult to generalize to PDE
parameters not seen during training. We propose
a Channel Attention mechanism guided by PDE
Parameter Embeddings (C APE) component for
neural surrogate models and a simple yet effective
curriculum learning strategy. The C APE module
can be combined with neural PDE solvers allowing them to adapt to unseen PDE parameters. The
curriculum learning strategy provides a seamless
transition between teacher-forcing and fully autoregressive training. We compare C APE in conjunction with the curriculum learning strategy using
a popular PDE benchmark and obtain consistent
and significant improvements over the baseline
models. The experiments also show several advantages of C APE, such as its increased ability
to generalize to unseen PDE parameters without large increases inference time and parameter
count. An implementation of the method and experiments are available at https://github.
com/nec-research/CAPE-ML4Sci.

Recently, there has been a rapidly growing interest in machine learning methods for the problem of solving PDEs
due to their various applications in science and engineering
(Guo et al., 2016; Lusch et al., 2018; Sirignano & Spiliopoulos, 2018; Raissi, 2018; Kim et al., 2019; Hsieh et al., 2019;
Bar-Sinai et al., 2019; Bhatnagar et al., 2019; Pfaff et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2020; Khoo et al., 2021). For example,
several prior studies reported that ML models can estimate
solutions more efficiently than classical numerical simulators (Li et al., 2021a; Stachenfeld et al., 2021). Moreover,
using neural networks as surrogate models allows us to
compute derivatives with respect to the input variables. Differentiable surrogate models enable the use of automatic
differentiation to solve inverse problems which have numerous real-world applications but are difficult to solve using
traditional numerical methods (Coros et al., 2013; Allen
et al., 2022). A considerable number of papers have shown
the advantage of ML-based surrogate models (Li et al., 2020;
2021a; Stachenfeld et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021). The majority of these methods, however, are purely data-driven,
which does not allow us to change PDE parameters. The
existing approaches taking PDE parameters into account,
are tailored to specific neural network architectures. For
instance, message-passing PDE solvers (Brandstetter et al.,
2022) use PDE parameters as input but transform these parameters into node embedding and, therefore, cannot be

1

NEC Laboratories Europe, Heidelberg, Germany 2 University
of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany. Correspondence to: Makoto
Takamoto <makoto.takamoto@neclab.eu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

