A Model-free Closeness-of-influence Test for Features in Supervised Learning

Mohammad Mehrabi 1 Ryan A. Rossi 2

Abstract

1. Introduction
In a classic supervised learning problem, we are given a
dataset of n iid data points {(xi , yi )}i=1:n with feature vectors x ∈ Rd and response value (label) y ∈ R. From the
inferential point of view, understanding the influence of
each individual feature i ∈ {1, . . . , d} on y is of paramount
importance. Considering a parametric family of distributions for L(Y |X) is among the most studied techniques
for this problem. In this setting, the influence of each feature can be seen by their corresponding coefficient value in
the parametric model. Essentially such methods can result
in spurious statistical findings, mainly due to model misspecification, where in the first place the ground-truth data
generating law L(Y |X) does not belong to the considered
parametric family. A natural remedy for this problem is to
relax the parametric family assumption, removing concerns
about model misspecification. Besides the difficulties with
the new model-free structure of the problem, we need a new
notion to capture the influence of features, as there is no
longer a coefficient vector as per class of parametric models.

Understanding the effect of a feature vector x ∈
Rd on the response value (label) y ∈ R is the
cornerstone of many statistical learning problems.
Ideally, it is desired to understand how a set of
collected features combine together and influence
the response value, but this problem is notoriously
difficult, due to the high-dimensionality of data
and limited number of labeled data points, among
many others. In this work, we take a new perspective on this problem, and we study the question of
assessing the difference of influence that the two
given features have on the response value. We first
propose a notion of closeness for the influence of
features, and show that our definition recovers the
familiar notion of the magnitude of coefficients in
the parametric model. We then propose a novel
method to test for the closeness of influence in
general model-free supervised learning problems.
Our proposed test can be used with finite number
of samples with control on type I error rate, no
matter the ground truth conditional law L(Y |X).
We analyze the power of our test for two general learning problems i) linear regression, and ii)
binary classification under mixture of Gaussian
models, and show that under the proper choice of
score function, an internal component of our test,
with sufficient number of samples will achieve
full statistical power. We evaluate our findings
through extensive numerical simulations, specifically we adopt the datamodel framework (Ilyas, et
al., 2022) for CIFAR-10 dataset to identify pairs
of training samples with different influence on
the trained model via optional black box training
mechanisms.

In this paper, we follow the model-free structure, but take a
new perspective on the generic problem of investigating the
influence of features on the response value. In particular, as
a first step towards this notoriously hard question under no
class of parametric distribution assumption or whatsoever,
we are specifically interested in assessing the closeness of
influence of features. For this end, we posit the following
fundamental question:
(*) In a general model-free supervised learning problem,
for two given features, is it possible to assess the closeness
of their influence on the response value (label) in a
statistically sound way?
In this paper, we answer question (*) affirmatively. We characterize a notion of closeness for the influence of features
on y under the general model-free framework. We show that
this notion aligns perfectly well with former expectations in
parametric models, where small difference in the coefficient
values imply close influence on the response value. We
then cast the closeness of influence question as a hypothesis
testing problem, and show that we can control associated
type I error rate with finite number of samples.

1
Department of Data Sciences and Operations, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA 2 Adobe, San
Jose, USA. Correspondence to: Mohammad Mehrabi <mehrabim@marshall.usc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

