Leveraging Proxy of Training Data for Test-Time Adaptation

Juwon Kang 1 Nayeong Kim 1 Donghyeon Kwon 1 Jungseul Ok 1 2 Suha Kwak 1 2

Abstract

Training-time

We consider test-time adaptation (TTA), the task
of adapting a trained model to an arbitrary test domain using unlabeled input data on-the-fly during
testing. A common practice of TTA is to disregard data used in training due to large memory
demand and privacy leakage. However, the training data are the only source of supervision. This
motivates us to investigate a proper way of using
them while minimizing the side effects. To this
end, we propose two lightweight yet informative
proxies of the training data and a TTA method
fully exploiting them. One of the proxies is composed of a small number of images synthesized
(hence, less privacy-sensitive) by data condensation which minimizes their domain-specificity to
capture a general underlying structure over a wide
spectrum of domains. Then, in TTA, they are
translated into labeled test data by stylizing them
to match styles of unlabeled test samples. This enables virtually supervised test-time training. The
other proxy is inter-class relations of training data,
which are transferred to target model during TTA.
On four public benchmarks, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art ones at remarkably less
computation and memory.

Test-time adaptation

Test data

Training data

Source
pretrained
model

Class relations
horse
car

Source
pretrained
model

bus

mcycl

Condensed data

Proxy of training data
Condensed data

Class relations

Figure 1. An overview of our test-time adaptation (TTA) framework. Before TTA, it (1) condenses training data into a tiny number
of synthetic images and (2) extracts inter-class relations the training data exhibit. During TTA, the condensed data are used as
labeled data for test-time training and the inter-class relations are
used to regularize predictions of the model.

since it is practically impossible to collect and annotate data
for all possible environments in advance of training. A large
body of research has alleviated the distribution shift problem via domain adaptation and generalization. Although
they have provided impressive performance gain on realistic
benchmarks, there is still a large gap between their problem settings and practical application scenarios: Domain
adaptation relies on an impractical assumption that test domain data are available in training (Long et al., 2015; Sun
& Saenko, 2016; Tzeng et al., 2017; Ganin & Lempitsky,
2015; Tsai et al., 2018; Chang et al., 2019), and domain
generalization does not exploit test data at all although they
are available in testing (Muandet et al., 2013; Li et al., 2017;
Huang et al., 2020; Iwasawa & Matsuo, 2021; Choi et al.,
2021; Shi et al., 2021; Kang et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Supervised learning with large-scale training data has driven
remarkable improvement in a variety of machine learning
tasks. In spite of its great success, however, it often suffers from limited generalization performance due to the
distribution shift between training and test data (Long et al.,
2015; Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015; Li et al., 2017; Dai &
Van Gool, 2018; Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019). In realworld deployment, such a distribution shift is inevitable
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
POSTECH, Pohang, Korea 2 Graduate school of Artificial Intelligence, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea. Correspondence to: Suha
Kwak <suha.kwak@postech.ac.kr>.

To address these limitations of domain adaptation and generalization, test-time adaptation (TTA) has been proposed
recently (Sun et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Sarkar et al.,
2022; Wang et al., 2021; Iwasawa & Matsuo, 2021; Wang

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

