FARE: Provably Fair Representation Learning with Practical Certificates

Nikola Jovanović 1 Mislav Balunović 1 Dimitar I. Dimitrov 1 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

Barocas & Selbst, 2016). For instance, a loan prediction
system might recommend rejection based on a sensitive attribute, such as race or gender. The relevance of fairness (as
perceived by companies) has increased the most over the
past year compared to any other potential risk of AI (Chui
et al., 2021; Benaich & Hogarth, 2021).

Fair representation learning (FRL) is a popular
class of methods aiming to produce fair classifiers via data preprocessing. Recent regulatory
directives stress the need for FRL methods that
provide practical certificates, i.e., provable upper
bounds on the unfairness of any downstream classifier trained on preprocessed data, which directly
provides assurance in a practical scenario. Creating such FRL methods is an important challenge
that remains unsolved. In this work, we address
that challenge and introduce FARE (Fairness with
Restricted Encoders), the first FRL method with
practical fairness certificates. FARE is based on
our key insight that restricting the representation
space of the encoder enables the derivation of
practical guarantees, while still permitting favorable accuracy-fairness tradeoffs for suitable instantiations, such as one we propose based on
fair trees. To produce a practical certificate, we
develop and apply a statistical procedure that computes a finite sample high-confidence upper bound
on the unfairness of any downstream classifier
trained on FARE embeddings. In our comprehensive experimental evaluation, we demonstrate
that FARE produces practical certificates that are
tight and often even comparable with purely empirical results obtained by prior methods, which
establishes the practical value of our approach.

Fair representation learning A promising approach to
addressing this issue is fair representation learning (FRL,
Zemel et al. (2013)), which relies on separation of responsibility between two parties—a data producer and a data
consumer. The key promise of FRL is that the data producer,
who uses an encoder f to transform each point x ∈ X into
a debiased representation z, can ensure that these representations can be directly given to any data consumer aiming to
solve a prediction task, such that any classifier g ∈ G they
train will have favorable fairness, even if they are unaware
of fairness or actively aim to discriminate.
The need for certificates Recent regulatory directives
(FTC, 2021; EU, 2021) demand that parties aiming to deploy ML models ensure the fairness of predictions (Dwork
et al., 2012). In high-stakes applications (e.g., judicial),
failing to guarantee fairness may thus lead to fines or reputational harm (Simonite, 2018), in addition to causing societal
harm. This makes it essential that data producers provide
certificates guaranteeing that any classifier trained on their
representations must be fair, which follows the trends in
other areas in which certificates are of interest, such as privacy (Abadi et al., 2016) or robustness (Gehr et al., 2018).

1. Introduction

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich. Correspondence to: Nikola Jovanović <nikola.jovanovic@inf.ethz.ch>.

Practical certificates To achieve this goal, we are interested in practical certificates, which upper bound a fairness
metric (such as demographic parity distance) with high probability, and are computed using a finite dataset that the data
producer can access. The certificate should not make any
additional assumptions about the data distribution, and it
should hold for any model trained on the representations. Finally, a certificate should provide tight, non-vacuous bounds
that can be computed on real datasets. While there has been
a lot of work in this direction, none of the prior approaches
satisfy all of these requirements (see Section 4).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

This work We propose FARE (Fairness with Restricted
Encoders, Figure 1)—the first FRL method that provides

It has been repeatedly shown that machine learning systems
deployed in real-world applications propagate training data
biases (Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2017a).
This is especially concerning in decision-making applications which use data representing humans (e.g., financial or
medical), where such biases can lead to unfavorable treatment of certain population subgroups (Brennan et al., 2009;

1

