Dimensionality Reduction for General KDE Mode Finding

Xinyu Luo * 1 Christopher Musco * 2 Cas Widdershoven * 3
over Rd . Specifically, if D has probability density function
(PDF) p, our goal is to find any x∗ ∈ Rd such that:

Abstract
Finding the mode of a high dimensional probability distribution D is a fundamental algorithmic
problem in statistics and data analysis. There has
been particular interest in efficient methods for
solving the problem when D is represented as a
mixture model or kernel density estimate, although
few algorithmic results with worst-case approximation and runtime guarantees are known. In this
work, we significantly generalize a result of (Lee
et al., 2021) on mode approximation for Gaussian mixture models. We develop randomized
dimensionality reduction methods for mixtures
involving a broader class of kernels, including the
popular logistic, sigmoid, and generalized Gaussian kernels. As in Lee et al.’s work, our dimensionality reduction results yield quasi-polynomial
algorithms for mode finding with multiplicative
accuracy (1 − ϵ) for any ϵ > 0. Moreover, when
combined with gradient descent, they yield efficient practical heuristics for the problem. In addition to our positive results, we prove a hardness
result for box kernels, showing that there is no
polynomial time algorithm for finding the mode
of a kernel density estimate, unless P = NP . Obtaining similar hardness results for kernels used
in practice (like Gaussian or logistic kernels) is
an interesting future direction.

x∗ ∈ argmaxx∈Rd p(x)
A natural setting for this problem is when D is specified
as a kernel density estimate (KDE) or mixture distribution
(Scott, 2015; Silverman, 2018). In this setting, we are given
a set of points M ∈ Rd and a non-negative kernel function
κ : Rd × Rd → R+ and our PDF equals:
p(x) = KM (x) =

1 X
κ(x, m).
|M |
m∈M

As is typically the case, we will assume that κ is shiftinvariant and thus only depends on the difference between x
and m, meaning that it can be reparameterized as κ(x − m).
A classic example of a shift-invariant KDE is any mixture of
2
Gaussians distribution, for which κ(x−m) = C ·e−∥x−m∥2
−d/2
is taken to be the Gaussian kernel. Here C = π
is a normalizing constant. Kernel density estimates are widely used
to approximate other distributions in a compact way (Botev
et al., 2010; Kim & Scott, 2012), and they have been applied
to applications ranging from image annotation (Yavlinsky
et al., 2005), to medical data analysis (Sheikhpour et al.,
2016), to outlier detection (Kamalov & Leung, 2020). The
specific problem of finding the mode of a KDE has found
applications in object tracking (Shen et al., 2007), super
levelset computation (Phillips et al., 2015), typical object
finding (Gasser et al., 1997), and more (Lee et al., 2021).

1. Introduction

1.1. Prior Work

We consider the basic computational problem of finding
the mode of a high dimensional probability distribution D

Despite its many applications, the KDE mode finding problem presents a computational challenge in high-dimensions.
For any practically relevant kernel κ (e.g., Gaussian) there
are no known algorithms with runtime polynomial in both
n and d for KDEs on n = |M | base points. This is even the
case when we only want to find an ϵ-approximate mode for
some ϵ ∈ (0, 1), i.e. a point x̃∗ satisfying

*
1
Equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, Indiana, USA 2 Tandon School
of Engineering, New York University, New York, USA
3
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of
Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
Correspondence to:
Xinyu Luo <luo466@purdue.edu>,
Christopher Musco <cmusco@nyu.edu>, Cas Widdershoven
<cas.widdershoven@ios.ac.cn>.

KM (x̃∗ ) ≥ (1 − ϵ) max KM (x),
x∈Rd

There has been extensive work on heuristic local search
methods like the well-known “mean-shift” algorithm
(Carreira-Perpiñán, 2000; 2007), which can be viewed as

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

