Thompson Sampling for High-Dimensional Sparse Linear Contextual Bandits

Sunrit Chakraborty * 1 Saptarshi Roy * 1 Ambuj Tewari 1

Abstract

et al., 2003; Auer, 2002). Under this setting, (Dani et al.,
2008), (Chu et al., 2011) and (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011)
showed polynomial dependence of the cumulative regret
on ambient dimension d and time horizon T in low dimensional case. Specifically, (Dani et al., 2008) and (AbbasiYadkori√et al., 2011) proved a regret upper bound scaling
as O(d T ), while (Chu√et al., 2011) showed a regret upper
bound of the order O( dT ). It is worthwhile to mention
that all of the aforementioned algorithms fall under a certain class of algorithms known as upper confidence bound
(UCB) type algorithms that rely on the construction of a specific confidence set for the unknown parameter. In contrast,
Thompson Sampling (TS) maintains uncertainty about the
unknown parameter in the form of a posterior distribution.
The first TS algorithm under this setting was proposed by
(Agrawal & Goyal, 2013) √
where they established a regret
bound of the order O(d2 δ −1 T 1+δ ) for any δ ∈ (0, 1).

We consider the stochastic linear contextual bandit problem with high-dimensional features. We
analyze the Thompson sampling algorithm using
special classes of sparsity-inducing priors (e.g.,
spike-and-slab) to model the unknown parameter and provide a nearly optimal upper bound
on the expected cumulative regret. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first work that provides theoretical guarantees of Thompson sampling in high-dimensional and sparse contextual
bandits. For faster computation, we use variational inference instead of Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) to approximate the posterior distribution. Extensive simulations demonstrate the
improved performance of our proposed algorithm
over existing ones.

There is also a large body of work present in highdimensional sparse linear contextual bandit setup, where
the reward only depends on a small subset of features of the
observed contexts. This area has recently attracted considerable attention due to its abundance in modern reinforcement
learning applications (e.g, clinical trials, personalized recommendation systems, etc.) and has quite naturally spawned
theoretical research in this direction. Some of the important
references include (Bastani & Bayati, 2020; Wang et al.,
2018; Hao et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022; Ariu et al., 2022;
Kim & Paik, 2019; Li et al., 2022; Oh et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2021) among others. A more detailed discussion on existing
literature in the high dimensional bandit field is provided
in Section 3.3. However, there has been very limited work
dedicated to analyzing TS algorithms in high-dimensional
sparse bandit setups. (Hao et al., 2021) proposed a sparse
information-directed sampling (IDS) algorithm which under
a special case reduces to a TS algorithm based on a spikeand-slab Gaussian-Laplace prior. However, the regret bound
of IDS scales polynomially in d, which is sub-optimal in
the high-dimensional regime. In related work, (Gilton &
Willett, 2017) proposed a linear TS algorithm based on a
relevance vector machine (RVM) which again suffers from
sub-optimal dependence on d.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision-making, including bandits problems
and reinforcement learning, has been one of the most active
areas of research in machine learning. It formalizes the idea
of selecting actions based on current knowledge to optimize
some long term reward over sequentially collected data. On
the other hand, the abundance of personalized information
allows the learner to make decisions while incorporating
this contextual information, a setup that is mathematically
formalized as contextual bandits. Moreover, in the big data
era, the personal information used as contexts often has a
much larger size, which can be modeled by viewing the
contexts as high-dimensional vectors. Examples of such
models cover internet marketing and treatment assignment
in personalized medicine, among many others.
A particularly interesting special case of the contextual bandit problem is the linear contextual bandit problem, where
the expected reward is a linear function of the features (Abe
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. Correspondence to: Saptarshi Roy
<roysapta@umich.edu>.

In this paper, we specifically focus on the high-dimensional
sparse linear contextual bandit (SLCB) setup and propose
a TS algorithm based on a sparsity-inducing prior that en-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

