dugMatting: Decomposed-Uncertainty-Guided Matting

Jiawei Wu 1 Changqing Zhang 2 Zuoyong Li 3 Huazhu Fu 4 Xi Peng 5 Joey Tianyi Zhou 4 6

Abstract

1. Introduction
Digital image matting is the estimation of the opacity of
foreground or background from an image, which is one of
the fundamental elements in many applications, e.g., compositing live-action and rendered elements together, and
performing local color corrections. Specifically, given an
image I, image matting can be regarded as a linear combination of foreground F ∈ RH×W ×C and background
B ∈ RH×W ×C with the alpha matte µ ∈ [0, 1]H×W as
follows:
Im = µm Fm + (1 − µm )Bm ,

Cutting out an object and estimating its opacity
mask, known as image matting, is a key task in image and video editing. Due to the highly ill-posed
issue, additional inputs, typically user-defined
trimaps or scribbles, are usually needed to reduce
the uncertainty. Although effective, it is either
time consuming or only suitable for experienced
users who know where to place the strokes. In
this work, we propose a decomposed-uncertaintyguided matting (dugMatting) algorithm, which
explores the explicitly decomposed uncertainties
to efficiently and effectively improve the results.
Basing on the characteristic of these uncertainties, the epistemic uncertainty is reduced in the
process of guiding interaction (which introduces
prior knowledge), while the aleatoric uncertainty
is reduced in modeling data distribution (which
introduces statistics for both data and possible
noise). The proposed matting framework relieves
the requirement for users to determine the interaction areas by using simple and efficient labeling.
Extensively quantitative and qualitative results
validate that the proposed method significantly
improves the original matting algorithms in terms
of both efficiency and efficacy.

where m = (x, y) denotes the pixel position.
Since the estimation of µ without any extra information is
a highly ill-posed problem, traditional algorithms (Levin
et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2013; Lutz et al., 2018; Xu et al.,
2017; Li & Lu, 2020; Liu et al., 2021b; Park et al., 2022)
usually introduce a trimap to confine the solution space.
The trimap separates a picture into two known foreground
and background regions along with an unknown transition
region. Hence, the matting task is simplified as the problem
of estimating the opacity in the transition region. Based
on this simplification, the recently proposed matteformer
(Park et al., 2022) achieves the state-of-the-art performance.
However, drawing a suitable trimap is still time-consuming
and tedious. For some complex cases, it will even cost more
than 10 minutes (Wei et al., 2021).
Recently, some trimap-free matting algorithms attempt to
eliminate the model dependence on the prior labeling. However, the performance of trimap-free methods (Li et al.,
2022; Ke et al., 2022; Qin et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2018; Li
et al., 2021) still lags far behind the trimap-based methods.
The inherent reason is that these models cannot determine
which foreground target should be extracted without the
guidance of trimap. Therefore, existing trimap-free methods
are only able to extract the class-specific objects (e.g., portrait, animal) or salient objects after training on large-scale
matting data. Moreover, trimap-free methods is powerless
when users want to choose a new category. To balance the
efficiency and effectiveness, some novel interactive strategies have been introduced for matting. With user scribbles
or clicks, interactive matting achieves similar performance
to the trimap-based approaches in relatively low labeling
cost (Wei et al., 2021). However, a promising outcome

1
College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Fujian
Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, China 2 College of
Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Processing
and Intelligent Control, Minjiang University, Fuzhou, China
4
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 5 College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China 6 Centre for
Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Correspondence to:
Changqing Zhang <zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn>, Zuoyong Li
<fzulzytdq@126.com>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

