Facial Expression Recognition with Adaptive Frame Rate based on Multiple
Testing Correction

Andrey V. Savchenko 1 2 3

Abstract

high accuracy of decisions, low cost of equipment, ease
of use, etc. (Jillela & Ross, 2009). Video-based facial expression recognition (FER) is one of the most challenging
problems in facial analytics due to the ambiguity of labeling
emotions in large datasets, various intensities of the same
emotion, and high imbalance of emotions in different situations (Wang et al., 2022). Moreover, since real-world
settings entail uncontrolled conditions, FER systems should
be robust to various contexts and video recording conditions (Ryumina et al., 2022).

In this paper, we consider the problem of the high
computational complexity of video-based facial
expression recognition. A novel sequential procedure is proposed with an adaptive frame rate
selection in a short video fragment to speed up
decision-making. We automatically adjust the
frame rate and process fewer frames with a low
frame rate for more straightforward videos and
more frames for complex ones. To determine the
frame rate at which an inference is sufficiently
reliable, the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure from
multiple comparisons theory is employed to control the false discovery rate. The main advantages of our method are an improvement of the
trustworthiness of decision-making by maintaining only one hyper-parameter (false acceptance
rate) and its applicability with arbitrary neural
network models used as facial feature extractors
without the need to re-train these models. An
experimental study on datasets from ABAW and
EmotiW challenges proves the superior performance (1.5-40 times faster) of the proposed approach compared to processing all frames and
existing techniques with early exiting and adaptive frame selection.

Nevertheless, there exist many methods (Savchenko, 2023;
Zhang et al., 2022) that demonstrate reasonable accuracy
in several challenges, such as ABAW (Affective Behavior
Analysis in-the-Wild) (Kollias, 2022) and EmotiW (Emotion Recognition in-the-Wild) (Dhall, 2019). At first, the
majority of recent techniques (Jeong et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2019; Savchenko et al., 2022) perform two steps for each
video frame: (1) face detection; and (2) facial feature extraction. Even if the further processing is not computationally
complex, these steps typically employ slow inference in
deep neural networks. Unsatisfactory performance is exceptionally challenging for the second part, in which it is
essential to use complex models to reach high accuracy.
It is known that video data is often repetitive: the contents
of adjacent frames are usually strongly correlated (Dutson
et al., 2022). Hence, a lot of research has been done in
processing only a tiny fraction of available video frames by
selecting a subset of salient frames (Korbar et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2019b) or conditionally computing using early exiting (Ghodrati et al., 2021; Lim et al., 2022). Unfortunately,
most of these methods have been developed for action recognition problems (Yeung et al., 2016) and cannot be directly
applied to FER with the same gain in performance due to
the following reasons. At first, it is impossible to rapidly
analyze the quality of faces on each frame by a lightweight
neural net (Lin et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2019b) without running time-consuming face detection and/or tracking for each
frame. Secondly, existing emotional datasets are small and
dirty due to the high complexity of labeling emotions. The
trained models learn too many features specific to a concrete
dataset, which is impractical for in-the-wild settings. As a result, it is practically impossible to skip frames reliably using

1. Introduction
Affective behavior analysis and understanding of people’s
emotions should be essential to a new generation of humancentered interfaces, digital assistants, and personal advertisements (Kollias, 2022). It is known that face is the biometric
of choice for this task because of its desirable properties:
1

Sber AI Lab, Moscow, Russia 2 ISP RAS Research Center
for Trusted Artificial Intelligence 3 HSE University, Laboratory
of Algorithms and Technologies for Network Analysis, Nizhny
Novgorod, Russia. Correspondence to: Andrey V. Savchenko
<andrey.v.savchenko@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

