The Power of Preconditioning in Overparameterized Low-Rank Matrix Sensing

Xingyu Xu 1 Yandi Shen 2 Yuejie Chi 1 Cong Ma 2

Abstract

computationally efficient manner in recent years. Perhaps
the most well-known method is convex relaxation (Candès
& Plan, 2011; Davenport & Romberg, 2016; Recht et al.,
2010), which seeks the matrix with lowest nuclear norm to
fit the observed measurements:

We propose ScaledGD(λ), a preconditioned gradient descent method to tackle the low-rank matrix sensing problem when the true rank is unknown, and when the matrix is possibly illconditioned. Using overparameterized factor representations, ScaledGD(λ) starts from a small
random initialization, and proceeds by gradient
descent with a specific form of damped preconditioning to combat bad curvatures induced by
overparameterization and ill-conditioning. At the
expense of light computational overhead incurred
by preconditioners, ScaledGD(λ) is remarkably
robust to ill-conditioning compared to vanilla gradient descent (GD) even with overprameterization.
Specifically, we show that, under the Gaussian
design, ScaledGD(λ) converges to the true lowrank matrix at a constant linear rate after a small
number of iterations that scales only logarithmically with respect to the condition number and the
problem dimension. This significantly improves
over the convergence rate of vanilla GD which
suffers from a polynomial dependency on the condition number. Our work provides evidence on the
power of preconditioning in accelerating the convergence without hurting generalization in overparameterized learning.

min

M ⪰0

∥M ∥∗

s.t.

y = A(M ).

While statistically optimal, convex relaxation is prohibitive
in terms of both computation and memory as it directly
operates in the ambient matrix domain, i.e., Rn×n . To
address this challenge, nonconvex approaches based on lowrank factorization have been proposed (Burer & Monteiro,
2005):
min

X∈Rn×r

1
4

2

A(XX ⊤ ) − y 2 ,

(1)

where r is a user-specified rank parameter. Despite nonconvexity, when the rank is correctly specified, i.e., r = r⋆ , the
problem (1) admits computationally efficient solvers (Chi
et al., 2019), e.g., gradient descent (GD) with spectral initialization or with small random initialization. However, two
main challenges remain when applying the factorizationbased nonconvex approach in practice.
• Unknown rank. First, the true rank r⋆ is often unknown,
which makes it infeasible to set r = r⋆ . One necessarily
needs to consider an overparameterized setting in which r
is set conservatively, i.e., one sets r ≥ r⋆ or even r = n.
• Poor conditioning. Second, the ground truth matrix M⋆
may well be ill-conditioned, which is commonly encountered in practice. Existing approaches such as gradient descent are still computationally expensive in such settings as
the number of iterations necessary for convergence increases
with the condition number.

1. Introduction
Low-rank matrix recovery plays an essential role in modern
machine learning and signal processing. To fix ideas, let us
consider estimating a rank-r⋆ positive semidefinite matrix
M⋆ ∈ Rn×n based on a few linear measurements y :=
A(M⋆ ), where A : Rn×n → Rm models the measurement
process. Significant research efforts have been devoted
to tackling low-rank matrix recovery in a statistically and

In light of these two challenges, the main goal of this work
is to address the following question: Can one develop an
efficient method for solving ill-conditioned matrix recovery
in the overparameterized setting?

1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, United States
University of Chicago, Chicago, United States. Correspondence to: Yuejie Chi <yuejiec@andrew.cmu.edu>, Cong Ma
<congm@uchicago.edu>.
2

1.1. Our contributions: a preview
The main contribution of the current paper is to answer
the question affirmatively by developing a preconditioned
gradient descent method (ScaledGD(λ)) that converges to

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

