Meta-Learning the Inductive Bias of Simple Neural Circuits

William Dorrell 1 Maria Yuffa 1 Peter Latham 1

Abstract

the training data is likely noisy; how you sift signal from
noise can heavily influence generalisation, Fig. 1B.

Training data is always finite, making it unclear
how to generalise to unseen situations. But, animals do generalise, wielding Occam’s razor to
select a parsimonious explanation of their observations. How they do this is called their inductive
bias, and it is implicitly built into the operation
of animals’ neural circuits. This relationship between an observed circuit and its inductive bias
is a useful explanatory window for neuroscience,
allowing design choices to be understood normatively. However, it is generally very difficult to
map circuit structure to inductive bias. Here, we
present a neural network tool to bridge this gap.
The tool meta-learns the inductive bias by learning functions that a neural circuit finds easy to
generalise, since easy-to-generalise functions are
exactly those the circuit chooses to explain incomplete data. In systems with analytically known inductive bias, i.e. linear and kernel regression, our
tool recovers it. Generally, we show it can flexibly
extract inductive biases from supervised learners,
including spiking neural networks, and show how
it could be applied to real animals. Finally, we use
our tool to interpret recent connectomic data illustrating our intended use: understanding the role
of circuit features through the resulting inductive
bias.

Generalising requires prior assumptions about likely explanations of the data. For example, prior belief that small
changes in activity lead to correspondingly small changes
in valence would bias you towards smoother explanations,
breaking the tie between options 1 and 2 in Fig. 1A. It is
a learner’s inductive bias that chooses certain, otherwise
similarly well-fitting, explanations over others. Beyond this,
the inductive bias is not rigorously defined. For the purposes
of this paper we operationalise the inductive bias via the
generalisation error: learners are inductively biased towards
functions they generalise with low error.

Figure 1. Generalisation Requires Prior Assumptions. A: The
same dataset is perfectly fit by many functions. B: Different
assumptions about signal quality lead to different fittings. C:
Training a 2 (shallow) or 8 (deep) layer ReLU network on the
same dataset leads to different generalisations.

1
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, UCL. Correspondence to: William Dorrell <dorrellwec@gmail.com>.

The inductive bias of a learning algorithm, such as a neural network, can be a powerful route to understanding in
both Machine Learning and Neuroscience. Classically, the
success of convolutional neural networks can be attributed
to their explicit inductive bias towards translation-invariant
classifications (LeCun et al., 1998), and these ideas have
since been successfully extended to networks with a range of
structural biases (Bronstein et al., 2021). Further, many network features have been linked to implicit regularisation of
the network, such as the stochasticity of SGD (Mandt et al.,
2017), parameter initialisation (Glorot & Bengio, 2010),
early stopping (Hardt et al., 2016), or low rank biases of
gradient descent (Gunasekar et al., 2017).

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In neuroscience, the inductive bias has been used to assign
normative roles to representational or structural choices
via their effect on generalisation. For example, the non-

1. Introduction
Generalising to unseen data is a fundamental problem for
animals and machines: you receive a set of noisy training
data, say an assignment of valence to the activity of a sensory neuron, and must fill the gaps to predict valence from
activity, Fig. 1A. This is hard since, without prior assumptions, it is completely underconstrained. Many explanations
or hypotheses perfectly fit any dataset (Hume, 1748), but
different choices lead to wildly different outcomes. Further,

1

