Bayesian Estimation of Differential Privacy

Santiago Zanella-Béguelin * 1 Lukas Wutschitz * 1 Shruti Tople 1 Ahmed Salem 1 Victor Rühle 1
Andrew Paverd 1 Mohammad Naseri 2 Boris Köpf 1 Daniel Jones 1

Abstract
Algorithms such as Differentially Private SGD
enable training machine learning models with formal privacy guarantees. However, because these
guarantees hold with respect to unrealistic adversaries, the protection afforded against practical
attacks is typically much better. An emerging
strand of work empirically estimates the protection afforded by differentially private training as
a confidence interval for the privacy budget ε̂
spent with respect to specific threat models. Existing approaches derive confidence intervals for
ε̂ from confidence intervals for false positive and
false negative rates of membership inference attacks, which requires training an impractically
large number of models to get intervals that can
be acted upon. We propose a novel, more efficient
Bayesian approach that brings privacy estimates
within the reach of practitioners. Our approach
reduces sample size by computing a posterior for
ε̂ (not just a confidence interval) from the joint
posterior of the false positive and false negative
rates of membership inference attacks. We implement an end-to-end system for privacy estimation
that integrates our approach and state-of-the-art
membership inference attacks, and evaluate it on
text and vision classification tasks. For the same
number of samples, we see a reduction in interval
width of up to 40 % compared to prior work.

2

4

6

8

10

ε

90% CI using Clopper-Pearson [0, ∞)
90% CI using our approach [0.15, 6.4]

Figure 1. Comparison of the posterior PDF fε using our Bayesian
approach and the upper bound εth obtained from a state-of-the-art
DP accountant (Gopi et al., 2021) for a CNN trained on CIFAR-10
with δ of 10−5 . Empirical evaluation suggests stronger privacy
than what can be proven using accountants. Below the plot, we
illustrate the reduction in uncertainty of the 90 % credible interval
of our Bayesian approach over Clopper-Pearson intervals.

2016; Song et al., 2013) and PATE (Papernot et al., 2017)
partially addresses this concern by bounding the amount
of information that models can leak. However, there is a
gap between the degree of protection that DP training offers in theory, and the protection it offers in practice. For
example, DP training with a privacy budget of ε = 4, a
common choice in practice (Desfontaines, 2022), cannot
rule out membership inference attacks (Humphries et al.,
2020). Nonetheless, DP training with such large budgets effectively defeats attacks in many practical scenarios (Carlini
et al., 2019; Jayaraman & Evans, 2019; Song & Shmatikov,
2019; Zanella-Béguelin et al., 2020). The reason for this
discrepancy is that provable DP bounds (Gopi et al., 2021)
hold up to extremely powerful threat models (e.g., in the
case of DP-SGD, adversaries that can observe and tamper
with intermediate model updates) and so overestimate the
privacy risks of weaker adversaries that matter in practice.

The use of machine learning in industries such as healthcare
and finance requires strong and auditable safeguards against
leakage of sensitive training data. Differentially Private (DP)
training using algorithms such as DP-SGD (Abadi et al.,
1

εth

0.1

1. Introduction

*

PDF for ε

fε
0.2

Without any information beyond provable DP bounds, practitioners must either err on the side of caution and use unnecessarily small privacy budgets, which hurt utility, or risk
using larger budgets based on a guess of the privacy they
provide. To resolve this conflict, an emerging strand of work
measures the empirical protection afforded by DP training
against specific adversaries by computing statistical estimates for the privacy budget spent (Hyland & Tople, 2019;

2

Equal contribution Microsoft, Cambridge, UK University
College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Santiago
Zanella-Béguelin <santiago@microsoft.com>, Lukas Wutschitz
<luwutsch@microsoft.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

