Understanding Self-Distillation in the Presence of Label Noise

Rudrajit Das 1 Sujay Sanghavi 1

Abstract

capacity to better model the underlying label distribution
compared to the provided hard labels, and have the student
with smaller capacity learn some mixture of the teacher’s
predicted label distribution (a.k.a. “dark knowledge”) and
the provided label distribution. Specifically, the student’s
per-sample loss in the KD framework is:

Self-distillation (SD) is the process of first training a "teacher" model and then using its predictions to train a "student" model that has the same
architecture. Specifically, the student’s loss is ξ ∗
ℓ(teacher’s predictions, student’s predictions) +
(1 − ξ) ∗ ℓ(given labels, student’s predictions) ,
where ℓ is the loss function and ξ is some parameter ∈ [0, 1]. SD has been empirically observed to
provide performance gains in several settings. In
this paper, we theoretically characterize the effect
of SD in two supervised learning problems with
noisy labels. We first analyze SD for regularized
linear regression and show that in the high label
noise regime, the optimal value of ξ that minimizes the expected error in estimating the ground
truth parameter is surprisingly greater than 1. Empirically, we show that ξ > 1 works better than
ξ ≤ 1 even with the cross-entropy loss for several
classification datasets when 50% or 30% of the
labels are corrupted. Further, we quantify when
optimal SD is better than optimal regularization.
Next, we analyze SD in the case of logistic regression for binary classification with random label
corruption and quantify the range of label corruption in which the student outperforms the teacher
(w.r.t. accuracy). To our knowledge, this is the
first result of its kind for the cross-entropy loss.



ξ ∗ ℓ yT , yS (θ) + (1 − ξ) ∗ ℓ y, yS (θ) ,

where ℓ is some loss function (usually, regularized crossentropy loss for classification problems), yT is the teacher’s
predicted label, y is the given label on which the teacher
is trained, yS (θ) is the prediction of the student model parameterized by θ, and ξ ∈ [0, 1] is known as the imitation
parameter (Lopez-Paz et al., 2015)1 . KD and its variants
have been shown to be beneficial for model compression
(i.e., distilling a bigger teacher model’s knowledge into a
smaller student model), making models robust and improving performance in general (Li et al., 2017; Furlanello et al.,
2018; Sun et al., 2019; Ahn et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020;
Xie et al., 2020; Sarfraz et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Beyer
et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022); see Gou et al. (2021) for a
survey on KD.
The focus of this work is on the special case of the student
and teacher having the same architecture, which is known
as self-distillation (following Mobahi et al. (2020)); we
abbreviate it as SD henceforth. Since the teacher and student
have the same capacity, one would expect the utility of the
teacher’s dark knowledge to be very limited, if any at all.
However, surprisingly, Furlanello et al. (2018) show that SD
(with ensembling) yields performance gains in both vision
and language tasks with extensive experiments. Further, Li
et al. (2017) empirically demonstrate that SD can ameliorate
learning in the presence of noisy labels. There are also a
few works that theoretically investigate SD, such as Mobahi
et al. (2020); Dong et al. (2019); we discuss these in detail
in Section 2. The results of these papers are only with the
squared loss and not the cross-entropy loss which is the de
facto loss function for classification problems.

1. Introduction
The core idea of knowledge distillation (KD), introduced in
Hinton et al. (2015), is to train a student model with a teacher
model’s predicted soft labels (i.e., the output probability
distribution over the classes for classification problems)
in addition to the original hard labels (one-hot vectors for
classification problems) on which the teacher is trained. The
original rationale was to use a teacher with large statistical
1
UT Austin.
<rdas@utexas.edu>.

Correspondence to:

(1)

In this work, we theoretically analyze SD in the presence
of label corruption (in the supervised setting) for the crossentropy loss as well as the squared loss, characterizing its

Rudrajit Das

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1
In this work, we set the temperature parameter suggested in
Hinton et al. (2015) equal to 1.

1

