On the Effectiveness of Offline RL for Dialogue Response Generation

Paloma Sodhi 1 Felix Wu 1 Ethan R. Elenberg 1 Kilian Q. Weinberger 1 2 Ryan McDonald 1

Abstract

However, this can be expensive to collect. Instead, modelbased metrics to measure utterance similarity, such as
BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019) and BLEURT (Sellam
et al., 2020), provide a cheaper alternative. These are automated metrics that capture semantic similarity between
sentences and tend to have a high correlation with human
judgment (Zhang et al., 2019; Sellam et al., 2020). Given
a choice of such metrics, what learning framework would
allow us to maximize them for dialogue text generation?

A common training technique for language models is teacher forcing (TF). TF attempts to match
human language exactly, even though identical
meanings can be expressed in different ways. This
motivates use of sequence-level objectives for dialogue response generation. In this paper, we study
the efficacy of various offline reinforcement learning (RL) methods to maximize such objectives.
We present a comprehensive evaluation across
multiple datasets, models, and metrics. Offline
RL shows a clear performance improvement over
teacher forcing while not inducing training instability or sacrificing practical training budgets.3

Recent works have explored online RL methods for text generation (Ranzato et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; Ouyang et al.,
2022; Ramamurthy et al., 2022), leading to some exciting
successes (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, offline RL has
received relatively less attention (Jaques et al., 2020; Pang
& He, 2020). We argue that offline RL (Levine et al., 2020)
does provide a framework that meets all aforementioned
desiderata. Unlike teacher forcing, it can handle losses on
the entire sequence as a reward function and unlike online
RL, it can leverage existing data without having to explore,
matching similar training times as teacher forcing.

1. Introduction
Dialogue response generation is an important task in natural
language processing with numerous applications such as
virtual personal assistants and call center agent tools (Zhou
et al., 2017; Swanson et al., 2019; Jaques et al., 2020; Ramakrishnan et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022). Historically,
text generation models have typically been trained with
teacher forcing (TF) (Williams & Zipser, 1989), which involves predicting the next token in a sequence to exactly
match the human utterance in a ground truth dataset. However, this can be a needlessly challenging objective, as a human may choose to say the same thing in multiple different
ways. Consider a dialogue system that provides suggestions
to an agent during a conversation with a customer. These
suggestions need only be close enough for an agent to select
it. This suggests a different objective, one that is defined on
the entire sentence rather than individual tokens.

In this paper, we present a comprehensive evaluation of
offline RL methods for dialogue text generation and investigate best practices. We explore three complementary
approaches. The first, TF Top, is to fine-tune a model on
utterances that accrue high returns. The second, Decision
Transformers (DT) (Chen et al., 2021b), is to train a conditional model that conditions on returns, and at inference
time condition on a high return. The third, ILQL (Kostrikov
et al., 2021; Snell et al., 2022), is an off-policy Q-learning
approach that uses dynamic programming to train a critic.
All three of these approaches are complementary and have
been shown to be competitive outside of dialogue settings,
making them great candidates to evaluate the efficacy of
offline RL for dialogue text generation.

One way to design such a loss would be to incorporate
human-in-the-loop feedback if a model generated utterance matches the meaning of the ground truth sentence.

To summarize our contributions, we formalize three stateof-the-art offline RL approaches for the task of dialogue
text generation. We evaluate them across multiple data
sets, models, and metrics and provide a thorough ablation
analysis of these approaches. We find that offline RL methods show a clear performance improvement over teacher
forcing and achieve a trade-off where they generate text
close enough in meaning to human. Through different experiments, we demonstrate that the offline RL framework

1

ASAPP, New York, United States 2 Cornell University,
New York, United States. Correspondence to: Paloma Sodhi
<psodhi@asapp.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
3
Our code is available at https://github.com/
asappresearch/dialogue-offline-rl

1

