Towards Explaining Distribution Shifts

Sean Kulinski 1 David I. Inouye 1

Abstract

appropriate reaction, if any, that needs to be taken. In this
work, our goal is to aid these operators in providing an
explanation of such a change.

A distribution shift can have fundamental consequences such as signaling a change in the operating environment or significantly reducing the accuracy of downstream models. Thus, understanding distribution shifts is critical for examining
and hopefully mitigating the effect of such a shift.
Most prior work focuses on merely detecting if a
shift has occurred and assumes any detected shift
can be understood and handled appropriately by
a human operator. We hope to aid in these manual mitigation tasks by explaining the distribution
shift using interpretable transportation maps from
the original distribution to the shifted one. We
derive our interpretable mappings from a relaxation of optimal transport, where the candidate
mappings are restricted to a set of interpretable
mappings. We then inspect multiple quintessential use-cases of distribution shift in real-world
tabular, text, and image datasets to showcase how
our explanatory mappings provide a better balance between detail and interpretability than baseline explanations by both visual inspection and
our PercentExplained metric.

This ubiquitous phenomenon of having a difference between
related distributions is known as distribution shift. Much
prior work focuses on detecting distribution shifts; however,
there is little prior work that looks into understanding a
detected distribution shift. As it is usually solely up to an
operator investigating a flagged distribution shift to decide
what to do next, understanding the shift is critical for the
operator to more efficiently mitigate any harmful effects
of the distribution shift. Due to the fact that there are no
cohesive methods for understanding distribution shifts, as
well as, the potential high complexity of distribution shifts
(e.g., (Koh et al., 2021)), this important manual investigation task can be daunting. The current de facto standard
in analyzing a shift in tabular data is to look at how the
mean of the original, source, distribution shifted to the new,
target, distribution. However, this simple explanation can
miss crucial shift information due to being a coarse summary (e.g., Figure 2) or, in high-dimensional regimes, can
be uninterpretable. Thus, there is a need for methods that
can automatically provide detailed, yet interpretable, information about a detected shift which ultimately can lead to
actionable insights about the shift.

1. Introduction

Therefore, we propose a novel framework for explaining distribution shifts, such as showing how features have changed
or how groups within the distributions have shifted. Since a
distribution shift can be seen as a movement from a source
distribution x ∼ Psrc to a target distribution y ∼ Ptgt , we
define a distribution shift explanation as a transport map
T (x) which maps a point in our source distribution onto
a point in our target distribution. For example, under this
framework, the typical distribution shift explanation via
mean shift can be written as T (x) = x + (µy − µx ). Intuitively, these transport maps can be thought of as a functional
approximation of how the source distribution could have
moved in a distribution space to become our target distribution. However, without making assumptions on the type of
shift, there exist many possible mappings that explain the
shift (see subsection A.1 for examples). Thus, we leverage
prior optimal transport work to define an ideal distribution
shift explanation and develop practical algorithms for finding and validating such maps.

Most real-world environments are constantly changing, and
in many situations, understanding how a specific operating
environment has changed is crucial to making decisions
respective to such a change. Such a change might be due to
a new data distribution seen in deployment which causes a
machine-learning model to begin to fail. Another example
is a decrease in monthly sales data which could be due to
a temporary supply chain issue in distributing a product or
could mark a shift in consumer preferences. When these
changes are encountered, the burden is often placed on a
human operator to investigate the shift and determine the
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. Correspondence
to: David I. Inouye <dinouye@purdue.edu>, Sean Kulinski
<skulinsk@purdue.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

