Semi-Supervised Offline Reinforcement Learning with Action-Free Trajectories

Qinqing Zheng 1 Mikael Henaff 1 Brandon Amos 1 Aditya Grover 2

Abstract

sources (Levine et al., 2020). Standard offline RL assumes fully logged datasets: the trajectories are complete
sequences of observations, actions, and rewards. However,
contrary to curated benchmarks in use today, the nature of
offline demonstrations in the real world can be highly varied.
For example, the demonstrations could be misaligned due
to frequency mismatch (Burns et al., 2022), use different
sensors, actuators, or dynamics (Reed et al., 2022; Lee et al.,
2022), or lack partial state (Ghosh et al., 2022; Rafailov
et al., 2021; Mazoure et al., 2021) or reward information (Yu
et al., 2022). Successful offline RL in the real world requires
embracing these heterogeneous aspects for maximal data
efficiency, similar to learning in humans.

Natural agents can effectively learn from multiple
data sources that differ in size, quality, and types
of measurements. We study this heterogeneity in
the context of offline reinforcement learning (RL)
by introducing a new, practically motivated semisupervised setting. Here, an agent has access to
two sets of trajectories: labelled trajectories containing state, action and reward triplets at every
timestep, along with unlabelled trajectories that
contain only state and reward information. For
this setting, we develop and study a simple metaalgorithmic pipeline that learns an inverse dynamics model on the labelled data to obtain proxylabels for the unlabelled data, followed by the use
of any offline RL algorithm on the true and proxylabelled trajectories. Empirically, we find this
simple pipeline to be highly successful — on several D4RL benchmarks (Fu et al., 2020), certain
offline RL algorithms can match the performance
of variants trained on a fully labelled dataset even
when we label only 10% of trajectories which are
highly suboptimal. To strengthen our understanding, we perform a large-scale controlled empirical
study investigating the interplay of data-centric
properties of the labelled and unlabelled datasets,
with algorithmic design choices (e.g., choice of
inverse dynamics, offline RL algorithm) to identify general trends and best practices for training
RL agents on semi-supervised offline datasets.

1

In this work, we propose a new and practically motivated
semi-supervised setup for offline RL: the offline dataset
consists of some action-free trajectories (which we call unlabelled) in addition to the standard action-complete trajectories (which we call labelled). In particular, we are mainly
interested in the case where a significant majority of the
trajectories in the offline dataset are unlabelled, and the unlabelled data might have different qualities than the labelled
ones. One motivating example for this setup is learning
from videos (Schmeckpeper et al., 2020a;b) or third-person
demonstrations (Stadie et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2019).
There are tremendous amounts of internet videos that can
be potentially used to train RL agents, yet they are without
action labels and are of varying quality. Notably, our setup
has two key properties that differentiate it from traditional
semi-supervised learning:
• First, we do not assume that the distribution of the labelled
and unlabelled trajectories are necessarily identical. In
realistic scenarios, we expect these to be different with unlabelled data having higher returns than labelled data e.g.,
videos of a human professional are easy to obtain whereas
precisely measuring their actions is challenging. We replicate such varied data quality setups in some of our experiments; Figure 1.1 shows an illustration of the difference in
returns between the labelled and unlabelled dataset splits
using the hopper-medium-expert D4RL dataset.

Introduction

One of the key challenges with deploying reinforcement
learning (RL) agents is their prohibitive sample complexity
for real-world applications. Offline reinforcement learning (RL) can significantly reduce the sample complexity
by exploiting logged demonstrations from auxiliary data
1
Meta AI Research 2 UCLA. Correspondence to: Qinqing
Zheng <zhengqinqing@gmail.com>.

• Second, our end goal goes beyond labelling the actions
in the unlabelled trajectories, but rather we intend to use
the unlabelled data for learning a downstream policy that
is better than the behavioral policies used for generating
the offline datasets.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

