Lowering the Pre-training Tax for Gradient-based Subset Training:
A Lightweight Distributed Pre-Training Toolkit

Yeonju Ro 1 Zhangyang Wang 1 Vijay Chidambaram 1 2 Aditya Akella 1

1. Introduction

Abstract

In the era of deep learning, neural networks are progressively becoming larger, and so are the dataset sizes (Gao
et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2020). Training with gigantic datasets
demands significant computation resources such as CPUs
and GPUs, and high-capacity memories are required to load
and process samples. When it comes to distributed training, large datasets also induce significant communication
between storage and compute nodes as well as between
worker nodes (e.g., to aggregate gradients).

Training data and model sizes are increasing exponentially. One way to reduce training time and
resources is to train with a carefully selected subset of the full dataset. Prior work uses the gradient signals obtained during a warm-up or “pretraining” phase over the full dataset, for determining the core subset; if the pre-training phase
is too small, the gradients obtained are chaotic
and unreliable. As a result, the pre-training phase
itself incurs significant time/resource overhead,
and prior work has not gone beyond hyperparameter search to reduce pre-training time. Our work
explicitly aims to reduce this pre-training tax
in gradient-based subset training. We develop a
principled, scalable approach for pre-training in a
distributed setup. Our approach is lightweight and
minimizes communication between distributed
worker nodes. It is the first to utilize the concept of model-soup based distributed training at
initialization. The key idea is to minimally train
an ensemble of models on small, disjointed subsets of the data; we further employ data-driven
sparsity and data augmentation for local worker
training to boost ensemble diversity. The centralized model, obtained at the end of pre-training
by merging the per-worker models, is found to
offer stabilized gradient signals to select subsets,
on which the main model is further trained. We
have validated the effectiveness of our method
through extensive experiments on CIFAR-10/100,
and ImageNet, using ResNet and WideResNet
models. For example, our approach is shown
to achieve 15.4× pre-training speedup and 2.8×
end-to-end speedup on CIFAR10 and ResNet18
without loss of accuracy. The code is at https:
//github.com/moonbucks/LiPT.git.

Subset (or coreset) training has been explored as a potential workaround to the explosion of large datasets (Agarwal et al., 2005; Maalouf et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2023; Liu
et al., 2023). The key idea is to train on a small, but important, subset instead of the full dataset; this reduces both
training time and resource use. Researchers have proposed
a variety of algorithms to select the most valuable data
(e.g., based on Shapley value (Tripathi et al., 2020), geometric distance (Sener & Savarese, 2017), and submodular functions (Wei et al., 2014a; 2015; 2014b; Iyer et al.,
2021)). Among these, the recently proposed gradient-based
methods (Toneva et al., 2018; Paul et al., 2021; Killamsetty
et al., 2021a; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020; Killamsetty et al.,
2021b) have demonstrated state-of-the-art accuracy. These
approaches generally use gradient signals for data valuation.
Score-based methods (Toneva et al., 2018; Paul et al., 2021)
give an importance value to each data item based on its
gradients and select items with high values for subset training. Gradient-matching-based methods (Killamsetty et al.,
2021a; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020) pick the data subset
whose weighted gradients can best match the full training
(or validation) set’s gradients.
Gradient-based subset training methods run into a wellknown issue: since early-stage gradients obtained from
nearly untrained models are chaotic and unreliable, they
can deteriorate the quality of the chosen subset. Most prior
works hence introduce a default “pre-training” or warmup stage and later perform subset selection using the pretrained model gradients. The typical pre-training approach
is to train a model using the entire data over several epochs
(Section 3.1). Despite effectively boosting the accuracy,
this conventional pre-training approach is clearly not free of

1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 VMware Research. Correspondence to: Yeonju Ro <yro@cs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

