What can online reinforcement learning with function approximation benefit
from general coverage conditions?

Fanghui Liu 1 Luca Viano 1 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

trajectory. To tackle the large state/action space setting,
function approximation (Sutton et al., 1999; Jin et al., 2020)
is a powerful and indispensable technique in both theory
and practice to approximate the true value function from a
pre-given function class.

In online reinforcement learning (RL), instead
of employing standard structural assumptions on
Markov decision processes (MDPs), using a certain coverage condition (original from offline RL)
is enough to ensure sample-efficient guarantees
(Xie et al., 2023). In this work, we focus on
this new direction by digging more possible and
general coverage conditions, and study the potential and the utility of them in efficient online
RL. We identify more concepts, including the Lp
variant of concentrability, the density ratio realizability, and trade-off on the partial/rest coverage
condition, that can be also beneficial to sampleefficient online RL, achieving improved regret
bound. Furthermore, if exploratory offline data
are used, under our coverage conditions, both
statistically and computationally efficient guarantees can be achieved for online RL. Besides, even
though the MDP structure is given, e.g., linear
MDP, we elucidate that, good coverage conditions
are still √
beneficial to obtain faster regret bound bee T ) and even a logarithmic order regret.
yond O(
These results provide a good justification for the
usage of general coverage conditions in efficient
online RL.

In online RL, much efforts are devoted to developing sampleefficient algorithms in a general function approximation
class beyond linear MDP (Jin et al., 2020). By explicitly assuming some structural assumptions on MDPs, e.g., Eluder
dimension (Russo and Van Roy, 2013), Bellman Eluder (BE)
dimension (Jin et al., 2021a), typical algorithms including
GOLF (Jin et al., 2021a), OPERA (Chen et al., 2022) enjoy
sample efficient guarantees in online RL. Normally, these
algorithms for general function approximation in online RL
are not computation-efficient due to the constructed “global”
confidence sets for exploration.
Instead of explicitly assuming structural assumptions as
above-mentioned, the data coverage condition (Munos and
Szepesvári, 2008), widely used in offline RL, in fact implicitly imposes structural assumptions on the MDP dynamics
(Chen and Jiang, 2019). It asserts that a pre-given (even
unknown) data distribution µ provides sufficient coverage
over the state space. Recently, Xie et al. (2023) show that,
even though no offline data are used, a good data coverage condition, w.r.t an underlying distribution, can ensure
sample-efficient guarantees in online RL.
Accordingly, studying the coverage condition instead of
classical structural assumption on MDPs in online RL is
an alternative but promising way. This direction provides
a natural connection between offline and online RL in both
theory (Wang et al., 2021a; Foster et al., 2021; Zanette,
2021) and practice (Nair et al., 2020; Levine et al., 2020).
Besides, it provides a new view to develop sample-efficient
and even computation-efficient algorithms for general function approximation in online RL, as suggested by (Song
et al., 2022).

1. Introduction
Modern reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms modeled
by Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Szepesvári, 2010),
e.g., deep Q network (Mnih et al., 2015), Go (Silver et al.,
2016), often work in an online setting under large (or even
infinite) state space and action space. Here the terminology
online means that the agent repeatedly interacts with the
environment by executing a policy and observing the past
1

Laboratory for Information and Inference Systems, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. Correspondence to: Fanghui Liu <fanghui.liu@epfl.ch>.

In this work, we focus on this new direction by digging
more general coverage conditions, and study the potential
and the utility of them in efficient online RL under various
scenarios as below.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

