Policy Mirror Ascent for
Efficient and Independent Learning in Mean Field Games

Batuhan Yardim 1 Semih Cayci 2 Matthieu Geist 3 Niao He 1

Abstract

games (Samvelyan et al., 2019), energy markets (Rashedi
et al., 2016), robotic control (Matignon et al., 2007), and
cloud resource management (Mao et al., 2022).

Mean-field games have been used as a theoretical
tool to obtain an approximate Nash equilibrium
for symmetric and anonymous N -player games.
However, limiting applicability, existing theoretical results assume variations of a “population
generative model”, which allows arbitrary modifications of the population distribution by the learning algorithm. Moreover, learning algorithms typically work on abstract simulators with population instead of the N -player game. Instead, we
show that N agents running policy mirror ascent
converge to the Nash equilibrium of the regulare −2 ) samples from a single
ized game within O(ε
sample trajectory without a population generative
model, up to a standard O( √1N ) error due to the
mean field. Taking a divergent approach from
the literature, instead of working with the bestresponse map we first show that a policy mirror
ascent map can be used to construct a contractive operator having the Nash equilibrium as its
fixed point. We analyze single-path TD learning
for N -agent games, proving sample complexity
guarantees by only using a sample path from the
N -agent simulator without a population generative model. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our
methodology allows for independent learning by
N agents with finite sample guarantees.

The mean field game (MFG) framework, first proposed by
Lasry & Lions (2007) and Huang et al. (2006), is a useful
theoretical tool for analyzing a specific class of MARL problems for the N -player case when N is large. As its main
insight, MFG analyzes the limiting game when N → ∞,
under the condition that the rewards and transition dynamics of the game are symmetric for each agent and depend
only on the distribution of agents’ states (i.e., the agents
are anonymous). Conceptually, MFG formulates a representative agent playing against a distribution of agents. This
abstract framework makes it tractable to theoretically characterize an approximate Nash equilibrium for the N -agent
MARL, coinciding with the true Nash equilibrium as N
grows (Anahtarci et al., 2022; Saldi et al., 2018). Moreover,
one can efficiently learn such “MFG Nash equilibria” from
repeated plays (for instance, see Perrin et al., 2020). The
MFG formalism is useful in analyzing for instance financial
systems, auctions, and city planning.
While sharing similar ideas in principle, there have been
various mathematical formalizations of MFGs. In the finite
horizon case, the Lasry-Lions conditions have been analyzed to obtain Nash equilibria with time-dependent policies
(Perrin et al., 2020; 2021). In the infinite horizon setting, the
time-dependent evolution of the population becomes a challenge. One can either consider policies depending on the
population distribution (Yang et al., 2018; Carmona et al.,
2019), or consider Nash equilibria induced by stationary
population distributions (Anahtarci et al., 2022; Xie et al.,
2021; Zaman et al., 2022). This paper studies this “stationary MFG” problem, formalized in the following section.
The results of our work are juxtaposed with existing theory
in Table 1.

1. Introduction
Multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a fundamentally challenging problem, despite this with a wide spectrum
of applications, for instance in finance (Shavandi & Khedmati, 2022), civil engineering (Wiering, 2000), multi-player

In parallel to MFG literature, there exists a plethora of
results regarding policy gradient (PG) methods in single
agent RL (Agarwal et al., 2021; Lan, 2022; Cen et al., 2022;
Mei et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022; Tomar et al., 2021). Such
methods are typically on-policy algorithms, as opposed
to Q-learning which has been employed in MFG literature
(for instance in Anahtarci et al., 2022; Zaman et al.,

1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland 2 Department of Mathematics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany 3 Google Research, Brain team. Correspondence to: Batuhan Yardim <alibatuhan.yardim@inf.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

