Universal Morphology Control via Contextual Modulation

Zheng Xiong 1 Jacob Beck 1 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract

the high sample complexity of RL, the currently dominant
paradigm of learning a new policy from scratch for each
robot morphology is not scalable, and universal controllers
that can generalize across different morphologies are desirable to improve learning efficiency, i.e., we want to learn a
universal controller with much less environment interactions
compared to the total samples required to learn a separate
controller for each robot to control.

Learning a universal policy across different robot
morphologies can significantly improve learning
efficiency and generalization in continuous control. However, it poses a challenging multi-task
reinforcement learning problem, as the optimal
policy may be quite different across robots and
critically depend on the morphology. Existing
methods utilize graph neural networks or transformers to handle heterogeneous state and action
spaces across different morphologies, but pay little attention to the dependency of a robot’s control
policy on its morphology context. In this paper,
we propose a hierarchical architecture to better
model this dependency via contextual modulation,
which includes two key submodules: (1) Instead
of enforcing hard parameter sharing across robots,
we use hypernetworks to generate morphologydependent control parameters; (2) We propose a
fixed attention mechanism that solely depends on
the morphology to modulate the interactions between different limbs in a robot. Experimental
results show that our method not only improves
learning performance on a diverse set of training robots, but also generalizes better to unseen
morphologies in a zero-shot fashion. The code is
publicly available at https://github.com/
MasterXiong/ModuMorph.

Multi-task RL (MTRL) (Vithayathil Varghese & Mahmoud,
2020) provides a promising solution to this challenge by
treating the control of each robot as a unique task. Instead
of learning a separate policy for each morphology, MTRL
learns a single policy, conditioned on both the robot state
and the morphology, to generalize across different robots.
From this MTRL perspective, the robot morphology is important context that helps identify the task, as the optimal
control policy of a robot critically depends on its morphology. For example, if an animal injures a leg, which changes
its morphology, then a different gait may be required for
locomotion. Similarly, an animal’s tail can significantly influence its locomotion even if all the other body parts remain
unchanged (Jagnandan & Higham, 2017).
However, previous work on universal morphology control
mainly focuses on policy architecture design, such as using
graph neural networks (GNNs) (Wang et al., 2018; Huang
et al., 2020) or transformers (Kurin et al., 2021; Gupta et al.,
2022), to enable generalization over heterogeneous state
and action spaces, as the number of limbs differs across
morphologies. By contrast, little attention has been paid
to how to effectively utilize the morphology context in the
control policy. While some recent works propose to feed
morphology context as an additional input to the policy
network (Gupta et al., 2022), or add a morphology-aware
positional encoding (PE) to the state representation (Gupta
et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2022), in effect they are equivalent
to just adding a context-conditioned bias term to the node
embedding layer in the network. This may lack sufficient
model capacity to represent the diverse policies required
to control different morphologies, as supported by both
theoretical (Galanti & Wolf, 2020) and empirical evidence
(Ben-Iwhiwhu et al., 2022; Beck et al., 2022) from previous
work in multi-task learning and meta-learning.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) for robotic control has made
great progress in recent years (Levine et al., 2016; Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Brohan et al.,
2022). However, the control policy learned on one robot
usually cannot transfer to another robot with a different morphology due to their incompatible state and action spaces.
Given the huge number of possible robot morphologies and
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom. Correspondence to: Zheng Xiong
<zheng.xiong@cs.ox.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To better utilize task context for morphology control, we

1

