Combinatorial Neural Bandits
Taehyun Hwang * 1 Kyuwook Chai * 1 Min-hwan Oh 1

Abstract

the feature vectors (contexts) of the chosen arms. However,
the functional form of the feedback model is unknown to
the agent. Therefore, the agent needs to carefully balance
exploration and exploitation in order to simultaneously learn
the feedback model and optimize cumulative rewards.

We consider a contextual combinatorial bandit problem where in each round a learning
agent selects a subset of arms and receives feedback on the selected arms according to their
scores. The score of an arm is an unknown function of the arm’s feature. Approximating this
unknown score function with deep neural networks, we propose algorithms: Combinatorial
Neural UCB (CN-UCB) and Combinatorial Neural Thompson Sampling (CN-TS).pWe prove that
√
e K) regret,
e de T ) or O(
e dT
CN-UCB achieves O(
e
where d is the effective dimension of a neural
tangent kernel matrix, K is the size of a subset
of arms, and T is the time horizon. For CN-TS,
we adapt an optimistic sampling technique to ensure the optimism of the sampled combinatorial
action, achieving
a worst-case (frequentist) regret
√
of e
O(de T K). To the best of our knowledge,
these are the first combinatorial neural bandit algorithms with regret performance guarantees. In
particular, CN-TS is the first Thompson sampling
algorithm with the worst-case regret guarantees
for the general contextual combinatorial bandit
problem. The numerical experiments demonstrate
the superior performances of our proposed algorithms.

Many real-world applications are naturally combinatorial
action selection problems. For example, in most online recommender systems, such as streaming services and online
retail, recommended items are typically presented as a set
or a list. Real-time vehicle routing can be formulated as the
shortest-path problem under uncertainty which is a classic
combinatorial problem. Network routing is also another
example of a combinatorial optimization problem. Often, in
these applications, the response model is not fully known
a priori (e.g., user preferences in recommender systems,
arrival time in vehicle routing) but can only be queried by
sequential interactions. Therefore, these applications can be
formulated as a combinatorial bandit problem.
Despite the generality and wide applicability of the combinatorial bandit problem in practice, the combinatorial action
space poses a greater challenge in balancing exploration
and exploitation. To overcome such a challenge, parametric
models such as the (generalized) linear model are often assumed for the feedback model (Qin et al., 2014; Wen et al.,
2015; Kveton et al., 2015; Zong et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016;
2019; Oh & Iyengar, 2019). These works typically extend
the techniques in the (generalized) linear contextual bandits (Abe & Long, 1999; Auer, 2002; Filippi et al., 2010;
Rusmevichientong & Tsitsiklis, 2010; Abbasi-Yadkori et al.,
2011; Chu et al., 2011; Li et al., 2017) to utilize contextual
information and the structure of the feedback/reward model
to avoid the naive exploration in combinatorial action space.
However, the representation power of the (generalized) linear model can be limited in many real-world applications.
When the model assumptions are violated, often the performances of the algorithms that exploit the structure of a
model can severely deteriorate.

1. Introduction
We consider a general class of contextual semi-bandits with
combinatorial actions, where in each round the learning
agent is given a set of arms, chooses a subset of arms, and
receives feedback on each of the chosen arms along with
the reward based on the combinatorial actions. The goal of
the agent is to maximize cumulative rewards through these
repeated interactions. The feedback is given as a function of

Beyond the parametric assumption for the feedback model,
discretization-based techniques (Chen et al., 2018; Nika
et al., 2020) have been proposed to capture the non-linearity
of the base arm under the Lipschitz condition on the feedback model. These techniques split the context space and
compute an upper confidence bound of rewards for each context partition. The performances of the algorithms strongly

*

Equal contribution 1 Graduate School of Data Science, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Correspondence
to: Min-hwan Oh <minoh@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

