Diagnosis, Feedback, Adaptation:
A Human-in-the-Loop Framework for Test-Time Policy Adaptation

Andi Peng 1 Aviv Netanyahu 1 Mark Ho 2 Tianmin Shu 1 Andreea Bobu 3 Julie Shah 1 Pulkit Agrawal 1

Abstract
Policies often fail due to distribution shift—
changes in the state and reward that occur when
a policy is deployed in new environments. Data
augmentation can increase robustness by making the model invariant to task-irrelevant changes
in the agent’s observation. However, designers
don’t know which concepts are irrelevant a priori,
especially when different end users have different preferences about how the task is performed.
We propose an interactive framework to leverage
feedback directly from the user to identify personalized task-irrelevant concepts. Our key idea is to
generate counterfactual demonstrations that allow
users to quickly identify possible task-relevant
and irrelevant concepts. The knowledge of taskirrelevant concepts is then used to perform data
augmentation and thus obtain a policy adapted to
personalized user objectives. We present experiments validating our framework on discrete and
continuous control tasks with real human users.
Our method (1) enables users to better understand
agent failure, (2) reduces the number of demonstrations required for fine-tuning, and (3) aligns
the agent to individual user task preferences.

Figure 1. Illustrative distribution shifts for task: “Get my mug.”
Shifted concepts can be state-based (a changed object) and also
reward-based (dependent on user preference). We can deploy data
augmentation for task-irrelevant shifts (green checks), a subset
where the modified state does not impact desired policy behaviour.

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 New York University
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Andi
Peng <andipeng@mit.edu>.

What can we, as designers, do to fix the robot? We could retrain the robot via reinforcement learning, but such training
is expensive and requires the user to be an expert at reward
design (Amodei et al., 2016). Alternatively, we could ask
the user for diverse demonstrations of them picking up the
mug for finetuning the robot via imitation learning (Schaal,
1999), but doing so would be time-consuming (and unscalable) for the user. Fortunately, we can teach the robot more
efficiently via data augmentation (Baran et al., 2019; Tobin
et al., 2017), a technique that varies, or augments, concepts
in the state that we know to not impact the task. For example, if the user intends for all mugs to be similarly handled
(and the glass mug has a similar size and shape to already
seen ceramic mugs), we could “recycle” actions the robot
knows for picking up ceramic mugs to also teach it to pick
up the glass mug. But what if the user actually considers
the glass object to be a cup (instead of a mug), i.e. their
reward implicitly includes the material of the object being
important to the task? Unfortunately, we don’t know this
ahead of time, i.e. knowing whether the shifted concept
is task-irrelevant (TI) or task-relevant (TR) for the desired
task expressed by a user is impossible a priori.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

Our insight is that the end users are uniquely positioned to
recognize which concepts are relevant or irrelevant for their
desired task. If we had a way to reliably and quickly query

1. Introduction
Consider a user who purchases a factory-trained robot for
use in their home (Figure 1). They task the robot: “get
my mug” and are confused when it unexpectedly crashes.
Despite the factory’s best attempts at teaching the robot
common visual concepts like mug shape and material, the
robot may face a distribution shift from the observations it
saw during training, e.g. the robot only saw ceramic and
metal mugs in the factory but not the user’s glass mug.
1

3

1

