Generating Private Synthetic Data with Genetic Algorithms

Terrance Liu * 1 Jingwu Tang * 2 Giuseppe Vietri * 3 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract

fore, privacy concerns impose legal and ethical constraints
on what one can access for data analysis. Differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) has become an increasingly popular framework for protecting sensitive information by providing a formal privacy guarantee that allows one to calibrate the trade-off between privacy and accuracy. Moreover,
differentially private synthetic data has become especially
attractive, given that such data can be accessed repeatedly
without added privacy costs. Consequently, we focus on
the problem of generating synthetic data that approximates
various properties of the underlying sensitive dataset while
providing privacy guarantees.

We study the problem of efficiently generating
differentially private synthetic data that approximate the statistical properties of an underlying
sensitive dataset. In recent years, there has been a
growing line of work that approaches this problem
using first-order optimization techniques. However, such techniques are restricted to optimizing differentiable objectives only, severely limiting the types of analyses that can be conducted.
For example, first-order mechanisms have been
primarily successful in approximating statistical
queries only in the form of marginals for discrete
data domains. In some cases, one can circumvent such issues by relaxing the task’s objective
to maintain differentiability. However, even when
possible, these approaches impose a fundamental
limitation in which modifications to the minimization problem become additional sources of error.
Therefore, we propose P RIVATE -GSD, a private
genetic algorithm based on zeroth-order optimization heuristics that do not require modifying the
original objective; thus, it avoids the aforementioned limitations of first-order optimization. We
demonstrate empirically that on data with both discrete and real-valued attributes, P RIVATE -GSD
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on nondifferential queries while matching accuracy in
approximating differentiable ones.

A standard approach to this problem is to find a synthetic
dataset that matches a large family of statistics derived from
the underlying dataset. In this work, we focus on statistics in
the form of statistical queries, which count the fraction of examples that satisfy some specific properties. This approach
is often framed as synthetic data for private query release,
where the goal is to release answers to an extensive collection of statistical queries by outputting a synthetic dataset
from which answers are derived from. There exists a long
line of research studying synthetic data for private query
release (Blum et al., 2008; Hardt et al., 2012; Gaboardi et al.,
2014b; McKenna et al., 2018; Vietri et al., 2020; McKenna
et al., 2019; Aydöre et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021a;b). Moreover, when the set of statistical properties is sufficiently rich,
this approach has been shown to outperform differentially
private deep generative models (e.g., GANs) in both capturing various statistical properties and enabling downstream
machine learning tasks (Tao et al., 2021; Vietri et al., 2022).
Even though the problem of generating synthetic data for private query release is shown to be computationally intractable
in the worst case (Ullman & Vadhan, 2011; Ullman, 2013),
there has been a line of work on practical algorithms that
can perform well on real datasets (Gaboardi et al., 2014b;
Vietri et al., 2020; McKenna et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2021a).
Before our work, the algorithms that achieve state-of-the-art
performance all leverage gradient-based optimization (Liu
et al., 2021b; Vietri et al., 2022) to minimize the error for
certain classes of statistical queries. However, these methods require differentiability, severely limiting the types of
statistical properties one can optimize. For example, existing algorithms such as RAP (Aydöre et al., 2021) and
GEM (Liu et al., 2021b) focus specifically on using first-

1. Introduction
Access to high-quality data is critical for decision-making
and data analysis. However, the reliance on sensitive data
can reveal private information about the individuals in the
data, such as medical conditions or financial status. There*

1
Equal contribution
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Peking University University of Minnesota.
Correspondence to: Terrance Liu <terrancl@cs.cmu.edu>, Jingwu
Tang <tangjingwu@pku.edu.cn>, Giuseppe Vietri <vietr002@umn.edu>, Zhiwei Steven Wu <zstevenwu@cmu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

