Beyond Uniform Lipschitz Condition in Differentially Private Optimization

Rudrajit Das * 1 Satyen Kale 2 Zheng Xu 2 Tong Zhang 2 3 Sujay Sanghavi 1

Abstract

paper, we focus on DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016) which is
the default algorithm for private optimization in practice.

Most prior results on differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) are derived under
the simplistic assumption of uniform Lipschitzness, i.e., the per-sample gradients are uniformly
bounded. We generalize uniform Lipschitzness
by assuming that the per-sample gradients have
sample-dependent upper bounds, i.e., per-sample
Lipschitz constants, which themselves may be
unbounded. We provide principled guidance on
choosing the clip norm in DP-SGD for convex
over-parameterized settings satisfying our general
version of Lipschitzness when the per-sample Lipschitz constants are bounded; specifically, we recommend tuning the clip norm only till values up to
the minimum per-sample Lipschitz constant. This
finds application in the private training of a softmax layer on top of a deep network pre-trained on
public data. We verify the efficacy of our recommendation via experiments on 8 datasets. Furthermore, we provide new convergence results for DPSGD on convex and nonconvex functions when
the Lipschitz constants are unbounded but have
bounded moments, i.e., they are heavy-tailed.

We briefly introduce the problem setting and DP-SGD to
facilitate further discussion (see Section 3 for more details). We consider
empirical risk minimization (ERM) of
Pn
f (w) = n1 i=1 fi (w), where each fi : Rd −
→ R. In every
iteration of DP-SGD (stated in Algorithm 1), the optimizer
receives a noise-perturbed average of the clipped per-sample
gradients for performing the update; noise is added to guarantee differential privacy.
P Specifically, at iteration t, the optimizer receives gt = 1b i∈St clip(∇fi (wt ), τ ) + ζt , where
St is a random batch of samples formed by picking each
sample in {1, . . . , n} with probability (b/n), clip(z, c) :=
z min(1, c/∥z∥) for a vector z, τ is the clipping threshold
or clip norm, and ζt is an isotropic Gaussian random vector
whose variance is proportional to τ 2 and also depends on
the amount of privacy required.
Clipping is employed in DP-SGD to bound the maximum
sensitivity of the average gradient to each sample’s individual gradient, which is required to set the noise variance.
However, clipping can also make gt a biased estimator of
∇f (wt ), and the amount of bias depends on the clip norm
τ – the higher we set τ , the lower is the bias, and vice-versa.
As the noise variance is proportional to τ 2 , there is an inherent tension between the bias and variance of gt due to the
clip norm τ . This raises a natural question - how do we set
“good” clip norms to balance the bias-variance tradeoff?

1. Introduction

In order to circumvent the analysis of the clipping bias, most
prior convergence results for private optimization (Bassily
et al., 2014; 2019; Wang et al., 2018; 2019) assume that
the loss function is uniformly Lipschitz for all samples and
model parameters, i.e., the per-sample gradients (w.r.t. the
model parameters) have a sample-independent upper bound
known as the Lipschitz constant. Under this assumption,
the clip norm is set equal to the Lipschitz constant resulting in zero bias as no clipping happens. But in practice,
such a choice of clip norm results in very poor performance;
see Figure 1 and its caption. Additionally, uniform Lipschitzness does not even hold for simple problems like linear
regression with Gaussian data, precluding the existence of a
trivial clip norm for analysis.

With the ever-increasing amount of data being used, there is
a growing need for the development of privacy-preserving
training schemes for machine learning (ML) models. Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) is a popular
privacy-preserving framework that is being incorporated in
the training of ML models. We formally define DP in Definition 3.3, but at a high level, DP can be guaranteed by adding
Gaussian noise, where the noise scale is determined by the
“sensitivity” to an individual’s data. There has been copious
research on private optimization for private training; in this
*

Part of this work was done when Rudrajit was an intern at
Google Research. 1 UT Austin 2 Google Research 3 HKUST. Correspondence to: Rudrajit Das <rdas@utexas.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

In this work, we generalize uniform Lipschitzness by instead assuming that the per-sample gradients have sample1

