Outline, Then Details: Syntactically Guided Coarse-To-Fine Code Generation

Wenqing Zheng 1 S P Sharan 1 Ajay Kumar Jaiswal 1 Kevin Wang 1 Yihan Xi 1 Dejia Xu 1 Zhangyang Wang 1

Abstract

of methods leverage transformers to model programs as sequences, and have demonstrated prospects to automatically
analyze, annotate, translate, or synthesize code (Li et al.,
2022; Austin et al., 2021; Fried et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2021a; Kanade et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2020; Clement et al.,
2020; Svyatkovskiy et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021). These
LLMs are trained on a large corpus of code so as to imbibe
syntactic and semantic understanding into model weights,
and develop logical reasoning for program synthesis.

For a complicated algorithm, its implementation
by a human programmer usually starts with outlining a rough control flow followed by iterative enrichments, eventually yielding carefully generated
syntactic structures and variables in a hierarchy.
However, state-of-the-art large language models
generate codes in a single pass, without intermediate warm-ups to reflect the structured thought
process of “outline-then-detail”. Inspired by the
recent success of chain-of-thought prompting, we
propose ChainCoder, a program synthesis language model that generates Python code progressively, i.e. from coarse to fine in multiple passes.
We first decompose source code into layout frame
components and accessory components via abstract syntax tree parsing to construct a hierarchical representation. We then reform our prediction
target into a multi-pass objective, each pass generates a subsequence, which is concatenated in the
hierarchy. Finally, a tailored transformer architecture is leveraged to jointly encode the natural
language descriptions and syntactically aligned
I/O data samples. Extensive evaluations show
that ChainCoder outperforms state-of-the-arts,
demonstrating that our progressive generation
eases the reasoning procedure and guides the language model to generate higher-quality solutions.
Our codes are available at: https://github.
com/VITA-Group/ChainCoder.

Though current LLMs have gained success in code understanding and generation, their inherent design, as well as the
training/finetuning techniques, are largely borrowed from
the natural language modeling. This limits their potential
in code generation modeling due to two reasons.
First, for a given problem specification, LLMs generate
end-to-end code solutions autoregressively in a single pass
regardless of the logical complexity involved. Even from a
programmer’s perspective, it is difficult to write good code
in a single shot without laying out logical and hierarchical
thinking. In other words, composing code involves molding an overall “warm-up” proceeded by lower-level atomic
algorithms and variable definitions1 .
Second, LLMs tokenize the code using tokenizers meant for
everyday-natural-language strings and disregard syntactical
awareness as structural priors (Chen et al., 2022; Hendrycks
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021a; Austin et al.,
2021; Athiwaratkun et al., 2022; Nijkamp et al., 2022; Xu
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Chen et al.; Li et al., 2023;
Mao et al., 2022). Notably, programming languages contain
complex rules and conform to more rigorous layouts compared to their natural language counterparts (Casalnuovo
et al., 2019; Naur, 1975). They have fewer choices of synonyms, stringent syntax requirements, and diverse control
flows (sequential statement execution, selection/branching,
and repetition such as for and while loops).

1. Introduction
The goal of automatic program synthesis has been established and extensively researched for decades (Waldinger
& Lee, 1969; Backus et al., 1957). Recently, with the rapid
advancements of Large Language Models (LLMs), a surge

In our ChainCoder, we investigate if addressing the aforementioned flaws is indeed promising. As shown in Figure 1,
we aim to remodel the code generation that previous works
treat as a no-warm-up, single-shot textual sequence comple-

1

VITA Group, The University of Texas At Austin, Austin,
TX, US. Correspondence to: Wenqing Zheng, Zhangyang Wang
<w.zheng@utexas.edu, atlaswang@utexas.edu>.

1

This is usually termed as a top-down practice in programming:
beginning with creating an outline or high-level view of the program, and then successively breaking it down into smaller and
smaller components until the entire program is complete.

th

Proceedings of the 40 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

