Disentangled Generative Models for Robust Prediction of System Dynamics

Stathi Fotiadis 1 Mario Lino 2 Shunlong Hu 1 Stef Garasto 3 Chris D Cantwell 2 Anil Anthony Bharath 1

Abstract

niques are known to suffer from poor OOD performance
(Goyal & Bengio, 2020), when they are employed in a setting they had not encountered in their training phase.

The use of deep neural networks for modelling
system dynamics is increasingly popular, but longterm prediction accuracy and out-of-distribution
generalization still present challenges. In this
study, we address these challenges by considering the parameters of dynamical systems as factors of variation of the data and leverage their
ground-truth values to disentangle the representations learned by generative models. Our experimental results in phase-space and observationspace dynamics, demonstrate the effectiveness of
latent-space supervision in producing disentangled representations, leading to improved longterm prediction accuracy and out-of-distribution
robustness.

When it comes to modelling dynamics, training data contain
both the dynamics themselves and the dynamical system
parameters. However, many approaches to learning fail to
distinguish between the two, which could result in entangled representations, leading to overfitting and thus poorer
forecasts (Bengio et al., 2013). Here, our aim is to investigate generative models whose latent space is disentangled
in such a way that the parameters and the dynamics are
distinctly represented. More specifically, we explore dynamical systems modelled by ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) and their respective parameters.
Our method builds on two elements. First, the inherent ability of Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling,
2014) to produce disentangled representations in an unsupervised way (Higgins et al., 2017), a feature that has been
applied in the context of image and scene modelling (Kim &
Mnih, 2018). Second, latent space supervision with groundtruth factors has been found to produce more disentangled
representations in image modelling (Locatello et al., 2019).
We motivate the use of disentangled representations through
a theoretical analysis of the emission process through the
scope of dynamical systems. In practice, we treat the parameters of a dynamical system as factors of variation of the
data distribution and use the ground-truth values of these
parameters to improve the latent space disentanglement.
While various assumptions, like domain stationarity, have
been used to improve the disentanglement in the prediction of dynamical systems in an unsupervised way (Li &
Mandt, 2018; Miladinović et al., 2019), to the best of our
knowledge, this is the first attempt to use supervised disentanglement for system dynamics. Furthermore, contrary to
system-identification techniques that require knowledge of
the full underlying system to be computationally effective
(Ayyad et al., 2020), our technique only needs to be aware
of the system parameters.

1. Introduction
The robust prediction of the behaviour of dynamical systems
remains an open question in machine learning, and engineering in general. The ability to make robust predictions is
important not only for forecasting systems of interest like
weather (Garg et al., 2021), but also because it supports
innovations in fields like system control, autonomous planning (Hafner et al., 2019) and computer-aided engineering
(Brunton et al., 2020). In this context, the use of deep generative models has recently gained significant traction for
sequence modelling (Girin et al., 2020). The robustness
of machine learning models can be considered along two
axes: (1) long-term and (2) out-of-distribution (OOD) performance. Accurate long-term prediction can be notoriously
difficult in many dynamical systems because error accumulation can cause divergence in finite time (Zhou et al., 2020;
Raissi et al., 2019), a problem that even traditional solvers
can suffer from. At the same time, machine learning tech1 Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London,

UK 2 Department of Aeronautics, Imperial College London, UK
3 School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, University
of Greenwich, London, UK. Correspondence to: Stathi Fotiadis
<s.fotiadis19@imperial.ac.uk>.

Contributions Our work is the first, to the best of our knowledge, that uses ground-truth information of the dynamical
system parameters to disentangle the latent space of generative models. We provide a theoretical motivation for disentangled representations in dynamical system prediction and,

Proceedings of the 40𝑡 ℎ International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

