TabLeak: Tabular Data Leakage in Federated Learning

Mark Vero 1 Mislav Balunović 2 Dimitar I. Dimitrov 2 Martin Vechev 2

Abstract
While federated learning (FL) promises to preserve privacy, recent works in the image and text
domains have shown that training updates leak
private client data. However, most high-stakes applications of FL (e.g., in healthcare and finance)
use tabular data, where the risk of data leakage
has not yet been explored. A successful attack
for tabular data must address two key challenges
unique to the domain: (i) obtaining a solution to
a high-variance mixed discrete-continuous optimization problem, and (ii) enabling human assessment of the reconstruction as unlike for image
and text data, direct human inspection is not possible. In this work we address these challenges
and propose TabLeak, the first comprehensive
reconstruction attack on tabular data. TabLeak
is based on two key contributions: (i) a method
which leverages a softmax relaxation and pooled
ensembling to solve the optimization problem,
and (ii) an entropy-based uncertainty quantification scheme to enable human assessment. We
evaluate TabLeak on four tabular datasets for both
FedSGD and FedAvg training protocols, and show
that it successfully breaks several settings previously deemed safe. For instance, we extract
large subsets of private data at > 90% accuracy
even at the large batch size of 128. Our findings
demonstrate that current high-stakes tabular FL is
excessively vulnerable to leakage attacks.

Figure 1: Comparison of image, text, and tabular data reconstruction. While the attack success can be judged by
human inspection in images and text, for tabular data it is
not possible, as both reconstructions look plausible. The image reconstruction example is taken from Yin et al. (2021).
database. While prior work has examined privacy leakage
from exchanged updates in FL on images (Zhu et al., 2019;
Geiping et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2021) and text (Deng et al.,
2021; Dimitrov et al., 2022a; Gupta et al., 2022), many
applications of FL involve tabular datasets incorporating
highly sensitive personal data such as financial information
and health status (Borisov et al., 2021; Long et al., 2021;
Rieke et al., 2020). However, as no prior work has studied
the issue of privacy leakage in tabular data, we are unaware
of the true extent of its risks. This is also a cause of concern for US and UK public institutions which have recently
launched a $1.6 mil. prize competition1 to develop privacypreserving FL solutions for financial fraud detection and
infection risk prediction, both being tabular datasets.
Ingredients of a Data Leakage Attack A successful attack builds on two pillars: (i) ability to reconstruct private
data from client updates with high accuracy, and (ii) a mechanism that allows a human to assess the obtained reconstructions without knowledge of the true data. Advancing along
the first pillar typically requires leveraging the unique aspects of the given domain, e.g., image attacks employ image
priors (Geiping et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2021), while attacks
on text make use of pre-trained language models (Dimitrov
et al., 2022a; Gupta et al., 2022). However, in the image and
text domains, the second pillar naturally comes for free, as
the credibility of the obtained data can be assessed simply
by human inspection, in contrast to tabular data, where this
is not possible, as illustrated in Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (McMahan et al., 2017) (FL) has
emerged as the most prominent approach to training machine learning models collaboratively without requiring sensitive data of different parties to be collected in a central
1
Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 2 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Correspondence
to: Mark Vero <mveroe@ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

1

https://petsprizechallenges.com/

