Quantized Distributed Training of Large Models with Convergence Guarantees

Ilia Markov 1 Adrian Vladu 2 3 Qi Guo 4 Dan Alistarh 1

Abstract

2022) easily count billions of trainable parameters, which induces tremendous computational and memory costs. Training such models can easily exceed the memory capacity of
a single computational unit, such as a GPU.

Communication-reduction techniques are a popular way to improve scalability in data-parallel
training of deep neural networks (DNNs). The
recent emergence of large language models such
as GPT has created the need for new approaches
to exploit data-parallelism. Among these, fullysharded data parallel (FSDP) training is highly
popular, yet it still encounters scalability bottlenecks. One reason is that applying compression
techniques to FSDP is challenging: as the vast majority of the communication involves the model’s
weights, direct compression alters convergence
and leads to accuracy loss. We present QSDP,
a variant of FSDP which supports both gradient
and weight quantization with theoretical guarantees, is simple to implement and has essentially no
overheads. To derive QSDP we prove that a natural modification of SGD achieves convergence
even when we only maintain quantized weights,
and thus the domain over which we train consists
of quantized points and is, therefore, highly nonconvex. We validate this approach by training
GPT-family models with up to 1.3 billion parameters on a multi-node cluster. Experiments show
that QSDP preserves model accuracy, while completely removing the communication bottlenecks
of FSDP, providing end-to-end speedups of up to
2.2x.

As a consequence, standard distribution strategies such as
data-parallel training (Bottou, 2010), which require each
node to be able to keep all parameters in memory, are no
longer directly applicable. Several novel distribution strategies have been proposed to mitigate this challenge, such as
model-parallel training (Shoeybi et al., 2019; Raffel et al.,
2020), pipeline-parallel training (Huang et al., 2019; Harlap
et al., 2018) and model sharding (Ren et al., 2021; Rajbhandari et al., 2020; Rasley et al., 2020; FairScale, 2021).
We consider the communication costs of distribution strategies for massive models, and focus on Fully-Sharded
Data-Parallel (FSDP) distributed training, which is among
the most popular and user-friendly approaches to mitigate per-node memory limitations. FSDP is supported
natively by Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019), Facebook
fairscale (FairScale, 2021), and Microsoft DeepSpeed (Ren et al., 2021), where it is known as ZeRO-3.
The main idea behind FSDP is that both the training data
and the model parameters are partitioned among the P
nodes. That is, only a 1/P partition of the parameters of
each layer is stored at a node. Then, both for the forward
and for the backward pass, nodes proceed synchronously
layer-by-layer, gathering full weights for the current layer,
via all-to-all communication, before executing its forward or
backward operation. After this operation is complete, nodes
can discard the current layer’s received weights partitions,
and move to the next layer. (Please see Figure 1 for an
illustration, and Section 4.1 for a detailed description.)

1. Introduction
The impressive recent progress of Deep Learning in tasks
such as natural language processing and computer vision
has been accompanied by massive increases in parameter
counts. For instance, large language models (LLMs) from
Transformer family, such as GPT (Radford et al., 2018),
OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) and BLOOM (Laurençon et al.,

The key advantage of this pattern is that it reduces memory usage linearly in P . Thus, it enables running models
with billions of parameters on small or medium-sized clusters (FairScale, 2021; MosaicML, 2022). At the same time,
FSDP faces challenges in terms of communication efficiency:
since every forward and backward pass relies on all-to-all
weight exchanges, FSDP can put massive pressure on the
network bandwidth, which becomes a bottleneck.

1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria 2 CNRS 3 IRIF,
Université Paris Cité 4 Max Planck Institute for Informatics. Correspondence to: Ilia Markov <ilia.markov@ist.ac.at>, Dan Alistarh
<dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at>.

As we will show, all-to-all communication leads to significant communication bottlenecks when training LLMs on

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

