Contextual Combinatorial Bandits with Probabilistically Triggered Arms

Xutong Liu 1 Jinhang Zuo 2 3 Siwei Wang 4 John C.S. Lui 1 Mohammad Hajiesmaili 2 Adam Wierman 3
Wei Chen 4

Abstract

et al., 2012). As an extension of MAB, combinatorial multiarmed bandits (CMAB) have drawn attention due to fruitful
applications in online advertising, network optimization,
and healthcare systems (Gai et al., 2012; Kveton et al.,
2015a; Chen et al., 2013; 2016a; Wang & Chen, 2017;
Merlis & Mannor, 2019). CMAB is a sequential decisionmaking game between a learning agent and an environment.
In each round, the agent chooses a combinatorial action that
triggers a set of base arms (i.e., a super-arm) to be pulled
simultaneously, and the outcomes of these pulled base arms
are observed as feedback (typically known as semi-bandit
feedback). The goal of the agent is to minimize the expected regret, which is the difference in expectation for the
overall rewards between always playing the best action (i.e.,
the action with the highest expected reward) and playing
according to the agent’s own policy.

We study contextual combinatorial bandits with
probabilistically triggered arms (C2 MAB-T) under a variety of smoothness conditions that capture a wide range of applications, such as contextual cascading bandits and contextual influence
maximization bandits. Under the triggering probability modulated (TPM) condition, we devise the
C2 -UCB-T algorithm and √
propose a novel analysis that achieves an Õ(d KT ) regret bound,
removing a potentially exponentially large factor
O(1/pmin ), where d is the dimension of contexts,
pmin is the minimum positive probability that any
arm can be triggered, and batch-size K is the
maximum number of arms that can be triggered
per round. Under the variance modulated (VM)
or triggering probability and variance modulated
(TPVM) conditions, we propose a new variance2
adaptive algorithm
√ VAC -UCB and derive a regret bound Õ(d T ), which is independent of the
batch-size K. As a valuable by-product, our analysis technique and variance-adaptive algorithm
can be applied to the CMAB-T and C2 MAB setting, improving existing results there as well. We
also include experiments that demonstrate the improved performance of our algorithms compared
with benchmark algorithms on synthetic and realworld datasets.

Motivated by large-scale applications with a huge number
of items (base arms), there exists a prominent line of work
that advances the CMAB model: the combinatorial contextual bandits (or C2 MAB for short) (Qin et al., 2014; Li
et al., 2016; Takemura et al., 2021). Specifically, C2 MAB incorporates contextual information and adds the simple yet
effective linear structure assumption to allow scalability,
which provides regret bounds that are independent of the
number of base arms m. Despite C2 MAB’s success in leveraging contextual information for better scalability, existing
works fail to formulate the general arm triggering process,
which is essential to model a wider range of applications,
e.g., cascading bandits (CB) and influence maximization
(IM), and more importantly, they do not provide satisfying
results for settings with probabilistically triggered arms. For
example, Qin et al. (2014); Takemura et al. (2021) only consider the deterministic semi-bandit feedback for C2 MAB.
Li et al. (2016); Wen et al. (2017) implicitly consider the
arm triggering process for specific CB or IM applications
but only gives sub-optimal results with unsatisfying factors
(e.g., 1/pmin , K that could be as large as the number of
base arms), owing to loose analysis, weak conditions, or
inefficient algorithms that explore the unknown parameters
too conservatively.

1. Introduction
The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a
classical sequential decision-making problem that has been
widely studied (Robbins, 1952; Auer et al., 2002; Bubeck
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China 2 University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA, United States
3
California Institute of Technology, CA, United States 4 Microsoft
Research, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Xutong Liu <liuxt@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>, Wei Chen <weic@microsoft.com>, John
C.S. Lui <cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk>.

To handle the above issues, we enhance the C2 MAB framework by considering an arm triggering process. Specifically,
we propose the general framework of contextual combi-

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

