Path Neural Networks: Expressive and Accurate Graph Neural Networks

Gaspard Michel * 1 2 Giannis Nikolentzos * 1 Johannes Lutzeyer * 1 Michalis Vazirgiannis 1

Abstract

data. Notably, most of those algorithms belong either to
the family of graph kernels (Kriege et al., 2020; Borgwardt
et al., 2020; Nikolentzos et al., 2021) or to that of graph
neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020).
Due to some limitations that are inherent to kernels (e. g.,
they do not scale to large datasets, they struggle with continuous features, etc.), GNNs have become the most common
approach for dealing with graph learning problems.

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently become the standard approach for learning with
graph-structured data. Prior work has shed light
into their potential, but also their limitations. Unfortunately, it was shown that standard GNNs are
limited in their expressive power. These models are no more powerful than the 1-dimensional
Weisfeiler-Leman (1-WL) algorithm in terms of
distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs. In this paper, we propose Path Neural Networks (PathNNs),
a model that updates node representations by aggregating paths emanating from nodes. We derive three different variants of the PathNN model
that aggregate single shortest paths, all shortest
paths and all simple paths of length up to K. We
prove that two of these variants are strictly more
powerful than the 1-WL algorithm, and we experimentally validate our theoretical results. We
find that PathNNs can distinguish pairs of nonisomorphic graphs that are indistinguishable by
1-WL, while our most expressive PathNN variant
can even distinguish between 3-WL indistinguishable graphs. The different PathNN variants are
also evaluated on graph classification and graph
regression datasets, where in most cases, they outperform the baseline methods.

GNNs have been studied extensively in the past years. So
far, research in the field has mainly focused on message passing architectures (Gilmer et al., 2017). These models follow
a recursive neighborhood aggregation scheme where each
node aggregates the representations of its neighbors along
with its own representation to compute new updated representations. It has been shown that there is a connection between the neighborhood aggregation scheme of these models and the relabeling procedure of the Weisfeiler-Leman
(WL) algorithm, a well-known heuristic for testing graph
isomorphism (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019). More
importantly, it was shown that the standard message passing
architectures are at most as powerful as the WL algorithm in
terms of distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs. This has led
to the development of more complex models that focus on
subgraphs (Maron et al., 2019b;a; Cotta et al., 2021). Some
of these models are inspired by higher-order variants of the
WL algorithm (Morris et al., 2019; 2020b).
Besides subgraphs, there are also other structures of graphs
that can improve a model’s expressive power. For instance,
paths can distinguish connected from disconnected graphs,
while the WL algorithm fails to distinguish this property.
Unfortunately, finding all paths in a graph is NP-hard. However, some subsets of paths can be computed in polynomial
time. For instance, computing shortest paths in a graph is a
problem solvable in polynomial time (Dijkstra, 1959). It has
been shown that models that use shortest path distances between nodes as features can provide more expressive power
than the WL algorithm (Li et al., 2020). Furthermore, if
we restrict the length of the paths to some small integer k,
the parameterized complexity of computing all the bounded
length paths is tractable.

1. Introduction
Graphs have emerged in recent years as a powerful tool
for representing irregular data. Among many other applications, graphs have been used to model the relationships between individuals within a social network (Easley & Kleinberg, 2010) and the interactions between the atoms of a
molecule (Stokes et al., 2020). The large availability of
graph-structured data has motivated the development of machine learning algorithms that are designed for this kind of
*

Equal contribution 1 LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris,
France 2 Deezer Research, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Gaspard Michel <gmichel@deezer.com>.

In this paper, we propose Path Neural Networks (PathNNs),
a GNN that generates node representations that are based on
paths emanating from the nodes of graphs. By computing

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

