Confidence and Dispersity Speak: Characterizing Prediction Matrix for
Unsupervised Accuracy Estimation

Weijian Deng 1 Yumin Suh 2 Stephen Gould 1 Liang Zheng 1

Abstract

world deployment, where the test environments undergo
distribution shifts and ground truths are not provided. In
the presence of a distribution shift, in-distribution accuracy
may only be a weak predictor of model performance (Deng
& Zheng, 2021; Garg et al., 2022). Moreover, annotating
data itself is a laborious task, let alone it is impractical to
label every new test distribution. Hence, a way to predict
a classifier accuracy using unlabelled test data only has recently received much attention (Chuang et al., 2020; Deng
& Zheng, 2021; Guillory et al., 2021; Garg et al., 2022).

This work aims to assess how well a model performs under distribution shifts without using labels. While recent methods study prediction confidence, this work reports prediction dispersity
is another informative cue. Confidence reflects
whether the individual prediction is certain; dispersity indicates how the overall predictions are
distributed across all categories. Our key insight
is that a well-performing model should give predictions with high confidence and high dispersity.
That is, we need to consider both properties so
as to make more accurate estimates. To this end,
we use nuclear norm that has been shown to be
effective in characterizing both properties. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of
nuclear norm for various models (e.g., ViT and
ConvNeXt), different datasets (e.g., ImageNet and
CUB-200), and diverse types of distribution shifts
(e.g., style shift and reproduction shift). We show
that nuclear norm is more accurate and robust in
accuracy estimation than existing methods. Furthermore, we validate the feasibility of other measurements (e.g., mutual information maximization) for characterizing dispersity and confidence.
Lastly, we investigate the limitation of nuclear
norm, study its improved variant under severe
class imbalance, and discuss potential directions.

Given an unlabeled test set, existing accuracy estimation
methods typically derive model-based distribution statistics
of test samples (Deng & Zheng, 2021; Guillory et al., 2021;
Deng et al., 2021; Garg et al., 2022; Baek et al., 2022). For
example, recent works develop methods based on the prediction matrix on unlabeled data (Guillory et al., 2021; Garg
et al., 2022). They focus on the overall confidence of the
prediction matrix. Confidence refers to whether the model
gives a confident prediction on individual test data. It can
be measured by entropy or maximum softmax probability.
Guillory et al. (2021) show that the average of maximum
softmax scores on a test set is useful for accuracy estimation.
Garg et al. (2022) predict accuracy as the fraction of test
data with maximum softmax scores above a threshold.
In this work, we consider another property of the prediction
matrix: dispersity. It measures how spread out the predictions are across classes. When testing a source-trained classifier on a target (out-of-distribution) dataset, target features
may exhibit degenerate structures due to the distribution
shift, where many target features are distributed in a few
clusters. As a result, their corresponding class predictions
would also be degenerate rather than diverse: the classifier
predicts test features into specific classes and few into others.
There are existing works that encourage the cluster sizes
in the target data to be balanced (Shi & Sha, 2012; Liang
et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2020), thereby
increasing the prediction dispersity. In comparison, this
work does not aim to improve cluster structures and instead
studies the prediction dispersity to predict model accuracy
on unlabeled test sets.

1. Introduction
Model evaluation is critical in both machine learning research and practice. The standard evaluation protocol is to
evaluate a model on a held-out test set that is 1) fully labeled
and 2) drawn from the same distribution as the training set.
However, this way of evaluation is often infeasible for real1

The Australian National University 2 NEC Laboratories America, Inc. (NEC Labs). Correspondence to: Weijian Deng <weijian.deng@anu.edu.au>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

To illustrate dispersity is useful for accuracy estimation, we
report our empirical observation in Fig. 1. We compute
1

