Convergence of First-Order Methods for Constrained Nonconvex Optimization
with Dependent Data

Ahmet Alacaoglu * 1 Hanbaek Lyu * 2
where π is a distribution on a sample space Ω ⊆ Rd with
a density function; ℓ : Ω × Θ → R a per-sample loss function and Θ ⊆ Rp a closed convex set with an efficiently
computable projection

Abstract
We focus on analyzing the classical stochastic
projected gradient methods under a general dependent data sampling scheme for constrained
smooth nonconvex optimization. We show the
worst-case rate of convergence Õ(t−1/4 ) and
complexity Õ(ε−4 ) for achieving an ε-near stationary point in terms of the norm of the gradient of Moreau envelope and gradient mapping.
While classical convergence guarantee requires
i.i.d. data sampling from the target distribution,
we only require a mild mixing condition of the
conditional distribution, which holds for a wide
class of Markov chain sampling algorithms. This
improves the existing complexity for the constrained smooth nonconvex optimization with dependent data from Õ(ε−8 ) to Õ(ε−4 ) with a significantly simpler analysis. We illustrate the generality of our approach by deriving convergence
results with dependent data for stochastic proximal gradient methods, adaptive stochastic gradient algorithm AdaGrad and stochastic gradient
algorithm with heavy ball momentum. As an application, we obtain first online nonnegative matrix factorization algorithms for dependent data
based on stochastic projected gradient methods
with adaptive step sizes and optimal rate of convergence.

1
proj(θ) = arg min ∥θ − θ ′ ∥2 .
θ ′ ∈Θ 2

We assume that f is a smooth and possibly nonconvex function. Constrained nonconvex optimization with dependent
data arise in many situations such as decentralized constrained optimization over networked systems, where the
i.i.d. sampling requires significantly more communication
than the dependent sampling (Johansson et al., 2007; 2010;
Duchi et al., 2012). Other applications are policy evaluation in reinforcement learning where the Markovian data is
naturally present since the underlying model is a Markov
Decision Process (Bhandari et al., 2018), and online nonnegative matrix factorization and network denoising (Lyu
et al., 2020).
1.1. Related Work and Summary of Contributions
It is well-known that obtaining optimal complexity
with single-sample projected stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) for constrained nonconvex problems is significantly
more challenging than unconstrained nonconvex optimization (Ghadimi et al., 2016; Davis and Drusvyatskiy, 2019;
Alacaoglu et al., 2021). This challenge has been recently
overcome by (Davis and Drusvyatskiy, 2019) within the
framework of weakly convex optimization, which resulted
in optimal complexity results for projected/proximal SGD
(PSGD). Later, this result is extended for algorithms such
as SGD with heavy ball momentum (Mai and Johansson,
2020) or adaptive algorithms such as AMSGrad and AdaGrad (Alacaoglu et al., 2021). These guarantees require i.i.d.
sampling from the underlying distribution π.

1. Introduction
Consider the minimization of a function f : Rp → R given
as an expectation:
θ ∗ ∈ arg min {f (θ) := Ex∼π [ℓ(θ, x)]} ,

(2)

(1)

θ∈Θ

Optimization with non-i.i.d. data is studied in the convex
and nonconvex cases with gradient/mirror descent in (Sun
et al., 2018; Duchi et al., 2012; Nagaraj et al., 2020) and
block coordinate descent in (Sun et al., 2020). SGD is also
recently considered in (Wang et al., 2021) for convex problems. Another important work in this direction is (Karimi
et al., 2019) that focused on unconstrained nonconvex case

*
Equal contribution 1 Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin–Madison, WI, USA 2 Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin–Madison, WI, USA. Correspondence
to: Hanbaek Lyu <hlyu@math.wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

