JAWS-X: Addressing Efficiency Bottlenecks of Conformal Prediction
Under Standard and Feedback Covariate Shift
Drew Prinster 1 Suchi Saria 1 2 Anqi Liu 1

Abstract

be trusted via reliable predictive uncertainty quantification.
The use of standard approaches to ML uncertainty quantification (UQ) in practice, however, is often hindered by at
least two key challenges. Firstly, real-world scenarios often
involve data shifts that violate the common ML assumption
that “the future will look like the past” (Finlayson et al.,
2021)—indeed, even the mere use of ML-generated insights
to inform future decisions can induce feedback-loop shifts
between training (e.g., development) and test (e.g., deployment) data that invalidate standard UQ methods (Fannjiang
et al., 2022). Secondly, even if data shift is accounted for,
many UQ methods are too resource-demanding to implement without sacrificing overall model performance. For
instance, many UQ methods have extreme or prohibitive
computational demands (e.g., extensive retraining of large
ML predictors), while others impose strict data-availability
requirements that can be unrealistic (e.g., requiring infinite
data in “asymptopia”) or harm model performance (e.g.,
requiring sample splitting to form a “holdout” UQ dataset
that cannot be used in training, which degrades accuracy
relative to if all labeled data were used to learn parameters).

We study the efficient estimation of predictive confidence intervals for black-box predictors when
the common data exchangeability (e.g., i.i.d.) assumption is violated due to potentially feedbackinduced shifts in the input data distribution. That
is, we focus on standard and feedback covariate
shift (FCS), where the latter allows for feedback
dependencies between train and test data that occur in many decision-making scenarios like experimental design. Whereas prior conformal prediction methods for this problem are in general either
extremely computationally demanding or make
inefficient use of labeled data, we propose a collection of methods based on the jackknife+ that
achieve a practical balance of computational and
statistical efficiency. Theoretically, our proposed
JAW-FCS method extends the rigorous, finitesample coverage guarantee of the jackknife+ to
FCS. We moreover propose two tunable relaxations to JAW-FCS’s computation that maintain
finite-sample guarantees: one using only K leaveone-out models (JAW-KLOO) and a second building on K-fold cross validation+ (WCV+). Practically, we demonstrate that JAW-FCS and its computational relaxations outperform state-of-the-art
baselines on a variety of real-world datasets under
standard and feedback covariate shift, including
for biomolecular design and active learning tasks.

Figure 1: Illustration of biomolecular design data shift scenario.

For a concrete example, take an experimental design scenario, where a biomolecular engineer aims to propose a
novel protein sequence with high “fitness”—strong expression of a desired property such as fluorescence or medicinal
efficacy—using predictions of an ML model trained on a
protein dataset with experimentally-labeled fitness values.
This biomolecular design problem often requires leveraging
UQ to balance exploring novel sequences that are “far” from
the training data with exploiting “close” sequences whose
fitness values are already estimated with high confidence.
However, by selecting (for downstream experimental design) novel protein sequences according to the models’ predicted fitness, the engineer induces a dependency between
the training and test (designed sequence) distributions (Fig-

1. Introduction
To safely and effectively deploy machine learning (ML) systems in high-stakes decision making, a promising approach
is to communicate to users whether a given prediction can
1
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA 2 Bayesian Health, New York, NY, USA.
Correspondence to: Drew Prinster <drew@cs.jhu.edu>, Suchi
Saria <ssaria@cs.jhu.edu>, Anqi Liu <aliu@cs.jhu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

