Quantifying Human Priors over Social and Navigation Networks

Gecia Bravo-Hermsdorff 1

Abstract

as sensitivity to orientation and spatial frequency) have been
shown to be optimized for transmitting information about
natural scenes (Simoncelli, 2003; Field, 1989).

Human knowledge is largely implicit and
relational — do we have a friend in common?
can I walk from here to there? In this work, we
leverage the combinatorial structure of graphs
to quantify human priors over such relational
data. Our experiments focus on two domains
that have been continuously relevant over evolutionary timescales: social interaction and spatial
navigation. We find that some features of the
inferred priors are remarkably consistent, such as
the tendency for sparsity as a function of graph
size. Other features are domain-specific, such as
the propensity for triadic closure in social interactions. More broadly, our work demonstrates
how nonclassical statistical analysis of indirect
behavioral experiments can be used to efficiently
model latent biases in the data.

Likewise, the mammalian cochlea and auditory nerve fibers
have properties that allow for efficient representation of
the acoustic structure of speech and other natural sounds
(Lewicki, 2002; McDermott et al., 2013). Other computations, such as visual attention (Orbán et al., 2008) and
working memory (Mathy & Feldman, 2012; Brady et al.,
2009), display analogous properties.
Visual priors color our perception. This principle of
efficient coding also explains several well-known visual
illusions (Howe & Purves, 2005; Howe et al., 2005), evidentiating a general and important computational tradeoff in
biology: priors cannot be both exhaustive and efficient. That
is, by efficiently distinguishing relevant visual information,
our priors render us blind to insignificant differences. Might
there be similar “illusions” with respect to our priors over
the structure of connections?

1. Brains Rely on Efficient Priors
2. Tasks are Often Relational

A foundational result in the fields of artificial intelligence,
neuroscience, and psychology is the establishing of the
central role played by inductive biases or priors in learning
(Shiffrin et al., 2020; Wolpert, 2021). The importance of
priors cannot be understated; indeed, their quantification
elucidates many aspects of our perception and cognition.

From roads between places, websites on the internet, words
in a text, and friendships between people, humans are routinely confronted with a web of things (nodes) structured in
terms of their relations (edges). Despite the pervasiveness of
networks in our lives, knowledge of our priors about them
is rather sparse.

The efficient coding hypothesis. Examples of how priors
inform neuroscience can often be understood through the
lens of the “efficient coding hypothesis”, which states that
neural representations have adapted to efficiently encode the
relevant statistics of our environment (Barlow et al., 1961).

However, one notable paradigm is the learning of network
structure from random walks (Lynn & Bassett, 2020; Klishin
& Bassett, 2022). This approach typically consists of showing nodes to participants in a temporal sequence that respects
the structure of the network (such as samples of random
walks), and comparing the ease with which they learn these
transitions for several different networks (Schapiro et al.,
2013; Tompson et al., 2019).

Several decades of work investigating and refining this hypothesis have contributed to major advances in our understanding of the neural code (Manookin & Rieke, 2023). For
example, many properties of mammalian visual cells (such

Complementing these detailed experiments on specific networks, our work focuses on quantifying humans’ initial
beliefs about all such networks. The motivating question
is: given a set of n things and minimal or no information
about how they relate, what is the prior likelihood assigned
to each of the many possible patterns of connections?

1

Department of Statistical Science, University of London, UK.
Correspondence to:
Gecia Bravo-Hermsdorff <gecia.bravo@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

