Model-Free Robust Average-Reward Reinforcement Learning

Yue Wang 1 Alvaro Velasquez 2 George Atia 3 Ashley Prater-Bennette 4 Shaofeng Zou 1

Abstract

Two performance criteria are commonly used for infinitehorizon MDPs: 1) the discounted-reward setting, where
the reward is discounted exponentially with time; and 2)
the average-reward setting, where the long-term averagereward over time is of interest. For systems that operate for
an extended period of time, e.g., queue control, inventory
management in supply chains, or communication networks,
it is more important to optimize the average-reward since
policies obtained from the discounted-reward setting may
be myopic and have poor long-term performance (Kazemi
et al., 2022). However, much of the work on robust MDPs
has focused on the discounted-reward setting, and robust
average-reward MDPs remain largely unexplored.

Robust Markov decision processes (MDPs) address the challenge of model uncertainty by optimizing the worst-case performance over an uncertainty set of MDPs. In this paper, we focus on the
robust average-reward MDPs under the modelfree setting. We first theoretically characterize
the structure of solutions to the robust averagereward Bellman equation, which is essential for
our later convergence analysis. We then design
two model-free algorithms, robust relative value
iteration (RVI) TD and robust RVI Q-learning,
and theoretically prove their convergence to the
optimal solution. We provide several widely used
uncertainty sets as examples, including those defined by the contamination model, total variation,
Chi-squared divergence, Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence and Wasserstein distance.

Robust MDPs under the two criteria are fundamentally different. Compared to the discounted-reward setting, the
average-reward setting places equal weight on immediate
and future rewards, thus depends on the limiting stateaction frequencies of the underlying MDPs. This makes it
more challenging to investigate than the discounted-reward
setting. For example, to establish a contraction in the
discounted-reward setting, it generally suffices to have a
discount factor strictly less than one, whereas in the averagereward setting, convergence depends on the structure of the
MDP. Studies on robust average-reward MDPs are quite
limited in the literature, e.g., (Tewari & Bartlett, 2007; Lim
et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2023), and are model-based, where
the uncertainty set is fully known to the learner. However,
the more practical model-free setting, where only samples
from the nominal MDP (the centroid of the uncertainty set)
can be observed, has yet to be explored. Algorithms and
fundamental convergence guarantees in this setting have not
been established yet, which is the focus of this paper.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated remarkable
success in applications like robotics, finance, and games.
However, RL often suffers from a severe performance degradation when deployed in real-world environments, which is
often due to the model mismatch between the training and
testing environments. Such a model mismatch could be a
result of non-stationary conditions, modeling errors between
simulated and real systems, external perturbations and adversarial attacks. To address this challenge, a framework
of robust MDPs and robust RL was developed in (Nilim &
El Ghaoui, 2004; Iyengar, 2005; Bagnell et al., 2001), where
an uncertainty set of MDPs is constructed, and a pessimistic
approach is adopted to optimize the worst-case performance
over the uncertainty set. Such a minimax approach guarantees performance for all MDPs within the uncertainty set,
making it robust to model mismatch.

1.1. Challenges and Contributions
In this paper, we develop a fundamental characterization of
solutions to the robust average-reward Bellman equation,
design model-free algorithms with provable optimality guarantees, and construct an unbiased estimator of the robust
average-reward Bellman operator for various types of uncertainty sets. Our results fill the gap in model-free algorithms
for robust average-reward RL, and are fundamentally different from existing studies on robust discounted RL and robust
and non-robust average-reward MDPs. In the following, we
summarize the major challenges and our key contributions.

1
University at Buffalo 2 University of Colorado Boulder
University of Central Florida 4 Air Force Research Laboratory. Correspondence to: Yue Wang <ywang294@buffalo.edu>,
Shaofeng Zou <szou3@buffalo.edu>.
3

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).

1

