Large Language Models Can Be Easily Distracted by Irrelevant Context

Freda Shi 1 2 * Xinyun Chen 1 * Kanishka Misra 1 3 Nathan Scales 1 David Dohan 1 Ed Chi 1
Nathanael Schärli 1 Denny Zhou 1

Abstract

Original Problem
Jessica is six years older than Claire. In two years,
Claire will be 20 years old. How old is Jessica now?
Modified Problem
Jessica is six years older than Claire. In two years, Claire
will be 20 years old. Twenty years ago, the age of
Claire’s father is 3 times of Jessica’s age. How old is
Jessica now?
Standard Answer 24

Large language models have achieved impressive
performance on various natural language processing tasks. However, so far they have been evaluated primarily on benchmarks where all information in the input context is relevant for solving
the task. In this work, we investigate the distractibility of large language models, i.e., how
the model problem-solving accuracy can be influenced by irrelevant context. In particular, we introduce Grade-School Math with Irrelevant Context
(GSM-IC), an arithmetic reasoning dataset with
irrelevant information in the problem description.
We use this benchmark to measure the distractibility of cutting-edge prompting techniques for large
language models, and find that the model performance is dramatically decreased when irrelevant
information is included. We also identify several
approaches for mitigating this deficiency, such
as decoding with self-consistency and adding to
the prompt an instruction that tells the language
model to ignore the irrelevant information.1

Table 1. An example problem from GSM-IC. An irrelevant sentence (italic and underlined) that does not affect the standard answer is added immediately before the question.

related information, which may or may not be relevant to
the problems that we want to solve. We have to identify
what information is actually necessary during solving those
problems. Studies in psychology have shown that irrelevant
information may significantly decrease some children and
even adults problem-solving accuracy (Hoyer et al., 1979;
Pasolunghi et al., 1999; Marzocchi et al., 2002, inter alia).
In this work, we study the distractibility of large language
models for various prompting techniques; i.e., how is large
language model prompting affected by irrelevant context,
and what strategies can be used to improve performance? To
measure distractibility, we construct the GSM-IC dataset, a
grade-school math problem dataset derived from GSM8K
(Cobbe et al., 2021) and introduce two different metrics. In
contrast to prior work that derives benchmark variations by
substituting sentences of the base problems with variations
(Patel et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2021, inter alia), we keep
the base problem description and add to it one irrelevant sentence, while making sure that it does not affect the solution
of the problem (Table 1).

1. Introduction
Prompting large language models performs decently well in
a variety of domains (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al.,
2022, inter alia). However, for most of theses evaluation
benchmarks, all the information provided in the problem description is relevant to the problem solution, as the problems
in exams. This is different from real-world situations, where
problems usually come with several pieces of contextually
Work done while FS and KM are student researchers at
*
Google DeepMind.
Equal contribution 1 Google Deep2
Mind Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 3 Purdue University. Correspondence to: Freda Shi <freda@ttic.edu>,
Xinyun Chen <xinyunchen@google.com>, Denny Zhou <dennyzhou@google.com>.

We use Codex (code-davinci-002) and GPT-3.5 (
text-davinci-003) in the GPT3 model family to evaluate state-of-the-art prompting techniques on GSM-IC,2
including chain-of-thought prompting (C OT; Wei et al.,
2022), zero-shot chain-of-thought prompting (0-C OT; Kojima et al., 2022), least-to-most-prompting (LT M; Zhou
et al., 2022), and prompting with programs (P ROGRAM;

Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
1
Dataset is available at https://github.com/
google-research-datasets/GSM-IC.

2

1

http://openai.com/api/

