Transferable Calibration with Lower Bias and
Variance in Domain Adaptation

Ximei Wang, Mingsheng Long∗, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I. Jordan]
School of Software, KLiss, BNRist, Tsinghua University ] University of California, Berkeley
wxm17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Domain Adaptation (DA) enables transferring a learning machine from a labeled
source domain to an unlabeled target one. While remarkable advances have been
made, most of the existing DA methods focus on improving the target accuracy
at inference. How to estimate the predictive uncertainty of DA models is vital for
decision-making in safety-critical scenarios but remains the boundary to explore. In
this paper, we delve into the open problem of Calibration in DA, which is extremely
challenging due to the coexistence of domain shift and the lack of target labels.
We first reveal the dilemma that DA models learn higher accuracy at the expense
of well-calibrated probabilities. Driven by this finding, we propose Transferable
Calibration (TransCal) to achieve more accurate calibration with lower bias and
variance in a unified hyperparameter-free optimization framework. As a general
post-hoc calibration method, TransCal can be easily applied to recalibrate existing
DA methods. Its efficacy has been justified both theoretically and empirically.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve the state of the art predictive accuracy in machine learning tasks
with the benefit of powerful ability to learn discriminative representations [35, 11, 57]. However, in
real-world scenarios, it is hard (intolerably time-consuming and labor-expensive) to collect sufficient
labeled data through manual labeling, causing DNNs to confront challenges when generalizing the
pre-trained model to a different domain with unlabeled data. To tackle this challenge, researchers
propose to transfer knowledge from a different but related domain by leveraging the readily-available
labeled data, a.k.a. domain adaptation (DA) [44].
There are mainly two types of domain adaptation formulas: covariate shift [44, 37, 29, 13] and
label shift [27, 2, 1], while we focus on the former in this paper since it appears more natural in
recognition tasks and attracts more attention in the literature. Early domain adaptation methods
bridge the source and target domains mainly by learning domain-invariant representations [37, 16]
or instance importances [23, 15]. After the breakthrough in deep neural networks (DNNs) has been
achieved, they are widely believed to be able to learn more transferable features [35, 11, 57, 61],
since they disentangle explanatory factors of variations. Recent works in deep domain adaptation can
be mainly grouped into two categories: 1) moment matching. These methods align representations
across domains by minimizing the discrepancy between feature distributions [51, 29, 31, 32, 28];
2) adversarial training. These methods adversarially learn transferable feature representations by
confusing a domain discriminator in a two-player game [14, 50, 30, 55, 60].
While numerous domain adaptation methods have been proposed, most of them mainly focus on
improving the accuracy in the target domain but fail to estimate the predictive uncertainty, falling
∗

Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn)

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

