Co-exposure maximization in online social networks

Sijing Tu
Department of Computer Science
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
sijing@kth.se

Cigdem Aslay
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
Aarhus, Denmark
cigdem@cs.au.dk

Aristides Gionis
Department of Computer Science
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
argioni@kth.se

Abstract
Social media has created new ways for citizens to stay informed on societal matters
and participate in political discourse. However, with its algorithmically-curated and
virally-propagating content, social media has contributed further to the polarization
of opinions by reinforcing users’ existing viewpoints. An emerging line of research
seeks to understand how content-recommendation algorithms can be re-designed
to mitigate societal polarization amplified by social-media interactions. In this
paper, we study the problem of allocating seed users to opposing campaigns: by
drawing on the equal-time rule of political campaigning on traditional media,
our goal is to allocate seed users to campaigners with the aim to maximize the
expected number of users who are co-exposed to both campaigns. We show that
the problem of maximizing co-exposure is NP-hard and its objective function is
neither submodular nor supermodular. However, by exploiting a connection to
a submodular function that acts as a lower bound to the objective, we are able
to devise a greedy algorithm with provable approximation guarantee. We further
provide a scalable instantiation of our approximation algorithm by introducing
a novel extension to the notion of random reverse-reachable sets for efficiently
estimating the expected co-exposure. We experimentally demonstrate the quality
of our proposal on real-world social networks.

1

Introduction

Social media have created new ways for citizens to stay informed and participate in societal discourse.
However, despite enabling users to access a variery of information, social media has been linked to
increased societal polarization [22], by amplifying the phenomenon of echo chambers [4, 27], where
users are only exposed to information from like-minded individuals, and of filter bubbles [35, 37],
where algorithms only present personalized content that agrees with the user’s viewpoint. To address
these concerns, an emerging line of research seeks to understand how content-recommendation
algorithms can be re-designed to mitigate societal polarization amplified by social-media interactions.
Recent work includes developing methods for balancing [25] and diversifying [3] information
exposure, while considering the tendency of the recommended content to spread through the online
social network under a stochastic information propagation model.
In this paper, we take a step in this direction and consider the problem of breaking filter bubbles
through the information-propagation lens. Following related work that has considered the problem
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

