An implicit function learning approach for
parametric modal regression

Yangchen Pan, Ehsan Imani
Univ. of Alberta & Amii

Amir-massoud Farahmand
Vector Institute & Univ. of Toronto

Martha White
Univ. of Alberta

{pan6,imani}@ualberta.ca

farahmand@vectorinstitute.ai

whitem@ualberta.ca

Abstract
For multi-valued functions—such as when the conditional distribution on targets
given the inputs is multi-modal—standard regression approaches are not always
desirable because they provide the conditional mean. Modal regression algorithms
address this issue by instead finding the conditional mode(s). Most, however, are
nonparametric approaches and so can be difficult to scale. Further, parametric
approximators, like neural networks, facilitate learning complex relationships
between inputs and targets. In this work, we propose a parametric modal regression
algorithm. We use the implicit function theorem to develop an objective, for
learning a joint function over inputs and targets. We empirically demonstrate on
several synthetic problems that our method (i) can learn multi-valued functions
and produce the conditional modes, (ii) scales well to high-dimensional inputs,
and (iii) can even be more effective for certain uni-modal problems, particularly
for high-frequency functions. We demonstrate that our method is competitive in a
real-world modal regression problem and two regular regression datasets.

1

Introduction

The goal in regression is to find the relationship between the input (observation) variable X ∈ X
and the output (response) Y ∈ Y variable, given samples of (X, Y ). The underlying premise is
that there exists an unknown underlying function g ∗ : X 7→ Y that maps the input space X to
the output space Y. We only observe a noise-contaminated value of that function: sample (x, y)
has y = g ∗ (x) + η for some noise η. If the goal is to minimize expected squared error, it is well
known that E[Y |x] is the optimal predictor (Bishop, 2006). It is common to use Generalized Linear
Models (Nelder & Wedderburn, 1972), which attempt to estimate E[Y |x] for different uni-modal
distribution choices for p(y|x), such as Gaussian (l2 regression) and Poisson (Poisson regression).
For multi-modal distributions, however, predicting E[Y |x] may not be desirable, as it may correspond
to rarely observed y that simply fall between two modes. Further, this predictor does not provide any
useful information about the multiple modes.
Modal regression is designed for this problem, and though not widely studied in the general machine
learning community, has been actively studied in statistics. Most of the methods are non-parametric,
and assume a single mode Lee (1989); Lee & Kim (1998); Kemp & Silva (2012); Yu & Aristodemou
(2012); Yao & Li (2014); Lv et al. (2014); Feng et al. (2017). The basic idea is to adjust target
values towards their closest empirical conditional modes, based on a kernel density estimator. These
methods rely on the chosen kernel and may have issues scaling to high-dimensional data due to issues
in computing similarities in high-dimensional spaces. There is some recent work using quantile
regression to estimate conditional modes (Ota et al., 2018), and though promising for a parametric
approach, is restricted to linear quantile regression.
A parametric approach for modal regression would enable these estimators to benefit from the
advances in learning functions with neural networks. The most straightforward way to do so is to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

