Relaxed Scheduling for Scalable Belief Propagation

Vitaly Aksenov
ITMO University
aksenov.vitaly@gmail.com

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Janne H. Korhonen
IST Austria
janne.korhonen@ist.ac.at

Abstract
The ability to leverage large-scale hardware parallelism has been one of the key
enablers of the accelerated recent progress in machine learning. Consequently,
there has been considerable effort invested into developing efficient parallel variants
of classic machine learning algorithms. However, despite the wealth of knowledge
on parallelization, some classic machine learning algorithms often prove hard to
parallelize efficiently while maintaining convergence.
In this paper, we focus on efficient parallel algorithms for the key machine learning
task of inference on graphical models, in particular on the fundamental belief
propagation algorithm. We address the challenge of efficiently parallelizing this
classic paradigm by showing how to leverage scalable relaxed schedulers in this
context. We present an extensive empirical study, showing that our approach
outperforms previous parallel belief propagation implementations both in terms
of scalability and in terms of wall-clock convergence time, on a range of practical
applications.

1

Introduction

Hardware parallelism has been a key computational enabler for recent advances in machine learning,
as it provides a way to reduce the processing time for the ever-increasing quantities of data required for
training accurate models. Consequently, there has been considerable effort invested into developing
efficient parallel variants of classic machine learning algorithms, e.g. [28, 22, 23, 24, 15].
In this paper, we will focus on efficient parallel algorithms for the fundamental task of inference on
graphical models. The inference task in graphical models takes the form of marginalisation: we are
given observations for a subset of the random variables, and the task is to compute the conditional
distribution of one or a few variables of interest. The marginalization problem is known to be
computationally intractable in general [10, 32, 9], but inexact heuristics are well-studied for practical
inference tasks.
One popular heuristic for inference on graphical models is belief propagation [27], inspired by the
exact dynamic programming algorithm for marginalization on trees. While belief propagation has
no general approximation or even convergence guarantees, it has proven empirically successful in
inference tasks, in particular in the context of decoding low-density parity check codes [8]. However,
it remains poorly understood how to properly parallelize belief propagation.
Parallelizing belief propagation. To illustrate the challenges of parallelizing belief propagation,
we will next give a simplified overview of the belief propagation algorithm, and refer the reader
to Section 2 for full details. Belief propagation can be seen as a message passing or a weight
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

