How to Characterize The Landscape of
Overparameterized Convolutional Neural Networks

Yihong Gu∗1 , Weizhong Zhang∗2 , Cong Fang1 , Jason D. Lee1 , Tong Zhang2
1
Princeton University, 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yihongg,jasonlee}@princeton.edu, zhangweizhongzju@gmail.com
fangcong@pku.edu.cn, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
For many initialization schemes, parameters of two randomly initialized deep neural
networks (DNNs) can be quite different, but feature distributions of the hidden
nodes are similar at each layer. With the help of a new technique called neural
network grafting, we demonstrate that even during the entire training process,
feature distributions of differently initialized networks remain similar at each layer.
In this paper, we present an explanation of this phenomenon. Specifically, we
consider the loss landscape of an overparameterized convolutional neural network
(CNN) in the continuous limit, where the numbers of channels/hidden nodes in
the hidden layers go to infinity. Although the landscape of the overparameterized
CNN is still non-convex with respect to the trainable parameters, we show that very
surprisingly, it can be reformulated as a convex function with respect to the feature
distributions in the hidden layers. Therefore by reparameterizing neural networks
in terms of feature distributions, we obtain a much simpler characterization of the
landscape of overparameterized CNNs. We further argue that training with respect
to network parameters leads to a fixed trajectory in the feature distributions.

1

Introduction

A good characterization of the landscape is very important for understanding remarkable successes of
DNNs in various domains including computer vision, nature language processing and speech. There
have been a lot of research [29, 21, 24, 20, 26, 8] analyzing the landscape of deep neural network in
parameter space. On one hand, even one-hidden-layer neural network has complex landscape with
exponential number of local minima and saddle points. On the other hand, some interesting empirical
phenomena like mode connectivity, that low-cost solutions of DNN could be connected by simple
path in parameter space, have been found, indicating that the loss landscape is not as complex as we
expected. These two conclusions of the landscape in parameter space seem to be contradictory.
We believe that the loss landscape should be investigated in the feature distribution space directly
instead of the parameter space as existing studies have done due to the excellent capability of
DNN to learn effective feature representations. But our understanding on the feature distribution
learned by DNNs is still limited. For example, even to the basic question of to what extent two
feature representations learned by different DNNs are essentially the same, various studies such
as [23, 32, 19] reached different conclusions due to the redundancy in the feature representations
comes from the special properties of DNNs, e.g., the permutation & scale invariance of the trainable
parameters, the truncation operation in ReLU, etc. Two feature representations that look quite
different at current layer could be essentially the same. As the example illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the
difference may have little effect on the features in subsequent layers and could be alleviated, or even
eliminated completely after passing the linear transformations and the activation functions ReLU
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

