On Reward-Free Reinforcement Learning with
Linear Function Approximation∗

Ruosong Wang†

Simon S. Du‡

Lin F. Yang§

Ruslan Salakhutdinov†

Abstract
Reward-free reinforcement learning (RL) is a framework which is suitable for both
the batch RL setting and the setting where there are many reward functions of
interest. During the exploration phase, an agent collects samples without using
a pre-specified reward function. After the exploration phase, a reward function
is given, and the agent uses samples collected during the exploration phase to
compute a near-optimal policy. Jin et al. [2020] showed that in the tabular setting,
the agent only needs to collect polynomial number of samples (in terms of the
number states, the number of actions, and the planning horizon) for reward-free
RL. However, in practice, the number of states and actions can be large, and thus
function approximation schemes are required for generalization. In this work, we
give both positive and negative results for reward-free RL with linear function
approximation. We give an algorithm for reward-free RL in the linear Markov
decision process setting where both the transition and the reward admit linear
representations. The sample complexity of our algorithm is polynomial in the
feature dimension and the planning horizon, and is completely independent of
the number of states and actions. We further give an exponential lower bound for
reward-free RL in the setting where only the optimal Q-function admits a linear
representation. Our results imply several interesting exponential separations on the
sample complexity of reward-free RL.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent repeatedly interacts with an unknown environment to
maximize the cumulative reward. To achieve this goal, RL algorithms must be equipped with
exploration mechanisms to effectively solve tasks with long horizons and sparse reward signals.
Empirically, there is a host of successes by combining deep RL methods with different exploration
strategies. However, the theoretical understanding of exploration in RL by far is rather limited.
In this work we study the reward-free RL setting which was formalized in the recent work by Jin
et al. [2020]. There are two phases in the reward-free setting: the exploration phase and the planning
phase. During the exploration phase, the agent collects trajectories from an unknown environment
without any pre-specified reward function. Then, in the planning phase, a specific reward function is
given to the agent, and the goal is to use samples collected during the exploration phase to output a
near-optimal policy for the given reward function. From a practical point of view, this paradigm is
particularly suitable for 1) the batch RL setting [Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996] where data collection
and planning are explicitly separated and 2) the setting where there are multiple reward function
∗

Correspondence to:
Ruosong
<ssdu@cs.washington.edu>,
Lin
F.
<rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu>.
†
Carnegie Mellon University
‡
University of Washington, Seattle
§
University of California, Los Angeles

Wang
Yang

<ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu>,
Simon S. Du
<linyang@ee.ucla.edu>,
Ruslan
Salakhutdinov

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

