The Devil is in the Detail: A Framework for
Macroscopic Prediction via Microscopic Models

Yingxiang Yang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
yyang172@illinois.edu

Negar Kiyavash
Ecole polytechnique federale de Lausanne
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Le Song
Georgia Institute of Technology
lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Niao He
UIUC & ETH Zurich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Macroscopic data aggregated from microscopic events are pervasive in machine
learning, such as country-level COVID-19 infection statistics based on city-level
data. Yet, many existing approaches for predicting macroscopic behavior only use
aggregated data, leaving a large amount of fine-grained microscopic information
unused. In this paper, we propose a principled optimization framework for macroscopic prediction by fitting microscopic models based on conditional stochastic
optimization. The framework leverages both macroscopic and microscopic information, and adapts to individual microscopic models involved in the aggregation.
In addition, we propose efficient learning algorithms with convergence guarantees.
In our experiments, we show that the proposed learning framework clearly outperforms other plug-in supervised learning approaches in real-world applications,
including the prediction of daily infections of COVID-19 and medicare claims.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks involve fitting data sets where each data point describes an aggregated
effect. For example, country-level COVID-19 infection statistics are aggregation of city-level data;
the popularity of a meme in a social network reflects the combined sharing and posting behaviors of
the users; a bank’s balance sheet numbers depend on the lending and saving practices of all its clients.
We refer to the machine learning problems that involve fitting these data sets at the aggregated level
as macroscopic learning, or macro-learning for short.1
Why learn from macro data? From an application perspective, performances of many systems are
naturally described by statistics at the aggregated level. For example, the GDP reflects the wealth
condition of a country, and historic earnings capture the prospect of a company. In these applications,
the learning goal is at the aggregated or macroscopic level [1, 14, 33]. Moreover, many applications
routinely store and release their data only in the aggregated form, which could be due to privacy
concerns [9, 30, 37], or the need to reduce noise in the measurements [34, 35].
Why learn with micro-models? Since macro data can often be viewed as aggregated outcomes
of fine-grained micro-models, it is natural to learn the underlying micro-models to capture the datagenerating dynamics. Additionally, the size of micro data set is often much larger than the macro
1

Throughout the paper, we use macro and micro for macroscopic and microscopic, respectively.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

