Tensor Completion Made Practical

Allen Liu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
cliu568@mit.edu
Ankur Moitra∗
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
moitra@mit.edu

Abstract
Tensor completion is a natural higher-order generalization of matrix completion
where the goal is to recover a low-rank tensor from sparse observations of its
entries. Existing algorithms are either heuristic without provable guarantees, based
on solving large semidefinite programs which are impractical to run, or make strong
assumptions such as requiring the factors to be nearly orthogonal. In this paper we
introduce a new variant of alternating minimization, which in turn is inspired by
understanding how the progress measures that guide convergence of alternating
minimization in the matrix setting need to be adapted to the tensor setting. We
show strong provable guarantees, including showing that our algorithm converges
linearly to the true tensors even when the factors are highly correlated and can be
implemented in nearly linear time. Moreover our algorithm is also highly practical
and we show that we can complete third order tensors with a thousand dimensions
from observing a tiny fraction of its entries. In contrast, and somewhat surprisingly,
we show that the standard version of alternating minimization, without our new
twist, can converge at a drastically slower rate in practice.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study the problem of recovering a low-rank tensor from sparse observations of its
entries. In particular, suppose
r
X
T =
σi xi ⊗ yi ⊗ zi
i=1

Here {xi }i , {yi }i and {zi }i are called the factors in the low rank decomposition and the σi ’s
are scalars, which allows us to assume without loss of generality that the factors are unit vectors.
Additionally T is called a third order tensor because it is naturally represented as a three-dimensional
array of numbers. Now suppose each entry of T is revealed independently with some probability p.
Our goal is to accurately estimate the missing entries with p as small as possible.
Tensors completion is a natural generalization of the classic matrix completion problem [7]. Similarly,
it has a wide range of applications including in recommendation systems [33], signal and image
processing [20, 19, 24, 4], data analysis in engineering and the sciences [26, 18, 29, 31] and harmonic
∗

This work was supported in part by a Microsoft Trustworthy AI Grant, NSF CAREER Award CCF-1453261,
NSF Large CCF1565235, a David and Lucile Packard Fellowship, an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship and an ONR
Young Investigator Award.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

