Differentiable Meta-Learning of Bandit Policies
Craig Boutilier
Google Research

Chih-Wei Hsu
Google Research

Branislav Kveton
Google Research

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind / University of Alberta

Martin Mladenov
Google Research

Manzil Zaheer
Google Research

Abstract
Exploration policies in Bayesian bandits maximize the average reward over problem
instances drawn from some distribution P. In this work, we learn such policies
for an unknown distribution P using samples from P. Our approach is a form of
meta-learning and exploits properties of P without making strong assumptions
about its form. To do this, we parameterize our policies in a differentiable way and
optimize them by policy gradients, an approach that is pleasantly general and easy
to implement. We derive effective gradient estimators and propose novel variance
reduction techniques. We also analyze and experiment with various bandit policy
classes, including neural networks and a novel softmax policy. The latter has regret
guarantees and is a natural starting point for our optimization. Our experiments
show the versatility of our approach. We also observe that neural network policies
can learn implicit biases expressed only through the sampled instances.

1

Introduction

A stochastic bandit [36, 9, 38] is an online learning problem where a learning agent sequentially
pulls arms with stochastic rewards. The agent aims to maximize its expected cumulative reward over
some horizon. It does not know the mean rewards of the arms a priori and learns them by pulling
the arms. This induces the well-known exploration-exploitation trade-off : explore, and learn more
about an arm; or exploit, and pull the arm with the highest estimated reward. In a clinical trial, the
arm might be a treatment and its reward is the outcome of that treatment for a patient.
Bandit algorithms are typically designed to have low regret, worst-case or instance-dependent, for
some problem class of interest to the algorithm designer [38]. While regret guarantees are reassuring,
this approach often results in algorithms that are overly conservative, since they do not exploit the
full properties of the problem class or objective. We explore an alternative view, which is to learn a
bandit algorithm. Specifically, we assume that the agent has access to bandit instances sampled from
an unknown distribution P and attempts to learn a bandit algorithm with a high Bayes reward, the
average reward over the instances drawn from P. In essence, we automate the learning of policies for
Bayesian bandits [16]. Our approach can be viewed as a form of meta-learning [55, 56, 11, 12] with
gradient ascent [25].
A classic approach to Bayesian bandits is to design Bayes optimal policies [27, 28], which take a
simple form for specific priors P. Our approach is more general, since it makes minimal assumptions
about P and optimized policies. It is also more computationally efficient and easier to parallelize.
However, we lose guarantees on Bayes optimality. Another line of work [48, 59, 49] bounds the
Bayes regret of classic bandit policies. These policies also have instance-dependent regret bounds
and thus are more conservative than our work, where we directly optimize the Bayes reward.
Overall, our aim is to make learning of bandit policies as straightforward as applying gradient descent
to supervised learning problems. We take the following steps toward this goal. First, we carefully
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

