Reparameterizing Mirror Descent
as Gradient Descent
Ehsan Amid⇤ and Manfred K. Warmuth
Google Research, Brain Team
Mountain View, CA
{eamid, manfred}@google.com

Abstract
Most of the recent successful applications of neural networks have been based
on training with gradient descent updates. However, for some small networks,
other mirror descent updates learn provably more efficiently when the target is
sparse. We present a general framework for casting a mirror descent update as
a gradient descent update on a different set of parameters. In some cases, the
mirror descent reparameterization can be described as training a modified network
with standard backpropagation. The reparameterization framework is versatile
and covers a wide range of mirror descent updates, even cases where the domain
is constrained. Our construction for the reparameterization argument is done for
the continuous versions of the updates. Finding general criteria for the discrete
versions to closely track their continuous counterparts remains an interesting open
problem.

1

Introduction

Mirror descent (MD) [Nemirovski and Yudin, 1983, Kivinen and Warmuth, 1997] refers to a family
of updates which transform the parameters w 2 C from a convex domain C 2 Rd via a link function
(a.k.a. mirror map) f : C ! Rd before applying the descent step. The continuous-time mirror
descent (CMD) update, which can be seen as the limit case of (discrete-time) MD, corresponds to
the solution of the following ordinary differential equation (ODE) [Nemirovski and Yudin, 1983,
Warmuth and Jagota, 1998, Raginsky and Bouvrie, 2012]:
f (w(t + h))
h

f (w(t)) h!0 •
= f w(t) = rL(w(t)) ,
⇣
⌘
w(t + h) = f 1 f (w(t)) h rL(w(t)) .

(CMD)

(1)

(MD)

(2)

•

Here L denotes a differentiable real-valued loss and f := @f
@t is the time derivative of the link function.
The vanilla discretized MD update is obtained by setting the step size to h. The main link functions
investigated in the past are f (w) = w and f (w) = log(w) leading to the gradient descent (GD)
and the unnormalized exponentiated gradient (EGU) family of updates.2 These two link functions
are associated with the squared Euclidean and the relative entropy divergences, respectively. For
example, the classical Perceptron and Winnow algorithms are motivated using the identity and log
links, respectively, when the loss is the hinge loss. A number of papers discuss the difference between
the two updates [Kivinen and Warmuth, 1997, Kivinen et al., 2006, Nie et al., 2016, Ghai et al.,
2020] and their rotational invariance properties have been explored in [Warmuth et al., 2014]. In
⇤

An earlier version of this manuscript (with additional results on the matrix case) appeared as "Interpolating
Between Gradient Descent and Exponentiated Gradient Using Reparameterized Gradient Descent" as a preprint.
2
The normalized version is called EG and the two-sided version EGU± . More about this later.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

