PlanGAN: Model-based Planning With Sparse
Rewards and Multiple Goals

Henry Charlesworth
Giovanni Montana
Warwick Manufacturing Group
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
{H.Charlesworth, G.Montana}@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning with sparse rewards remains a significant challenge in reinforcement
learning (RL), especially when the aim is to train a policy capable of achieving
multiple different goals. To date, the most successful approaches for dealing with
multi-goal, sparse reward environments have been model-free RL algorithms. In
this work we propose PlanGAN, a model-based algorithm specifically designed for
solving multi-goal tasks in environments with sparse rewards. Our method builds
on the fact that any trajectory of experience collected by an agent contains useful
information about how to achieve the goals observed during that trajectory. We
use this to train an ensemble of conditional generative models (GANs) to generate
plausible trajectories that lead the agent from its current state towards a specified
goal. We then combine these imagined trajectories into a novel planning algorithm
in order to achieve the desired goal as efficiently as possible. The performance of
PlanGAN has been tested on a number of robotic navigation/manipulation tasks in
comparison with a range of model-free reinforcement learning baselines, including
Hindsight Experience Replay. Our studies indicate that PlanGAN can achieve
comparable performance whilst being around 4-8 times more sample efficient.

1

Introduction

One of the primary appeals of reinforcement learning (RL) is that it provides a framework for the
autonomous learning of complex behaviours without the need for human supervision. In recent
years RL has had significant success in areas such as playing video games [1, 2], board games [3, 4]
and robotic control tasks [5, 6, 7]. Despite this, progress in applying RL to more practically useful
environments has been somewhat limited. One of the main problems is that RL algorithms generally
require a well-shaped, dense reward function in order to make learning progress. Often a reward
function that fully captures the desired behaviour of an agent is not readily available and has to be
engineered manually for each task, requiring a lot of time and domain-specific knowledge. This
defeats the point of designing an agent that is capable of learning autonomously. A more general
approach is to learn with sparse rewards, where an agent only receives a reward once a task has been
completed. This is much easier to specify and is applicable to a wide range of problems, however
training becomes significantly more challenging since the agent only receives infrequent feedback
at the end of every rollout. This becomes especially challenging in the case of goal-conditioned
RL [8, 9], where the aim is to train a policy that can achieve a variety of different goals within the
environment.
Much of RL’s success has come with model-free approaches, where the policy is learned directly
from the reward signal obtained by interacting with the environment. However recently there has been
a lot of interest in applying model-based approaches to the same kind of problems [7, 10, 11]. One
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

