End-to-End Learning and Intervention in Games

Jiayang Li
Northwestern University
jiayangli2024@u.northwestern.edu
Yu (Marco) Nie
Northwestern University
y-nie@northwestern.edu

Jing Yu
Northwestern University
jingyu2021@u.northwestern.edu
Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Abstract
In a social system, the self-interest of agents can be detrimental to the collective
good, sometimes leading to social dilemmas. To resolve such a conflict, a central
designer may intervene by either redesigning the system or incentivizing the agents
to change their behaviors. To be effective, the designer must anticipate how the
agents react to the intervention, which is dictated by their often unknown payoff
functions. Therefore, learning about the agents is a prerequisite for intervention. In
this paper, we provide a unified framework for learning and intervention in games.
We cast the equilibria of games as individual layers and integrate them into an
end-to-end optimization framework. To enable the backward propagation through
the equilibria of games, we propose two approaches, respectively based on explicit
and implicit differentiation. Specifically, we cast the equilibria as the solutions to
variational inequalities (VIs). The explicit approach unrolls the projection method
for solving VIs, while the implicit approach exploits the sensitivity of the solutions
to VIs. At the core of both approaches is the differentiation through a projection
operator. Moreover, we establish the correctness of both approaches and identify
the conditions under which one approach is more desirable than the other. The
analytical results are validated using several real-world problems.

1

Introduction

The history of human societies may be viewed as an evolutionary process through which countless
self-interested individuals learn to cooperate with each other [20]. While human self-interest can
be channeled towards socially desirable ends, interventions—in the form of laws, social norms and
incentives—are often required. Indeed, even the “invisible hand” of Adam Smith would not work
without proper regulations and policing. This process continues, as it uncovers and resolves previously
unknown or non-existent conflicts between self- and collective interest. For example, the potential
conflict between overpopulation and welfare states has been heatedly debated among biologists, social
scientists, philosophers and alike [21, 16]. In economics, externalities (a.k.a. neighboring effects)
lead to market failures because self-interested agents do not bear the cost/benefit of their actions
in its entirety. Lloyd’s common devastated by excessive grazing [34] and Pigou’s road jammed by
selfish drivers [50] are two classical examples. More recently, Braess [10] shows expanding a road
network could worsen traffic congestion. This paradoxical phenomenon, related closely to the price
of anarchy [28], demonstrates vividly how unregulated self-interest may be detrimental to the social
good. In this paper, we develop a general framework aiming to regulate various systems comprised
of self-interested agents.
Game theory is often used to determine the most likely outcomes of a system in which agents pursue
self-interest and interact with each other [27, 18]. Although a game-theoretic model of the real-world
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

