Online Algorithm for Unsupervised Sequential
Selection with Contextual Information
Manjesh K. Hanawal
Department of IEOR
IIT Bombay, India
mhanawal@iitb.ac.in

Arun Verma
Department of IEOR
IIT Bombay, India
v.arun@iitb.ac.in
Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind/University of Alberta
Alberta, Canada
szepi@google.com

Venkatesh Saligrama
Departmetn of ECE
Boston University, USA
srv@bu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study Contextual Unsupervised Sequential Selection (USS), a
new variant of the stochastic contextual bandits problem where the loss of an arm
cannot be inferred from the observed feedback. In our setup, arms are associated
with fixed costs and are ordered, forming a cascade. In each round, a context is
presented, and the learner selects the arms sequentially till some depth. The total
cost incurred by stopping at an arm is the sum of fixed costs of arms selected and
the stochastic loss associated with the arm. The learner’s goal is to learn a decision
rule that maps contexts to arms with the goal of minimizing the total expected loss.
The problem is challenging as we are faced with an unsupervised setting as the
total loss cannot be estimated. Clearly, learning is feasible only if the optimal arm
can be inferred (explicitly or implicitly) from the problem structure. We observe
that learning is still possible when the problem instance satisfies the so-called
‘Contextual Weak Dominance’ (CWD) property. Under CWD, we propose an
algorithm for the contextual USS problem and demonstrate that it has sub-linear
regret. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets validate our algorithm.

1

Introduction

Industrial systems, such as those found in medical, airport security, and manufacturing, utilize a suite
of tests or classifiers for monitoring patients, people, and products. Tests have costs with the more
intrusive and informative ones resulting in higher monetary costs and higher latency. For this reason,
they are often organized as a classifier cascade (Chen et al., 2012; Trapeznikov and Saligrama, 2013;
Wang et al., 2015), so that new input is first probed by an inexpensive test then a more expensive one.
The goal of a cascaded system is to resolve easy to handle examples early so that the overall system
maintains high accuracy at low average costs.
Over time, due to environmental changes or test calibrations, sequential testing protocols (STP) may
no longer be accurate, resulting in higher costs. While one can leverage off-line methods such as
supervised training of cascades (Wang et al., 2015), they require new annotated data collection. In
many scenarios, new data cannot be collected in-situ, and system shutdown is not an option. In the
absence of annotated data, we face a dilemma. While we can observe test outcomes, we cannot
ascertain their reliability due to the absence of ground truth, necessitating unsupervised sequential
selection (USS) methods, where an arm represents a test/classifier. Recent works (Hanawal et al.,
2017; Verma et al., 2019a, 2020a) propose methods for solving the USS problem; however, they
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

