Bayesian Causal Structural Learning with
Zero-Inflated Poisson Bayesian Networks

Junsouk Choi
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
jchoi@stat.tamu.edu

Robert Chapkin
Department of Nutrition
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
r-chapkin@tamu.edu

Yang Ni
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
yni@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
Multivariate zero-inflated count data arise in a wide range of areas such as economics, social sciences, and biology. To infer causal relationships in zero-inflated
count data, we propose a new zero-inflated Poisson Bayesian network (ZIPBN)
model. We show that the proposed ZIPBN is identifiable with cross-sectional
data. The proof is based on the well-known characterization of Markov equivalence class which is applicable to other distribution families. For causal structural
learning, we introduce a fully Bayesian inference approach which exploits the
parallel tempering Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm to efficiently explore the
multi-modal network space. We demonstrate the utility of the proposed ZIPBN
in causal discoveries for zero-inflated count data by simulation studies with comparison to alternative Bayesian network methods. Additionally, real single-cell
RNA-sequencing data with known causal relationships will be used to assess the
capability of ZIPBN for discovering causal relationships in real-world problems.

1

Introduction

This paper addresses causal structural learning problems for zero-inflated count data. While true
causality can only be determined using controlled experimentation (Gourévitch et al., 2006), statistical
methods are useful in generating testable causal hypotheses which can semi-automate and expedite
the causal discovery process. Bayesian networks (BNs) are popular approaches for causal structural
learning and inference (Pearl, 2009). However, BNs may not be identifiable with cross-sectional
data due to Markov equivalence class (MEC, Heckerman et al. 1995) in which all BNs encode the
same conditional independence assertions. This implies that without further assumptions, one cannot
differentiate BNs that belong to the same MEC.
Several approaches have been developed to address the identifiability issue of BNs. BNs for continuous data are often represented as sparse additive noise models. Under such representation, BNs
are identifiable if the noises are non-Gaussian (Shimizu et al., 2006), if the functional form of the
additive noise model is nonlinear plus very mild additional conditions (Hoyer et al., 2009; Zhang &
Hyvärinen, 2009), or if the noise variances are equal (Peters & Bühlmann, 2014). When the noises are
non-Gaussian (Shimizu et al., 2006), a BN is identifiable because it is equivalent to the independent
component analysis (ICA) and hence its identifiability theory applies. To learn the causal structure,
they extended the ICA algorithm with additional steps of rotation, normalization, and test-based
pruning. Hoyer et al. (2009) proposed to learn the structure of a nonlinear BN by testing whether the
noises are independent and showed that nonlinear BNs are identifiable for bivariate case. Zhang &
Hyvärinen (2009) further considered additional nonlinear effects of measurement errors and proposed
an ICA-based algorithm for bivariate BNs and a two-step approach (first identifying MEC by conditional independence tests and then determining a unique BN with a similar approach in Hoyer et al.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

