Active Structure Learning of Causal DAGs via
Directed Clique Trees

Chandler Squires
LIDS, MIT
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
csquires@mit.edu
Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com

Sara Magliacane
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
sara.magliacane@gmail.com
Dmitriy Katz
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
dkatzrog@us.ibm.com

Murat Kocaoglu
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
murat@ibm.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Abstract
A growing body of work has begun to study intervention design for efficient
structure learning of causal directed acyclic graphs (DAGs). A typical setting is
a causally sufficient setting, i.e. a system with no latent confounders, selection
bias, or feedback, when the essential graph of the observational equivalence class
(EC) is given as an input and interventions are assumed to be noiseless. Most
existing works focus on worst-case or average-case lower bounds for the number
of interventions required to orient a DAG. These worst-case lower bounds only
establish that the largest clique in the essential graph could make it difficult to
learn the true DAG. In this work, we develop a universal lower bound for singlenode interventions that establishes that the largest clique is always a fundamental
impediment to structure learning. Specifically, we present a decomposition of a
DAG into independently orientable components through directed clique trees and
use it to prove that the number of single-node interventions necessary to orient any
DAG in an EC is at least the sum of half the size of the largest cliques in each chain
component of the essential graph. Moreover, we present a two-phase intervention
design algorithm that, under certain conditions on the chordal skeleton, matches
the optimal number of interventions up to a multiplicative logarithmic factor in the
number of maximal cliques. We show via synthetic experiments that our algorithm
can scale to much larger graphs than most of the related work and achieves better
worst-case performance than other scalable approaches. 1

1

Introduction

Causal modeling is an important tool in medicine, biology and econometrics, allowing practitioners to
predict the effect of actions on a system and the behavior of a system if its causal mechanisms change
due to external factors (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2000; Peters et al., 2017). A commonly-used model
1

A code base to recreate these results can be found at https://github.com/csquires/dct-policy.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

