Sample Complexity of Uniform Convergence
for Multicalibration
Eliran Shabat∗
Tel Aviv University
shabat.eliran@gmail.com

Lee Cohen∗
Tel Aviv University
leecohencs@gmail.com

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and
Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract
There is a growing interest in societal concerns in machine learning systems, especially in fairness. Multicalibration gives a comprehensive methodology to address
group fairness. In this work, we address the multicalibration error and decouple
it from the prediction error. The importance of decoupling the fairness metric
(multicalibration) and the accuracy (prediction error) is due to the inherent tradeoff between the two, and the societal decision regarding the “right tradeoff” (as
imposed many times by regulators). Our work gives sample complexity bounds
for uniform convergence guarantees of multicalibration error, which implies that
regardless of the accuracy, we can guarantee that the empirical and (true) multicalibration errors are close. We emphasize that our results: (1) are more general
than previous bounds, as they apply to both agnostic and realizable settings, and do
not rely on a specific type of algorithm (such as differentially private), (2) improve
over previous multicalibration sample complexity bounds and (3) implies uniform
convergence guarantees for the classical calibration error.

1

Introduction

Data driven algorithms influence our everyday lives. While they introduce significant achievements
in face recognition, to recommender systems and machine translation, they come at a price. When
deployed for predicting outcomes that concern individuals, such as repaying a loan, surviving surgery,
or skipping bail, predictive systems are prone to accuracy disparities between different social groups
that often induce discriminatory results. These significant societal issues arise due to a variety
of reasons: problematic analysis, unrepresentative data and even inherited biases against certain
social groups due to historical prejudices. At a high level, there are two separate notions of fairness:
individual fairness and group fairness. Individual fairness is aimed to guarantee fair prediction
to each given individual, while group fairness aggregates statistics of certain subpopulations, and
compares them. There is a variety of fairness notions for group fairness, such as demographic parity,
equalized odds, equalized opportunity, and more (see Barocas et al. (2019)). Our main focus would
be on multicalibration criteria for group fairness Hebert-Johnson et al. (2018). Multicalibration of a
predictor is defined as follows. There is a prespecified set of subpopulations of interest. The predictor
returns a value for each individual (which can be interpreted as a probability). The multicalibration
requires that for any “large” subpopulation, and for any value which is predicted “frequently” on that
subpopulation, the predicted value and average realized values would be close on this subpopulation.
Note that calibration addresses the relationship between the predicted and average realized values,
and is generally unrelated to the prediction quality. For example, if a population is half positive and
half negative, a predictor that predicts for every individual a value of 0.5 is perfectly calibrated but
has poor accuracy. The work of Hebert-Johnson et al. (2018) proposes a specific algorithm to find a
multicalibrated predictor and derived its sample complexity. The work of Liu et al. (2018) related the
calibration error to the prediction loss, specifically, it bounds the calibration error as a function of the
∗

First two authors have equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

