Entrywise Convergence of
Iterative Methods for Eigenproblems

Vasileios Charisopoulos
Department of Operations Research & Information Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
vc333@cornell.edu
Austin R. Benson
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
arb@cs.cornell.edu

Anil Damle
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
damle@cornell.edu

Abstract
Several problems in machine learning, statistics, and other fields rely on computing
eigenvectors. For large scale problems, the computation of these eigenvectors is
typically performed via iterative schemes such as subspace iteration or Krylov
methods. While there is classical and comprehensive analysis for subspace convergence guarantees with respect to the spectral norm, in many modern applications
other notions of subspace distance are more appropriate. Recent theoretical work
has focused on perturbations of subspaces measured in the `2→∞ norm, but does
not consider the actual computation of eigenvectors. Here we address the convergence of subspace iteration when distances are measured in the `2→∞ norm
and provide deterministic bounds. We complement our analysis with a practical
stopping criterion and demonstrate its applicability via numerical experiments. Our
results show that one can get comparable performance on downstream tasks while
requiring fewer iterations, thereby saving substantial computational time.

1

Introduction & Background

Spectral methods play a fundamental role in machine learning, statistics, and data mining. Methods for foundational tasks such as clustering [52]; semi-supervised learning [36]; dimensionality
reduction [5, 22, 45]; latent factor models [25] ranking and preference learning [38, 51]; graph signal
processing [42, 49]; and covariance estimation all use information about eigenvalues and eigenvectors
(or singular values and singular vectors) from an underlying data matrix (either directly or indirectly).
The pervasiveness of spectral methods in machine learning applications1 has greatly influenced the
last decade of research in large-scale computation, including but not limited to sketching / randomized
NLA [26, 37, 53] as well as theoretical guarantees for linear algebra primitives (e.g., eigensolvers,
low-rank decompositions) in previously overlooked settings.
In many of these cases, the relevant information is in the “leading” eigenvectors, i.e., those corresponding to the k algebraically largest eigenvalues for some k (possibly after shifting and rescaling).
To avoid performing a full eigendecomposition, these are typically approximated with iterative
algorithms such as the power or Lanczos methods. The approximation quality, as measured by
1
For example, searching for “arpack” [30] (an iterative eigensolver) in the scikit-learn [44] Github
repository reveals that several modules depend on it crucially.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

