Weisfeiler and Leman go sparse: Towards scalable
higher-order graph embeddings

Christopher Morris∗

Gaurav Rattan†

Petra Mutzel‡

Abstract
Graph kernels based on the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm and corresponding neural architectures recently emerged as powerful tools for (supervised)
learning with graphs. However, due to the purely local nature of the algorithms, they
might miss essential patterns in the given data and can only handle binary relations.
The k-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm addresses this by considering
k-tuples, defined over the set of vertices, and defines a suitable notion of adjacency
between these vertex tuples. Hence, it accounts for the higher-order interactions
between vertices. However, it does not scale and may suffer from overfitting when
used in a machine learning setting. Hence, it remains an important open problem
to design WL-based graph learning methods that are simultaneously expressive,
scalable, and non-overfitting. Here, we propose local variants and corresponding
neural architectures, which consider a subset of the original neighborhood, making
them more scalable, and less prone to overfitting. The expressive power of (one of)
our algorithms is strictly higher than the original algorithm, in terms of ability to
distinguish non-isomorphic graphs. Our experimental study confirms that the local
algorithms, both kernel and neural architectures, lead to vastly reduced computation
times, and prevent overfitting. The kernel version establishes a new state-of-the-art
for graph classification on a wide range of benchmark datasets, while the neural
version shows promising performance on large-scale molecular regression tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is ubiquitous across application domains ranging from chemo- and bioinformatics [10, 103] to image [101] and social network analysis [27]. To develop successful machine
learning models in these domains, we need techniques that can exploit the rich information inherent
in the graph structure, as well as the feature information contained within nodes and edges. In
recent years, numerous approaches have been proposed for machine learning with graphs—most
notably, approaches based on graph kernels [71] or using graph neural networks (GNNs) [19, 45, 47].
Here, graph kernels based on the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm (1-WL) [46, 111], and
corresponding GNNs [83, 115] have recently advanced the state-of-the-art in supervised node and
graph learning. Since the 1-WL operates via simple neighborhood aggregation, the purely local nature
of these approaches can miss important patterns in the given data. Moreover, they are only applicable
to binary structures, and therefore cannot deal with general t-ary structures, e.g., hypergraphs [124] or
subgraphs, in a straight-forward way. A provably more powerful algorithm (for graph isomorphism
testing) is the k-dimensional Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm (k-WL) [15, 46, 77]. The algorithm can
capture more global, higher-order patterns by iteratively computing a coloring (or discrete labeling) for
k-tuples, instead of single vertices, based on an appropriately defined notion of adjacency between two
k-tuples. However, it fixes the cardinality of this neighborhood to k · n, where n denotes the number of
∗

CERC in Data Science for Real-Time Decision-Making, Polytechnique Montréal
Department of Computer Science, RWTH Aachen University
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of Bonn
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

