Statistical Efficiency of Thompson Sampling for
Combinatorial Semi-Bandits
Pierre Perrault
Inria Lille — ENS Paris-Saclay
pierre.perrault@inria.fr

Etienne Boursier
ENS Paris-Saclay
etienne.boursier1@gmail.com

Vianney Perchet
ENSAE — Criteo AI Lab
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Michal Valko
DeepMind Paris — Inria Lille
valkom@deepmind.com

Abstract
We investigate stochastic combinatorial multi-armed bandit with semi-bandit feedback (CMAB). In CMAB, the question of the existence of an efficient policy with
an optimal asymptotic regret (up to a factor poly-logarithmic with the action size)
is still open for many families of distributions, including mutually independent
outcomes, and more generally the multivariate sub-Gaussian family. We propose
to answer the above question for these two families by analyzing variants of the
Combinatorial Thompson Sampling policy (CTS). For mutually independent outcomes in [0, 1], we propose a tight analysis of CTS using Beta priors. We then look
at the more general setting of multivariate sub-Gaussian outcomes and propose a
tight analysis of CTS using Gaussian priors. This last result gives us an alternative
to the Efficient Sampling for Combinatorial Bandit policy (ESCB), which, although
optimal, is not computationally efficient.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB) Robbins [1952], Berry and Fristedt [1985], Lai and Robbins
[1985] are decision-making frameworks in which a learning agent acts sequentially in an uncertain
environment. At every round t ∈ N∗ , the agent must select one arm from a pool of n arms, denoted by
[n] , {1, . . . , n}, using a learning policy based on the feedback collected from the previous rounds.
Then it obtains as feedback a reward (also called outcome) Xi,t ∈ R — a random variable sampled
from PXi , independently from previous rounds — where i is the selected arm and PXi is a probability
distribution — unknown to the agent — of mean µ∗i . The goal for the agent is to maximize the
cumulative reward over a total of T rounds (T may be unknown1 ). The performance metric of a policy
is the regret, i.e., the expectation of the difference over T rounds of the cumulative reward between
the policy that always picked the arm with the highest expected reward and the learning policy.
MAB models the classical dilemma between exploration and exploitation, i.e., whether to continue
exploring arms to obtain more information (and thus strengthen the confidence in the estimates of
the distributions PXi ), or to use the information gathered by playing the best arm according to the
observations so far.
In this paper, we study stochastic combinatorial multi-armed bandit (CMAB) [Cesa-Bianchi and
Lugosi, 2012], which is an extension of MAB where the agent selects a super arm (or action)
At ∈ A ⊂ P([n]) at each round t. The set A is the action space, defined as a collection of subsets
1
We recall here the fact that in MAB, whether the horizon T is known or not is not really relevant as
algorithms can be easily adapted [Degenne and Perchet, 2016a].

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

