Transferable Graph Optimizers for ML Compilers
Yanqi Zhou1 , Sudip Roy1 , Amirali Abdolrashidi2 , Daniel Wong3 , Peter Ma1 , Qiumin Xu1 ,
Hanxiao Liu1 , Mangpo Phitchaya Phothilimtha1 , Shen Wang1 , Anna Goldie1 ,
Azalia Mirhoseini1 , and James Laudon1
1

Google, Mountain View, CA, USA
{yanqiz, sudipr, pcma, qiuminxu, hanxiaol, mangpo, shenwang, agoldie,
azalia, jlaudon}@google.com
2
UC Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA
abdolrashidi@gmail.com
3
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
wonglkd@gmail.com

Abstract
Most compilers for machine learning (ML) frameworks need to solve many correlated optimization problems to generate efficient machine code. Current ML
compilers rely on heuristics based algorithms to solve these optimization problems
one at a time. However, this approach is not only hard to maintain but often
leads to sub-optimal solutions especially for newer model architectures. Existing
learning based approaches in the literature are sample inefficient, tackle a single
optimization problem, and do not generalize to unseen graphs making them infeasible to be deployed in practice. To address these limitations, we propose an
end-to-end, transferable deep reinforcement learning method for computational
graph optimization (GO), based on a scalable sequential attention mechanism over
an inductive graph neural network. GO generates decisions on the entire graph
rather than on each individual node autoregressively, drastically speeding up the
search compared to prior methods. Moreover, we propose recurrent attention layers
to jointly optimize dependent graph optimization tasks and demonstrate 33%-60%
speedup on three graph optimization tasks compared to TensorFlow default optimization. On a diverse set of representative graphs consisting of up to 80,000
nodes, including Inception-v3, Transformer-XL, and WaveNet, GO achieves on
average 21% improvement over human experts and 18% improvement over the
prior state of the art with 15× faster convergence, on a device placement task
evaluated in real systems.

1

Introduction

Increasingly, many applications are driven by large and complex neural network models [12, 28,
15, 18, 24]. The high computation requirements of training such models requires efficient use of
ML accelerator(like GPUs and TPUs). However, the effective use of such accelerators is largely
determined by device-specific optimization by compilers, like TensorFlow XLA, Glow, MLIR, and
AutoTVM [10, 26, 17, 4], which map the high-level computational graph to operations executable on
the device.
In mapping a computational graph to machine code that executes on a collection of devices, ML
compilers need to solve many optimization problems including graph rewriting, assignment of
operations on devices, operation fusion, layout and tiling of tensors, and scheduling. ML compilers
usually apply heuristics to solve these problems individually, which suffers from two key limitations.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

