RL Unplugged: A Suite of Benchmarks for Offline
Reinforcement Learning
Caglar GulcehreD,⇤

Ziyu WangG,⇤

Sergio Gómez ColmenarejoD

Alexander NovikovD,⇤

Konrad ŻołnaD

Daniel MankowitzD

Cosmin PaduraruD

Mohammad NorouziG

Matt HoffmanD
D: DeepMind

Tom Le PaineD,⇤

Rishabh AgarwalG

Josh MerelD

Gabriel Dulac-ArnoldG

Jerry LiD

Nicolas HeessD

Nando de FreitasD

G: Google Brain

Abstract
Offline methods for reinforcement learning have a potential to help bridge the
gap between reinforcement learning research and real-world applications. They
make it possible to learn policies from offline datasets, thus overcoming concerns
associated with online data collection in the real-world, including cost, safety, or
ethical concerns. In this paper, we propose a benchmark called RL Unplugged to
evaluate and compare offline RL methods. RL Unplugged includes data from a
diverse range of domains including games (e.g., Atari benchmark) and simulated
motor control problems (e.g., DM Control Suite). The datasets include domains
that are partially or fully observable, use continuous or discrete actions, and have
stochastic vs. deterministic dynamics. We propose detailed evaluation protocols
for each domain in RL Unplugged and provide an extensive analysis of supervised
learning and offline RL methods using these protocols. We will release data for
all our tasks and open-source all algorithms presented in this paper. We hope
that our suite of benchmarks will increase the reproducibility of experiments and
make it possible to study challenging tasks with a limited computational budget,
thus making RL research both more systematic and more accessible across the
community. Moving forward, we view RL Unplugged as a living benchmark suite
that will evolve and grow with datasets contributed by the research community and
ourselves. Our project page is available on github.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has seen important breakthroughs, including learning directly from
raw sensory streams [Mnih et al., 2015], solving long-horizon reasoning problems such as Go [Silver
et al., 2016], StarCraft II [Vinyals et al., 2019], DOTA [Berner et al., 2019], and learning motor
control for high-dimensional simulated robots [Heess et al., 2017, Akkaya et al., 2019]. However,
many of these successes rely heavily on repeated online interactions of an agent with an environment.
Despite its success in simulation, the uptake of RL for real-world applications has been limited.
Power plants, robots, healthcare systems, or self-driving cars are expensive to run and inappropriate
controls can have dangerous consequences. They are not easily compatible with the crucial idea of
⇤

Indicates joint first authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

