Debiasing Distributed Second Order Optimization
with Surrogate Sketching and Scaled Regularization
Michał Dereziński
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mderezin@berkeley.edu

Burak Bartan
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
bbartan@stanford.edu

Mert Pilanci
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
pilanci@stanford.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
In distributed second order optimization, a standard strategy is to average many
local estimates, each of which is based on a small sketch or batch of the data.
However, the local estimates on each machine are typically biased, relative to the
full solution on all of the data, and this can limit the effectiveness of averaging.
Here, we introduce a new technique for debiasing the local estimates, which
leads to both theoretical and empirical improvements in the convergence rate of
distributed second order methods. Our technique has two novel components: (1)
modifying standard sketching techniques to obtain what we call a surrogate sketch;
and (2) carefully scaling the global regularization parameter for local computations.
Our surrogate sketches are based on determinantal point processes, a family of
distributions for which the bias of an estimate of the inverse Hessian can be
computed exactly. Based on this computation, we show that when the objective
being minimized is l2 -regularized with parameter and individual machines are
each given a sketch of size m, then to eliminate the bias, local estimates should
be computed using a shrunk regularization parameter given by 0 = · (1 dm ),
where d is the -effective dimension of the Hessian (or, for quadratic problems,
the data matrix).

1

Introduction

We consider the task of second order optimization in a distributed or parallel setting. Suppose that q
workers are each given a small sketch of the data (e.g., a random sample or a random projection) and
a parameter vector xt . The goal of the k-th worker is to construct a local estimate t,k of the Newton
step relative to a convex loss on the full dataset. The estimates are then
Pq averaged and the parameter
vector is updated using this averaged step, obtaining xt+1 = xt + 1q k=1 t,k . This basic strategy
has been extensively studied and it has proven effective for a variety of optimization tasks because of
its communication-efficiency [40]. However, a key problem that limits the scalability of this approach
is that local estimates of second order steps are typically biased, which means that for a sufficiently
large q, adding more workers will not lead to any improvement in the convergence rate. Furthermore,
for most types of sketched estimates this bias is difficult to compute, or even approximate, which
makes it difficult to correct.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

