Counterfactual Vision-and-Language Navigation:
Unravelling the Unseen
Amin Parvaneh, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Damien Teney,
Javen Qinfeng Shi, Anton van den Hengel
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
University of Adelaide, Australia
{amin.parvaneh, ehsan.abbasnejad, damien.teney,
javen.shi, anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
The task of vision-and-language navigation (VLN) requires an agent to follow text
instructions to find its way through simulated household environments. A prominent challenge is to train an agent capable of generalising to new environments
at test time, rather than one that simply memorises trajectories and visual details
observed during training. We propose a new learning strategy that learns both
from observations and generated counterfactual environments. We describe an
effective algorithm to generate counterfactual observations on the fly for VLN, as
linear combinations of existing environments. Simultaneously, we encourage the
agent’s actions to remain stable between original and counterfactual environments
through our novel training objective – effectively removing spurious features that
would otherwise bias the agent. Our experiments show that this technique provides
significant improvements in generalisation on benchmarks for Room-to-Room
navigation and Embodied Question Answering.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has generated significant advances in computer vision and natural language processing.
The most striking successes are witnessed on perceptual tasks that essentially amount to pattern
matching. A strength of deep learning is its ability to pick up statistical patterns in large labeled
datasets. As a flip side, this capacity leads to models that indiscriminately rely on dataset biases and
spurious correlations as much as task-relevant features. This limits the generalisation capabilities of
learned models and restrict their applicability on complex tasks (e.g. [1, 2] with images and [3, 4, 5, 6]
in multimodal tasks). Most successful applications of deep learning rely on settings where the seen
training data and the unseen test data are statistically similar. Yet we argue that better generalisation
could be achieved with new training strategies. This is particularly relevant to multimodal, high-level
tasks where training examples can only cover a tiny part of the input space.
In this paper, we propose to consider the unseen to learn representations that lead to better generalisation. The method is applied to the task of vision-and-language navigation (VLN, [7, 8, 9])
which requires relating complex inputs with observations of unseen environments. In VLN, an agent
receives instructions in natural language and it must decide on a sequence of actions (e.g. turn left,
move forward, ...) to reach a target location while observing 2D images of its environment. The task is
extremely ambitious: the agent must learn to ground language with visual observations, to understand
sequences of instructions and high-level actions (e.g. wait by the door), to generate navigation plans,
etc. The standard approach is to train an agent with a combination of reinforcement learning [10, 11]
and imitation learning with human-generated examples of instructions and trajectories. These agents
can memorise successful sequences of actions and grounding associations but they often fail to apply
their capabilities to unseen environments at test time [11]. Our intuition is that a mechanism to reason
about alternative observations and trajectories during training could help learning robust navigation
strategies. We would like to consider, for example, what would happen if a desk were observed
instead of a chair ?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

