Coresets for Near-Convex Functions
Murad Tukan
muradtuk@gmail.com

Alaa Maalouf
alaamalouf12@gmail.com

Dan Feldman
dannyf.post@gmail.com

The Robotics and Big Data Lab,
Department of Computer Science,
University of Haifa,
Haifa, Israel

Abstract
Coreset is usually a small weighted subset of n input points in Rd , that provably
approximates their loss function for a given set of queries (models, classifiers,
etc.). Coresets become increasingly common in machine learning since existing
heuristics or inefficient algorithms may be improved by running them possibly
many times on the small coreset that can be maintained for streaming distributed
data. Coresets can be obtained by sensitivity (importance) sampling, where its
size is proportional to the total sum of sensitivities. Unfortunately, computing the
sensitivity of each point is problem dependent and may be harder to compute than
the original optimization problem at hand. We suggest a generic framework for
computing sensitivities (and thus coresets) for wide family of loss functions which
we call near-convex functions. This is by suggesting the f -SVD factorization that
generalizes the SVD factorization of matrices to functions. Example applications
include coresets that are either new or significantly improves previous results,
such as SVM, Logistic regression, M-estimators, and `z -regression. Experimental
results and open source are also provided.

1

Introduction

In common machine learning problems, we are given a set of input points P ⊆ Rd (training data),
and a loss function f : P × Rd → [0, ∞), where the goal is to solve the optimization
P problem of
finding a query (model, classifiers, centers) x∗ that minimizes the sum of fitting errors p∈P f (p, x)
over every query x in a given (usually infinite) set. For example, in k-median (or k-mean) clustering,
each query is a set of k centers and the loss function is the distance (or squared distance) of a point
to its nearest center. In linear regression or SVM, every input point includes a label, and the loss
function is the fitting error between the classification of p via a given query to the actual label of p.
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) may be used to generalize the result from train to test data.
Modern machine learning. In practice, many of these optimization or learning problems are usually
hard even to approximate. Instead, practical heuristics with no provable guarantees may be used to
solve them. Even for well understood problems, which have close optimal solution, such as linear
regression or classes of convex optimization, in the era of big data we may wish to maintain the
solution in other computation models such as: streaming input data (“on-the-fly") that provably
uses small memory, parallel computations on distributed data (on the cloud, network or GPUs) as
well as deletion of points, constrained optimization (e.g. sparse classifiers). Cross validation [34]
or hyper-parameter tuning techniques such as AutoML [30, 32] need to evaluate many queries for
different subsets of the data, and different constraints.
Coresets. One approach is to redesign existing machine learning algorithms for faster, approximate
solutions and these new computation models. A different approach that is to use data summarization
techniques. Coresets in particular were first used to solve problems in computational geometry [1] and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

