Dynamic Submodular Maximization

Morteza Monemizadeh
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
TU Eindhoven, the Netherlands
m.monemizadeh@tue.nl

Abstract
One of the basic primitives in the class of submodular optimization problems is
the submodular maximization under a cardinality constraint. Here we are given a
ground set V that is endowed with a monotone submodular function f : 2V → R+
and a parameter 0 < k ≤ n and the goal is to return an optimal set S ⊆ V of at most
k elements, i.e., f (S) is maximum among all subsets of V of size at most k. This
basic primitive has many applications in machine learning as well as combinatorial
optimization. Example applications are agglomerative clustering, exemplar-based
clustering, categorical feature compression, document and corpus summarization,
recommender systems, search result diversification, data subset selection, minimum
spanning tree, max flow, global minimum cut, maximum matching, traveling
salesman problem, max clique, max cut, set cover and knapsack, among the others.
In this paper, we propose the first dynamic algorithm for this problem. Given
a stream of inserts and deletes of elements of an underlying ground set V , we
develop a dynamic algorithm that with high probability, maintains a ( 12 − )approximation of a cardinality-constrained monotone submodular maximization
for any sequence of z updates (inserts and deletes) in time O(k 2 z−3 · log5 n),
where n is the maximum size of V at any time. That is, the amortized update time
of our algorithm is O(k 2 −3 · log5 n).

1

Introduction

A general approach to solve machine learning problems as well as combinatorial optimization
problems is to cast the problem at hand as a submodular optimization problem and then solve the
submodular problem (approximately) using a rich toolkit of algorithmic techniques known for this
class of problems. Such problems include agglomerative clustering, exemplar-based clustering
[DF07], categorical feature compression [BCE+ 19], document summarization [LB11, SSSJ12],
recommender systems [EG11], search result diversification [AGHI09], data subset selection [WIB15],
social networks analysis [KKT15], minimum spanning tree, global minimum cut, maximum matching,
traveling salesman problem, max clique, max cut, set cover and knapsack, among the others.
One of the basic primitives in the class of submodular optimization problems is the submodular
maximization under a cardinality constraint. Here we are given a ground set V that is endowed with
a monotone submodular function f : 2V → R+ and a parameter 0 < k ≤ n and the goal is to return
an optimal set S ⊆ V of at most k elements, i.e., f (S) is maximum among all subsets of V of size at
most k. In this paper, we propose the first dynamic algorithm for this problem. We state our main
result here:
Theorem 1 Suppose we start with an empty set V . Then, there exists a randomized dynamic
algorithm that with probability at least 1 − n12 maintains a ( 12 − )-approximation of a cardinalityconstrained monotone submodular maximization for any sequence of z updates (inserts and deletes)
in O(k 2 −3 · log5 n) amortized update time, where n is the maximum size of V at any time.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

