Hierarchical nucleation in deep neural networks

Diego Doimo
International School for Advanced Studies
ddoimo@sissa.it

Aldo Glielmo
International School for Advanced Studies
aglielmo@sissa.it

Alessio Ansuini
Area Science Park
alessio.ansuini@areasciencepark.it

Alessandro Laio
International School for Advanced Studies
laio@sissa.it

Abstract
Deep convolutional networks (DCNs) learn meaningful representations where
data that share the same abstract characteristics are positioned closer and closer.
Understanding these representations and how they are generated is of unquestioned
practical and theoretical interest. In this work we study the evolution of the
probability density of the ImageNet dataset across the hidden layers in some stateof-the-art DCNs. We find that the initial layers generate a unimodal probability
density getting rid of any structure irrelevant for classification. In subsequent layers
density peaks arise in a hierarchical fashion that mirrors the semantic hierarchy of
the concepts. Density peaks corresponding to single categories appear only close to
the output and via a very sharp transition which resembles the nucleation process
of a heterogeneous liquid. This process leaves a footprint in the probability density
of the output layer where the topography of the peaks allows reconstructing the
semantic relationships of the categories.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional networks (DCNs) have become fundamental tools of modern science and technology. They provide a powerful approach to supervised classification, allowing the automatic extraction
of meaningful features from data. The capability of DCNs to discover representations without human
input, has attracted the interest of the machine learning community. In the intermediate layers of
a DCN, the data are represented with a set of features (the activations) embedded in a manifold
whose tangent directions capture the relevant factors of variation of the inputs [1, 2]. Accordingly,
understanding these data representations requires both studying the geometrical properties of the
underlying manifolds and characterising the data distributions on them.
In the present paper, we analyse how the probability density of the data changes across the layers
of a DCN. We consider in particular DCNs trained for classifying ImageNet; as we will see, the
complexity and heterogeneity of this dataset critically affects the results of our analysis.
Comparisons between representations based on generalizations of multivariate correlation have
already been performed with the methods in [3] (SVCCA), [4] (PWCCA) and, more extensively, in
[5] (CKA). Representational similarity analysis (RSA) [6] – introduced originally in neuroscience
– investigates artificial representations as well, and in each layer a matrix of pairwise distances
(representation dissimilarity matrix (RDM) ) between the activation vectors of the data points tells
which data is similar or dissimilar in that layer. The introduction of RDMs allowed performing
multiple comparisons including those between artificial and biological networks [7, 8, 9].
More recently many techniques have been proposed to understand representations. In [10] it was
shown that feature maps are often aligned to a specific explanatory factor of the data distribution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

