Bandit Linear Control
Asaf Cassel
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
acassel@mail.tau.ac.il

Tomer Koren
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the problem of controlling a known linear dynamical system under
stochastic noise, adversarially chosen costs, and bandit feedback. Unlike the full
feedback setting where the entire cost function is revealed after each decision,
here only the cost incurred by the learner is observed. We present a new and
efficient algorithm that, for strongly convex and smooth costs, obtains regret that
grows with the square root of the time horizon 𝑇. We also give extensions of this
result to general convex, possibly non-smooth costs, and to non-stochastic system
noise. A key component of our algorithm is a new technique for addressing bandit
optimization of loss functions with memory.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning studies sequential decision making problems where a learning agent repeatedly
interacts with an environment and aims to improve her strategy over time based on the received
feedback. One of the most fundamental tradeoffs in reinforcement learning theory is the exploration
vs. exploitation tradeoff, that arises whenever the learner observes only partial feedback after each
of her decisions, thus having to balance between exploring new strategies and exploiting those that
are already known to perform well. The most basic and well-studied form of partial feedback is the
so-called “bandit” feedback, where the learner only observes the cost of her chosen action on each
decision round, while obtaining no information about the performance of other actions.
Traditionally, the environment dynamics in reinforcement learning are modeled as a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) with a finite number of possible states and actions. The MDP model has been
studied and analyzed in numerous different settings and under various assumptions on the transition
parameters, the nature of the reward functions, and the feedback model. Recently, a particular focus
has been given to continuous state-action MDPs, and in particular, to a specific family of models
in classic control where the state transition function is linear. Concretely, in linear control the state
evolution follows the linear dynamics:
𝑥 𝑡+1 = 𝐴★𝑥 𝑡 + 𝐵★𝑢 𝑡 + 𝑤 𝑡 ,

(1)

where 𝑥 𝑡 ∈ ℝ 𝑑𝑥 , 𝑢 𝑡 ∈ ℝ 𝑑𝑢 , 𝑤 𝑡 ∈ ℝ 𝑑𝑥 are respectively the system state, action (control), and noise at
round 𝑡, and 𝐴★ ∈ ℝ 𝑑𝑥 ×𝑑𝑥 , 𝐵★ ∈ ℝ 𝑑𝑥 ×𝑑𝑢 are the system parameters. The goal is to minimize the total
control costs with respect to cost function 𝑐 𝑡 (𝑥, 𝑢) : ℝ 𝑑𝑥 × ℝ 𝑑𝑢 → ℝ put forward on round 𝑡.
However, in contrast to the reinforcement learning literature, existing work on learning in linear
control largely assumes the full feedback model, where after each decision round the learning agent
observes the entire cost function 𝑐 𝑡 used to assign costs on the same round. In fact, to the best of our
knowledge, thus far linear control has not been studied in the bandit setting, even in the special case
where the costs are generated stochastically over time.
Contributions. In this paper, we introduce and study the bandit linear control problem, where a
learning agent has to control a known linear dynamical system (as in Eq. (1)) under stochastic noise,
adversarially chosen convex cost functions, and bandit feedback. Namely, after each decision round
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

