Understanding spiking networks through convex
optimization

Allan Mancoo ∗
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal
Ecole Normale Superieure, Paris, France
allan.mancoo@neuro.fchampalimaud.org
Sander W. Keemink ∗
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal
sander.keemink@research.fchampalimaud.org
Christian K. Machens
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal
christian.machens@neuro.fchampalimaud.org

Abstract
Neurons mainly communicate through spikes, and much effort has been spent
to understand how the dynamics of spiking neural networks (SNNs) relates to
their connectivity. Meanwhile, most major advances in machine learning have
been made with simpler, rate-based networks, with SNNs only recently showing
competitive results, largely thanks to transferring insights from rate to spiking
networks. However, it is still an open question exactly which computations SNNs
perform. Recently, the time-averaged firing rates of several SNNs were shown to
yield the solutions to convex optimization problems. Here we turn these findings
around and show that virtually all inhibition-dominated SNNs can be understood
through the lens of convex optimization, with network connectivity, timescales, and
firing thresholds being intricately linked to the parameters of underlying convex
optimization problems. This approach yields new, geometric insights into the
computations performed by spiking networks. In particular, we establish a class
of SNNs whose instantaneous output provides a solution to linear or quadratic
programming problems, and we thereby reveal their input-output mapping. Using
these insights, we derive local, supervised learning rules that can approximate
given convex input-output functions, and we show that the resulting networks are
consistent with many features from biological networks, such as low firing rates,
irregular firing, E/I balance, and robustness to perturbations and synaptic delays.

1

Introduction

The brain functions through vast networks of neurons, which mainly interact through sparse and
irregular spiking activity. Yet even today, much of both neuroscience theory (e.g. [1, 2, 3]) and
machine learning [4] relies on rate-based units. Learning and understanding the core computations of
SNNs have proven more challenging. Only recently have SNNs shown competitive results in machine
learning, partly through new, spike-based learning rules [5, 6, 7], but mainly through transferring
insights from rate to spiking networks [8, 9, 10].
∗

These authors contributed equally

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

