Robust Density Estimation under Besov IPM Losses

Ananya Uppal
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
auppal@andrew.cmu.edu

Shashank Singh
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
shashanksi@google.com

Barnabás Póczos
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study minimax convergence rates of nonparametric density estimation under
the Huber contamination model, in which a proportion of the data comes from
an unknown outlier distribution. We provide the first results for this problem
under a large family of losses, called Besov integral probability metrics (IPMs),
that include the Lp , Wasserstein, Kolmogorov-Smirnov, Cramer-von Mises, and
other commonly used metrics. Under a range of smoothness assumptions on
the population and outlier distributions, we show that a re-scaled thresholding
wavelet estimator converges at minimax optimal rates under a wide variety of
losses and also exhibits optimal dependence on the contamination proportion. We
also provide a purely data-dependent extension of the estimator that adapts to both
an unknown contamination proportion and the unknown smoothness of the true
density. Finally, based on connections recently shown between density estimation
under IPM losses and generative adversarial networks (GANs), we show that
certain GAN architectures are robustly minimax optimal.

1

Introduction

In many settings, observed data contains not only samples from the distribution of interest, but also
a small proportion of outlier samples. Because these outliers can exhibit arbitrary, unpredictable
behavior, they can be difficult to detect or to explicitly account for. This has inspired a large body of
work on robust statistics, which seeks statistical methods for which the error introduced by a small
proportion of arbitrary outlier samples can be controlled.
The majority of work in robust statistics has focused on providing guarantees under the Huber
-contamination model [Huber, 1965]. Under this model, data is assumed to be observed from a
mixture distribution (1 − )P + G, where P is an unknown population distribution of interest, G is
an unknown outlier distribution, and  ∈ [0, 1) is the “contamination proportion” of outlier samples.
Equivalently, this models the misspecified case in which data are drawn from a small perturbation
by (G − P ) of the target distribution P of interest. The goal is then to develop methods whose
performance degrades as little as possible when  is non-negligible.
The present paper studies nonparametric density estimation under this model. Specifically, given
independent and identically distributed samples from the mixture (1 − )P + G, we characterize
minimax optimal convergence rates for estimating P . Prior work on this problem has assumed P
has a Hölder continuous density p and has provided minimax rates under total variation loss [Chen
et al., 2018] or for estimating p(x) at a point x [Liu and Gao, 2017]. In the present paper, in addition
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

