A Contour Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics
Algorithm for Simulations of Multi-modal
Distributions
Wei Deng
Department of Mathematics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
weideng056@gmail.com

Guang Lin
Departments of Mathematics &
School of Mechanical Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
guanglin@purdue.edu

Faming Liang ∗
Departments of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
fmliang@purdue.edu

Abstract
We propose an adaptively weighted stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics algorithm (SGLD), so-called contour stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (CSGLD),
for Bayesian learning in big data statistics. The proposed algorithm is essentially
a scalable dynamic importance sampler, which automatically flattens the target
distribution such that the simulation for a multi-modal distribution can be greatly facilitated. Theoretically, we prove a stability condition and establish the asymptotic
convergence of the self-adapting parameter to a unique fixed-point, regardless of
the non-convexity of the original energy function; we also present an error analysis
for the weighted averaging estimators. Empirically, the CSGLD algorithm is tested
on multiple benchmark datasets including CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. The numerical results indicate its superiority over the existing state-of-the-art algorithms in
training deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

AI safety has long been an important issue in the deep learning community. A promising solution to
the problem is Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which leads to asymptotically correct uncertainty
quantification for deep neural network (DNN) models. However, traditional MCMC algorithms
[Metropolis et al., 1953, Hastings, 1970] are not scalable to big datasets that deep learning models
rely on, although they have achieved significant successes in many scientific areas such as statistical
physics and bioinformatics. It was not until the study of stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics
(SGLD) [Welling and Teh, 2011] that resolves the scalability issue encountered in Monte Carlo
computing for big data problems. Ever since, a variety of scalable stochastic gradient Markov chain
Monte Carlo (SGMCMC) algorithms have been developed based on strategies such as Hamiltonian
dynamics [Chen et al., 2014, Ma et al., 2015, Ding et al., 2014], Hessian approximation [Ahn et al.,
2012, Li et al., 2016, Şimşekli et al., 2016], and higher-order numerical schemes [Chen et al., 2015,
Li et al., 2019]. Despite their theoretical guarantees in statistical inference [Chen et al., 2015, Teh
et al., 2016, Vollmer et al., 2016] and non-convex optimization [Zhang et al., 2017, Raginsky et al.,
2017, Xu et al., 2018], these algorithms often converge slowly, which makes them hard to be used for
efficient uncertainty quantification for many AI safety problems.
To develop more efficient SGMCMC algorithms, we seek inspirations from traditional MCMC
algorithms, such as simulated annealing [Kirkpatrick et al., 1983], parallel tempering [Swendsen and
Wang, 1986, Geyer, 1991], and flat histogram algorithms [Berg and Neuhaus, 1991, Wang and Landau,
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed: Faming Liang.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

