Blind Video Temporal Consistency via
Deep Video Prior

Chenyang Lei∗
Yazhou Xing∗
Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Applying image processing algorithms independently to each video frame often
leads to temporal inconsistency in the resulting video. To address this issue, we
present a novel and general approach for blind video temporal consistency. Our
method is only trained on a pair of original and processed videos directly instead
of a large dataset. Unlike most previous methods that enforce temporal consistency
with optical flow, we show that temporal consistency can be achieved by training
a convolutional network on a video with the Deep Video Prior. Moreover, a
carefully designed iteratively reweighted training strategy is proposed to address the
challenging multimodal inconsistency problem. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach on 7 computer vision tasks on videos. Extensive quantitative and
perceptual experiments show that our approach obtains superior performance than
state-of-the-art methods on blind video temporal consistency. Our source codes are
publicly available at github.com/ChenyangLEI/deep-video-prior.

1

Introduction

Numerous image processing algorithms have demonstrated great performance in single image processing tasks [9, 15, 23, 38, 41], but applying them directly to videos often results in undesirable temporal
inconsistency (e.g., flickering). To encourage video temporal consistency, most researchers design
specific methods for different video processing tasks [20, 25, 28] such as video colorization [21],
video denoising [24] and video super resolution [32]. Although task-specific video processing algorithms can improve temporal coherence, it is unclear or challenging to apply similar strategies
to other tasks. Therefore, a generic framework that can turn an image processing algorithm into its
video processing counterpart with strong temporal consistency is highly valuable. In this work, we
study a novel approach to obtain a temporally consistent video from a processed video, which is a
video after independently applying an image processing algorithm to each frame of an input video.
Prior work has studied general frameworks instead of task-specific solutions to improve temporal
consistency [3, 7, 19, 39]. Bonneel et al. [3] present a general approach that is blind to image
processing operators by minimizing the distance between the output and the processed video in
the gradient domain and a warping error between two consecutive output frames. Based on this
approach, Yao et al. [39] further leverage more information from a key frame stack for occluded
areas. However, these two methods assume that the output and processed videos are similar in the
gradient domain, which may not hold in practice. To address this issue, Lai et al. [19] maintain
the perceptual similarity with processed videos by adopting a perceptual loss [16]. In addition to
blind video temporal consistency methods, Eilertsen et al. [7] propose a framework to finetune a
convolutional network (CNN) by enforcing regularization on transform invariance if the pretrained
CNN is available. Moreover, most approaches [3, 19, 39] enforce the regularization based on dense
correspondence (e.g., optical flow or PatchMatch [1]), and the long-term temporal consistency often
degrades.
∗

Joint first authors

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

