Deep reconstruction of strange attractors from time
series
William Gilpin∗
Quantitative Biology Initiative
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
wgilpin@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Experimental measurements of physical systems often have a limited number of
independent channels, causing essential dynamical variables to remain unobserved.
However, many popular methods for unsupervised inference of latent dynamics
from experimental data implicitly assume that the measurements have higher intrinsic dimensionality than the underlying system—making coordinate identification
a dimensionality reduction problem. Here, we study the opposite limit, in which
hidden governing coordinates must be inferred from only a low-dimensional time
series of measurements. Inspired by classical analysis techniques for partial observations of chaotic attractors, we introduce a general embedding technique for
univariate and multivariate time series, consisting of an autoencoder trained with
a novel latent-space loss function. We show that our technique reconstructs the
strange attractors of synthetic and real-world systems better than existing techniques, and that it creates consistent, predictive representations of even stochastic
systems. We conclude by using our technique to discover dynamical attractors in
diverse systems such as patient electrocardiograms, household electricity usage,
neural spiking, and eruptions of the Old Faithful geyser—demonstrating diverse
applications of our technique for exploratory data analysis.

1

Introduction

Faced with an unfamiliar experimental system, it is often impossible to know a priori which quantities to measure in order to gain insight into the system’s dynamics. Instead, one typically must
rely on whichever measurements are readily observable or technically feasible, resulting in partial
measurements that fail to fully describe a system’s important properties. These hidden variables
seemingly preclude model building, yet history provides many compelling counterexamples of mechanistic insight emerging from simple measurements—from Shaw’s inference of the strange attractor
driving an irregularly-dripping faucet, to Winfree’s discovery of toroidal geometry in the Drosophila
developmental clock [1, 2].
Here, we consider this problem in the context of recent advances in unsupervised learning, which
have been applied to the broad problem of discovering dynamical models directly from experimental
data. Given high-dimensional observations of an experimental system, various algorithms can be used
to extract latent coordinates that are either time-evolved through empirical operators or fit directly to
differential equations [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. This process represents an empirical analogue of the
traditional model-building approach of physics, in which approximate mean-field or coarse-grained
dynamical variables are inferred from first principles, and then used as independent coordinates
in a reduced-order model [11, 12]. However, many such techniques implicitly assume that the
∗

Code available at: https://github.com/williamgilpin/fnn

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

