Directional convergence and alignment
in deep learning

Ziwei Ji
Matus Telgarsky
{ziweiji2,mjt}@illinois.edu
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
In this paper, we show that although the minimizers of cross-entropy and related
classification losses are off at infinity, network weights learned by gradient flow converge in direction, with an immediate corollary that network predictions, training
errors, and the margin distribution also converge. This proof holds for deep homogeneous networks — a broad class of networks allowing for ReLU, max-pooling,
linear, and convolutional layers — and we additionally provide empirical support
not just close to the theory (e.g., the AlexNet), but also on non-homogeneous
networks (e.g., the DenseNet). If the network further has locally Lipschitz gradients, we show that these gradients also converge in direction, and asymptotically
align with the gradient flow path, with consequences on margin maximization,
convergence of saliency maps, and a few other settings. Our analysis complements
and is distinct from the well-known neural tangent and mean-field theories, and
in particular makes no requirements on network width and initialization, instead
merely requiring perfect classification accuracy. The proof proceeds by developing
a theory of unbounded nonsmooth Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz inequalities for functions
definable in an o-minimal structure, and is also applicable outside deep learning.

1

Introduction

Recent efforts to rigorously analyze the optimization of deep networks have yielded many exciting
developments, for instance the neural tangent [Jacot et al., 2018, Du et al., 2018, Allen-Zhu et al.,
2018, Zou et al., 2018] and mean-field perspectives [Mei et al., 2019, Chizat and Bach, 2018]. In
these works, it is shown that small training or even testing error are possible for wide networks.
The above theories, with finite width networks, usually require the weights to stay close to initialization in certain norms. By contrast, practitioners run their optimization methods as long as their
computational budget allows [Shallue et al., 2018], and if the data can be perfectly classified, the
parameters are guaranteed to diverge in norm to infinity [Lyu and Li, 2019]. This raises a worry that
the prediction surface can continually change during training; indeed, even on simple data, as in
Figure 1, the prediction surface continues to change after perfect classification is achieved, and even
with large width is not close to the maximum margin predictor from the neural tangent regime. If the
prediction surface never stops changing, then the generalization behavior, adversarial stability, and
other crucial properties of the predictor could also be unstable.
In this paper, we resolve this worry by guaranteeing stable convergence behavior of deep networks as
training proceeds, despite this growth of weight vectors to infinity. Concretely:
1. Directional convergence: the parameters converge in direction, which suffices to guarantee
convergence of many other relevant quantities, such as the prediction margins.
2. Alignment: when gradients exist, they converge in direction to the parameters, which
implies various margin maximization results and saliency map convergence, to name a few.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

