What Do Neural Networks Learn
When Trained With Random Labels?
Hartmut Maennel?
hartmutm@google.com

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin?
ibomohsin@google.com

Ilya Tolstikhin
tolstikhin@google.com

Robert J. N. Baldock†
rbaldock@google.com

Olivier Bousquet
obousquet@google.com

Sylvain Gelly
sylvaingelly@google.com

Daniel Keysers
keysers@google.com
Google Research, Brain Team
Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
We study deep neural networks (DNNs) trained on natural image data with entirely
random labels. Despite its popularity in the literature, where it is often used to study
memorization, generalization, and other phenomena, little is known about what
DNNs learn in this setting. In this paper, we show analytically for convolutional
and fully connected networks that an alignment between the principal components
of network parameters and data takes place when training with random labels.
We study this alignment effect by investigating neural networks pre-trained on
randomly labelled image data and subsequently fine-tuned on disjoint datasets with
random or real labels. We show how this alignment produces a positive transfer:
networks pre-trained with random labels train faster downstream compared to training from scratch even after accounting for simple effects, such as weight scaling.
We analyze how competing effects, such as specialization at later layers, may hide
the positive transfer. These effects are studied in several network architectures,
including VGG16 and ResNet18, on CIFAR10 and ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Over-parameterization helps deep neural networks (DNNs) to generalize better in real-life applications [8, 24, 30, 54], despite providing them with the capacity to fit almost any set of random
labels [55]. This phenomenon has spawned a growing body of work that aims at identifying fundamental differences between real and random labels, such as in training time [4, 19, 20, 56], sharpness
of the minima [28, 40], dimensionality of layer embeddings [3, 11, 35], and sensitivity [4, 41], among
other complexity measures [6, 7, 39, 40]. While it is obvious that over-parameterization helps DNNs
to interpolate any set of random labels, it is not immediately clear what DNNs learn when trained in
this setting. The objective of this study is to provide a partial answer to this question.
There are at least two reasons why answering this question is of value. First, in order to understand
how DNNs work, it is imperative to observe how they behave under “extreme” conditions, such as
?
†

Equal contribution.
Work completed during the Google AI Residency Program.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

