Fictitious Play for Mean Field Games:
Continuous Time Analysis and Applications
Sarah Perrin⇤,1 , Julien Perolat⇤,2 , Mathieu Laurière3 , Matthieu Geist4 ,
Romuald Elie2 , Olivier Pietquin4
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, UMR 9189 CRIStAL1
Princeton University, ORFE3
sarah.perrin@inria.fr
lauriere@princeton.edu

DeepMind Paris2

Google Research, Brain Team4
perolat@google.com

[mfgeist, relie, pietquin]@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we deepen the analysis of continuous time Fictitious Play learning
algorithm to the consideration of various finite state Mean Field Game settings
(finite horizon, -discounted), allowing in particular for the introduction of an
additional common noise. We first present a theoretical convergence analysis of the
continuous time Fictitious Play process and prove that the induced exploitability
decreases at a rate O( 1t ). Such analysis emphasizes the use of exploitability as
a relevant metric for evaluating the convergence towards a Nash equilibrium in
the context of Mean Field Games. These theoretical contributions are supported
by numerical experiments provided in either model-based or model-free settings.
We provide hereby for the first time converging learning dynamics for Mean Field
Games in the presence of common noise.

1

Introduction

Learning in games has a long history [103, 101] but learning in the midst of a large number of players
still remains intractable. Even the most recent successes of machine learning, including Reinforcement
Learning (RL) [112], remain limited to interactions with a handful of players (e.g. Go [106, 108, 107],
Chess [28], Checkers [102, 101], Hex [13], Starcraft II [114], poker games [24, 25, 91, 21] or Stratego
[87]). Whilst the general multi-agent learning case might seem out of reach, considering interactions
within a very large population of players may lead to tractable models. Inspired by the large economic
literature on games with a continuum of players [15], the notion of Mean Field Games (MFGs)
has been introduced in [84, 76] to model strategic interactions through the distribution of players’
states. In such framework, all players are identical, anonymous (i.e., they are not identifiable) and
have symmetric interests. In this asymptotic formulation, the learning problem can be reduced to
characterizing the optimal interactions between one representative player and the full population.
Most of the MFG literature assumes the representative player to be fully informed about the game
dynamics and the associated reward mechanisms. In such context, the Nash equilibrium for an
MFG is usually computed via the solution of a coupled system of dynamical equations. The
first equation models the forward dynamics of the population distribution, while the second is the
dynamic programming equation of the representative player. Such approaches typically rely on partial
differential equations and require deterministic numerical approximations [9] (e.g., finite differences
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

