Restoring Negative Information in Few-Shot Object
Detection
Yukuan Yang∗
Tsinghua University
yyk17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Miaojing Shi
King’s College London
miaojing.shi@kcl.ac.uk

Fangyun Wei
Microsoft Research Asia
fawe@microsoft.com
Guoqi Li
Tsinghua University
liguoqi@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot learning has recently emerged as a new challenge in the deep learning
field: unlike conventional methods that train the deep neural networks (DNNs)
with a large number of labeled data, it asks for the generalization of DNNs on new
classes with few annotated samples. Recent advances in few-shot learning mainly
focus on image classification while in this paper we focus on object detection. The
initial explorations in few-shot object detection tend to simulate a classification
scenario by using the positive proposals in images with respect to certain object
class while discarding the negative proposals of that class. Negatives, especially
hard negatives, however, are essential to the embedding space learning in few-shot
object detection. In this paper, we restore the negative information in few-shot
object detection by introducing a new negative- and positive-representative based
metric learning framework and a new inference scheme with negative and positive
representatives. We build our work on a recent few-shot pipeline RepMet [1] with
several new modules to encode negative information for both training and testing.
Extensive experiments on ImageNet-LOC and PASCAL VOC show our method
substantially improves the state-of-the-art few-shot object detection solutions. Our
code is available at https://github.com/yang-yk/NP-RepMet.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, there has been a transformative revolution in computer vision cultivated by the
adoption of deep learning [2]. Driven by the increasing availability of large annotated datasets and
efficient training techniques, deep learning-based solutions have been progressively employed from
image classification to action recognition. The majority of deep learning methods are designed to
solve fully-supervised problems where large amount of data come with carefully assigned labels. In
contrast, humans, even children can easily recognize a multitude of objects in images when told only
once or few times, despite the fact that the image of objects may vary in different viewpoints, sizes
and scales. This ability, however, is still a challenge for machine perception.
To enable machine perception with only few training samples, some studies start shifting towards
the so-called few-shot learning problem: after learning on a set of base (seen) classes with abundant
examples, new tasks are given with only few support images of novel (unseen) classes. Recent
advances in few-shot learning mainly focus on image classification and recognition tasks [3–9].
∗
The work is done when Yukuan Yang was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia. Miaojing Shi and Guoqi Li
are the corresponding authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

