One-bit Supervision for Image Classification

Hengtong Hu1,2 , Lingxi Xie3 , Zewei Du3 Richang Hong1,2∗, Qi Tian3
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data, Hefei University of Technology,
2
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology,
3
Huawei Inc.
huhengtong.hfut@gmail.com, 198808xc@gmail.com, duzewei@huawei.com,
hongrc@hfut.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com
1

Abstract
This paper presents one-bit supervision, a novel setting of learning from incomplete
annotations, in the scenario of image classification. Instead of training a model
upon the accurate label of each sample, our setting requires the model to query
with a predicted label of each sample and learn from the answer whether the guess
is correct. This provides one bit (yes or no) of information, and more importantly,
annotating each sample becomes much easier than finding the accurate label from
many candidate classes. There are two keys to training a model upon one-bit
supervision: improving the guess accuracy and making use of incorrect guesses.
For these purposes, we propose a multi-stage training paradigm which incorporates
negative label suppression into an off-the-shelf semi-supervised learning algorithm.
In three popular image classification benchmarks, our approach claims higher
efficiency in utilizing the limited amount of annotations.

1

Introduction

In the deep learning era [18], training deep neural networks is a standard methodology for solving
computer vision problems. Yet, it is a major burden to collect annotations for training data. In
particular, when the dataset contains a large number of object categories (e.g., ImageNet [3]), it is
even difficult for human to memorize all categories [30, 41]. In these scenarios, the annotation job
would be much easier if the worker is asked whether an image belongs to a specified class, rather
than being asked to find the accurate class label from a large amount of candidates.
This paper investigates this setting, which we refer to as one-bit supervision because the labeler
provides one bit of information by answering the yes-or-no question. In comparison, each accurate
label provides log2 C bits of information where C is the number of classes, though we point out that
the actual cost of accurate annotation is often much higher than log2 C× that of one-bit annotation.
One-bit supervision is a new challenge of learning from incomplete annotation. We expect the
learning efficiency, in terms of accuracy under the same amount of supervision bits, to be superior
to that of semi-supervised learning. For example, in a dataset with 100 classes, we can choose
to accurately annotate 10K samples which give 10K × log2 100 = 66.4K bits of information, or
accurately annotate 5K samples which give 33.2K bits of information, and leave the remainder to
answering 33.2K yes-or-no questions raised by the neural network. To verify its superiority, we asked
three labelers to annotate 100 images (50 correctly labeled and 50 wrongly labeled) from ImageNet
in one-bit setting. The average annotation time is 2.72 seconds per image (with a precision of 92.3%).
According to [30], the average time for a full-bit annotation is around 1 minute, much higher than
10× of the one-bit cost. This validates our motivation in a many-class dataset.
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

