On Function Approximation in Reinforcement
Learning: Optimism in the Face of Large State
Spaces
Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University
zy6@princeton.edu

Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Mengdi Wang
Princeton University
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoran.wang@northwestern.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
The classical theory of reinforcement learning (RL) has focused on tabular and
linear representations of value functions. Further progress hinges on combining
RL with modern function approximators such as kernel functions and deep neural
networks, and indeed there have been many empirical successes that have exploited
such combinations in large-scale applications. There are profound challenges,
however, in developing a theory to support this enterprise, most notably the need to
take into consideration the exploration-exploitation tradeoff at the core of RL in
conjunction with the computational and statistical tradeoffs that arise in modern
function-approximation-based learning systems. We approach these challenges
by studying an optimistic modification of the least-squares value iteration algorithm, in the context of the action-value function represented by a kernel function
or an overparameterized neural network. We establish both polynomial runtime
complexity and polynomial sample complexity for this algorithm, without additional assumptions on the
data-generating model. In particular, we prove that
p
e F H 2 T ) regret, where F characterizes the intrinsic
the algorithm incurs an O(
complexity of the function class F, H is the length of each episode, and T is the
total number of episodes. Our regret bounds are independent of the number of
states, a result which exhibits clearly the benefit of function approximation in RL.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms combined with modern function approximators such as
kernel functions and deep neural networks have produced empirical successes in a variety of application problems [e.g., 27, 60, 61, 72, 70]. However, theory has lagged, and when these powerful
function approximators are employed, there is little theoretical guidance regarding the design of RL
algorithms that are efficient computationally or statistically, or regarding whether they even converge.
In particular, function approximation blends statistical estimation issues with dynamical optimization
issues, resulting in the need to balance the bias-variance tradeoffs that arise in statistical estimation
with the exploration-exploitation tradeoffs that are inherent in RL. Accordingly, full theoretical
treatments are mostly restricted to the tabular setting, where both the state and action spaces are
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

