How Can I Explain This to You? An Empirical Study
of Deep Neural Network Explanation Methods

Jeya Vikranth Jeyakumar, Joseph Noor, Yu-Hsi Cheng, Luis Garcia, Mani Srivastava
{vikranth94, jnoor, ellieyhc45, garcialuis, mbs}@ucla.edu
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California, USA

Abstract
Explaining the inner workings of deep neural network models have received considerable attention in recent years. Researchers have attempted to provide human
parseable explanations justifying why a model performed a specific classification.
Although many of these toolkits are available for use, it is unclear which style
of explanation is preferred by end-users, thereby demanding investigation. We
performed a cross-analysis Amazon Mechanical Turk study comparing the popular
state-of-the-art explanation methods to empirically determine which are better in
explaining model decisions. The participants were asked to compare explanation
methods across applications spanning image, text, audio, and sensory domains.
Among the surveyed methods, explanation-by-example was preferred in all domains except text sentiment classification, where LIME’s method of annotating
input text was preferred. We highlight qualitative aspects of employing the studied explainability methods and conclude with implications for researchers and
engineers that seek to incorporate explanations into user-facing deployments.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the explainability of deep neural network (DNN) models has come under scrutiny
due to their black box nature [7, 14]. While it can approximate complex and arbitrary functions,
studying its structure often provides little to no insight on the actual underlying mechanics. It is
hard to look "into" the network and ascertain why specific features are selected over others during
training. Although the impressive state-of-the-art performance cannot be disputed, it is increasingly
insufficient to place confidence in inferences without justification. In particular, when considering
deployments where models generate high-stakes predictions, sensitive decisions often mandate a
sufficient accompanying explanation. For example, “Robot Radiologists” now provide superior
MRI and X-Ray image classification in comparison to the average trained human expert [31]. A
life-or-death diagnosis undeniably justifies the use of the best-performing model; however, it is
unreasonable for either a patient or medical professional to simply accept an automated prediction
at face value. With the inclusion of privacy regulations, including the GDPR “right to explanation,”
such an explanation is not only desirable, but also legally mandated [1].
While multiple definitions exist across the literature, we define an explanation as an image, text,
or other visual aid that accompanies a prediction to offer intuition into the underlying reasons for
the model output. Previous works have introduced several alternative techniques to provide such
insight into a DNN model inference. Approaches span contrasting styles that focus on different
model elements, e.g., the training dataset or the learned feature representations. Model-transparent
approaches such as Grad-CAM++ [10] and saliency maps [36] highlight which particular input
features triggered key activations within a model’s weights. Model-agnostic methods such as
LIME [32], SHAP [27], and Anchor [33] treat the model as a black-box and attempt to approximate the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

