Variance Reduction via Accelerated Dual Averaging
for Finite-Sum Optimization
Chaobing Song†⇤

Yong Jinag†

Yi Ma‡

†
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
songcb16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
‡
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a simplified and unified method for finite-sum convex optimization, named Variance Reduction via Accelerated Dual Averaging
(VRADA). In both general convex and strongly convex settings, VRADA can attain
an O n1 -accurate solution in O(n log log n) number of stochastic gradient evaluations which improves the best known result O(n log n), where n is the number
of samples. Meanwhile, VRADA matches the lower bound of the general convex setting up to a log log n factor and matches the lower bounds in both regimes
n  ⇥() and n
 of the strongly convex setting, where  denotes the condition
number. Besides improving the best known results and matching all the above
lower bounds simultaneously, VRADA has more unified and simplified algorithmic
implementation and convergence analysis for both the general convex and strongly
convex settings. The underlying novel approaches such as the novel initialization
strategy in VRADA may be of independent interest. Through experiments on real
datasets, we show the good performance of VRADA over existing methods for
large-scale machine learning problems.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the following composite convex optimization problem:
n
1X
min f (x) := g(x) + l(x) :=
gi (x) + l(x),
(1)
n i=1
x2Rd
Pn
where g(x) := n1 i=1 gi (x) with gi (x) being convex and smooth, and l(x) is convex, probably
nonsmooth but admitting an efficient proximal operator. In this paper, we mainly assume that each
gi (x) is L-smooth (L > 0) and l(x) is -strongly convex (
0). If = 0, then the problem
is general convex. If > 0, then the problem is strongly convex and we define the corresponding
condition number  := L/ . Instances of problem (1) appear widely in statistical learning, operations
research, and signal processing. For instance, in machine learning, if 8i 2 [n], gi (x) := hi (hai , xi),
where hi : R ! R is a convex loss function and ai 2 Rd is the data vector, then the problem (1)
is also called regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM). Important instances of ERM include
ridge regression, Lasso, logistic regression, and support vector machine.
In the large-scale setting where n is large, first-order methods become the natural choice for solving
(1) due to its better scalability. However, when n is very large, even accessing the full gradient
rg(x) becomes prohibitively expensive. To alleviate this difficulty, a common approach is to use
an unbiased stochastic gradient rgi (x) (i is randomly chosen from [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}) to replace
⇤

This work was conducted during Chaobing Song’s visit to Professor Yi Ma’s group at UC Berkeley.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

