Functional Regularization for Representation
Learning: A Unified Theoretical Perspective

Siddhant Garg∗
Amazon Alexa AI Search
Manhattan Beach, CA, USA
sidgarg@amazon.com

Yingyu Liang
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yliang@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised and self-supervised learning approaches have become a crucial tool
to learn representations for downstream prediction tasks. While these approaches
are widely used in practice and achieve impressive empirical gains, their theoretical understanding largely lags behind. Towards bridging this gap, we present a
unifying perspective where several such approaches can be viewed as imposing
a regularization on the representation via a learnable function using unlabeled
data. We propose a discriminative theoretical framework for analyzing the sample complexity of these approaches, which generalizes the framework of [3] to
allow learnable regularization functions. Our sample complexity bounds show
that, with carefully chosen hypothesis classes to exploit the structure in the data,
these learnable regularization functions can prune the hypothesis space, and help
reduce the amount of labeled data needed. We then provide two concrete examples
of functional regularization, one using auto-encoders and the other using masked
self-supervision, and apply our framework to quantify the reduction in the sample
complexity bound of labeled data. We also provide complementary empirical
results to support our analysis.

1

Introduction

Advancements in machine learning have resulted in large prediction models, which need large amounts
of labeled data for effective learning. Expensive label annotation costs have increased the popularity
of unsupervised (or self-supervised) representation learning techniques using additional unlabeled
data. These techniques learn a representation function on the input, and a prediction function over
the representation for the target prediction task. Unlabeled data is utilised by posing an auxiliary
unsupervised learning task on the representation, e.g., using the representation to reconstruct the
input. Some popular examples of the auxiliary task are auto-encoders [45, 4], sparse dictionaries [46],
masked self-supervision [13], manifold learning [11], among others [9]. These approaches have been
extensively used in applications in domains such as computer vision (e.g., [56, 61, 16]) and natural
language processing (e.g., [58, 13, 34]), and have achieved impressive empirical performance.
An important takeaway from these empirical studies is that learning representations using unlabeled
data can drastically reduce the size of labeled data needed for the prediction task. In contrast to the
popularity and impressive practical gains of these representation learning approaches, there have
been far fewer theoretical studies focused at understanding them, most of which have been specific to
individual approaches. While intuition dictates that the unlabeled and labeled data distributions along
with the choice of models are crucial factors which govern the empirical gains, theoretically there
is still ambiguity over questions like "When can the auxiliary task over the unlabeled data help the
target prediction task? How much can it reduce the sample size of the labeled data by?"
∗

Work completed at the University of Wisconsin-Madison

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

