Teaching a GAN What Not to Learn

Siddarth Asokan∗
Robert Bosch Center for Cyber-Physical Systems
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
siddartha@iisc.ac.in

Chandra Sekhar Seelamantula
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
css@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) were originally envisioned as unsupervised generative models that learn to follow a target distribution. Variants such
as conditional GANs, auxiliary-classifier GANs (ACGANs) project GANs on to
supervised and semi-supervised learning frameworks by providing labelled data
and using multi-class discriminators. In this paper, we approach the supervised
GAN problem from a different perspective, one that is motivated by the philosophy
of the famous Persian poet Rumi who said, “The art of knowing is knowing what
to ignore.” In the GAN framework, we not only provide the GAN positive data that
it must learn to model, but also present it with so-called negative samples that it
must learn to avoid — we call this the Rumi framework. This formulation allows
the discriminator to represent the underlying target distribution better by learning
to penalize generated samples that are undesirable — we show that this capability
accelerates the learning process of the generator. We present a reformulation of the
standard GAN (SGAN) and least-squares GAN (LSGAN) within the Rumi setting.
The advantage of the reformulation is demonstrated by means of experiments
conducted on MNIST, Fashion MNIST, CelebA, and CIFAR-10 datasets. Finally,
we consider an application of the proposed formulation to address the important
problem of learning an under-represented class in an unbalanced dataset. The
Rumi approach results in substantially lower FID scores than the standard GAN
frameworks while possessing better generalization capability.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Generative adversarial networks (GANs), originally proposed by Goodfellow et al. [1], are unsupervised deep learning machines, wherein a generator learns to mimic a target data distribution, whereas
the discriminator attempts to distinguish between real data and the samples coming from the generator.
The original GAN optimization and subsequent flavors such as the least-squares GAN (LSGAN) [2]
and f -GANs could be viewed as performing divergence minimization, where the optimal generator
is the minimizer of a chosen divergence metric between the generated and true data distributions.
The generator in the standard GAN formulation transforms input noise z ∼ pZ , typically a standard
multivariate Gaussian, to the output G(z) with distribution pg (x). The target data is sampled from an
underlying distribution pd (x). The discriminator D(x) predicts the probability of its input coming
from pd . This is formulated as a min-max game between the generator and the discriminator:
min max
pg D(x)

Ex∼pd [log D(x)] + Ex∼pg [log(1 − D(x))] ,

d
where the optimal discriminator D∗ (x) = pdp+p
was shown to be the one that measures the odds of a
g
sample coming from the data distribution, and the optimal generator was shown to be the minimizer of

∗

Corresponding Author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

