Agnostic Learning of a Single Neuron with Gradient
Descent
Spencer Frei
Department of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
spencerfrei@ucla.edu

Yuan Cao
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
yuancao@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the best-fitting single neuron as measured
by the expected square loss E(x,y)∼D [(σ(w> x) − y)2 ] over some unknown joint
distribution D by using gradient descent to minimize the empirical risk induced by
a set of i.i.d. samples S ∼ Dn . The activation function σ is an arbitrary Lipschitz
and non-decreasing function, making the optimization problem nonconvex and
nonsmooth in general, and covers typical neural network activation functions and
inverse link functions in the generalized linear model setting. In the agnostic PAC
learning setting, where no assumption on the relationship between the labels y and
the input x is made, if the optimal population risk is OPT, we show that gradient
descent achieves population risk O(OPT) + ε in polynomial time and sample
complexity when σ is strictly increasing. For the ReLU activation, our population
risk guarantee is O(OPT1/2 ) + ε. When labels take the form y = σ(v > x) + ξ
for zero-mean sub-Gaussian noise ξ, we show that the population risk guarantees
for gradient descent improve to OPT + ε. Our sample complexity and runtime
guarantees are (almost) dimension independent, and when σ is strictly increasing,
require no distributional assumptions beyond boundedness. For ReLU, we show
the same results under a nondegeneracy assumption for the marginal distribution
of the input.

1

Introduction

We study learning the best possible single neuron that captures the relationship between the input
x ∈ Rd and the output label y ∈ R as measured by the expected square loss over some unknown but
fixed distribution (x, y) ∼ D. In particular, for a given activation function σ : R → R, we define the
population risk F (w) associated with a set of weights w as
h
2 i
.
(1.1)
F (w) := (1/2)E(x,y)∼D σ(w> x) − y
The activation function is assumed to be non-decreasing and Lipschitz, and includes nearly all
activation functions used in neural networks such as the rectified linear unit (ReLU), sigmoid, tanh,
and so on. In the agnostic PAC learning setting [23], no structural assumption is made regarding the
relationship of the input and the label, and so the best-fitting neuron could, in the worst case, have
nontrivial population risk. Concretely, if we denote
v := argminkwk2 ≤1 F (w), OPT := F (v),
(1.2)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

