StratLearner: Learning a Strategy for
Misinformation Prevention in Social Networks
Guangmo Tong
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
amotong@udel.edu

Abstract
Given a combinatorial optimization problem taking an input, can we learn a
strategy to solve it from the examples of input-solution pairs without knowing
its objective function? In this paper, we consider such a setting and study the
misinformation prevention problem. Given the examples of attacker-protector
pairs, our goal is to learn a strategy to compute protectors against future attackers,
without the need of knowing the underlying diffusion model. To this end, we
design a structured prediction framework, where the main idea is to parameterize
the scoring function using random features constructed through distance functions
on randomly sampled subgraphs, which leads to a kernelized scoring function
with weights learnable via the large margin method. Evidenced by experiments,
our method can produce near-optimal protectors without using any information
about the diffusion model, and it outperforms other possible graph-based and
learning-based methods by an evident margin.

1

Introduction

The online social network has been an indispensable part of today’s community, but it is also making
misinformation like rumor and fake news widespread [1, 2]. During COVID-19, there have been
more than 150 rumors identified by Snopes.com [3]. Misinformation prevention (MP) limits the
spread of misinformation by launching a positive cascade, assuming that the users who have received
the positive cascade will not be conceived by the misinformation. Such a strategy has been considered
as feasible [4], and now fact-checking services are trending on the web, such as Snopes.com [5] and
Factcheck.org [6]. Formally, information cascades start to spread from their seed nodes, and the
propagation process is governed by an underlying diffusion model. Given the seed nodes (attacker)
of the misinformation, the MP problem seeks the seed nodes (protector) of the positive cascade such
that the spread of misinformation can be maximally limited.
MP without Knowing the Diffusion Model. Existing works often assume that the parameters in the
diffusion model are known to us, and they focus primarily on algorithmic analysis for selecting seed
nodes [7, 8]. However, the real propagation process is often complicated, and in reality, we can only
have certain types of historical data with little to none prior knowledge of the underlying diffusion
model. In this paper, we adopt the well-known triggering model [9] to formulate the diffusion process
and assume that the parameters are unknown. Now we are given the social graph together with a
collection of historical attacker-protector pairs where the protectors were successful, and the goal is to
design a learning scheme to compute the best protector against a new attacker. Given the ground set
V of the users, the MP problem is given by a mapping arg maxP f (M, P ) : 2V → 2V , where f is
the objective function determined by the underlying diffusion model to quantify the prevention effect
of the protector P ⊆ V against the attacker M ⊆ V . Therefore, our problem is nothing but to learn a
mapping from 2V (attacker) to 2V (protector) using training examples { Mi , arg maxP f (Mi , P ) }.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

