Beyond Individualized Recourse: Interpretable and
Interactive Summaries of Actionable Recourses
Kaivalya Rawal
Harvard University
kaivalyarawal45@gmail.com

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
hlakkaraju@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
As predictive models are increasingly being deployed in high-stakes decisionmaking, there has been a lot of interest in developing algorithms which can provide
recourses to affected individuals. While developing such tools is important, it is
even more critical to analyse and interpret a predictive model, and vet it thoroughly
to ensure that the recourses it offers are meaningful and non-discriminatory before
it is deployed in the real world. To this end, we propose a novel model agnostic
framework called Actionable Recourse Summaries (AReS) to construct global
counterfactual explanations which provide an interpretable and accurate summary
of recourses for the entire population. We formulate a novel objective which
simultaneously optimizes for correctness of the recourses and interpretability of the
explanations, while minimizing overall recourse costs across the entire population.
More specifically, our objective enables us to learn, with optimality guarantees on
recourse correctness, a small number of compact rule sets each of which capture
recourses for well defined subpopulations within the data. We also demonstrate
theoretically that several of the prior approaches proposed to generate recourses
for individuals are special cases of our framework. Experimental evaluation with
real world datasets and user studies demonstrate that our framework can provide
decision makers with a comprehensive overview of recourses corresponding to
any black box model, and consequently help detect undesirable model biases and
discrimination.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) models are being increasingly deployed to make a
variety of consequential decisions ranging from hiring decisions to loan approvals. Consequently,
there is growing emphasis on designing tools and techniques which can explain the decisions of
these models to the affected individuals and provide a means for recourse [38]. For example,
when an individual is denied loan by a credit scoring model, he/she should be informed about the
reasons for this decision and what can be done to reverse it. Several approaches in recent literature
tackled the problem of providing recourses to affected individuals by generating local (instance
level) counterfactual explanations [39, 36, 12, 27, 20]. For instance, Wachter et al. [39] proposed a
model-agnostic, gradient based approach to find a closest modification (counterfactual) to any data
point which can result in the desired prediction.
While prior research has focused on providing counterfactual explanations (recourses) for individual instances, it has left a critical problem unadressed. It is often important to analyse and
interpret a model, and vet it thoroughly to ensure that the recourses it offers are meaningful and
non-discriminatory before it is deployed in the real world. To achieve this, appropriate stake holders
and decision makers should be provided with a high level, global understanding of model behaviour.
However, existing techniques cannot be leveraged here as they are only capable of auditing individual
instances. Consequently, while existing approaches can be used to provide recourses to affected
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

