Efficient Variational Inference for Sparse Deep
Learning with Theoretical Guarantee

Jincheng Bai
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
bai45@purdue.edu

Qifan Song
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
qfsong@purdue.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
chengg@purdue.edu

Abstract
Sparse deep learning aims to address the challenge of huge storage consumption
by deep neural networks, and to recover the sparse structure of target functions.
Although tremendous empirical successes have been achieved, most sparse deep
learning algorithms are lacking of theoretical support. On the other hand, another
line of works have proposed theoretical frameworks that are computationally infeasible. In this paper, we train sparse deep neural networks with a fully Bayesian
treatment under spike-and-slab priors, and develop a set of computationally efficient variational inferences via continuous relaxation of Bernoulli distribution. The
variational posterior contraction rate is provided, which justifies the consistency
of the proposed variational Bayes method. Notably, our empirical results demonstrate that this variational procedure provides uncertainty quantification in terms
of Bayesian predictive distribution and is also capable to accomplish consistent
variable selection by training a sparse multi-layer neural network.

1

Introduction

Dense neural network (DNN) may face various problems despite its huge successes in AI fields.
Larger training sets and more complicated network structures improve accuracy in deep learning,
but always incur huge storage and computation burdens. For example, small portable devices may
have limited resources such as several megabyte memory, while a dense neural networks like ResNet50 with 50 convolutional layers would need more than 95 megabytes of memory for storage and
numerous floating number computation (Cheng et al., 2018). It is therefore necessary to compress
deep learning models before deploying them on these hardware limited devices.
In addition, sparse neural networks may recover the potential sparsity structure of the target function,
e.g., sparse teacher network in the teacher-student framework (Goldt et al., 2019; Tian, 2018). Another
example is from nonparametric regression with sparse target functions, i.e., only a portion of input
variables are relevant to the response variable. A sparse network may serve the goal of variable
selection (Feng and Simon, 2017; Liang et al., 2018; Ye and Sun, 2018), and is also known to be
robust to adversarial samples against l8 and l2 attacks (Guo et al., 2018).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

