Sample Efficient Reinforcement Learning
via Low-Rank Matrix Estimation
Devavrat Shah
EECS, MIT
devavrat@mit.edu

Dogyoon Song
EECS, MIT
dgsong@mit.edu

Zhi Xu
EECS, MIT
zhixu@mit.edu

Yuzhe Yang⇤
EECS, MIT
yuzhe@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the question of learning Q-function in a sample efficient manner for
reinforcement learning with continuous state and action spaces under a generative
model. If Q-function is Lipschitz continuous, then the minimal sample complexity
1
for estimating ✏-optimal Q-function is known to scale as ⌦( ✏d1 +d
) per classical
2 +2
non-parametric learning theory, where d1 and d2 denote the dimensions of the
state and action spaces respectively. The Q-function, when viewed as a kernel, induces a Hilbert-Schmidt operator and hence possesses square-summable spectrum.
This motivates us to consider a parametric class of Q-functions parameterized
by its “rank” r, which contains all Lipschitz Q-functions as r ! 1. As our
key contribution, we develop a simple, iterative learning algorithm that finds ✏e max(d1,d )+2 ) when the optimal
optimal Q-function with sample complexity of O(
1 2
✏
Q-function has low rank r and the discounting factor is below a certain threshold.
Thus, this provides an exponential improvement in sample complexity. To enable
our result, we develop a novel Matrix Estimation algorithm that faithfully estimates
an unknown low-rank matrix in the `1 sense even in the presence of arbitrary
bounded noise, which might be of interest in its own right. Empirical results on
several stochastic control tasks confirm the efficacy of our “low-rank” algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a promising technique for a variety of decision-making
tasks, highlighted by impressive successes in solving Atari games [29, 30] and Go [39, 40]. However,
generic RL methods suffer from “curse-of-dimensionality.” Specifically, the classical minimax theory
1
[41, 45] suggests that for ✏ > 0, we need ⌦( ✏d1 +d
) samples to learn an ✏-optimal state-action value,
2 +2
i.e., Q-function, when the (continuous) state and action spaces have dimensions d1 and d2 respectively
and the Q-function is Lipschitz continuous. On the other hand, as exemplified by empirical successes,
practical RL tasks seem to possess low-dimensional latent structures. Indeed, feature-based methods
aim to explain such a phenomenon by positing that either the transition kernel [48, 49] or the value
function [44, 28, 31, 26, 52] is linear in low-dimensional features associated with states and actions.
That is, not only the states and actions have low-dimensional representations, the value function is
linear. While these may be true, the algorithm may not have the knowledge of such feature maps
beforehand; and relying on the hope of a neural network to find them might be too much to ask.
With these motivations, the primary goal of this work is to learn the optimal Q-function in a dataefficient manner when it has a lower-dimensional structure, without the need for any additional
information such as knowledge of features. Thus, we ask the following key question in this paper:
“Is there a universal representation of Q-function that allows for designing a dataefficient learning algorithm if the Q-function has a low-dimensional structure?”
⇤

The author ordering is alphabetical.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

