Trade-offs and Guarantees of Adversarial
Representation Learning for Information Obfuscation
Han Zhao⇤
D. E. Shaw & Co.
han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu

Jianfeng Chi⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
jc6ub@virginia.edu

Yuan Tian
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
yuant@virginia.edu

Geoffrey J. Gordon
Carnegie Mellon University
Microsoft Research Montreal
geoff.gordon@microsoft.com

Abstract
Crowdsourced data used in machine learning services might carry sensitive information about attributes that users do not want to share. Various methods have been
proposed to minimize the potential information leakage of sensitive attributes while
maximizing the task accuracy. However, little is known about the theory behind
these methods. In light of this gap, we develop a novel theoretical framework for
attribute obfuscation. Under our framework, we propose a minimax optimization
formulation to protect the given attribute and analyze its inference guarantees
against worst-case adversaries. Meanwhile, it is clear that in general there is a
tension between minimizing information leakage and maximizing task accuracy.
To understand this, we prove an information-theoretic lower bound to precisely
characterize the fundamental trade-off between accuracy and information leakage.
We conduct experiments on two real-world datasets to corroborate the inference
guarantees and validate this trade-off. Our results indicate that, among several
alternatives, the adversarial learning approach achieves the best trade-off in terms
of attribute obfuscation and accuracy maximization.

1

Introduction

With the growing demand for machine learning systems provided as services, a massive amount
of data containing sensitive information, such as race, income level, age, etc., are generated and
collected from local users. This poses a substantial challenge and it has become an imperative object
of study in machine learning [18], computer vision [6, 34], healthcare [2, 3], speech recognition [30],
and many other domains. In this paper, we consider a practical scenario where the prediction vendor
requests crowdsourced data for a target task, e.g, scientific modeling. The data owner agrees on
the data usage for the target task while she does not want her other sensitive information (e.g., age,
race) to be leaked. The goal in this context is then to obfuscate sensitive attributes of the sanitized
data released by data owner from potential attribute inference attacks from a malicious adversary.
For example, in an online advertising scenario, while the user (data owner) may agree to share her
historical purchasing events, she also wants to protect her age information so that no malicious
adversary can infer her age range from the shared data. Note that simply removing age attribute
⇤ The first two authors contributed equally to this work. Work done while HZ was at Carnegie Mellon
University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

