Reinforcement Learning with Combinatorial Actions:
An Application to Vehicle Routing
Arthur Delarue
MIT Operations Research Center
Cambridge, MA
adelarue@mit.edu

Ross Anderson
Google Research
Cambridge, MA
rander@google.com

Christian Tjandraatmadja
Google Research
Cambridge, MA
ctjandra@google.com

Abstract
Value-function-based methods have long played an important role in reinforcement
learning. However, finding the best next action given a value function of arbitrary
complexity is nontrivial when the action space is too large for enumeration. We
develop a framework for value-function-based deep reinforcement learning with
a combinatorial action space, in which the action selection problem is explicitly
formulated as a mixed-integer optimization problem. As a motivating example, we
present an application of this framework to the capacitated vehicle routing problem
(CVRP), a combinatorial optimization problem in which a set of locations must
be covered by a single vehicle with limited capacity. On each instance, we model
an action as the construction of a single route, and consider a deterministic policy
which is improved through a simple policy iteration algorithm. Our approach is
competitive with other reinforcement learning methods and achieves an average
gap of 1.7% with state-of-the-art OR methods on standard library instances of
medium size.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful tool that has made significant progress on hard problems.
For instance, in games like Atari [1] or Go [2], RL algorithms have devised strategies that significantly
surpass the performance of experts, even with little to no knowledge of problem structure. The success
of reinforcement learning has carried over to other applications such as robotics [3] and recommender
systems [4]. As they encompass ever more application areas, RL algorithms need to be adjusted and
expanded to account for new problem-specific features.
One area in which RL has yet to make a convincing breakthrough is combinatorial optimization.
There has been significant effort in recent years to apply RL frameworks to NP-hard combinatorial
optimization problems [5, 6, 7], including the traveling salesman problem (TSP) or more general
vehicle routing problem (VRP) (see [8] for a recent survey). Solving these problems produces a
practical impact for many industries, including transportation, finance, and energy. Yet in contrast
to [1, 2], RL methods have yet to match the performance of expert implementations in this domain,
such as the state-of-the-art Concorde TSP solver [9, 10].
A major difficulty of designing an RL framework for combinatorial optimization is formulating the
action space. Value-based RL algorithms typically require an action space small enough to enumerate,
while policy-based algorithms are designed with continuous action spaces in mind [11]. These twin
requirements severely limit the expressiveness of the action space, thus placing the entire weight of
the problem on the machine learning model. For instance, in [12], the selected action space models
advancing the current vehicle one city at a time. RL algorithms for combinatorial optimization must
therefore rely on complex architectures such as pointer networks [5, 6, 12] or graph embeddings [7].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

