Certified Monotonic Neural Networks
Xingchao Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
xcliu@utexas.edu

Xing Han
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
aaronhan223@utexas.edu

Na Zhang
Tsinghua University
zhangna@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn

Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Learning monotonic models with respect to a subset of the inputs is a desirable
feature to effectively address the fairness, interpretability, and generalization issues
in practice. Existing methods for learning monotonic neural networks either require
specifically designed model structures to ensure monotonicity, which can be too
restrictive/complicated, or enforce monotonicity by adjusting the learning process,
which cannot provably guarantee the learned model is monotonic on selected
features. In this work, we propose to certify the monotonicity of the general
piece-wise linear neural networks by solving a mixed integer linear programming
problem. This provides a new general approach for learning monotonic neural
networks with arbitrary model structures. Our method allows us to train neural
networks with heuristic monotonicity regularizations, and we can gradually increase
the regularization magnitude until the learned network is certified monotonic.
Compared to prior works, our method does not require human-designed constraints
on the weight space and also yields more accurate approximation. Empirical
studies on various datasets demonstrate the efficiency of our approach over the
state-of-the-art methods, such as Deep Lattice Networks [34].

1

Introduction

Monotonicity with respect to certain inputs is a desirable property of the machine learning (ML)
predictions in many practical applications [e.g., 17, 28, 11, 9, 10, 6]. For real-world scenarios
with fairness or security concerns, model predictions that violate monotonicity could be considered
unacceptable. For example, when using ML to predict admission decisions, it may seem unfair to
select student X over student Y, if Y has a higher score than X, while all other aspects of the two
are identical. A similar problem can arise when applying ML in many other areas, such as loan
application, criminal judgment, and recruitment. In addition to the fairness and security concerns,
incorporating the monotonic property into the ML models can also help improve their interpretability,
especially for the deep neural networks [22]. Last but not least, enforcing monotonicity could increase
the generalization ability of the model and hence the accuracy of the predictions [10, 34], if the
enforced monotonicity pattern is consistent with the underlying truth.
While incorporating monotonicity constraints has been widely studied for the traditional machine
learning and statistical models for decades [e.g., 9, 8, 5, 27, 2, 21], the current challenge is how to
incorporate monotonicity into complex neural networks effectively and flexibly. Generally, existing
approaches for learning monotonic neural networks can be categorized into two groups:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

