Adversarial Example Games

Avishek Joey Bose∗
Mila, McGill University
joey.bose@mail.mcgill.ca
Hugo Berard∗
Mila, Université de Montréal
Facebook AI Research

Gauthier Gidel∗
Mila, Université de Montréal
gauthier.gidel@umontreal.ca

Andre Cianflone
Mila, McGill University

Simon Lacoste-Julien†
Mila, Université de Montréal

Pascal Vincent†
Mila, Université de Montréal
Facebook AI Research

William L. Hamilton†
Mila, McGill University

Abstract
The existence of adversarial examples capable of fooling trained neural network
classifiers calls for a much better understanding of possible attacks to guide the
development of safeguards against them. This includes attack methods in the challenging non-interactive blackbox setting, where adversarial attacks are generated
without any access, including queries, to the target model. Prior attacks in this
setting have relied mainly on algorithmic innovations derived from empirical observations (e.g., that momentum helps), lacking principled transferability guarantees.
In this work, we provide a theoretical foundation for crafting transferable adversarial examples to entire hypothesis classes. We introduce Adversarial Example
Games (AEG), a framework that models the crafting of adversarial examples as
a min-max game between a generator of attacks and a classifier. AEG provides a
new way to design adversarial examples by adversarially training a generator and
a classifier from a given hypothesis class (e.g., architecture). We prove that this
game has an equilibrium, and that the optimal generator is able to craft adversarial
examples that can attack any classifier from the corresponding hypothesis class.
We demonstrate the efficacy of AEG on the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets, outperforming prior state-of-the-art approaches with an average relative improvement of
29.9% and 47.2% against undefended and robust models (Table 2 & 3) respectively.

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks on deep neural nets expose critical vulnerabilities in traditional machine learning
systems [55, 3, 64, 8]. In order to develop models that are robust to such attacks, it is imperative that
we improve our theoretical understanding of different attack strategies. While there has been considerable progress in understanding the theoretical underpinnings of adversarial attacks in relatively
permissive settings (e.g. whitebox adversaries; [53]), there remains a substantial gap between theory
and practice in more demanding and realistic threat models.
In this work, we provide a theoretical framework for understanding and analyzing adversarial attacks
in the highly-challenging Non-interactive blackBox adversary (NoBox) setting, where the attacker
has no direct access, including input-output queries, to the target classifier it seeks to fool. Instead,
∗
†

Equal Contribution, order chosen via randomization.
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

