The phase diagram of approximation rates for deep
neural networks
Dmitry Yarotsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
d.yarotsky@skoltech.ru

Anton Zhevnerchuk
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Anton.Zhevnerchuk@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We explore the phase diagram of approximation rates for deep neural networks
and prove several new theoretical results. In particular, we generalize the existing
result on the existence of deep discontinuous phase in ReLU networks to functional
classes of arbitrary positive smoothness, and identify the boundary between the
feasible and infeasible rates. Moreover, we show that all networks with a piecewise
polynomial activation function have the same phase diagram. Next, we demonstrate
that standard fully-connected architectures with a fixed width independent of
smoothness can adapt to smoothness and achieve almost optimal rates. Finally, we
consider deep networks with periodic activations (“deep Fourier expansion”) and
prove that they have very fast, nearly exponential approximation rates, thanks to
the emerging capability of the network to implement efficient lookup operations.

1

Introduction

There is a subtle interplay between different notions of complexity for neural networks. One, most
obvious, aspect of complexity is the network size measured in terms of the number of connections
and neurons. Another is characteristics of the network architecture (e.g., shallow or deep). A third
is the type of the activation function used in the neurons. Yet another, important but sometimes
overlooked aspect is the precision of operations performed by neurons. All these complexities are
connected by tradeoffs: if we fix a particular problem solvable by neural networks, then we have
some freedom in decreasing one complexity at the cost of others. The question we address is: what
are the limits of this freedom? In the present paper we perform a systematic theoretical study of this
question in the context of network expressiveness. We fix the classical approximation problem and
explore the opportunities potentially present in solving it within different neural network scenarios.
Specifically, suppose that we have a class F of maps from the d-dimensional cube [0, 1]d to R, and
we want the network to approximate elements of F in the uniform norm k · k∞ . We will make the
standard assumption that F is a Sobolev- or Hölder ball of smoothness r > 0 (i.e., a ball of “r times
differentiable functions”, see Section 2). Then, for a particular type of approximation model, we
examine the optimal approximation rate, i.e. the relation beween the approximation accuracy and the
required number W of model parameters. Typically, this relation has the form of a power law
kf − feW k∞ = O(W −p ),

∀f ∈ F,

(1)

where feW is an approximation of f by a model with W parameters, and p is a constant (which we
will also refer to as the rate). In standard fully-connected networks, there is one parameter (weight)
per each connection and neuron, so W can be equivalently viewed as the size of the model. Our
approach in this paper will be to analyze how the rates p depend on various approximation conditions
(e.g., network depth, activation functions, etc.).
There are several important general ideas explaining which approximation rates p we can reasonably
expect in Eq.(1). In the context of abstract approximation theory, we can forget (for a moment) about
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

