Fighting Copycat Agents in
Behavioral Cloning from Observation Histories

Chuan Wen∗1 , Jierui Lin∗2 , Trevor Darrell2 , Dinesh Jayaraman3 , Yang Gao†124
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
UC Berkeley, 3 University of Pennsylvania, 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
Imitation learning trains policies to map from input observations to the actions that
an expert would choose. In this setting, distribution shift frequently exacerbates the
effect of misattributing expert actions to nuisance correlates among the observed
variables. We observe that a common instance of this causal confusion occurs in
partially observed settings when expert actions are strongly correlated over time:
the imitator learns to cheat by predicting the expert’s previous action, rather than
the next action. To combat this “copycat problem”, we propose an adversarial
approach to learn a feature representation that removes excess information about the
previous expert action nuisance correlate, while retaining the information necessary
to predict the next action. In our experiments, our approach improves performance
significantly across a variety of partially observed imitation learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning is a simple, yet powerful paradigm for learning complex behaviors from expert
demonstrations, with many successful applications ranging from autonomous driving to natural
language generation [35, 40, 26, 28, 8, 16, 52]. The key idea underlying these successes is straightforward: given a training dataset of demonstrations by an expert, an agent’s action policy π can be
trained by mapping demonstration states st to expert actions at .
Partially observed settings pose a problem for this approach: rather than the full state st , only
observations ot are available to the agent. As an example, for an autonomous car driving agent with a
forward-facing camera, a single frame observation ot from the camera omits much of the relevant
state information for driving, such as the velocities of vehicles in front of the car, and the presence
or absence of vehicles by its side. An policy trained to map ot to actions at would thus be severely
limited in such settings [13, 5, 19], especially in imitation learning. However, this limitation may in
principle be alleviated by a simple fix: rather than training a policy π(at |ot ), one could train a policy
π(at |õt = [ot , ot−1 , ot−2 , · · · ]), accessing past observations to fill in missing state information from
the current observation.
In practice, several prior works have reported that imitation from observation histories sometimes
performs worse than imitation from a single frame alone [51, 26, 6]. To illustrate why this happens,
consider the sequence of actions in an expert demonstration when it starts to drive in response
to a red traffic light turning green (Figure 1). Assuming an action space with only two actions,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while at UC Berkeley.
cwen20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jerrylin0928@berkeley.edu,
trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu, dineshj@seas.upenn.edu, gaoyangiiis@tsinghua.edu.cn

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

