Ratio Trace Formulation of Wasserstein Discriminant
Analysis

Hexuan Liu, Yunfeng Cai, You-Lin Chen, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
No.10 Xibeiwang East Road, Beijing 100193, China
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, Washington 98004, USA
{lhxuan93, yunfengcai09, cyoulin.tw, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
We reformulate the Wasserstein Discriminant Analysis (WDA) as a ratio trace
problem and present an eigensolver-based algorithm to compute the discriminative subspace of WDA. This new formulation, along with the proposed algorithm,
can be served as an efficient and more stable alternative to the original trace ratio
formulation and its gradient-based algorithm. We provide a rigorous convergence
analysis for the proposed algorithm under the self-consistent field framework,
which is crucial but missing in the literature. As an application, we combine WDA
with low-dimensional clustering techniques, such as K-means, to perform subspace clustering. Numerical experiments on real datasets show promising results
of the ratio trace formulation of WDA in both classification and clustering tasks.

1

Introduction

Wasserstein Discriminant Analysis (WDA) [13] is a supervised linear dimensionality reduction technique that generalizes the classical Fisher Discriminant Analysis (FDA) [16] using the optimal transport distances [41]. Many existing works [44, 29, 11, 4] have addressed the issue that FDA only
considers global information. In particular, [49] proposed a new formula relaying on worst-case
distance; [37] developed a localized version of FDA; [22] provided an adaptive method for learning
local structure from data. The recently proposed WDA [13] has the advantage of adaptively capturing both local and global information, and shows competitive performance in classification tasks
compared to other supervised dimensionality reduction techniques.
WDA as developed in [13] used the trace ratio formulation to maximize the ratio of the inter-class’s
regularized Wasserstein distances to the intra-class’s regularized Wasserstein distances. Formally,
they aimed to solve maxP Trace(PT Cb (T)P)/Trace(PT Cw (T)P) where Cb and Cw are the interclass and intra-class covariance matrices, respectively, and are functions of the optimal transport
matrix T. The optimal transport matrix T quantifies how important the distance between two samples should be in order to obtain a good projection matrix P. The authors in [13] derived the gradient
of the objective function with respect to P and also utilized automatic differentiation to compute the
gradients. The difficulties of their approach are 1) the optimization objective is non-convex and
non-smooth; and 2) Cb and Cw are functions of T and T is an implicit function on P. Thus WDA is
a bi-level optimization problem [8] and requires solving an optimal transport problem in every step
of gradient descent. Due to these complications, theoretical guarantees on the convergence are lacking. Vanilla gradient descent gets stuck easily in the non-smooth region, especially for real datasets,
due to the natural structure of the data such as low rank or sparsity. In practice, the approach introduced in [13] can be sensitive to initialization and may take many iterations or even fail to reach
convergence. All these issues raise concerns when WDA is applied to real data.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

