Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting with Structured
Shape and Temporal Diversity

Vincent Le Guen 1,2
vincent.le-guen@edf.fr

2

Nicolas Thome 2
nicolas.thome@cnam.fr

1
EDF R&D, Chatou, France
Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, CEDRIC, Paris, France

Abstract
Probabilistic forecasting consists in predicting a distribution of possible future
outcomes. In this paper, we address this problem for non-stationary time series,
which is very challenging yet crucially important. We introduce the STRIPE
model for representing structured diversity based on shape and time features,
ensuring both probable predictions while being sharp and accurate. STRIPE is
agnostic to the forecasting model, and we equip it with a diversification mechanism
relying on determinantal point processes (DPP). We introduce two DPP kernels
for modeling diverse trajectories in terms of shape and time, which are both
differentiable and proved to be positive semi-definite. To have an explicit control
on the diversity structure, we also design an iterative sampling mechanism to
disentangle shape and time representations in the latent space. Experiments carried
out on synthetic datasets show that STRIPE significantly outperforms baseline
methods for representing diversity, while maintaining accuracy of the forecasting
model. We also highlight the relevance of the iterative sampling scheme and the
importance to use different criteria for measuring quality and diversity. Finally,
experiments on real datasets illustrate that STRIPE is able to outperform state-ofthe-art probabilistic forecasting approaches in the best sample prediction.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting consists in analysing historical signal correlations to anticipate future outcomes. In this work, we focus on probabilistic forecasting in non-stationary contexts, i.e. we aim at
producing plausible and diverse predictions where future trajectories can present sharp variations.
This forecasting context is of crucial importance in many applicative fields, e.g. climate [62, 34, 15],
optimal control or regulation [66, 41], traffic flow [39, 38], healthcare [8, 1], stock markets [14, 7],
etc. Our motivation is illustrated in the example of the blue input in Figure 1(a): we aim at performing
predictions covering the full distribution of future trajectories, whose samples are shown in green.
State-of-the-art methods for time series forecasting currently rely on deep neural networks, which
exhibit strong abilities in modeling complex nonlinear dependencies between variables and time.
Recently, increasing attempts have been made for improving architectures for accurate predictions
[31, 53, 37, 42, 35] or for making predictions sharper, e.g. by explicitly modeling dynamics [9, 16, 50],
or by designing specific loss functions addressing the drawbacks of blurred prediction with mean
squared error (MSE) training [12, 47, 33, 58]. Although Figure 1(b) shows that such approaches
produce sharp and realistic forecasts, their deterministic nature limits them to a single trajectory
prediction without uncertainty quantification.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

