KFC: A Scalable Approximation Algorithm for
k-center Fair Clustering ∗
Elfarouk Harb∗
Independent Researcher
Hong Kong
eyfmharb@gmail.com

Lam Ho Shan∗
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong
hslamaa@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of fair clustering on the k−center objective. In
fair clustering, the input is N points, each belonging to at least one of l protected
groups, e.g. male, female, Asian, Hispanic. The objective is to cluster the N points
into k clusters to minimize a classical clustering objective function. However,
there is an additional constraint that each cluster needs to be fair, under some
notion of fairness. This ensures that no group is either “over-represented” or
“under-represented” in any cluster. Our work builds on the work of Chierichetti
et al. (NIPS 2017), Bera et al. (NeurIPS 2019), Ahmadian et al. (KDD 2019),
and Bercea et al. (APPROX 2019). We obtain a randomized 3−approximation
algorithm for the k−center objective function, beating the previous state of the
art (4−approximation). We test our algorithm on real datasets, and show that our
algorithm is effective in finding good clusters without over-representation or underrepresentation, surpassing the current state of the art in runtime speed, clustering
cost, while achieving similar fairness violations.

1

Introduction and Prior Work

The aim of classical clustering is to group N points into k clusters in order to minimize an objective
function, such as k − {centers, medians, means, ...}. The problem has been studied extensively and
there is a plethora of papers discussing approximation algorithms and PTAS algorithms for different
objective functions. (See [8, 4] for k-median, [13, 15, 16] for k−center, [18, 20] for k-means, and
[1] for a recent survey).
Variants of clustering problems have been proposed to impose additional constraints to attain a desired
demographic in clustering outcome, diversity of a cluster for instance. The constraint of interest in
this paper is fairness, it is motivated by practical scenarios encountered when formulating clustering
problems that require fairness and has received a lot of attention recently [2, 5, 9, 7, 11, 12, 17, 10].
Ahmadian et al. [2] provided some examples such as clustering news articles while requiring that no
one view point or news source over-represents any cluster. They also noted its necessity in online
advertising systems to ensure that no advertiser has the majority market share over certain keyword
clusters. Other examples where a fair clustering is crucial include clustering people to choose who is
awarded loans [19, 21], or predicting recidivism [3] where using classical clustering techniques can
be detrimental to minority groups. We discuss this with more details in the broader impact section.
There are several definitions of fairness in the literature. Dwork. et al. [11] used the Lipschitz
inequality, by defining a clustering M as a map that maps a point in the inputs, to a probability
∗

Both authors contributed equally to the paper. Author order is in alphabetical order. We thank Ho Chung
Leon Law from University of Oxford for recommending the algorithm name. We also thank all the reviewers for
their incisive comments and helping us improve the paper.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

