Information Theoretic Counterfactual Learning from
Missing-Not-At-Random Feedback
Zifeng Wang1 ,Xi Chen2 ,Rui Wen2 ,Shao-Lun Huang1 ,Ercan E. Kuruoglu1,3 ,Yefeng Zheng2
1

2
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
Jarvis Lab, Tencent
3
Institute of Science and Technologies of Information, CNR, Pisa, Italy

wangzf18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {jasonxchen,ruiwen,yefengzheng}@tencent.com
shaolun.huang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn ercan.kuruoglu@isti.cnr.it

Abstract
Counterfactual learning for dealing with missing-not-at-random data (MNAR) is
an intriguing topic in the recommendation literature since MNAR data are ubiquitous in modern recommender systems. Missing-at-random (MAR) data, namely
randomized controlled trials (RCTs), are usually required by most previous counterfactual learning methods for debiasing learning. However, the execution of RCTs is
extraordinarily expensive in practice. To circumvent the use of RCTs, we build an
information-theoretic counterfactual variational information bottleneck (CVIB), as
an alternative for debiasing learning without RCTs. By separating the task-aware
mutual information term in the original information bottleneck Lagrangian into
factual and counterfactual parts, we derive a contrastive information loss and an
additional output confidence penalty, which facilitates balanced learning between
the factual and counterfactual domains. Empirical evaluation on real-world datasets
shows that our CVIB significantly enhances both shallow and deep models, which
sheds light on counterfactual learning in recommendation that goes beyond RCTs.

1

Introduction

A surge of research shows that the real-world logging policy often collects missing-not-at-random
(MNAR) data (or selective labels) [25]. For example, users tend to reveal ratings for items they like,
thus the observed users’ feedback, usually described by click-through-rate (CTR), can be substantially
higher than those not observed yet. Consider a mini system with two users and three items in Fig.
1, when ignoring the unobserved events, the estimated average CTR from the observed outcomes is
2/3 ≈ 0.67. However, if the rest unobserved outcomes were 0, the true CTR would be 1/3 ≈ 0.33.
This gap between the factual and counterfactual ratings in MNAR situation further exaggerates due
to path-dependence that the learned policy tends to overestimate on the observed events outcomes
[32].
Table 1: Missing ratings in a recommender system, where 3, 7 and ? mean positive, negative and
unknown outcomes, respectively.
Item 1 Item 2 Item 3
User A
User B

3
7

?
?

?
3

Vast majority of existing works in the recommendation literature neglect the MNAR effect, as
they mainly focus on designing novel architectures and training techniques for improving model
performance on the observed events [8, 12, 24], where the objective function is designed in principle
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

