HYDRA: Pruning Adversarially Robust Neural
Networks
Vikash Sehwag< , Shiqi Wangg , Prateek Mittal< , Suman Janag
<
Princeton University, USA g Columbia University, USA

Abstract
In safety-critical but computationally resource-constrained applications, deep learning faces two key challenges: lack of robustness against adversarial attacks and
large neural network size (often millions of parameters). While the research community has extensively explored the use of robust training and network pruning
independently to address one of these challenges, only a few recent works have
studied them jointly. However, these works inherit a heuristic pruning strategy
that was developed for benign training, which performs poorly when integrated
with robust training techniques, including adversarial training and verifiable robust
training. To overcome this challenge, we propose to make pruning techniques
aware of the robust training objective and let the training objective guide the search
for which connections to prune. We realize this insight by formulating the pruning
objective as an empirical risk minimization problem which is solved efficiently using SGD. We demonstrate that our approach, titled HYDRA1 , achieves compressed
networks with state-of-the-art benign and robust accuracy, simultaneously. We
demonstrate the success of our approach across CIFAR-10, SVHN, and ImageNet
dataset with four robust training techniques: iterative adversarial training, randomized smoothing, MixTrain, and CROWN-IBP. We also demonstrate the existence of
highly robust sub-networks within non-robust networks. Our code and compressed
networks are publicly available2 .

1

Introduction

=2

How can we train deep neural networks (DNNs)
that are robust against adversarial examples
while minimizing the size of the neural network?
In safety-critical and resource-constrained environments, both robustness and compactness are
simultaneously necessary. However, existing
work is limited in its ability to answer this question since it has largely addressed these challenges in isolation. For example, neural network
pruning is an efficient approach to minimize the
size of the neural networks. In parallel, robust
training techniques can significantly improve
the adversarial robustness of neural networks.
However, improving adversarial robustness has
been shown to require even larger neural networks [30, 49]. Thus it is even more critical
1
2

Robust accuracy (era)

Our work

=8
LWM

90
70
50
30

100

101
102
Compression ratio(x)
Figure 1: Comparison of our proposed approach (?)
and least-weight magnitude based pruning (+) for adversarial training (l∞ ≤ ) with VGG16 network
and CIFAR-10 dataset. For both a weaker adversary
(=2/255) or a stronger adversary (=8/255), our proposed technique leads to higher empirical robust accuracy where the gap increases with compression ratio.

a small organism with high resiliency and biological immortality due to regenerative abilities.
https://github.com/inspire-group/compactness-robustness

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

