AdvFlow: Inconspicuous Black-box Adversarial
Attacks using Normalizing Flows

Hadi M. Dolatabadi, Sarah Erfani, Christopher Leckie
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne
Parkville, Victoria, Australia
hadi.mohagheghdolatabadi@student.unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Deep learning classifiers are susceptible to well-crafted, imperceptible variations
of their inputs, known as adversarial attacks. In this regard, the study of powerful attack models sheds light on the sources of vulnerability in these classifiers,
hopefully leading to more robust ones. In this paper, we introduce AdvFlow: a
novel black-box adversarial attack method on image classifiers that exploits the
power of normalizing flows to model the density of adversarial examples around a
given target image. We see that the proposed method generates adversaries that
closely follow the clean data distribution, a property which makes their detection
less likely. Also, our experimental results show competitive performance of the
proposed approach with some of the existing attack methods on defended classifiers.
The code is available at https://github.com/hmdolatabadi/AdvFlow.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNN) have been successfully applied to a wide variety of machine learning
tasks. For instance, trained neural networks can reach human-level accuracy in image classification [46]. However, Szegedy et al. [53] showed that such classifiers can be fooled by adding an
imperceptible perturbation to the input image. Since then, there has been extensive research in this
area known as adversarial machine learning, trying to design more powerful attacks and devising
more robust neural networks. Today, this area encompasses a broader type of data than images, with
video [25], graphs [65], text [34], and other types of data classifiers being attacked.
In this regard, the design of stronger adversarial attacks plays a crucial role in understanding the
nature of possible real-world threats. The ultimate goal of such studies is to help neural networks
become more robust against such adversaries. This line of research is extremely important as even
the slightest flaw in some real-world applications of DNNs such as self-driving cars can have severe,
irreparable consequences [12].
In general, adversarial attack approaches can be classified into two broad categories: white-box
and black-box. In white-box adversarial attacks, the assumption is that the threat model has full
access to the target DNN. This way, adversaries can leverage their knowledge about the target model
to generate adversarial examples (for instance, by taking the gradient of the neural network). In
contrast, black-box attacks assume that they do not know the internal structure of the target model
a priori. Instead, they can only query the model about some inputs, and work with the labels or
confidence levels associated with them [62]. Thus, black-box attacks seem to be making more realistic
assumptions. In the beginning, black-box attacks were mostly thought of as the transferability of
white-box adversarial examples to unseen models [42]. Recently, however, there has been more
research to attack black-box models directly.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

