Noise-Contrastive Estimation for Multivariate Point
Processes
Hongyuan Mei
Tom Wan
Jason Eisner
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University
3400 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218 U.S.A
{hmei,tom,jason}@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract

The log-likelihood of a generative model often involves both positive and negative
terms. For a temporal multivariate point process, the negative term sums over all
the possible event types at each time and also integrates over all the possible times.
As a result, maximum likelihood estimation is expensive. We show how to instead
apply a version of noise-contrastive estimation—a general parameter estimation
method with a less expensive stochastic objective. Our specific instantiation of
this general idea works out in an interestingly non-trivial way and has provable
guarantees for its optimality, consistency and efficiency. On several synthetic and
real-world datasets, our method shows benefits: for the model to achieve the same
level of log-likelihood on held-out data, our method needs considerably fewer
function evaluations and less wall-clock time.

1

Introduction

Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is a popular training method for generative models. However, to obtain the likelihood of a generative model given the observed data, one must compute the
probability of each observed sample, which often includes an expensive normalizing constant. For
example, in a language model, each word is typically drawn from a softmax distribution over a large
vocabulary, whose normalizing constant requires a summation over the vocabulary.
This paper aims to alleviate a similar computational cost for multivariate point processes. These
generative models are natural tools to analyze streams of discrete events in continuous time. Their
likelihood is improved not only by raising the probability of the observed events, but by lowering the
probabilities of the events that were observed not to occur. There are infinitely many times at which
no event of any type occurred; to predict these non-occurrences, the likelihood must integrate the
infinitesimal event probability for each event type over the entire observed time interval. Therefore,
the likelihood is expensive to compute, particularly when there are many possible event types.
As an alternative to MLE, we propose to train the model by learning to discriminate the observed
events from events sampled from a noise process. Our method is a version of noise-contrastive
estimation (NCE), which was originally developed for unnormalized (energy-based) distributions
and then extended to conditional softmax distributions such as language models. To our best knowledge, we are the first to extend the method and its theoretical guarantees (for optimality, consistency
and efficiency) to the context of multivariate point processes. We will also discuss similar efforts in
related areas in section 4.
On several datasets, our method shows compelling results. By evaluating fewer event intensities,
training takes much less wall-clock time while still achieving competitive log-likelihood.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

