Deep direct likelihood knockoffs

Mukund Sudarshan∗
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
sudarshan@cims.nyu.edu

Wesley Tansey
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
tanseyw@mskcc.org

Rajesh Ranganath
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
Center for Data Science
New York University
rajeshr@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Predictive modeling often uses black box machine learning methods, such as deep
neural networks, to achieve state-of-the-art performance. In scientific domains, the
scientist often wishes to discover which features are actually important for making
the predictions. These discoveries may lead to costly follow-up experiments and
as such it is important that the error rate on discoveries is not too high. ModelX knockoffs [2] enable important features to be discovered with control of the
false discovery rate (FDR). However, knockoffs require rich generative models
capable of accurately modeling the knockoff features while ensuring they obey
the so-called “swap” property. We develop Deep Direct Likelihood Knockoffs
(DDLK), which directly minimizes the KL divergence implied by the knockoff swap
property. DDLK consists of two stages: it first maximizes the explicit likelihood of
the features, then minimizes the KL divergence between the joint distribution of
features and knockoffs and any swap between them. To ensure that the generated
knockoffs are valid under any possible swap, DDLK uses the Gumbel-Softmax trick
to optimize the knockoff generator under the worst-case swap. We find DDLK has
higher power than baselines while controlling the false discovery rate on a variety
of synthetic and real benchmarks including a task involving a large dataset from
one of the epicenters of COVID-19.

1

Introduction

High dimensional multivariate datasets pervade many disciplines including biology, neuroscience,
and medicine. In these disciplines, a core question is which variables are important to predict the
phenomenon being observed. Finite data and noisy observations make finding informative variables
impossible without some error rate. Scientists therefore seek to find informative variables subject to a
specific tolerance on an error rate such as the false discovery rate (FDR).
Traditional methods to control to the FDR rely on assumptions on how the covariates of interest x may
be related to the response y. Model-X knockoffs [2] provide an alternative framework that controls
e, called knockoffs, that look like the original covariates,
the FDR by constructing synthetic variables x
but have no relationship with the response given the original covariates. Variables of this form can be
used to test the conditional independence of each covariate in a collection, with the response given
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

