A Class of Algorithms for
General Instrumental Variable Models
Niki Kilbertus∗
Helmholtz AI

Matt J. Kusner
University College London
The Alan Turing Institute

Ricardo Silva
University College London
The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Causal treatment effect estimation is a key problem that arises in a variety of
real-world settings, from personalized medicine to governmental policy making.
There has been a flurry of recent work in machine learning on estimating causal
effects when one has access to an instrument. However, to achieve identifiability,
they in general require one-size-fits-all assumptions such as an additive error model
for the outcome. An alternative is partial identification, which provides bounds
on the causal effect. Little exists in terms of bounding methods that can deal with
the most general case, where the treatment itself can be continuous. Moreover,
bounding methods generally do not allow for a continuum of assumptions on
the shape of the causal effect that can smoothly trade off stronger background
knowledge for more informative bounds. In this work, we provide a method for
causal effect bounding in continuous distributions, leveraging recent advances
in gradient-based methods for the optimization of computationally intractable
objective functions. We demonstrate on a set of synthetic and real-world data
that our bounds capture the causal effect when additive methods fail, providing
a useful range of answers compatible with observation as opposed to relying on
unwarranted structural assumptions.1

1

Introduction

Machine learning is becoming more and more prevalent in applications that inform actions to be
taken in the physical world. To ensure robust and reliable performance, many settings require an
understanding of the causal effects an action will have before it is taken. Often, the only available
source of training data is observational, where the actions of interest were chosen by unknown criteria.
One of the major obstacles to trustworthy causal effect estimation with observational data is the
reliance on the strong, untestable assumption of no unobserved confounding. To avoid this, only in
very specific settings (e.g., front-door adjustment, linear/additive instrumental variable regression)
it is possible to allow for unobserved confounding and still identify the causal effect (Pearl, 2009).
Outside of these settings, one can only hope to meaningfully bound the causal effect (Manski, 2007).
In many applications, we have one or few treatment variables X and one outcome variable Y . Nearly
all existing approaches to obtain meaningful bounds on the causal effect of X on Y impose constraints
on how observed variables are related, in order to mitigate the influence of unobserved confounders.
One of the most useful structural constraints is the existence of an observable instrumental variable
(IV): a variable Z, not caused by X, whose relationship with Y is entirely mediated by X, see Pearl
(2009) for a graphical characterization. The existence of an IV can be used to derive upper (lower)
bounds on causal effects of interest by maximizing (minimizing) those effects among all IV models
compatible with the observable distribution. In this work, we develop algorithms to compute these
∗
1

Majority of work done while at Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems and University of Cambridge.
Code available at https://github.com/nikikilbertus/general-iv-models.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

