Revisiting Parameter Sharing for
Automatic Neural Channel Number Search
Jiaxing Wang⇤† 1,3 , Haoli Bai⇤† 2 , Jiaxiang Wu4 , Xupeng Shi5 ,
Junzhou Huang4,6 , Irwin King2 , Michael Lyu2 , Jian Cheng1,3
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Tencent AI Lab 5 Northeastern University 6 University of Texas at Arlington
{hlbai,king,lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {jiaxing.wang,jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
jonathanwu@tencent.com, shi.xup@northeastern.edu, jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in neural architecture search inspire many channel number search
algorithms (CNS) for convolutional neural networks. To improve searching efficiency, parameter sharing is widely applied, which reuses parameters among
different channel configurations. Nevertheless, it is unclear how parameter sharing
affects the searching process. In this paper, we aim at providing a better understanding and exploitation of parameter sharing for CNS. Specifically, we propose
affine parameter sharing (APS) as a general formulation to unify and quantitatively
analyze existing channel search algorithms. It is found that with parameter sharing,
weight updates of one architecture can simultaneously benefit other candidates.
However, it also results in less confidence in choosing good architectures. We
thus propose a new strategy of parameter sharing towards a better balance between
training efficiency and architecture discrimination. Extensive analysis and experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed strategy in channel configuration
against many state-of-the-art counterparts on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success in various areas, but substantial
computational overhead limits their applications on resource-constrained platforms, e.g. mobile devices. To design light-weighted CNNs, neural architecture search (NAS) has been broadly adopted for
channel number search (CNS) in CNNs [21, 6]. As NAS generally consumes extensive computation
resources [39, 12], parameter sharing [25] is widely applied to improve the searching efficiency.
In the context of CNS, parameter sharing refers to reusing convolutional kernels of multiple network
architectures. While this is intuitively believed to accelerate network training during searching [37, 6],
no analysis is conducted to study its underlying mechanism. Existing parameter sharing methods
largely rely on hand-crafted heuristics. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, ordinal selection takes
channels ordinally from a shared super kernel to construct different candidates of that convolutional
layer [6, 37, 31, 28, 8, 29]. Independent selection, as another common practice, instantiates different
candidates of a layer as distinct trainable variables [7, 18, 24]. Though these heuristics are widely
applied, it is still not well understood how parameter sharing benefits the searching process, and
what the potential drawback is.
⇤
†

Both authors contribute equally and are listed in the random order.
This work is mainly done during internship at Tencent AI Lab.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

