Random Reshuffling is Not Always Better

Christopher De Sa
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Many learning algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent, are affected by the
order in which training examples are used. It is generally believed that sampling the
training examples without-replacement, also known as random reshuffling, causes
learning algorithms to converge faster. We give a counterexample to the Operator
Inequality of Noncommutative Arithmetic and Geometric Means, a longstanding
conjecture that relates to the performance of random reshuffling in learning algorithms [19]. We use this to give an example of a learning task and algorithm for
which with-replacement random sampling outperforms random reshuffling.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning algorithms work by iteratively updating a model based on one of a number of
possible steps. For example, in stochastic gradient descent (SGD), each model update is performed
based on a single example selected from a training dataset. The order in which the samples are
selected—in which the update steps are performed—can have an impact on the convergence rate of
the algorithm. There is a general sense in the community that the random reshuffling method, which
selects the order by without-replacement sampling of the steps in an epoch (where an epoch means a
single pass through the data, and different epochs may use different random orders), is better (for
convergence) than ordinary with-replacement sampling for these algorithms [7, 8, 19].
There are two intuitive reasons why we might expect random reshuffling to outperform sampling
with replacement. The first applies when our model updates are in some sense noisy: each one could
perturb us away from the desired optimum, and they are only guaranteed to approach the optimum
on average. In this case, random reshuffling ensures that the noise in some sense “cancels out” over
an epoch in which all samples are used. Most previous work on random reshuffling has studied this
noisy case, and this intuition has been borne out in a series of results that show random-reshuffling
results in a convergence rate of O(1/t2 ) rather than O(1/t) for convex SGD [8, 10, 16, 18, 20].
The second intuitive reason is that, because sampling without replacement avoids using the same
update step repeatedly, it should tend to be “more contractive” than sampling with replacement. This
intuition applies even for “noiseless” algorithms that converge at a linear rate of O(1)t . In contrast to
the noisy case, the belief that random reshuffling should be better in general for these algorithms that
converge at a linear rate is backed up theoretically only with conjectures. The main conjecture in
this space is the Operator Inequality of Noncommutative Arithmetic and Geometric Means, stated as
Conjecture 1 of Recht and Ré [19]. That conjecture, which is motivated by algorithms such as the
randomized Kaczmarz method [23] that converge at a linear rate, asserts the following.
Conjecture 1 (Operator Inequality of Noncommutative Arithmetic and Geometric Means). Let
A1 , . . . , An ∈ Rd×d be a collection of (symmetric) positive semidefinite matrices. Then it is

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

