Submodular Maximization Through
Barrier Functions
Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru
Google
ashwinkumarbv@gmail.com

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Ehsan Kazemi
Google
ehsankazemi@google.com

Jan Vondrák
Stanford University
jvondrak@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel technique for constrained submodular maximization, inspired by barrier functions in continuous optimization. This connection not only improves the running time for constrained submodular maximization
but also provides the state of the art guarantee. More precisely, for maximizing
a monotone submodular function subject to the combination of a k-matchoid and
`-knapsack constraints (for ` ≤ k), we propose a potential function that can be approximately minimized. Once we minimize the potential function up to an ε error,
it is guaranteed that we have found a feasible set with a 2(k+1+ε)-approximation
factor which can indeed be further improved to (k+1+ε) by an enumeration technique. We extensively evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithm over
several real-world applications, including a movie recommendation system, summarization tasks for YouTube videos, Twitter feeds and Yelp business locations,
and a set cover problem.

1

Introduction

In the constrained continuous optimization, barrier functions are usually used to impose an increasingly large cost on a feasible point as it approaches the boundary of the feasible region [40]. In effect,
barrier functions replace constraints by a penalizing term in the primal objective function so that the
solution stays away from the boundary of the feasible region. This is an attempt to approximate a
constrained optimization problem with an unconstrained one and to later apply standard optimization techniques. While the benefits of barrier functions are studied extensively in the continuous
domain [40], their use in discrete optimization is not very well understood.
In this paper, we show how discrete barrier functions manifest themselves in constrained submodular maximization. Submodular functions formalize the intuitive diminishing returns condition, a
property that not only allows optimization tractability but also appears in many machine learning
applications, including video, image, and text summarization [16, 31, 45], active set selection in
non-parametric learning [34], sensor placement and information gathering [14]. Formally, for a
ground set N , a non-negative set function f : 2N → R≥0 is submodular if for all sets A ⊆ B ⊂ N
and every element e ∈ N \ B, we have f (A ∪ {e}) − f (A) ≥ f (B ∪ {e}) − f (B). The submodular
function f is monotone if for all A ⊆ B we have f (A) ≤ f (B).
The celebrated results of Nemhauser et al. [39] and Fisher et al. [12] show that the vanilla greedy
algorithm provides an optimal approximation guarantee for maximizing a monotone submodular
function subject to a cardinality constraint. However, the performance of the greedy algorithm degrades as the feasibility constraint becomes more complex. For instance, the greedy algorithm does
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

