Learning to Orient Surfaces
by Self-supervised Spherical CNNs

Riccardo Spezialetti1 , Federico Stella1 , Marlon Marcon2 , Luciano Silva3

1

Samuele Salti 1 , Luigi Di Stefano 1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI), University of Bologna, Italy
2
Federal University of Technology - Paraná, Dois Vizinhos, Brazil
3
Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil
1
{riccardo.spezialetti, federico.stella5}@unibo.it
2
marlonmarcon@utfpr.edu.br
3
luciano@inf.ufpr.br

Abstract
Defining and reliably finding a canonical orientation for 3D surfaces is key to many
Computer Vision and Robotics applications. This task is commonly addressed
by handcrafted algorithms exploiting geometric cues deemed as distinctive and
robust by the designer. Yet, one might conjecture that humans learn the notion
of the inherent orientation of 3D objects from experience and that machines may
do so alike. In this work, we show the feasibility of learning a robust canonical
orientation for surfaces represented as point clouds. Based on the observation
that the quintessential property of a canonical orientation is equivariance to 3D
rotations, we propose to employ Spherical CNNs, a recently introduced machinery
that can learn equivariant representations defined on the Special Orthogonal group
SO(3). Specifically, spherical correlations compute feature maps whose elements
define 3D rotations. Our method learns such feature maps from raw data by a
self-supervised training procedure and robustly selects a rotation to transform the
input point cloud into a learned canonical orientation. Thereby, we realize the first
end-to-end learning approach to define and extract the canonical orientation of
3D shapes, which we aptly dub Compass. Experiments on several public datasets
prove its effectiveness at orienting local surface patches as well as whole objects.

1

Introduction

Humans naturally develop the ability to mentally portray and reason about objects in what we
perceive as their neutral, canonical orientation, and this ability is key for correctly recognizing and
manipulating objects as well as reasoning about the environment. Indeed, mental rotation abilities
have been extensively studied and linked with motor and spatial visualization abilities since the 70s
in the experimental psychology literature [36, 40, 16].
Robotic and computer vision systems similarly require neutralizing variations w.r.t. rotations when
processing 3D data and images in many important applications such as grasping, navigation, surface
matching, augmented reality, shape classification and detection, among the others. In these domains,
two main approaches have been pursued so to define rotation-invariant methods to process 3D data:
rotation-invariant operators and canonical orientation estimation. Pioneering works applying deep
learning to point clouds, such as PointNet [31, 32] achieved invariance to rotation by means of a
transformation network used to predict a canonical orientation to apply direclty to the coordinates
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

