Optimal Learning from Verified Training Data

Nicholas Bishop
University of Southampton, UK
nb8g13@soton.ac.uk

Enrico Gerding
University of Southampton, UK
eg@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Long Tran-Thanh
University of Warwick, UK
long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Standard machine learning algorithms typically assume that data is sampled independently from the distribution of interest. In attempts to relax this assumption,
fields such as adversarial learning typically assume that data is provided by an
adversary, whose sole objective is to fool a learning algorithm. However, in reality,
it is often the case that data comes from self-interested agents, with less malicious
goals and intentions which lie somewhere between the two settings described
above. To tackle this problem, we present a Stackelberg competition model for
least squares regression, in which data is provided by agents who wish to achieve
specific predictions for their data. Although the resulting optimisation problem
is nonconvex, we derive an algorithm which converges globally, outperforming
current approaches which only guarantee convergence to local optima. We also
provide empirical results on two real-world datasets, the medical personal costs
dataset and the red wine dataset, showcasing the performance of our algorithm relative to algorithms which are optimal under adversarial assumptions, outperforming
the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning algorithms perform under the assumption that data is sampled independently
and identically from the distribution of interest. In reality, this assumption does not hold in many
applications. A canonical example of this is spam email classification. Spammers are constantly
adapting and changing the formatting of their emails in an attempt to bypass spam filters. In order
to apply machine learning in such settings, approaches such as adversarial machine learning and
robust optimisation instead typically assume that data is provided by an adversary who is attempting
to fool the learning algorithm. This is a worst-case assumption that is well suited to problems such
as spam classification. However, in many scenarios this assumption is overly pessimistic, and, thus,
prevents the learning algorithm from achieving high performance (as it always assumes worst-case
manipulation).
Instead of such extreme assumptions, we should consider the individuals or organisations that
provide data samples and how their motives might influence the data distribution. In many cases, the
motivation of data providers is not to hinder generalization but to manipulate the learning algorithm
into selecting an outcome which is beneficial for them. In other words, data providers should
be viewed as strategic agents seeking to achieve a high payoff. By including the motivations of
agents directly in our optimisation process, we can consider a smaller set of possible adversarial
manipulations and cease our concerns over adversarial manipulations which are irrational.
Less pessimistic models of data provider manipulation were first considered by Brückner and Scheffer
[4], who formulated prediction from manipulated data as a Stackelberg competition. In this framework,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

