Language-Conditioned Imitation Learning for Robot
Manipulation Tasks

Simon Stepputtis 1 Joseph Campbell1 Mariano Phielipp2
Stefan Lee3 Chitta Baral1 Heni Ben Amor1
1
Arizona State University, 2 Intel AI Labs, 3 Oregon State University
{sstepput, jacampb1, chitta, hbenamor}@asu.edu
mariano.j.phielipp@intel.com
leestef@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Imitation learning is a popular approach for teaching motor skills to robots. However, most approaches focus on extracting policy parameters from execution traces
alone (i.e., motion trajectories and perceptual data). No adequate communication
channel exists between the human expert and the robot to describe critical aspects
of the task, such as the properties of the target object or the intended shape of the
motion. Motivated by insights into the human teaching process, we introduce a
method for incorporating unstructured natural language into imitation learning. At
training time, the expert can provide demonstrations along with verbal descriptions
in order to describe the underlying intent (e.g., “go to the large green bowl”). The
training process then interrelates these two modalities to encode the correlations
between language, perception, and motion. The resulting language-conditioned
visuomotor policies can be conditioned at runtime on new human commands and
instructions, which allows for more fine-grained control over the trained policies
while also reducing situational ambiguity. We demonstrate in a set of simulation
experiments how our approach can learn language-conditioned manipulation policies for a seven-degree-of-freedom robot arm and compare the results to a variety
of alternative methods.

1

Introduction

Learning robot control policies by imitation [31] is an appealing approach to skill acquisition and
has been successfully applied to several tasks, including locomotion, grasping, and even table
tennis [8, 2, 25]. In this paradigm, expert demonstrations of robot motion are first recorded via
kinesthetic teaching, teleoperation, or other input modalities. These demonstrations are then used
to derive a control policy that generalizes the observed behavior to a larger set of scenarios that
allow for responses to perceptual stimuli (e.g., joint angles and an RGBD camera image of the work
environment) with appropriate actions (e.g., moving a table-tennis paddle to hit an incoming ball).
In goal-conditioned tasks, perceptual inputs alone may be insufficient to dictate optimal actions
[10] (e.g., without a target object, what should a picking robot retrieve from a bin when activated?).
Consequently, expert demonstration and control policies must also be conditioned on a representation
of the goal. While we use the term goals, it may refer to end goals (e.g., target objects) or constraints
on motion (e.g., minimizing end-point effector acceleration) [14]. Prior work has typically employed
manually designed goal specifications (e.g., vectors indicating a target position, a one-hot vector
indicating target objects, or a single value indicating the execution speed). However, this is an
inflexible approach that must be pre-defined before training and cannot be modified after deployment.
In the present work, we consider language as a flexible goal specification for imitation learning
in manipulation tasks. As shown in Fig. 1(center), we consider a seven-degree-of-freedom robot
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

