Simplify and Robustify Negative Sampling for
Implicit Collaborative Filtering

Jingtao Ding1∗ Yuhan Quan1 Quanming Yao1,2 Yong Li1 Depeng Jin1
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
2
4Paradigm Inc.

Abstract
Negative sampling approaches are prevalent in implicit collaborative filtering for
obtaining negative labels from massive unlabeled data. As two major concerns in
negative sampling, efficiency and effectiveness are still not fully achieved by recent
works that use complicate structures and overlook risk of false negative instances.
In this paper, we first provide a novel understanding of negative instances by
empirically observing that only a few instances are potentially important for model
learning, and false negatives tend to have stable predictions over many training
iterations. Above findings motivate us to simplify the model by sampling from
designed memory that only stores a few important candidates and, more importantly,
tackle the untouched false negative problem by favouring high-variance samples
stored in memory, which achieves efficient sampling of true negatives with highquality. Empirical results on two synthetic datasets and three real-world datasets
demonstrate both robustness and superiorities of our negative sampling method.
The implementation is available at https://github.com/dingjingtao/SRNS.

1

Introduction

Collaborative filtering (CF), as the key technique of personalized recommender systems, focuses on
learning user preference from the observed user-item interactions [28, 34]. Today’s recommender
systems also witness the prevalence of implicit user feedback, such as purchases in E-commerce
sites and watches in online video platforms, which is much easier to collect compared to the explicit
feedback (such as ratings) on item utility. In above examples, each observed interaction normally
indicates a user’s interest on an item, i.e., a positive label, while the rest unobserved interactions
are unlabeled. As for learning an implicit CF model from this positive-only data, a widely adopted
approach is to select a few instances from the unlabeled part and treat them as negative labels, also
known as negative sampling [10, 34]. Then, the CF model is optimized to give positive instances
higher scores than those given to negative ones [34].
Similar to other related applications in representation learning of text [27] or graph data [30], negative
sampling in implicit CF also has two major concerns, i.e., efficiency and effectiveness [10, 46].
First, the efficient sampling process is required, as the number of unobserved user-item interactions
can be extremely huge. Second, the sampled instances need to be high-quality, so as to learn
useful information about user’s negative preference. However, since implicit CF is an applicationdriven problem where user behaviors play an important role, it may be unrealistic to assume that
unobserved interactions are all negative, which introduces false negative instances into training
process [21, 26, 49]. For example, an item may be ignored because of its displayed position and form,
not necessarily the user’s dislike. Therefore, false negative instances naturally exist in implicit CF.
∗

The first three authors have equal contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

