UDH: Universal Deep Hiding for Steganography,
Watermarking, and Light Field Messaging

Chaoning Zhang∗
KAIST
chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com

Philipp Benz∗
KAIST
pbenz@kaist.ac.kr

Geng Sun
KAIST
tosungeng@gmail.com

Adil Karjauv∗
KAIST
mikolez@gmail.com

In So Kweon
KAIST
iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural networks have been shown effective in deep steganography for hiding
a full image in another. However, the reason for its success remains not fully
clear. Under the existing cover (C) dependent deep hiding (DDH) pipeline, it is
challenging to analyze how the secret (S) image is encoded since the encoded
message cannot be analyzed independently. We propose a novel universal deep
hiding (UDH) meta-architecture to disentangle the encoding of S from C. We
perform extensive analysis and demonstrate that the success of deep steganography
can be attributed to a frequency discrepancy between C and the encoded secret
image. Despite S being hidden in a cover-agnostic manner, strikingly, UDH
achieves a performance comparable to the existing DDH. Beyond hiding one image,
we push the limits of deep steganography. Exploiting its property of being universal,
we propose universal watermarking as a timely solution to address the concern of
the exponentially increasing number of images and videos. UDH is robust to a
pixel intensity shift on the container image, which makes it suitable for challenging
application of light field messaging (LFM). Our work is the first to demonstrate
the success of (DNN-based) hiding a full image for watermarking and LFM. Code:
https://github.com/ChaoningZhang/Universal-Deep-Hiding

1

Introduction

The craft of steganography describes the secret communication without revealing the transported
information to a third-party [25, 27, 14, 28]. The challenge for image steganography is to hide
more information while keeping the container image look natural [17, 10, 9]. Recently, deep neural
networks [32] have been shown to successfully hide a full image in another one [2] with a message capacity of 24 bits per pixel (bpp) significantly exceeding that of traditional techniques, e.g. HUGO [39]
hides < 0.5 bpp. The task of (image) “steganography" with traditional techniques often requires
perfectly decoding the secret message while remaining undetected by steganalysis [40]. In contrast,
deep steganography in [2] has introduced a conceptually similar but technically different task of
hiding a full image. Specifically, it relaxed the constraint of perfect decoding while focused on a high
hiding capacity with a visual quality trade-off between container image and decoded secret image [2].
Due to the large hiding capacity, it is unlikely that the hidden image can remain undetected [3]. This
new task has also been explored in a wide range of works [45, 47]. Acknowledging the difference
between traditional steganography and deep steganography, in this work we adopt the term “deep
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

