Statistical control for spatio-temporal MEG/EEG
source imaging with desparsified multi-task Lasso

Jerome-Alexis Chevalier
Inria Saclay
Paris-Saclay, France
jerome-alexis.chevalier@inria.fr

Alexandre, Gramfort
Inria Saclay
Paris-Saclay, France
alexandre.gramfort@inria.fr

Joseph Salmon
IMAG, Université de Montpellier
Montpellier, France
joseph.salmon@umontpellier.fr

Bertrand, Thirion
Inria Saclay, CEA
Paris-Saclay, France
bertrand.thirion@inria.fr

Abstract
Detecting where and when brain regions activate in a cognitive task or in a
given clinical condition is the promise of non-invasive techniques like magnetoencephalography (MEG) or electroencephalography (EEG). This problem, referred
to as source localization, or source imaging, poses however a high-dimensional
statistical inference challenge. While sparsity promoting regularizations have been
proposed to address the regression problem, it remains unclear how to ensure
statistical control of false detections. Moreover, M/EEG source imaging requires
to work with spatio-temporal data and autocorrelated noise. To deal with this, we
adapt the desparsified Lasso estimator —an estimator tailored for high dimensional
linear model that asymptotically follows a Gaussian distribution under sparsity
and moderate feature correlation assumptions— to temporal data corrupted with
autocorrelated noise. We call it the desparsified multi-task Lasso (d-MTLasso). We
combine d-MTLasso with spatially constrained clustering to reduce data dimension
and with ensembling to mitigate the arbitrary choice of clustering; the resulting estimator is called ensemble of clustered desparsified multi-task Lasso (ecd-MTLasso).
With respect to the current procedures, the two advantages of ecd-MTLasso are that
i)it offers statistical guarantees and ii)it allows to trade spatial specificity for sensitivity, leading to a powerful adaptive method. Extensive simulations on realistic
head geometries, as well as empirical results on various MEG datasets, demonstrate
the high recovery performance of ecd-MTLasso and its primary practical benefit:
offer a statistically principled way to threshold MEG/EEG source maps.

1

Introduction

Source imaging with magnetoencephalography (MEG) and electroencephalography (EEG) delivers
insights into brain activity with high temporal and good spatial resolution in a non-invasive way (Baillet et al., 2001). It however requires to solve the bioelectromagnetic inverse problem, which is a
high-dimensional ill-posed regression problem. Various approaches have been proposed to regularize
the estimation of the regression coefficients that map activity to brain locations. Historically, `2
regularization was considered first (Hämäläinen and Ilmoniemi, 1994), with successive improvements
known as dSPM (Dale et al., 2000) and sLORETA (Pascual-Marqui, 2002) that are referred to as
“noise normalized” solutions. The reason is that the coefficients are standardized with an estimate
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

