Neural Sparse Representation for Image Restoration

Yuchen Fan, Jiahui Yu, Yiqun Mei, Yulun Zhang† , Yun Fu† , Ding Liu‡ , Thomas S. Huang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, † Northeastern University, ‡ ByteDance
yuchenf4@illinois.edu

Abstract
Inspired by the robustness and efficiency of sparse representation in sparse coding
based image restoration models, we investigate the sparsity of neurons in deep networks. Our method structurally enforces sparsity constraints upon hidden neurons.
The sparsity constraints are favorable for gradient-based learning algorithms and
attachable to convolution layers in various networks. Sparsity in neurons enables
computation saving by only operating on non-zero components without hurting
accuracy. Meanwhile, our method can magnify representation dimensionality and
model capacity with negligible additional computation cost. Experiments show that
sparse representation is crucial in deep neural networks for multiple image restoration tasks, including image super-resolution, image denoising, and image compression artifacts removal. Code is available at https://github.com/ychfan/nsr.

1

Introduction

Sparse representation plays a critical role in image restoration problems, such as image superresolution [1, 2, 3], denoising [4], compression artifacts removal [5], and many others [6, 7]. These
tasks are inherently ill-posed, where the input signal usually has insufficient information while the
output has infinitely many solutions w.r.t. the same input. Thus, it is commonly believed that sparse
representation is more robust to handle the considerable diversity of solutions.
Sparse representation in sparse coding is typically high-dimensional but with limited non-zero
components. Input signals are represented as sparse linear combinations of tokens from a dictionary.
High dimensionality implies larger dictionary size and generally leads to better restoration accuracy,
since a more massive dictionary is capable of more thoroughly sampling the underlying signal space,
and thus more precisely representing any query signal. Besides, sparsity limits numbers of non-zero
elements work as an essential image prior, which has been extensively investigated and exploited to
make restoration robust. Sparsity also brings computational efficiency by ignoring zero parts.
Deep convolutional neural networks for image restoration [8, 9, 10, 11, 12] extend the sparse coding
based methods with repeatedly cascaded structures. The deep network based approach was firstly
introduced to improve the performance in [13] and conceptually connected with previous sparse
coding based methods. A simple network, with two convolutional layers bridged by a non-linear
activation layer, can be interpreted as: activation denotes sparse representation; non-linearity enforces
sparsity and convolutional kernels consist of the dictionary. SRResNet [14] extended the basic
structure with skip connection to form a residual block and cascaded a large number of blocks to
construct very deep residual networks.
Sparsity of hidden representation in deep neural networks cannot be efficiently solved by iterative
optimization as sparse coding, since deep networks are feed-forward during inference. Sparsity of
neurons is commonly achieved by ReLU activation in [15] by thresholding negative values to zero
independently in each neuron. Still, its 50% sparsity on random vectors is far from the sparsity
definition on the overall number of non-zero components. Oppositely, sparsity constraints are more
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

