Audeo: Audio Generation for a Silent Performance
Video
Kun Su∗

Xiulong Liu∗

Eli Shlizerman†∗

Abstract
We present a novel system that gets as an input, video frames of a musician playing
the piano, and generates the music for that video. The generation of music from
visual cues is a challenging problem and it is not clear whether it is an attainable
goal at all. Our main aim in this work is to explore the plausibility of such a
transformation and to identify cues and components able to carry the association of
sounds with visual events. To achieve the transformation we built a full pipeline
named ‘Audeo’ containing three components. We first translate the video frames
of the keyboard and the musician hand movements into raw mechanical musical
symbolic representation Piano-Roll (Roll) for each video frame which represents
the keys pressed at each time step. We then adapt the Roll to be amenable for audio
synthesis by including temporal correlations. This step turns out to be critical for
meaningful audio generation. In the last step, we implement Midi synthesizers
to generate realistic music. Audeo converts video to audio smoothly and clearly
with only a few setup constraints. We evaluate Audeo on piano performance videos
collected from YouTube and obtain that their generated music is of reasonable
audio quality and can be successfully recognized with high precision by popular
music identification software. The source code with examples is available in a
Github repository 3 .

1

Introduction
Melody is the essence of music. I compare a good melodist to a fine racer.
Wolfagang Amadeus Mozart

The perfect combination of a musician’s skills with the musical instrument tones creates the delightful
experience of ‘live music’. Such an event is inspiring from the perspective of the melody being
played and also from the perspective of witnessing admirable synchrony between the musician and
the instrument.
What makes the musical performance to sound as it sounds? The answer to this question is intertwined.
We know many of the components that make musical performance sound well, but what we do not
know is how to rigorously quantify the contribution of the components. Notes, tempo, consistency,
timed precision, mechanical accurateness, rhythmic movements, harmonics, frequencies; all these
and more delicately compose the melody of a musical piece. Quantifying these aspects plays a key
role in the attempt to better understand how to generate realistic melodies.
A particular test which informs regarding music generation is to constitute the music (transcribe
the music) from visual information, i.e., finding possible ways to recreate the audio stream of a
musical performance just from the visual stream. In the case of a piano recording, that would be
∗

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
3
https://github.com/shlizee/Audeo

†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

