Shared Experience Actor-Critic for
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Filippos Christianos
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
f.christianos@ed.ac.uk

Lukas Schäfer
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
l.schaefer@ed.ac.uk

Stefano V. Albrecht
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
s.albrecht@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Exploration in multi-agent reinforcement learning is a challenging problem, especially in environments with sparse rewards. We propose a general method for
efficient exploration by sharing experience amongst agents. Our proposed algorithm, called Shared Experience Actor-Critic (SEAC), applies experience sharing
in an actor-critic framework by combining the gradients of different agents. We
evaluate SEAC in a collection of sparse-reward multi-agent environments and find
that it consistently outperforms several baselines and state-of-the-art algorithms by
learning in fewer steps and converging to higher returns. In some harder environments, experience sharing makes the difference between learning to solve the task
and not learning at all.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) necessitates exploration of the environment dynamics
and of the joint action space between agents. This is a difficult problem due to non-stationarity caused
by concurrently learning agents and the fact that the joint action space grows exponentially in the
number of agents [26]. The problem is exacerbated in environments with sparse rewards in which
most transitions will not yield informative rewards.
We propose a general method for efficient MARL exploration by sharing
experience amongst agents. Consider the simple multi-agent game shown
in Figure 1 in which two agents must simultaneously arrive at a goal.
This game presents a difficult exploration problem, requiring the agents
to wander for a long period before stumbling upon a reward. When the
agents finally succeed, the idea of sharing experience is appealing: both
agents can learn how to approach the goal from two different directions
after a successful episode by leveraging their collective experience. Such
experience sharing facilitates a steady progression of all learning agents,
meaning that agents improve at approximately equal rates as opposed to
diverging in their learning progress. We show in our experiments that this
approach of experience sharing can lead to significantly faster learning
and higher final returns.

Figure 1: Two randomlyplaced agents (triangles)
must simultaneously arrive at the goal (square).

We demonstrate this idea in a novel actor-critic MARL algorithm, called Shared Experience ActorCritic (SEAC).1 SEAC operates similarly to independent learning [33] but updates the actor and
critic parameters of an agent by combining gradients computed on the agent’s experience with
1

We provide open-source implementations of SEAC in www.github.com/uoe-agents/seac and our
two newly developed multi-agent environments: www.github.com/uoe-agents/lb-foraging (LBF) and
www.github.com/uoe-agents/robotic-warehouse (RWARE).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

