C OIN P RESS: Practical Private Mean
and Covariance Estimation∗
Yihe Dong
Microsoft
yihdong@microsoft.com

Sourav Biswas
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
s23biswa@uwaterloo.ca
Gautam Kamath
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
g@csail.mit.edu

Jonathan Ullman
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
jullman@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
We present simple differentially private estimators for the mean and covariance
of multivariate sub-Gaussian data that are accurate at small sample sizes. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms both theoretically and empirically
using synthetic and real-world datasets—showing that their asymptotic error rates
match the state-of-the-art theoretical bounds, and that they concretely outperform
all previous methods. Specifically, previous estimators either have weak empirical
accuracy at small sample sizes, perform poorly for multivariate data, or require the
user to provide strong a priori estimates for the parameters.

1

Introduction

One of the most basic problems in statistics and machine learning is to estimate the mean and
covariance of a distribution based on i.i.d. samples. The optimal solutions to these problems are
folklore—simply output the empirical mean and covariance of the samples. However, this solution
is not suitable when the samples consist of sensitive, private information belonging to individuals,
as it has been shown repeatedly that even releasing just the empirical mean can reveal this sensitive
information [13, 23, 8, 18, 17]. Thus, we need estimators that are not only accurate with respect to
the underlying distribution, but also protect the privacy of the individuals represented in the sample.
The most widely accepted solution to individual privacy in statistics and machine learning is differential privacy (DP) [15], which provides a strong guarantee of individual privacy by ensuring that no
individual has a significant influence on the learned parameters. A large body of work now shows
that, in principle, nearly every statistical task can be solved privately, and differential privacy is now
being deployed by Apple [11], Google [20, 3], Microsoft [12], and the US Census Bureau [10].
Differential privacy requires adding random noise to some stage of the estimator, and this noise might
increase the error of the final estimate. Typically, the amount of noise vanishes as the sample size n
grows, and one can often show that as n → ∞, the additional error due to privacy vanishes faster than
the sampling error of the estimator, making differential privacy highly practical for large samples.
However, differential privacy is often difficult to achieve for small datasets, or when we want to look
at some small subpopulation within a large dataset. Thus, a recent trend has been to focus on simple,
∗
Authors ordered alphabetically. Full version of the paper and code are available in the supplement, or
alternatively at the following URLs: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.06618 and https://github.com/
twistedcubic/coin-press.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

