Learning Continuous System Dynamics from
Irregularly-Sampled Partial Observations

Zijie Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
zijiehuang@cs.ucla.edu

Yizhou Sun
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
yzsun@cs.ucla.edu

Wei Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
weiwang@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Many real-world systems, such as moving planets, can be considered as multi-agent
dynamic systems, where objects interact with each other and co-evolve along with
the time. Such dynamics is usually difficult to capture, and understanding and
predicting the dynamics based on observed trajectories of objects become a critical
research problem in many domains. Most existing algorithms, however, assume the
observations are regularly sampled and all the objects can be fully observed at each
sampling time, which is impractical for many applications. In this paper, we propose to learn system dynamics from irregularly-sampled and partial observations
with underlying graph structure for the first time. To tackle the above challenge,
we present LG-ODE, a latent ordinary differential equation generative model for
modeling multi-agent dynamic system with known graph structure. It can simultaneously learn the embedding of high dimensional trajectories and infer continuous
latent system dynamics. Our model employs a novel encoder parameterized by
a graph neural network that can infer initial states in an unsupervised way from
irregularly-sampled partial observations of structural objects and utilizes neural
ODE to infer arbitrarily complex continuous-time latent dynamics. Experiments
on motion capture, spring system, and charged particle datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Learning system dynamics is a crucial task in a variety of domains, such as planning and control
in robotics [1], predicting future movements of planets in physics [2], etc. Recently, with the rapid
development of deep learning techniques, researchers have started building neural-based simulators,
aiming to approximate complex system interactions with neural networks [1, 3, 2, 4, 5] which can
be learned automatically from data. Existing models, such as Interaction Networks (IN) [3], usually
decompose the system into distinct objects and relations and learn to reason about the consequences
of their interactions and dynamics based on graph neural network (GNN). However, one major
limitation is that they only work for fully observable systems, where the individual trajectory of each
object can be accessed at every sampling time. In reality, many applications have to deal with partial
observable states, meaning that the observations for different agents are not temporally aligned. For
example, when a robot wants to push a set of blocks into a target configuration, only the blocks in the
top layer are visible to the camera [1]. More challengingly, the visibility of a specific object might
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

