Sinkhorn Barycenter via Functional Gradient
Descent
Zebang Shen∗ Zhenfu Wang† Alejandro Ribeiro∗ Hamed Hassani∗
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering † Department of Mathematics
University of Pennsylvania
{zebang@seas,zwang423@math,aribeiro@seas,hassani@seas}.upenn.edu

∗

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of computing the barycenter of a set of
probability distributions under the Sinkhorn divergence. This problem has recently
found applications across various domains, including graphics, learning, and vision,
as it provides a meaningful mechanism to aggregate knowledge. Unlike previous
approaches which directly operate in the space of probability measures, we recast
the Sinkhorn barycenter problem as an instance of unconstrained functional optimization and develop a novel functional gradient descent method named Sinkhorn
Descent (SD). We prove that SD converges to a stationary point at a sublinear rate,
and under reasonable assumptions, we further show that it asymptotically finds a
global minimizer of the Sinkhorn barycenter problem. Moreover, by providing a
mean-field analysis, we show that SD preserves the weak convergence of empirical measures. Importantly, the computational complexity of SD scales linearly in
the dimension d and we demonstrate its scalability by solving a 100-dimensional
Sinkhorn barycenter problem.

1

Introduction

Computing a nonlinear interpolation between a set of probability measures is a foundational task
across many disciplines. This problem is typically referred as the barycenter problem and, as it
provides a meaningful metric to aggregate knowledge, it has found numerous applications. Examples
include distribution clustering [Ye et al., 2017], Bayesian inference [Srivastava et al., 2015], texture
mixing [Rabin et al., 2011], and graphics [Solomon et al., 2015], etc. The barycenter problem can
be naturally cast as minimization of the average distance between the target measure (barycenter)
and the source measures; and the choice of the distance metric can significantly impact the quality of
the barycenter [Feydy et al., 2019]. In this regard, the Optimal Transport (OT) distance (a.k.a. the
Wasserstein distance) and its entropy regularized variant (a.k.a. the Sinkhorn divergence) are the most
suitable geometrically-faithful metrics, while the latter is more computational friendly. In this paper,
we provide efficient and provable methods for the Sinkhorn barycenter problem.
The prior work in this domain has mainly focused on finding the barycenter by optimizing directly in
the space of (discrete) probability measures. We can divide these previous methods into three broad
classes depending on how the support of the barycenter is determined:
(i) The first class assumes a fixed and prespecified support set for the barycenter and only optimizes
the corresponding weights [Staib et al., 2017, Dvurechenskii et al., 2018, Kroshnin et al., 2019].
Accordingly, the problem reduces to minimizing a convex objective subject to a simplex constraint.
However, fixing the support without any prior knowledge creates undesired bias and affects the quality
of the final solution. While increasing the support size (possibly exponentially in the dimension d)
can help to mitigate the bias, it renders the procedure computationally prohibitive as d grows.
(ii) To reduce the bias, the second class considers optimizing the support and the weights through an
alternating procedure [Cuturi and Doucet, 2014, Claici et al., 2018]. Since the barycenter objective is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

