Faster Differentially Private Samplers via Rényi
Divergence Analysis of Discretized Langevin MCMC

Arun Ganesh
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley∗
Berkeley, CA 94709
arunganesh@berkeley.edu

Kunal Talwar
Apple†
Cupertino, CA 95014
ktalwar@apple.com

Abstract
Various differentially private algorithms instantiate the exponential mechanism, and
require sampling from the distribution exp(−f ) for a suitable function f . When
the domain of the distribution is high-dimensional, this sampling can be computationally challenging. Using heuristic sampling schemes such as Gibbs sampling
does not necessarily lead to provable privacy. When f is convex, techniques from
log-concave sampling lead to polynomial-time algorithms, albeit with large polynomials. Langevin dynamics-based algorithms offer much faster alternatives under
some distance measures such as statistical distance. In this work, we establish
rapid convergence for these algorithms under distance measures more suitable
for differential privacy. For smooth, strongly-convex f , we give the first results
proving convergence in Rényi divergence. This gives us fast differentially private
algorithms for such f . Our techniques and simple and generic and apply also to
underdamped Langevin dynamics.

1

Introduction

The Exponential Mechanism [McSherry and Talwar, 2007] is a commonly-used mechanism in differential privacy [Dwork and Roth, 2014]. There is a large class of mechanisms in the differential privacy
literature that instantiate the Exponential Mechanism with appropriate score functions, use it as a
subroutine, or sample from exp(−f ) for some function f . This family includes differentially private
mechanisms for several important problems, such as PCA [Chaudhuri et al., 2013, Kapralov and
Talwar, 2013], functional PCA [Awan et al., 2019], answering counting queries [Hardt and Talwar,
2010], robust regression [Asi and Duchi, 2020], some combinatorial optimization problems [Gupta
et al., 2010], k-means clustering [Feldman et al., 2009], optimization of dispersed functions [Balcan
et al., 2018], convex optimization [Bassily et al., 2014, Minami et al., 2016], Bayesian data analysis [Mir, 2013, Dimitrakakis et al., 2014, Wang et al., 2015, Wasserman and Zhou, 2010, Foulds et al.,
2016], linear and quantile regression [Reimherr and Awan, 2019], etc.
Implementing these mechanisms requires sampling from a distribution given by exp(−f ) from some
domain D, for a suitable score function f . When the domain D is finite and small, this sampling is
straightforward. Several differentially private mechanisms instantiate the exponential mechanism
where D = Rd , in which case this sampling is not straightforward.
Such sampling problems are not new and often occur in statistics and machine learning settings. The
common practical approach is to use heuristic MCMC samplers such as Gibbs sampling, which often
works well in problems arising in practice. However, given that convergence is not guaranteed, the
∗
†

Part of this work performed while the author was an intern at Google Brain.
Work performed while at Google Brain.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

