Learning of Discrete Graphical Models with Neural
Networks
Abhijith J.
Centre for High Energy Physics,
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru.
abhijithj@iisc.ac.in

Andrey Y. Lokhov, Sidhant Misra, Marc Vuffray
Theoretical Division,
Los Alamos National Laboratory
{ lokhov, sidhant, vuffray }@lanl.gov

Abstract
Graphical models are widely used in science to represent joint probability distributions with an underlying conditional dependence structure. The inverse problem
of learning a discrete graphical model given i.i.d samples from its joint distribution can be solved with near-optimal sample complexity using a convex optimization method known as Generalized Regularized Interaction Screening Estimator
(GRISE). But the computational cost of GRISE becomes prohibitive when the energy function of the true graphical model has higher order terms. We introduce
NeurISE, a neural net based algorithm for graphical model learning, to tackle
this limitation of GRISE. We use neural nets as function approximators in an Interaction Screening objective function. The optimization of this objective then
produces a neural-net representation for the conditionals of the graphical model.
NeurISE algorithm is seen to be a better alternative to GRISE when the energy
function of the true model has a high order with a high degree of symmetry. In
these cases NeurISE is able to find the correct parsimonious representation for
the conditionals without being fed any prior information about the true model.
NeurISE can also be used to learn the underlying structure of the true model with
some simple modifications to its training procedure. In addition, we also show a
variant of NeurISE that can be used to learn a neural net representation for the full
energy function of the true model.

1

Introduction

Joint probability distributions of random variables with underlying conditional dependence structure
are ubiquitous in science and engineering. The dependency structure of these distributions often
reflect the properties of the scientific models that generate them. Undirected graphical models, also
known as Markov random fields, are a natural way to represent such distributions and have found
use in myriad fields such as physics [5], artificial intelligence [31], and biology [23] to name a few.
Due to the importance of graphical models, the inverse problem of learning them given i.i.d samples
from their joint distribution has been a very active area of research. This problem was first addressed
by Chow and Liu [8], who solved it for the case of graphical models with a tree structure. Since then
there have been many works on learning graphical models under certain assumptions about the true
model, with most of them focused on the special case of learning Ising models [28, 18, 26]. Bresler
[4] gave the first polynomial time greedy algorithm that learned Ising models without any underlying
assumptions. But the number of samples required to learn the model (i.e. sample complexity) using
this method was still sub-optimal. The first near-sample optimal method to learn binary models
with second order interactions (Ising models) was introduced by Vuffray et al. [29]. Under this
approach, the learning problem is converted to a convex optimization problem which reconstructs
the neighborhood of each variable in the model. The generalization of this method to learn any
discrete graphical model is known as the Generalized Regularized Interaction Screening Estimator
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

