Implicit Neural Representations with Periodic
Activation Functions
Vincent Sitzmann∗
sitzmann@cs.stanford.edu

Julien N. P. Martel∗
jnmartel@stanford.edu

David B. Lindell
lindell@stanford.edu

Alexander W. Bergman
awb@stanford.edu

Gordon Wetzstein
gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu

Stanford University
vsitzmann.github.io/siren/

Abstract
Implicitly defined, continuous, differentiable signal representations parameterized
by neural networks have emerged as a powerful paradigm, offering many possible
benefits over conventional representations. However, current network architectures
for such implicit neural representations are incapable of modeling signals with fine
detail. They also fail to accurately model spatial and temporal derivatives, which
is necessary to represent signals defined implicitly by differential equations. We
propose to leverage periodic activation functions for implicit neural representations
and demonstrate that these networks, dubbed sinusoidal representation networks or
SIRENs, are ideally suited for representing complex natural signals and their derivatives. We analyze SIREN activation statistics to propose a principled initialization
scheme and demonstrate the representation of images, wavefields, video, sound,
three-dimensional shapes, and their derivatives. Further, we show how SIRENs
can be leveraged to solve challenging boundary value problems, such as particular
Eikonal equations (yielding signed distance functions), the Poisson equation, and
the Helmholtz and wave equations. Lastly, we combine SIRENs with hypernetworks
to learn priors over the space of SIREN functions. Please see the project website for
a video overview of the proposed method and all applications.

1

Introduction

We are interested in a class of functions Φ that satisfy equations of the form:

C x, Φ, ∇x Φ, ∇2x Φ, . . . = 0, Φ : x 7→ Φ(x).

(1)

In this implicit problem formulation, a functional C takes as input the spatial or spatio-temporal
coordinates x ∈ Rm and, optionally, derivatives of Φ with respect to these coordinates. Our goal
is then to learn a neural network that parameterizes Φ to map x to some quantity of interest while
satisfying the constraint presented in Equation (1). Thus, Φ is implicitly defined by the relation
modeled by C and we refer to neural networks that parameterize such implicitly defined functions as
implicit neural representations. As we show in this paper, a surprisingly wide variety of problems
across scientific fields fall into this form, such as modeling many different types of discrete signals in
image, video, and audio processing using a continuous and differentiable representation, learning
3D shape representations via signed distance functions [1–4], and, more generally, solving boundary
value problems, such as the Poisson, Helmholtz, or wave equations.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

