Deep Archimedean Copulas

Chun Kai Ling
Computer Science Dept.
Carnegie Mellon University
chunkail@cs.cmu.edu

Fei Fang
Institute for Software Research
Carnegie Mellon University
feif@cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Computer Science Dept.
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
A central problem in machine learning and statistics is to model joint densities of
random variables from data. Copulas are joint cumulative distribution functions
with uniform marginal distributions and are used to capture interdependencies in
isolation from marginals. Copulas are widely used within statistics, but have not
gained traction in the context of modern deep learning. In this paper, we introduce
ACNet, a novel differentiable neural network architecture that enforces structural
properties and enables one to learn an important class of copulas–Archimedean
Copulas. Unlike Generative Adversarial Networks, Variational Autoencoders, or
Normalizing Flow methods, which learn either densities or the generative process
directly, ACNet learns a generator of the copula, which implicitly defines the
cumulative distribution function of a joint distribution. We give a probabilistic
interpretation of the network parameters of ACNet and use this to derive a simple
but efficient sampling algorithm for the learned copula. Our experiments show that
ACNet is able to both approximate common Archimedean Copulas and generate
new copulas which may provide better fits to data.

1

Introduction

Modeling dependencies between random variables is a central problem in machine learning and
statistics. Copulas are a special class of cumulative density functions which specify the dependencies
between random variables without any restriction on their marginals. This has led to long lines of
research in modeling and learning copulas [15, 7], as well as their applications in fields such as
finance and healthcare [5, 3]. Amongst the most common class of copulas are Archimedean Copulas,
which are defined by a one-dimensional function ϕ, known as the generator, and often favored for
their simplicity and ability to model extreme distributions. A key problem in the application of
Archimedean Copulas is the selection of the parametric form of ϕ as well as the limitations on the
expressiveness of commonly used copula. Present workarounds include the selection of the best
model between a fixed set of commonly used copulas, the use of methods based on information
criterion such as Akaike and Bayesian Information Criterion (AIC, BIC), as well as more modern
nonparametric methods.
In this paper, we propose ACNet, a novel network architecture which models the generator of an
Archimedean copula using a deep neural network, allowing for network parameters to be learnt
using backpropagation and gradient descent. The core idea behind ACNet is to model the generator
as a sum of convex combination of a finite set of exponential functions with varying rates of
decay, while exploiting their invariance to convex combinations and multiplications with other
exponentials. ACNet is built from simple, differentiable building blocks, ensuring that log-likelihood
is a differentiable function of ϕ, ensuring ease of training via backpropagation. By possessing a larger
set of parameters, ACNet is able to approximate all copulas with completely monotone generators,
a large class which encompasses most of the commonly used copulas, but also other Archimedean
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

