Fast Adversarial Robustness Certification of Nearest
Prototype Classifiers for Arbitrary Seminorms

Sascha Saralajew∗
Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG
Weissach, Germany
sascha.saralajew@porsche.de

Lars Holdijk∗
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands
larsholdijk@gmail.com

Thomas Villmann
UAS Mittweida
Mittweida, Germany,
villmann@hs-mittweida.de

Abstract
Methods for adversarial robustness certification aim to provide an upper bound on
the test error of a classifier under adversarial manipulation of its input. Current
certification methods are computationally expensive and limited to attacks that
optimize the manipulation with respect to a norm. We overcome these limitations
by investigating the robustness properties of Nearest Prototype Classifiers (NPCs)
like learning vector quantization and large margin nearest neighbor. For this
purpose, we study the hypothesis margin. We prove that if NPCs use a dissimilarity
measure induced by a seminorm, the hypothesis margin is a tight lower bound on
the size of adversarial attacks and can be calculated in constant time—this provides
the first adversarial robustness certificate calculable in reasonable time. Finally, we
show that each NPC trained by a triplet loss maximizes the hypothesis margin and
is therefore optimized for adversarial robustness. In the presented evaluation, we
demonstrate that NPCs optimized for adversarial robustness are competitive with
state-of-the-art methods and set a new benchmark with respect to computational
complexity for robustness certification.

1

Introduction

Adversarial robustness of a classifier describes its stability in classification under adversarial manipulations of the input. The adversarial setting has been studied extensively in numerous settings [1–3]
but mainly found footing after the seminal paper by Szegedy et al. [4] that formalized the problem of
adversarial examples. Since that, a wide line of research has sprung concerning both the construction
of adversarial attacks [5–7] and the heuristic defense against them [8–10]. Unfortunately, while some
progress has been made [11–13], most proposed defenses have been shown to be breakable by more
advanced attacks [14–16] so that the adversarial robustness problem is far from being solved. With
the heuristic defenses at the losing side of the metaphorical arms race, provable robustness guarantees
for classifiers provide a welcome alternative [11, 12, 17]. Robustness guarantees aim to provide
the so-called robust test error (or an upper bound) of a classifier under adversarial attacks and are
therefore not dependent on the current state of adversarial attacks. However, current methods for
determining the robust test error are computationally expensive [12, 17, 18] and are often limited
to Lp -norm evaluations [11, 13, 18]. As an adverse effect, we cannot use them for the rejection of
adversarial examples regarding an arbitrary seminorm without a huge computational overhead.
∗

Authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

