Differentially Private Clustering:
Tight Approximation Ratios
Badih Ghazi
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
badihghazi@gmail.com

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
pasin@google.com

Abstract
We study the task of differentially private clustering. For several basic clustering problems, including Euclidean DensestBall, 1-Cluster, k-means, and kmedian, we give efficient differentially private algorithms that achieve essentially
the same approximation ratios as those that can be obtained by any non-private algorithm, while incurring only small additive errors. This improves upon existing
efficient algorithms that only achieve some large constant approximation factors.
Our results also imply an improved algorithm for the Sample and Aggregate privacy framework. Furthermore, we show that one of the tools used in our 1-Cluster
algorithm can be employed to get a faster quantum algorithm for ClosestPair in
a moderate number of dimensions.

1

Introduction

With the significant increase in data collection, serious concerns about user privacy have emerged.
This has stimulated research on formalizing and guaranteeing strong privacy protections for usersensitive information. Differential Privacy (DP) [DMNS06, DKM+ 06] is a rigorous mathematical
concept for studying user privacy and has been widely adopted in practice [EPK14, Sha14, Gre16,
App17, DKY17, Abo18]. Informally, the notion of privacy is that the algorithm’s output (or output
distribution) should be mostly unchanged when any one of its inputs is changed. DP is quantified by
two parameters ✏ and ; the resulting notion is referred to as pure-DP when = 0, and approximateDP when > 0. See Section 2 for formal definitions of DP and [DR14, Vad17] for an overview.
Clustering is a central primitive in unsupervised machine learning [XW08, AC13]. An algorithm
for clustering in the DP model informally means that the cluster centers (or the distribution on
cluster centers) output by the algorithm should be mostly unchanged when any one of the input
points is changed. Many real-world applications involve clustering sensitive data. Motivated by
these, a long line of work has studied clustering algorithms in the DP model [BDMN05, NRS07,
FFKN09, GLM+ 10, MTS+ 12, WWS15, NSV16, NCBN16, SCL+ 16, FXZR17, BDL+ 17, NS18,
HL18, NCBN16, NS18, SK18, Ste20]. In this work we focus on several basic clustering problems
in the DP model and obtain efficient algorithms with tight approximation ratios.
Clustering Formulations. The input to all our problems is a set X of n points, each contained
in the d-dimensional unit ball. There are many different formulations of clustering. In the popular
k-means problem [Llo82], the goal is to find k centers minimizing the clustering cost, which is the
sum of squared distances from each point to its closest center. The k-median problem is similar
to k-means except that the distances are not squared in the definition of the clustering cost.1 Both
problems are NP-hard, and there is a large body of work dedicated to determining the best possible
1

For the formal definitions of k-means and k-median, see Definition 3 and the paragraph following it.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

