Multi-label classification: do Hamming loss and
subset accuracy really conflict with each other?

Guoqiang Wu, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Jiangsu Normal University, China
guoqiangwu90@gmail.com, dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Various evaluation measures have been developed for multi-label classification,
including Hamming Loss (HL), Subset Accuracy (SA) and Ranking Loss (RL).
However, there is a gap between empirical results and the existing theories: 1)
an algorithm often empirically performs well on some measure(s) while poorly
on others, while a formal theoretical analysis is lacking; and 2) in small label
space cases, the algorithms optimizing HL often have comparable or even better
performance on the SA measure than those optimizing SA directly, while existing
theoretical results show that SA and HL are conflicting measures. This paper
provides an attempt to fill up this gap by analyzing the learning guarantees of the
corresponding learning algorithms on both SA and HL measures. We show that
when a learning algorithm optimizes HL with its surrogate loss, it enjoys an error
bound for the HL measure independent of c (the number of labels), while the bound
for the SA measure depends on at most O(c). On the other hand, when directly
optimizing
SA with its surrogate loss, it has learning guarantees that depend on
√
O( c) for both HL and SA measures. This explains the observation that when the
label space is not large, optimizing HL with its surrogate loss can have promising
performance for SA. We further show that our techniques are applicable to analyze
the learning guarantees of algorithms on other measures, such as RL. Finally, the
theoretical analyses are supported by experimental results.

1

Introduction

Multi-label classification (MLC) [1] is a fundamental task that deals with the learning problems where
each instance might be associated with multiple labels simultaneously. It has enjoyed applications in
a wide range of areas, such as text categorization [2], image annotation [3], etc. It is more challenging
than the multi-class classification problem where only one label is assigned to each instance. Due
to the complexity of MLC, various measures [4, 5] have been developed from diverse aspects to
evaluate its performance, e.g., Hamming Loss (HL), Subset Accuracy (SA) and Ranking Loss (RL).
To optimize one or a subset of these measures, plenty of algorithms [3, 6, 7, 8] have been proposed.
For instance, Binary Relevance (BR) [3] aims to optimize HL while Rank-SVM [6] aims to optimize
RL. For a comprehensive evaluation of different algorithms, it is a common practice to test their
performance on various measures and a better algorithm is the one which performs well on most
of the measures. However, it is commonly observed that an algorithm usually performs well on
some measure(s) while poorly on others. Thus, it is important to theoretically understand such
inconsistency to reveal the intrinsic relationships among the measures.
∗

corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

