Post-training Iterative Hierarchical Data
Augmentation for Deep Networks

Adil Khan∗
Khadija Fraz
Institute of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
Innopolis University
Universitetskaya St, 1, Innopolis, Russia, 420500
a.khan@innopolis.ru, k.fraz@innopolis.university

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new iterative hierarchical data augmentation (IHDA)
method to fine-tune trained deep neural networks to improve their generalization
performance. The IHDA is motivated by three key insights: (1) Deep networks
(DNs) are good at learning multi-level representations from data. (2) Performing
data augmentation (DA) in the learned feature spaces of DNs can significantly improve their performance. (3) Implementing DA in hard-to-learn regions of a feature
space can effectively augment the dataset to improve generalization. Accordingly,
the IHDA performs DA in a deep feature space, at level l, by transforming it into a
distribution space and synthesizing new samples using the learned distributions for
data points that lie in hard-to-classify regions, which is estimated by analyzing the
neighborhood characteristics of each data point. The synthesized samples are used
to fine-tune the parameters of the subsequent layers. The same procedure is then
repeated for the feature space at level l + 1. To avoid overfitting, the concept of
dropout probability is employed, which is gradually relaxed as the IHDA works
towards high-level feature spaces. IHDA provided a state-of-the-art performance on
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet for several DNs, and beat the performance
of existing state-of-the-art DA approaches for the same networks on these datasets.
Finally, to demonstrate its domain-agnostic properties, we show the significant
improvements that IHDA provided for a deep neural network on a non-image
wearable sensor-based activity recognition benchmark.

1

Introduction

Despite the tremendous success of deep neural networks in solving discriminative tasks, improving
the generalization ability of these models remains as one of the most difficult challenges. There
exist several ways to solve this problem, such as dropout, batch normalization, pretraining, transfer
learning, and data augmentation (DA) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The goal of DA is to present the predictor with a
more comprehensive set of data points, during training, to minimize the distance between the training
and the test sets.
DA increases the size of the training data set, generally, in two ways. The first approach expands
the training data by performing expert-defined content preserving transformations to existing data
points [2]. In the case of images, such alterations may include image rotation, flipping, random
cropping, random erasing, and color space augmentation, etc. The second approach, on the other hand,
inflates the training data through deep learning. These include feature space augmentation [6, 7, 8],
adversarial training [9, 10], generative-adversarial-network based augmentation [11, 12, 13, 14],
and meta-learning data augmentations (MLDA) [15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. MLDA employs prepended
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

