CoADNet: Collaborative
Aggregation-and-Distribution Networks
for Co-Salient Object Detection

Qijian Zhang1∗, Runmin Cong2,3,1 *†, Junhui Hou1 , Chongyi Li4 , Yao Zhao2,3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
qijizhang3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, rmcong@bjtu.edu.cn, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk,
lichongyi25@gmail.com, yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn
https://rmcong.github.io/proj_CoADNet.html
1

Abstract
Co-Salient Object Detection (CoSOD) aims at discovering salient objects that
repeatedly appear in a given query group containing two or more relevant images.
One challenging issue is how to effectively capture co-saliency cues by modeling
and exploiting inter-image relationships. In this paper, we present an end-to-end
collaborative aggregation-and-distribution network (CoADNet) to capture both
salient and repetitive visual patterns from multiple images. First, we integrate
saliency priors into the backbone features to suppress the redundant background
information through an online intra-saliency guidance structure. After that, we
design a two-stage aggregate-and-distribute architecture to explore group-wise
semantic interactions and produce the co-saliency features. In the first stage, we
propose a group-attentional semantic aggregation module that models inter-image
relationships to generate the group-wise semantic representations. In the second
stage, we propose a gated group distribution module that adaptively distributes the
learned group semantics to different individuals in a dynamic gating mechanism.
Finally, we develop a group consistency preserving decoder tailored for the CoSOD
task, which maintains group constraints during feature decoding to predict more
consistent full-resolution co-saliency maps. The proposed CoADNet is evaluated
on four prevailing CoSOD benchmark datasets, which demonstrates the remarkable
performance improvement over ten state-of-the-art competitors.

1

Introduction

Different from salient object detection (SOD) that extracts the most attractive regions/objects from
a single image, co-salient object detection (CoSOD) aims to discover the salient and repetitive
objects from an image group containing two or more relevant images, which is consistent with
the collaborative processing mechanism of human visual systems [6, 14, 52]. Mining co-salient
patterns across image groups has been widely applied in various down-streaming computer vision
tasks, such as image co-segmentation [17, 18, 22], object detection [19, 40], and image retrieval
[50]. Conceptually, the co-salient objects belong to the same semantic category, but their category
attributes are unknown under the context of CoSOD, which is different from SOD for single image
or video sequences [7, 11, 12, 32, 33, 34]. Therefore, co-saliency models are supposed to capture
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: Runmin Cong (rmcong@bjtu.edu.cn)

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

