Simultaneously Learning Stochastic and Adversarial
Episodic MDPs with Known Transition

Tiancheng Jin
University of Southern California
tiancheng.jin@usc.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
This work studies the problem of learning episodic Markov Decision Processes
with known transition and bandit feedback. We develop the first algorithm with a
“best-of-both-worlds” guarantee: it achieves O(log T ) regret when the√losses are
stochastic, and simultaneously enjoys worst-case robustness with e
O( T ) regret
even when the losses are√
adversarial, where T is the number of episodes. More
e C) regret in an intermediate setting where the losses
generally, it achieves O(
are corrupted by a total amount of C. Our algorithm is based on the Followthe-Regularized-Leader method from Zimin and Neu [26], with a novel hybrid
regularizer inspired by recent works of Zimmert et al. [27, 29] for the special case
of multi-armed bandits. Crucially, our regularizer admits a non-diagonal Hessian
with a highly complicated inverse. Analyzing such a regularizer and deriving a
particular self-bounding regret guarantee is our key technical contribution and
might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of learning episodic Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). In this problem,
a learner interacts with the environment through T episodes. In each episode, the learner starts
from a fixed state, then sequentially selects one of the available actions and transits to the next state
according to a fixed transition function for a fixed number of steps. The learner observes only the
visited states and the loss for each visited state-action pair, and her goal is to minimize her regret, the
difference between her total loss over T episodes and that of the optimal fixed policy in hindsight.
When the losses are adversarial and can change arbitrarily between episodes,
√ the state-of-the-art is
e
achieved by the UOB-REPS algorithm of [12] with near-optimal regret O( T ) (ignoring dependence
on other parameters). On the other hand, the majority of the literature focuses on the stochastic/i.i.d.
loss setting where the loss for each state-action
pair follows a fixed distribution. For example, Azar
√
et al. [5] achieve the minimax regret e
O( T ) in this case. Moreover, the recent work of Simchowitz
and Jamieson [23] shows the first non-asymptotic gap-dependent regret bound
√ of order O(log T ) for
this problem, which is considerably more favorable than the worst-case e
O( T ) regret.
A natural question then arises: is it possible to achieve the best of both worlds with one single
algorithm? In other words, can we achieve O(log T√
) regret when the losses are stochastic, and
simultaneously enjoy worst-case robustness with e
O( T ) regret when the losses are adversarial?
Considering that the existing algorithms from [12] and [23] for these two settings are drastically
different, it is highly unclear whether this is possible.
In this work, we answer the question affirmatively and develop the first algorithm with such a bestof-both-worlds guarantee, under the condition that the transition function is known. We emphasize
that even in the case with known transition, the problem is still highly challenging. For example,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

