High-recall causal discovery for autocorrelated time
series with latent confounders
Andreas Gerhardus
German Aerospace Center
Institute of Data Science
07745 Jena, Germany
andreas.gerhardus@dlr.de

Jakob Runge
German Aerospace Center
Institute of Data Science
07745 Jena, Germany
jakob.runge@dlr.de

Abstract
We present a new method for linear and nonlinear, lagged and contemporaneous
constraint-based causal discovery from observational time series in the presence
of latent confounders. We show that existing causal discovery methods such as
FCI and variants suffer from low recall in the autocorrelated time series case
and identify low effect size of conditional independence tests as the main reason.
Information-theoretical arguments show that effect size can often be increased if
causal parents are included in the conditioning sets. To identify parents early on,
we suggest an iterative procedure that utilizes novel orientation rules to determine
ancestral relationships already during the edge removal phase. We prove that the
method is order-independent, and sound and complete in the oracle case. Extensive
simulation studies for different numbers of variables, time lags, sample sizes, and
further cases demonstrate that our method indeed achieves much higher recall than
existing methods for the case of autocorrelated continuous variables while keeping
false positives at the desired level. This performance gain grows with stronger
autocorrelation. At github.com/jakobrunge/tigramite we provide Python
code for all methods involved in the simulation studies.

1

Introduction

Observational causal discovery [Spirtes et al., 2000, Peters et al., 2017] from time series is a challenge of high relevance to many fields of science and engineering if experimental interventions are infeasible, expensive, or unethical. Causal knowledge of direct and indirect effects, interaction pathways,
and time lags can help to understand and model physical systems and to predict the effect of interventions [Pearl, 2000]. Causal graphs can also guide interpretable variable selection for prediction and
classification tasks. Causal discovery from time series faces major challenges [Runge et al., 2019a]
such as unobserved confounders, high-dimensionality, and nonlinear dependencies, to name a few.
Few frameworks can deal with these challenges and we here focus on constraint-based methods
pioneered in the seminal works of Spirtes, Glymour, and Zhang [Spirtes et al., 2000, Zhang, 2008].
We demonstrate that existing latent causal discovery methods strongly suffer from low recall in the
time series case where identifying lagged and contemporaneous causal links is the goal and autocorrelation is an added, ubiquitous challenge. Our main theoretical contributions lie in identifying low
effect size as a major reason why current methods fail and in introducing a novel sound, complete,
and order-independent causal discovery algorithm that yields strong gains in recall for autocorrelated
continuous data. Our practical contributions lie in extensive numerical experiments that can serve
as a future benchmark and in open-source Python implementations of our and major previous time
series causal discovery algorithms. The paper is structured as follows: After briefly introducing
the problem and existing methods in Sec. 2, we describe our method and theoretical results in Sec. 3.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

