Cooperative Multi-player Bandit Optimization

Ilai Bistritz, Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
{bistritz,bambos}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Consider a team of cooperative players that take actions in a networkedenvironment. At each turn, each player chooses an action and receives a reward
that is an unknown function of all the players’ actions. The goal of the team of
players is to learn to play together the action profile that maximizes the sum of
their rewards. However, players cannot observe the actions or rewards of other
players, and can only get this information by communicating with their neighbors. We design a distributed learning algorithm that overcomes the informational
bias players have towards maximizing the rewards of nearby players they got more
information about. We assume twice continuously differentiable reward functions
and constrained convex and compact action sets. Our communication graph is a
random time-varying graph that follows an ergodic Markov chain. We prove that
even if at every turn players take actions based only on the small random subset
of the players’ rewards that they know, our algorithm converges with probability 1
to the set of stationary points of (projected) gradient ascent on the sum of rewards
function. Hence, if the sum of rewards is concave, then the algorithm converges
with probability 1 to an optimal action profile.

1

Introduction

Bandit optimization is concerned with a single player that at each turn takes an action and receives a
reward ( [1,2]). Based on the past rewards, the player gradually learns to play better actions that yield
higher rewards. In a networked environment, many players take simultaneous actions. Examples are
smart cities, robotic networks, autonomous vehicles, the smart grid and communication networks.
In wireless communication networks, one player’s transmission creates interference for all others.
With autonomous vehicles, every vehicle creates congestion for all the others. Therefore, the actions
of one player affect the rewards of all others, and by that their future actions. This coupled learning
gives rise to a game-theoretic formulation, with conflicting individual reward functions.
Conflicting interests between players are often unavoidable due to limited resources. However,
conflicts do not have to result in a competition. In many applications, the players are willing or
simply programmed to cooperate. By cooperating, the outcome can turn out to be better for everyone
than with competition. Cooperation is naturally the case when players are deployed by the same
operator or that their protocol is standardized. These players operate as a team to solve their conflicts
in order to maximize the social welfare, as was done in [3–11]. In wireless networks, each user
typically wants to maximize its throughput, which reduces the throughput of other devices. However,
all devices must run a protocol that is programmed in their chip (e.g., LTE or WiFi), to the benefit
of all. With autonomous vehicles, each user wants to minimize its trip duration. However, the
vehicles are programmed to comply with the traffic rules, and are likely to follow a standardized
communication protocol to increase efficiency and safety [12].
If a player knew all the rewards of all other players at all times, the distributed learning problem boils
down to a single-player optimization problem with bandit feedback [1, 13]. The common approach
is then to estimate the gradient-based on samples of the unknown reward function.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

