Exemplar Guided Active Learning
Jason Hartford
AI21 Labs
jasonh@cs.ubc.ca

Kevin Leyton-Brown
AI21 Labs
kevinlb@cs.ubc.ca

Hadas Raviv
AI21 Labs
hadasr@ai21.com

Shahar Lev
AI21 Labs
shaharl@ai21.com

Dan Padnos
AI21 Labs
danp@ai21.com

Barak Lenz
AI21 Labs
barakl@ai21.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of wisely using a limited budget to label a small subset of
a large unlabeled dataset. We are motivated by the NLP problem of word sense
disambiguation. For any word, we have a set of candidate labels from a knowledge
base, but the label set is not necessarily representative of what occurs in the data:
there may exist labels in the knowledge base that very rarely occur in the corpus
because the sense is rare in modern English; and conversely there may exist true
labels that do not exist in our knowledge base. Our aim is to obtain a classifier
that performs as well as possible on examples of each “common class” that occurs
with frequency above a given threshold in the unlabeled set while annotating as
few examples as possible from “rare classes” whose labels occur with less than this
frequency. The challenge is that we are not informed which labels are common
and which are rare, and the true label distribution may exhibit extreme skew. We
describe an active learning approach that (1) explicitly searches for rare classes by
leveraging the contextual embedding spaces provided by modern language models,
and (2) incorporates a stopping rule that ignores classes once we prove that they
occur below our target threshold with high probability. We prove that our algorithm
only costs logarithmically more than a hypothetical approach that knows all true
label frequencies and show experimentally that incorporating automated search can
significantly reduce the number of samples needed to reach target accuracy levels.

1

Introduction

We are motivated by the problem of labelling a dataset for word sense disambiguation, where we
want to use a limited budget to collect annotations for a reasonable number of examples of each
sense for each word. This task can be thought of as an active learning problem (Settles, 2012), but
with two nonstandard challenges. First, for any given word we can get a set of candidate labels from
a knowledge base such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). However, this label set is not necessarily
representative of what occurs in the data: there may exist labels in the knowledge base that do not
occur in the corpus because the sense is rare in modern English; conversely, there may also exist
true labels that do not exist in our knowledge base. For example, consider the word “bass.” It is
frequently used as a noun or modifier, e.g., “the bass and alto are good singers”, or “I play the bass
guitar”. It is also commonly used to refer to a type of fish, but because music is so widely discussed
online, the fish sense of the word is orders of magnitude less common than the low-frequency sound
sense in internet text. The Oxford dictionary (Lexico) also notes that bass once referred to a fibrous
material used in matting or chords, but that sense is not common in modern English. We want a
method that collects balanced labels for the common senses, “bass frequencies” and “bass fish”, and
ignores sufficiently rare senses, such as “fibrous material”. Second, the empirical distribution of the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

