Robust, Accurate Stochastic Optimization for
Variational Inference
Akash Kumar Dhaka
Aalto University
akash.dhaka@aalto.fi

Alejandro Catalina
Aalto University
alejandro.catalina@aalto.fi

Michael Riis Andersen
Technical University of Denmark
miri@dtu.dk

Måns Magnusson
Uppsala University
mans.magnusson@statistik.uu.se

Jonathan H. Huggins
Boston University
huggins@bu.edu

Aki Vehtari
Aalto University
aki.vehtari@aalto.fi

Abstract
We consider the problem of fitting variational posterior approximations using
stochastic optimization methods. The performance of these approximations depends on (1) how well the variational family matches the true posterior distribution,
(2) the choice of divergence, and (3) the optimization of the variational objective.
We show that even in the best-case scenario when the exact posterior belongs to
the assumed variational family, common stochastic optimization methods lead to
poor variational approximations if the problem dimension is moderately large. We
also demonstrate that these methods are not robust across diverse model types.
Motivated by these findings, we develop a more robust and accurate stochastic
optimization framework by viewing the underlying optimization algorithm as producing a Markov chain. Our approach is theoretically motivated and includes a
diagnostic for convergence and a novel stopping rule, both of which are robust to
noisy evaluations of the objective function. We show empirically that the proposed
framework works well on a diverse set of models: it can automatically detect
stochastic optimization failure or inaccurate variational approximation.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference is a popular approach due to its flexibility and theoretical foundation in probabilistic reasoning [2, 46]. The central object in Bayesian inference is the posterior distribution of the
parameter of interest given the data. However, using Bayesian methods in practice usually requires
approximating the posterior distribution. Due to its computational efficiency, variational inference
(VI) has become a commonly used approach for large-scale approximate inference in machine
learning [26, 56]. Informally, VI methods find a simpler approximate posterior that minimizes a
divergence measure D [q||p] from the approximate posterior q to the exact posterior distribution p –
that is, they compute a optimal variational approximation q ∗ = arg minq∈Q D [q||p]. The variational
family is often parametrized by a vector λ ∈ RK so the parameter of q ∗ is given by
λ∗ = arg min D [qλ ||p] .

(1)

λ∈RK

Variational approximations in machine learning is typically used for prediction, but recent work
has shown that these approximations possess good statistical properties as point estimators and as
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

