On Uniform Convergence
and Low-Norm Interpolation Learning

Lijia Zhou
University of Chicago
zlj@uchicago.edu

Danica J. Sutherland
TTI-Chicago
danica@ttic.edu

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We consider an underdetermined noisy linear regression model where the minimumnorm interpolating predictor is known to be consistent, and ask: can uniform
convergence in a norm ball, or at least (following Nagarajan and Kolter) the subset
of a norm ball that the algorithm selects on a typical input set, explain this success?
We show that uniformly bounding the difference between empirical and population
errors cannot show any learning in the norm ball, and cannot show consistency for
any set, even one depending on the exact algorithm and distribution. But we argue
we can explain the consistency of the minimal-norm interpolator with a slightly
weaker, yet standard, notion: uniform convergence of zero-error predictors in a
norm ball. We use this to bound the generalization error of low- (but not minimal-)
norm interpolating predictors.

1

Introduction

In the past several years, it has become empirically clear that – contrary to traditional intuition –
it is possible for models which exactly interpolate noisy training data to reliably generalize well
on practical problems, especially in deep learning [7, 25, 34]. We refer to this phenomenon as
“interpolation learning.” It is closely related to the (re-)discovery of the “double descent” phenomenon
[1, 5, 23, 29], where many models first improve as their size is increased, then get much worse around
the point where they can first interpolate the data, and then improve again as they become more and
more overparametrized. Understanding interpolation learning, therefore, seems to be a key step on
the path towards better theoretical understanding of the successes of deep learning.
We now know of a few settings where interpolating models can be shown to generalize well [4, 8].
In particular, significant recent attention has been paid to the minimum-norm linear interpolator
(“ridgeless” regression) in certain high-dimensional linear regression regimes [3, 6, 14, 21]. This
setting is of particular interest not only because it is reasonably accessible to study while exhibiting
many of the surprising properties of more complex models, but also because this predictor is the same
one found by (stochastic) gradient descent initialized at the origin, and so it seems plausible that its
properties may generalize to more complex settings. Much is now understood about the properties of
the minimum-norm interpolator for (sub-)Gaussian data, including necessary and sufficient conditions
for its consistency. This line of inquiry has proved quite fertile for extensions to related settings and
further results [2, 13, 15, 18, 20].
One striking feature of this body of work is that none of it is based on the core workhorse of learning
theory, uniform convergence; most instead uses various tools, mostly from random matrix theory,
to directly analyze the generalization error of a particular predictor. Indeed, some have argued that
uniform convergence is unlikely to be able to explain interpolation learning; for instance, Mikhail
Belkin has said1 that “there are no [uniform generalization] bounds” with constants tight enough to
1

Talk at the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, July 2019: simons.berkeley.edu/talks/tbd-65

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

