Robust and Heavy-Tailed Mean Estimation Made
Simple, via Regret Minimization
Samuel B. Hopkins ⇤

Jerry Li †

Fred Zhang⇤

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating the mean of a distribution in high dimensions when either the samples are adversarially corrupted or the distribution is
heavy-tailed. Recent developments have established efficient and (near) optimal
procedures for both settings. However, the algorithms developed on each side tend
to be sophisticated and do not directly transfer to the other, with many of them
having ad-hoc or complicated analyses. In this paper, we provide a meta-problem
and a equivalence theorem that lead to a new unified view on robust and heavytailed mean estimation in high dimensions. We show that the meta-problem can
be solved either by a variant of the F ILTER algorithm from the recent literature on
robust estimation or by the quantum entropy scoring scheme (QUE), due to Dong,
Hopkins and Li (NeurIPS ’19). By leveraging our equivalence theorem, these results translate into simple and efficient algorithms for both robust and heavy-tailed
settings. Furthermore, the QUE-based procedure has run-time that matches the
fastest known algorithms on both fronts. Our analysis of F ILTER is through the
classic regret bound of the multiplicative weights update method. This connection
allows us to avoid the technical complications in previous works and improve
upon the run-time analysis of a gradient-descent-based algorithm for robust mean
estimation by Cheng, Diakonikolas, Ge and Soltanolkotabi (ICML ’20).

1

Introduction

Learning from high-dimensional data in the presence of outliers is a central task in modern statistics
and machine learning. Outliers have many sources. Modern data sets can be exposed to random
corruptions or even malicious tampering, as in data poison attacks. Data drawn from heavy-tailed
distributions can naturally contain outlying samples—heavy-tailed data are found often in network
science, biology, and beyond [22, 33, 6, 1]. Minimizing the effect of outliers on the performance of
learning algorithms is therefore a key challenge for statistics and computer science.
Robust statistics—that is, statistics in the presence of outliers—has been studied formally since
at least the 1960s, and informally since long before [27, 43]. However, handling outliers in high
dimensions presents significant computational challenges. Classical robust estimators (such as the
Tukey median) suffer from worst-case computational hardness, while naïve computationally-efficient
algorithms (e.g., throwing out atypical-looking samples) have far-from-optimal rates of error. In the
last five years, however, numerous works have developed sophisticated, efficient algorithms with
optimal error rates for a variety of problems in high-dimensional robust statistics. Despite significant
recent progress, many basic algorithmic questions remain unanswered, and many algorithms and
rigorous approaches to analyzing them remain complex and ad hoc.
In this work, we revisit the most fundamental high-dimensional estimation problem, estimating the
mean of a distribution from samples, in the following two basic and widely-studied robust settings. In
⇤
†

UC Berkeley. Email: {hopkins, z0}@berkeley.edu
Microsoft Research AI. Email: jerrl@microsoft.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

