COBE: Contextualized Object Embeddings
from Narrated Instructional Video
Gedas Bertasius1 , Lorenzo Torresani1,2
1
Facebook AI, 2 Dartmouth College

Abstract
Many objects in the real world undergo dramatic variations in visual appearance.
For example, a tomato may be red or green, sliced or chopped, fresh or fried,
liquid or solid. Training a single detector to accurately recognize tomatoes in
all these different states is challenging. On the other hand, contextual cues (e.g.,
the presence of a knife, a cutting board, a strainer or a pan) are often strongly
indicative of how the object appears in the scene. Recognizing such contextual
cues is useful not only to improve the accuracy of object detection or to determine
the state of the object, but also to understand its functional properties and to infer
ongoing or upcoming human-object interactions. A fully-supervised approach to
recognizing object states and their contexts in the real-world is unfortunately marred
by the long-tailed, open-ended distribution of the data, which would effectively
require massive amounts of annotations to capture the appearance of objects in
all their different forms. Instead of relying on manually-labeled data for this task,
we propose a new framework for learning Contextualized OBject Embeddings
(COBE) from automatically-transcribed narrations of instructional videos. We
leverage the semantic and compositional structure of language by training a visual
detector to predict a contextualized word embedding of the object and its associated
narration. This enables the learning of an object representation where concepts
relate according to a semantic language metric. Our experiments show that our
detector learns to predict a rich variety of contextual object information, and that it
is highly effective in the settings of few-shot and zero-shot learning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of object detection has witnessed dramatic progress in the domain of both
images [1, 2, 3, 4] and videos [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. To a large extent these advances have been driven
by the introduction of increasingly bigger labeled datasets [10, 11, 12, 13], which have enabled
the training of progressively more complex and deeper models. However, even the largest datasets
in this field [10, 11, 12] still define objects at a very coarse level, with label spaces expressed in
terms of nouns, e.g., tomato, fish, plant or flower. Such noun-centric ontologies fail to represent the
dramatic variations in appearance caused by changes in object “states” for many of these classes. For
example, a tomato may be fresh or fried, large or small, red or green. It may also frequently appear in
conjunction with other objects such as a knife, a cutting board, or a cucumber. Furthermore, it may
undergo drastic appearance changes caused by human actions (e.g., slicing, chopping, or squeezing).
The goal of this work is to design a model that can recognize a rich variety of contextual object
cues and states in the visual world (see Figure 1 for a few illustrative examples). A detection
system capable to do so is useful not only for understanding the object functional properties, but
also for inferring present or future human-object interactions. Unfortunately, due to the long-tailed,
open-ended distribution of the data, implementing a fully-supervised approach to this problem is
challenging as it requires collecting large amounts of annotations capturing the visual appearance
of objects in all their different forms. Instead of relying on manually-labeled data, we propose a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

