Interpretable Sequence Learning for
COVID-19 Forecasting

Sercan Ö. Arık, Chun-Liang Li, Jinsung Yoon, Rajarishi Sinha, Arkady Epshteyn,
Long T. Le, Vikas Menon, Shashank Singh, Leyou Zhang, Martin Nikoltchev,
Yash Sonthalia, Hootan Nakhost, Elli Kanal, Tomas Pfister
Google Cloud AI
{soarik,chunliang,jinsungyoon,sinharaj,aepshtey,longtle,vikasmenon,
shashanksi,leyouz,mnikoltchev,yashks,hootan,ekanal,tpfister}@google.com

Abstract
We propose a novel approach that integrates machine learning into compartmental
disease modeling (e.g., SEIR) to predict the progression of COVID-19. Our model
is explainable by design as it explicitly shows how different compartments evolve
and it uses interpretable encoders to incorporate covariates and improve performance. Explainability is valuable to ensure that the model’s forecasts are credible
to epidemiologists and to instill confidence in end-users such as policy makers
and healthcare institutions. Our model can be applied at different geographic
resolutions, and we demonstrate it for states and counties in the United States. We
show that our model provides more accurate forecasts compared to the alternatives,
and that it provides qualitatively meaningful explanatory insights.

1

Introduction

The rapid spread of COVID-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, has had a significant
impact on humanity. Accurately forecasting the progression of COVID-19 can help (i) healthcare
institutions to ensure sufficient supply of equipment and personnel to minimize fatalities, (ii) policy
makers to consider potential outcomes of their policy decisions, (iii) manufacturers and retailers to
plan their business decisions based on predicted attenuation or recurrence of the pandemic and (iv)
the general populace to have confidence in the choices made by the above actors.
Data is one of the greatest assets of the modern era, including for healthcare [1]. We aim to exploit
this abundance of data for COVID-19 forecasting. From available healthcare supply to mobility
indices, many information sources are expected to have predictive value for forecasting the spread of
COVID-19. Data-driven time-series forecasting has enjoyed great success, particularly with advances
in deep learning [2, 3, 4]. However, several features of the current pandemic limit the success of
standard time-series forecasting methods:
• Because there is no close precedent for the COVID-19 pandemic, it is necessary to integrate
existing data with priors based on epidemiological knowledge of disease dynamics.
• The data generating processes are non-stationary because progression of the disease influences
public policy and individuals’ public behaviors, and vice versa.
• There are many potential sources of data, but their causal impact on the disease is unclear, and
their impact on the progression of the disease is unknown.
• The problem is non-identifiable as most infected can be undocumented.
• Data sources are noisy due to reporting issues or due to data collection problems.
• Beyond accuracy, explainability is desired – the users, either from healthcare or policy or business
angles, should be able to interpret the results in a meaningful way for optimal strategic planning.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

