Input-Aware Dynamic Backdoor Attack

1

Tuan Anh Nguyen1,2 , Tuan Anh Tran1,3
VinAI Research, Hanoi University of Science and Technology, 3 VinUniversity
v.anhnt479@vinai.io, v.anhtt152@vinai.io
2

Abstract
In recent years, neural backdoor attack has been considered to be a potential security
threat to deep learning systems. Such systems, while achieving the state-of-the-art
performance on clean data, perform abnormally on inputs with predefined triggers.
Current backdoor techniques, however, rely on uniform trigger patterns, which
are easily detected and mitigated by current defense methods. In this work, we
propose a novel backdoor attack technique in which the triggers vary from input
to input. To achieve this goal, we implement an input-aware trigger generator
driven by diversity loss. A novel cross-trigger test is applied to enforce trigger
nonreusablity, making backdoor verification impossible. Experiments show that
our method is efficient in various attack scenarios as well as multiple datasets.
We further demonstrate that our backdoor can bypass the state of the art defense
methods. An analysis with a famous neural network inspector again proves the
stealthiness of the proposed attack. Our code is publicly available.

1

Introduction

Due to their superior performance, deep neural networks have become essential in modern artificial
intelligence systems. The state-of-the-art networks, however, require massive training data, expensive
computing hardwares, and days or even weeks of training. Therefore, instead of training these
networks from scratch, many companies use pre-trained models provided by third-parties. This has
caused an emerging security threat of neural backdoor attacks, in which the provided networks look
genuine but intentionally misbehave on a specific condition of the inputs.
BadNets [1] is one of the first studies discussing this problem on the image classification task. The
authors proposed to poison a part of the training data. More specifically, the poisoned images were
injected with a fixed small pattern, called a trigger, at a specific location, and the corresponding
labels were changed to some pre-defined attack classes. The trained networks could classify the clean
testing images accurately but quickly switched to return attack labels when trigger patterns appeared.
Liu et al. [2] extended it to different domains, including face recognition, speech recognition, and
sentence attitude recognition. Since then, many variations of backdoor attacks have been proposed
[3, 4].
Though varying in mechanisms and scenarios, all these attacks rely on the same premise of using a
fixed trigger on all poisoned data. It became a crucial weakness that has been exploited by defense
methods [5, 6, 7, 8]. These methods derive backdoor trigger candidates then verify by applying them
to a set of clean test images.
We argue that the fixed trigger premise is hindering the capability of backdoor attack methods. A
dynamic backdoor that has the trigger pattern varying from input to input is much stealthier. It
breaks the foundation assumption of all current defense methods, thus easily defeats them. Moreover,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

