Approximate Cross-Validation for Structured Models
Soumya Ghosh⇤ †
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
ghoshso@us.ibm.com

William T. Stephenson⇤
MIT CSAIL
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
wtstephe@mit.edu

Sameer K. Deshpande
MIT CSAIL
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
sameerd@alum.mit.edu

Tin D. Nguyen
MIT CSAIL
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
tdn@mit.edu

Tamara Broderick
MIT CSAIL
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
tbroderick@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Many modern data analyses benefit from explicitly modeling dependence structure in data – such as measurements across time or space, ordered words in a
sentence, or genes in a genome. A gold standard evaluation technique is structured
cross-validation (CV), which leaves out some data subset (such as data within a
time interval or data in a geographic region) in each fold. But CV here can be
prohibitively slow due to the need to re-run already-expensive learning algorithms
many times. Previous work has shown approximate cross-validation (ACV) methods provide a fast and provably accurate alternative in the setting of empirical risk
minimization. But this existing ACV work is restricted to simpler models by the
assumptions that (i) data across CV folds are independent and (ii) an exact initial
model fit is available. In structured data analyses, both these assumptions are often
untrue. In the present work, we address (i) by extending ACV to CV schemes
with dependence structure between the folds. To address (ii), we verify – both
theoretically and empirically – that ACV quality deteriorates smoothly with noise
in the initial fit. We demonstrate the accuracy and computational benefits of our
proposed methods on a diverse set of real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Models with complex dependency structures have become standard machine learning tools in analyses
of data from science, social science, and engineering fields. These models are used to characterize
disease progression [Sukkar et al., 2012, Wang et al., 2014, Sun et al., 2019], to track crime in
a city [Balocchi and Jensen, 2019, Balocchi et al., 2019], and to monitor and potentially manage
traffic flow [Ihler et al., 2006, Zheng and Liu, 2017] among many other applications. The potential
societal impact of these methods necessitates that they be used and evaluated with care. Indeed,
recent work [Musgrave et al., 2020] has emphasized that hyperparameter tuning and assessment with
cross-validation (CV) [Stone, 1974, Geisser, 1975] is crucial to trustworthy and meaningful analysis
of modern, complex machine learning methods.
While CV offers a conceptually simple and widely used tool for evaluation, it can be computationally
prohibitive in complex models. These models often already face severe computational demands to fit
just once, and CV requires multiple re-fits. To address this cost, recent authors [Beirami et al., 2017,
Rad and Maleki, 2020, Giordano et al., 2019] have proposed approximate CV (ACV) methods; their
⇤
†

Joint first authorship
Also with the Center for Computational Health

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

