Quantifying the Empirical Wasserstein Distance to a
Set of Measures: Beating the Curse of Dimensionality

Nian Si
Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Huang Engineering Center, 475 Via Ortega, Stanford, California 94305, United States
niansi@stanford.edu
Jose Blanchet
Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Huang Engineering Center, 475 Via Ortega, Stanford, California 94305, United States
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu
Soumyadip Ghosh
Mathematical Sciences
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
ghoshs@us.ibm.com

Mark S. Squillante
Mathematical Sciences
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
mss@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating the Wasserstein distance between the
empirical measure and a set of probability measures whose expectations over a
class of functions (hypothesis class) are constrained. If this class is sufficiently
rich to characterize a particular distribution (e.g., all Lipschitz functions), then our
formulation recovers the Wasserstein distance to such a distribution. We establish a
strong duality result that generalizes the celebrated Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality.
We also show that our formulation can be used to beat the curse of dimensionality,
which is well known to affect the rates of statistical convergence of the empirical
Wasserstein distance. In particular, examples of infinite-dimensional hypothesis
classes are presented, informed by a complex correlation structure, for which it is
shown that the empirical Wasserstein distance to such classes converges to zero at
the standard parametric rate. Our formulation provides insights that help clarify
why, despite the curse of dimensionality, the Wasserstein distance enjoys favorable
empirical performance across a wide range of statistical applications.

1

Introduction

In this paper we consider the problem of projecting the empirical measure, under the Wasserstein
distance, to a set of probability measures that are constrained to satisfy a family of expectations over
a class of functions. We call this class of functions the “hypothesis class”, examples of which include
moment constraints or expectations of functions other than polynomials.
The Wasserstein distance has generated a great deal of attention in recent years across a broad
spectrum of areas, ranging from artificial intelligence, learning and statistics to areas such as image
analysis, economics and operations research [1, 18, 9, 12, 15]. However, despite its versatility and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

