Grasp Proposal Networks: An End-to-End Solution
for Visual Learning of Robotic Grasps

Chaozheng Wu1∗ Jian Chen1∗ Qiaoyu Cao1
Yunxin Tai1

Lin Sun 2

Jianchi Zhang1

Kui Jia1†

1

2
South China University of Technology
Samsung, USA
{eeczwu,ee_chenjian,eeqycao,msj.c.zhang}@mail.scut.edu.cn
yunxintai@gmail.com lin1.sun@samsung.com kuijia@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning robotic grasps from visual observations is a promising yet challenging
task. Recent research shows its great potential by preparing and learning from
large-scale synthetic datasets. For the popular, 6 degree-of-freedom (6-DOF)
grasp setting of parallel-jaw gripper, most of existing methods take the strategy of
heuristically sampling grasp candidates and then evaluating them using learned
scoring functions. This strategy is limited in terms of the conflict between sampling
efficiency and coverage of optimal grasps. To this end, we propose in this work
a novel, end-to-end Grasp Proposal Network (GPNet), to predict a diverse set of
6-DOF grasps for an unseen object observed from a single and unknown camera
view. GPNet builds on a key design of grasp proposal module that defines anchors
of grasp centers at discrete but regular 3D grid corners, which is flexible to support
either more precise or more diverse grasp predictions. To test GPNet, we contribute
a synthetic dataset of 6-DOF object grasps; evaluation is conducted using rule-based
criteria, simulation test, and real test. Comparative results show the advantage of
our methods over existing ones. Notably, GPNet gains better simulation results via
the specified coverage, which helps achieve a ready translation in real test. Our
code and dataset are available on https://github.com/CZ-Wu/GPNet.

1

Introduction

Robotic object grasping is one of the basic functions that a robot system aims to emulate our human
beings. The task is challenging due to imprecision in sensing, planning, and actuation, and also due
to the possible absence of knowledge about physical properties of the object (e.g., mass distribution
and surface material). It was recently demonstrated that deep learning on annotated datasets of
robotic grasp can achieve good robustness and generalization [13, 21, 14, 10, 11]. Methods based on
synthetic data (e.g., object CAD models and the correspondingly rendered images) [17, 5, 32] show
particular promise, as they can ideally generate as many as infinite numbers of grasp annotations.
Even though there exists a risk of domain discrepancy between simulated and real environments,
deep learning models trained on such synthetic datasets show remarkable performance on real-world
grasp testings, with better generalization to novel object instances and categories [17, 5]. In this work,
we study deep learning optimal grasp configurations from synthetic images, with a particular focus
on grasping with a parallel-jaw gripper, whose parametrization is typically of 6 degrees of freedom
(6-DOFs), including 3D gripper center of the grasping location and 3D gripper orientation.
∗
†

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

