Structured Convolutions for Efficient Neural Network
Design

Yash Bhalgat

Yizhe Zhang

Jamie Menjay Lin

Fatih Porikli

Qualcomm AI Research∗
{ybhalgat, yizhez, jmlin, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
In this work, we tackle model efficiency by exploiting redundancy in the implicit
structure of the building blocks of convolutional neural networks. We start our
analysis by introducing a general definition of Composite Kernel structures that
enable the execution of convolution operations in the form of efficient, scaled,
sum-pooling components. As its special case, we propose Structured Convolutions
and show that these allow decomposition of the convolution operation into a sumpooling operation followed by a convolution with significantly lower complexity
and fewer weights. We show how this decomposition can be applied to 2D and 3D
kernels as well as the fully-connected layers. Furthermore, we present a Structural
Regularization loss that promotes neural network layers to leverage on this desired
structure in a way that, after training, they can be decomposed with negligible
performance loss. By applying our method to a wide range of CNN architectures,
we demonstrate ‘structured’ versions of the ResNets that are up to 2× smaller
and a new Structured-MobileNetV2 that is more efficient while staying within
an accuracy loss of 1% on ImageNet and CIFAR-10 datasets. We also show
similar structured versions of EfficientNet on ImageNet and HRNet architecture
for semantic segmentation on the Cityscapes dataset. Our method performs equally
well or superior in terms of the complexity reduction in comparison to the existing
tensor decomposition and channel pruning methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks deliver outstanding performance across a variety of use-cases but quite often fail
to meet the computational budget requirements of mainstream devices. Hence, model efficiency plays
a key role in bridging deep learning research into practice. Various model compression techniques
rely on a key assumption that the deep networks are over-parameterized, meaning that a significant
proportion of the parameters are redundant. This redundancy can appear either explicitly or implicitly.
In the former case, several structured [12, 23], as well as unstructured [8, 9, 27, 46], pruning methods
have been proposed to systematically remove redundant components in the network and improve
run-time efficiency. On the other hand, tensor-decomposition methods based on singular values of
the weight tensors, such as spatial SVD or weight SVD, remove somewhat implicit elements of the
weight tensor to construct low-rank decompositions for efficient inference [5, 14, 19].
Redundancy in deep networks can also be seen as network weights possessing an unnecessarily high
degrees of freedom (DOF). Alongside various regularization methods [17, 33] that impose constraints
to avoid overfitting, another approach for reducing the DOF is by decreasing the number of learnable
parameters. To this end, [14, 29, 38] propose using certain basis representations for weight tensors.
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

