Community detection using fast low-cardinality
semidefinite programming

Po-Wei Wang
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
poweiw@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie-Mellon University &
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Pittsburgh, PA
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Modularity maximization has been a fundamental tool for understanding the community structure of a network, but the underlying optimization problem is nonconvex and NP-hard to solve. State-of-the-art algorithms like the Louvain or Leiden
methods focus on different heuristics to help escape local optima, but they still
depend on a greedy step that moves node assignment locally and is prone to getting
trapped. In this paper, we propose a new class of low-cardinality algorithm that
generalizes the local update to maximize a semidefinite relaxation derived from
max-k-cut. This proposed algorithm is scalable, empirically achieves the global
semidefinite optimality for small cases, and outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms in real-world datasets with little additional time cost. From the algorithmic
perspective, it also opens a new avenue for scaling-up semidefinite programming
when the solutions are sparse instead of low-rank.

1

Introduction

Community detection, that is, finding clusters of densely connected nodes in a network, is a fundamental topic in network science. A popular class of methods for community detection, called
modularity maximization [34], tries to maximize the modularity of the cluster assignment, the quality
of partitions defined by the difference between the number of edges inside a community and the
expected number of such edges. However, optimizing modularity is NP-hard [14], so modern methods
focus on heuristics to escape local optima. A very popular heuristic, the Louvain method [8], greedily
updates the community membership node by node to the best possible neighboring community that
maximizes the modularity function’s gain. Then it aggregates the resulting partition and repeats until
no new communities are created. The Louvain method is fast and effective [48], although it still gets
trapped at local optima and might even create disconnected communities. A follow-up work, the
Leiden method [43], resolves disconnectedness by an additional refinement step, but it still relies on
greedy local updates and is prone to local optima.
In this paper, we propose the Locale (low-cardinality embedding) algorithm, which improves the
performance of community detecion above the current state of the art. It generalizes the greedy
local move procedure of the Louvain and Leiden methods by optimizing a semidefinite relaxation of
modularity, which originates from the extremal case of the max-k-cut semidefinite approximation
[22, 20, 2] when k goes to infinity. We provide a scalable solver for this semidefinite relaxation by
exploiting the low-cardinality property in the solution space. Traditionally, semidefinite programming
is considered unscalable. Recent advances in Riemannian manifold optimization [38, 16, 1] provide
a chance to scale-up by optimizing directly in a low-rank solution space, but it is not amenable in
many relaxations like the max-k-cut SDP, where there are nonnegativity constraints on all entries of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

