Multi-Stage Influence Function

Hongge Chen*,1 Si Si2 Yang Li 2 Ciprian Chelba 2
Sanjiv Kumar 2 Duane Boning 1 Cho-Jui Hsieh 3
1
MIT 2 Google Research 3 UCLA
*
Work was done when interning at Google Research.
chenhg@mit.edu sisidaisy@google.com liyang@google.com ciprianchelba@google.com
sanjivk@google.com boning@mtl.mit.edu chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Multi-stage training and knowledge transfer, from a large-scale pretraining task
to various finetuning tasks, have revolutionized natural language processing and
computer vision resulting in state-of-the-art performance improvements. In this
paper, we develop a multi-stage influence function score to track predictions
from a finetuned model all the way back to the pretraining data. With this score,
we can identify the pretraining examples in the pretraining task that contribute
most to a prediction in the finetuning task. The proposed multi-stage influence
function generalizes the original influence function for a single model in (Koh &
Liang, 2017), thereby enabling influence computation through both pretrained and
finetuned models. We study two different scenarios with the pretrained embeddings
fixed or updated in the finetuning tasks. We test our proposed method in various
experiments to show its effectiveness and potential applications.

1

Introduction

Multi-stage training has become increasingly important and has achieved state-of-the-art results in
many tasks. In natural language processing (NLP) applications, it is now a common practice to
first learn word embeddings (e.g., word2vec [16], GloVe [19]) or contextual representations (e.g.,
ELMo [20], BERT [7]) from a large unsupervised corpus, and then refine or finetune the model on
supervised end tasks. Also, transfer learning has been widely used in many different tasks. Intuitively,
the successes of these multi-stage learning paradigms are due to knowledge transfer from pretraining
tasks to the end task. However, current approaches using multi-stage learning are usually based on
trial-and-error and many fundamental questions remain unanswered. For example, which part of the
pretraining data/task contributes most to the end task? How can one detect “false transfer” where
some pretraining data/task could be harmful for the end task? If a testing point is wrongly predicted
by the finetuned model, can we trace back to the problematic examples in the pretraining data?
Answering these questions requires a quantitative measurement of how the data and loss function in
the pretraining stage influence the end model, which has not been studied in the past and is the main
focus of this paper.
To find the most influential training data responsible for a model’s prediction, the influence function
was first introduced by [5]. Recently, as large-scale applications become more challenging for
influence function computation, [13] proposed to use a first-order approximation to measure the effect
of removing one training point on the model’s prediction, to overcome computational challenges.
These methods are widely used in model debugging and there are also some applications in machine
learning fairness [2, 26]. However, all of the existing influence score computation algorithms study
the case of single-stage training – where there is only one model with one set of training/prediction
data in the training process. To the best of our knowledge, the influence of pretraining data on
a subsequent finetuning task and model has not been studied, and it is nontrivial to apply the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

