Axioms for Learning from Pairwise Comparisons
Ritesh Noothigattu
Carnegie Mellon University
riteshn@cmu.edu

Dominik Peters
Harvard University
dpeters@seas.harvard.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
To be well-behaved, systems that process preference data must satisfy certain
conditions identified by economic decision theory and by social choice theory. In
ML, preferences and rankings are commonly learned by fitting a probabilistic
model to noisy preference data. The behavior of this learning process from
the view of economic theory has previously been studied for the case where
the data consists of rankings. In practice, it is more common to have only
pairwise comparison data, and the formal properties of the associated learning
problem are more challenging to analyze. We show that a large class of random
utility models (including the Thurstone–Mosteller Model), when estimated
using the MLE, satisfy a Pareto efficiency condition. These models also
satisfy a strong monotonicity property, which implies that the learning process
is responsive to input data. On the other hand, we show that these models
fail certain other consistency conditions from social choice theory, and in
particular do not always follow the majority opinion. Our results inform existing and future applications of random utility models for societal decision making.

1

Introduction

More than two centuries ago, the marquis de Condorcet [1785] suggested a statistical interpretation
of voting. Each vote, Condorcet argued, can be seen as a noisy estimate of a ground-truth ranking of
the alternatives. A voting rule should aggregate votes into a ranking that is most likely to coincide
with the ground truth. Although Condorcet put forward a specific noise model, his reasoning applies
to any random noise model, which is a distribution over votes parameterized by a ground truth
ranking [Conitzer and Sandholm, 2005, Caragiannis et al., 2016].
Until NeurIPS 2014, this statistical approach to voting was studied in parallel to the more common
normative approach, which evaluates voting rules based on axiomatic properties. But the two
approaches converged in a paper by Azari Soufiani et al. [2014], whose key idea was to determine
whether maximum likelihood estimators (MLEs) for two noise models satisfy basic axiomatic
properties. Their results were sharpened and extended by Xia [2016].
Our point of departure is that instead of random noise models we consider random utility models,
where each alternative x has a utility x , and the probability of drawing a pairwise comparison that
puts x above y depends on x and y . For example, under the well-known Thurstone–Mosteller
Model [Thurstone, 1927, Mosteller, 1951], this pairwise comparison would be generated by sampling
u(x) and u(y) from normal distributions with unit variance and means x and y , respectively. Then
x is ranked above y if and only if u(x) > u(y).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

