Instance-optimality in differential privacy via
approximate inverse sensitivity mechanisms

Hilal Asi
Stanford University
asi@stanford.edu

John C. Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study and provide instance-optimal algorithms in differential privacy by extending and approximating the inverse sensitivity mechanism. We provide two
approximation frameworks, one which only requires knowledge of local sensitivities, and a gradient-based approximation for optimization problems, which are
efficiently computable for a broad class of functions. We complement our analysis
with instance-specific lower bounds for vector-valued functions, which demonstrate
that our mechanisms are (nearly) instance-optimal under certain assumptions and
that minimax lower bounds may not provide an accurate estimate of the hardness
of a problem in general: our algorithms can significantly outperform minimax
bounds for well behaved instances. Finally, we use our approximation framework
to develop private mechanisms for unbounded-range mean estimation, principal
component analysis, and linear regression. For PCA, our mechanisms give an
efficient (pure) differentially private algorithm with near-optimal rates.

1

Introduction

We study the estimation of a function (statistic) of interest under differential privacy, where strong
privacy protections usually decrease utility relative to non-private data analysis. In an effort to
improve the utility of private algorithms, it is of utmost importance to design mechanisms that adapt
to the hardness of the underlying data. Such mechanisms are of growing prevalence in the privacy
literature, with prominent examples including the smooth sensitivity [25] and propose-test-release [12]
frameworks.
To further investigate adaptivity to underlying instance, Asi and Duchi [4] recently study instanceoptimal mechanisms—which, in a sense, achieve optimal utility for every possible data instance—in
differentially private release of 1-dimensional quantities, moving beyond the more standard (worst
case) minimax optimality. Inspired by classical statistical theory, Asi and Duchi develop localminimax optimality and optimality against unbiased mechanisms, both of which aim to capture
the hardness of the underlying data. By developing instance-specific lower bounds, they show that
classical frameworks such as smooth sensitivity and propose-test-release may not be instance-optimal
in general. To overcome this challenge, they investigate what they term the inverse sensitivity
mechanism, showing it is instance-optimal for a wide range of functions.
Yet instance-optimality in private statistical estimation remains widely unexplored. First, the implementation of the inverse sensitivity mechanism requires a calculation of a particular sample distance
(see Section 1.1.1), which may be intractable. Moreover, the current instance-optimality guarantees
are not sharp for vector-valued functions. This is in part because the paper [4] tailors its instanceoptimality notions for 1-dimensional functions by leveraging Stein’s “hardest one-dimensional
alternative” approach to lower bounds [31, 9], which gives tight lower bounds for 1-dimensional
functions but fails to yield correct bounds in higher dimensions.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

