Sample-Efficient Optimization in the Latent Space of
Deep Generative Models via Weighted Retraining

Austin Tripp∗
University of Cambridge
ajt212@cam.ac.uk

Erik Daxberger∗
University of Cambridge
Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
ead54@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
Alan Turing Institute
Microsoft Research
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Many important problems in science and engineering, such as drug design, involve optimizing an expensive black-box objective function over a complex, highdimensional, and structured input space. Although machine learning techniques
have shown promise in solving such problems, existing approaches substantially
lack sample efficiency. We introduce an improved method for efficient black-box
optimization, which performs the optimization in the low-dimensional, continuous latent manifold learned by a deep generative model. In contrast to previous
approaches, we actively steer the generative model to maintain a latent manifold
that is highly useful for efficiently optimizing the objective. We achieve this by
periodically retraining the generative model on the data points queried along the
optimization trajectory, as well as weighting those data points according to their
objective function value. This weighted retraining can be easily implemented on
top of existing methods, and is empirically shown to significantly improve their
efficiency and performance on synthetic and real-world optimization problems.

1

Introduction

Many important problems in science and engineering can be formulated as optimizing an objective
function over an input space. Solving such problems becomes particularly challenging when 1) the
input space is high-dimensional and/or structured (i.e. discrete spaces, or non-Euclidean spaces such
as graphs, sequences, and sets) and 2) the objective function is expensive to evaluate. Unfortunately,
many real-world problems of practical interest have these characteristics. A notable example is
drug design, which has a graph-structured input space, and is evaluated using expensive wet-lab
experiments or time-consuming simulations. Recently, machine learning has shown promising results
in many problems that can be framed as optimization, such as conditional image [68, 47] and text
[51] generation, molecular and materials design [17, 58], and neural architecture search [16]. Despite
these successes, using machine learning on structured input spaces and with limited data is still an
open research area, making the use of machine learning infeasible for many practical applications.
One promising approach which tackles both challenges is a two-stage procedure that has emerged
over the past few years, which we will refer to as latent space optimization (LSO) [20, 37, 41, 42, 48].
In the first stage, a (deep) generative model is trained to map tensors in a low-dimensional continuous
space onto the data manifold in input space, effectively constructing a low-dimensional and continuous
analog of the optimization problem. In the second stage, the objective function is optimized over
this learned latent space using a surrogate model. Despite many successful applications in a variety
of fields including chemical design [20, 28, 37, 9] and automatic machine learning [41, 42], LSO is
primarily applied in a post-hoc manner using a pre-trained, general purpose generative model rather
∗

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

