Online Learning in Contextual Bandits
using Gated Linear Networks

Eren Sezener∗ Marcus Hutter∗

David Budden

Jianan Wang

Joel Veness

DeepMind
esezener@google.com

Abstract
We introduce a new and completely online contextual bandit algorithm called
Gated Linear Contextual Bandits (GLCB). This algorithm is based on Gated Linear
Networks (GLNs), a recently introduced deep learning architecture with properties
well-suited to the online setting. Leveraging data-dependent gating properties
of the GLN we are able to estimate prediction uncertainty with effectively zero
algorithmic overhead. We empirically evaluate GLCB compared to 9 state-ofthe-art algorithms that leverage deep neural networks, on a standard benchmark
suite of discrete and continuous contextual bandit problems. GLCB obtains mean
first-place despite being the only online method, and we further support these
results with a theoretical study of its convergence properties.

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit setting has been a focus of much recent attention, benefiting from both being
sufficiently constrained as to be theoretically tractable, yet broad enough to capture many different
types of real world applications such as recommendation systems. The linear contextual bandit
problem in particular has been subject to intense theoretical investigation; the recent book by [1]
gives a comprehensive overview. This line of investigation has yielded principled online algorithms
such as LINUCB [2], that work well given informative features. To work around the limitations of
linear representations in more difficult problems, these algorithms are often used in combination
with an offline nonlinear feature extraction technique such as deep learning. A limitation with such
approaches is that the feature extraction component is treated as a black box, which runs the risk of
ignoring the uncertainty introduced by the offline feature extraction component.
Recent advances in posterior approximation for deep networks has led to the introduction of a
variety of approximate Thompson Sampling based contextual bandits algorithms that perform well in
practice. A reoccurring theme across these works is to leverage some kind of efficiently approximated
surrogate notion of the estimation accuracy to drive exploration. Noteworthy examples include the
use of random value functions [3, 4], Bayes by Backprop [5], and noise injection [6]. An empirical
comparison of neural network based Bayesian methods can be found in [7]. A major drawback of
these methods is that they are not online, and often require expensive retraining at regular intervals.
Another line of investigation has focused on using count-based approaches to drive exploration via
the optimism in the face of uncertainty principle. Here various types of confidence bounds on action
value estimates are obtained directly from the state/context-action visitation counts, with algorithms
typically choosing an action greedily with respect to the upper confidence bound. Count-based
methods have seen noteworthy success in finite armed bandit problems [8], tabular reinforcement
learning [9, 10]), planning in MDPs [11], amongst others. For the most part however, the usage of
count based approaches has been limited to low dimensional settings, as counts get exponentially
∗

Equal contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

