Reinforcement Learning in Factored MDPs:
Oracle-Efficient Algorithms and Tighter Regret
Bounds for the Non-Episodic Setting

Ziping Xu
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
zipingxu@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning in non-episodic factored Markov decision processes (FMDPs). We propose two near-optimal and oracle-efficient algorithms for
FMDPs. Assuming oracle access to an FMDP planner, they enjoy a Bayesian and
a frequentist regret
bound respectively, both of which reduce to the near-optimal
√
bound e
O(DS AT ) for standard non-factored MDPs. We propose a tighter connectivity measure, factored span, for FMDPs and prove a lower bound that depends
on the factored span rather than the diameter D. In order to decrease the gap
between lower and upper bounds, we propose an adaptation of the REGAL.C
algorithm whose regret bound depends on the factored span. Our oracle-efficient
algorithms outperform previously proposed near-optimal algorithms on computer
network administration simulations.

1

Introduction

Designing computationally and statistically efficient algorithms is a core problem in Reinforcement
Learning (RL). There is a rich line of works that achieve a strong sample efficiency guarantee with
regret analysis in tabular MDPs, where state and action spaces are finite and small (Jaksch et al.,
2010; Osband et al., 2013; Dann and Brunskill, 2015; Kearns and Singh, 2002). A current challenge
in RL is dealing with large state and action spaces where even polynomial dependence of regret on
state and action spaces size is unacceptable. One idea to meet this challenge is to consider MDPs with
compact representations. For example, factored MDPs (FMDPs) (Boutilier et al., 2000) represent
transition functions of MDPs using a compact Dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) (Ghahramani,
1997). FMDPs have a variety of applications in important real-world problems, e.g. multi-agent RL,
and they also serve as important case studies in theoretical RL research (Guestrin et al., 2002a,c;
Tavakol and Brefeld, 2014; Sun et al., 2019).
There is no FMDP planner that is both computationally efficient and accurate (Goldsmith et al.,
1997; Littman, 1997). Guestrin et al. (2003) proposed approximate algorithms with prespecified
basis functions and bounded approximation errors. For the even harder online learning setting, we
study oracle-efficient algorithms, which learn an unknown FMDP efficiently when given access
to a planning oracle. In this paper, our goal is to design efficient online algorithms that only
make a polynomial number of calls to the oracle planning oracle. Side-stepping the computational
intractability of the offline problem by assuming oracle access to a solver has yielded insights
into simpler decision making problems. For example, oracle-based efficient algorithms have been
proposed for the contextual bandit problem (Syrgkanis et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2018).
Online learning in episodic FMDP has been studied by Osband and Van Roy (2014). They proposed
two algorithms, PSRL (Posterior Sampling RL) and UCRL-factored with near-optimal Bayesian and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

