A Simple Language Model for
Task-Oriented Dialogue

Ehsan Hosseini-Asl
ehosseiniasl@salesforce.com
Salesforce Research
Chien-Sheng Wu
wu.jason@salesforce.com
Salesforce Research

Bryan McCann
bmccann@salesforce.com
Salesforce Research

Semih Yavuz
syavuz@salesforce.com
Salesforce Research

Richard Socher
rsocher@salesforce.com
Salesforce Research

Abstract
Task-oriented dialogue is often decomposed into three tasks: understanding user input, deciding actions, and generating a response. While such decomposition might
suggest a dedicated model for each sub-task, we find a simple, unified approach
leads to state-of-the-art performance on the MultiWOZ dataset. SimpleTOD is a
simple approach to task-oriented dialogue that uses a single, causal language model
trained on all sub-tasks recast as a single sequence prediction problem. This allows
SimpleTOD to fully leverage transfer learning from pre-trained, open domain,
causal language models such as GPT-2. SimpleTOD improves over the prior stateof-the-art in joint goal accuracy for dialogue state tracking, and our analysis reveals
robustness to noisy annotations in this setting. SimpleTOD also improves the main
metrics used to evaluate action decisions and response generation in an end-to-end
setting: inform rate by 8.1 points, success rate by 9.7 points, and combined score
by 7.2 points.

1

Introduction

Conversational AI has been a long-standing area of exploration in computer science, and has gained
more attention recently in both academia and industries with the current advances of neural approaches [15]. There are broadly two categories of dialogue. Open-domain dialogue systems focus
on making chit-chat, open-ended conversations with humans more natural and engaging. They are
usually trained end-to-end using large-scale data from social media [1, 42]. Task-oriented dialogue
(TOD) systems accomplish a goal described by a user in natural language. They often use a pipeline
approach [46, 58]. The pipeline requires natural language understanding (NLU) for belief state
tracking, dialogue management (DM) for deciding which actions to take based on those beliefs, and
natural language generation (NLG) for generating responses [50].
Traditionally, each component of task-oriented dialogue systems is trained independently with
different supervision. The NLU module is trained on domain and intent labels. The DM module
employs dialogue belief and dialogue act labels. The NLG module accesses templatized or natural
responses. The modular dependencies of these components can lead to error propagation when
information is not provided to subsequent modules in the pipeline [27]. For example, many systems
do not consider the entire dialogue history at every turn, but rather rely on the NLU module to pass
belief states reliably to following module components [60].
We propose recasting task-oriented dialogue as a simple, causal (unidirectional) language modeling
task. We show that such an approach can solve all the sub-tasks in a unified way using multi-task
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

