Towards Scale-Invariant Graph-related
Problem Solving by Iterative Homogeneous
Graph Neural Networks

Hao Tang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
tanghaosjtu@gmail.com

Zhiao Huang
UC San Diego
z2huang@eng.ucsd.edu

Bao-Liang Lu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
bllu@sjtu.edu.cn

Jiayuan Gu
UC San Diego
jigu@eng.ucsd.edu

Hao Su
UC San Diego
haosu@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Current graph neural networks (GNNs) lack generalizability with respect to scales
(graph sizes, graph diameters, edge weights, etc..) when solving many graph analysis problems. Taking the perspective of synthesizing graph theory programs, we
propose several extensions to address the issue. First, inspired by the dependency
of the iteration number of common graph theory algorithms on graph size, we learn
to terminate the message passing process in GNNs adaptively according to the
computation progress. Second, inspired by the fact that many graph theory algorithms are homogeneous with respect to graph weights, we introduce homogeneous
transformation layers that are universal homogeneous function approximators, to
convert ordinary GNNs to be homogeneous. Experimentally, we show that our
GNN can be trained from small-scale graphs but generalize well to large-scale
graphs for a number of basic graph theory problems. It also shows generalizability
for applications of multi-body physical simulation and image-based navigation
problems.

1

Introduction

Graph, as a powerful data representation, arises in many real-world applications [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. On
the other hand, the flexibility of graphs, including the different representations of isomorphic graphs,
the unlimited degree distributions [7, 8], and the boundless graph scales [9, 10], also presents many
challenges to their analysis. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have attracted broad attention
in solving graph analysis problems. They are permutation-invariant/equivariant by design and have
shown superior performance on various graph-based applications [11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
However, investigation into the generalizability of GNNs with respect to the graph scale is still limited.
Specifically, we are interested in GNNs that can learn from small graphs and perform well on new
graphs of arbitrary scales. Existing GNNs [11, 12, 13, 15] are either ineffective or inefficient under
this setting. In fact, even ignoring the optimization process of network training, the representation
power of existing GNNs is yet too limited to achieve graph scale generalizability. There are at
least two issues: 1) By using a pre-defined layer number [16, 17, 18], these GNNs are not able to
approximate graph algorithms whose complexity depends on graph size (most graph algorithms
in textbooks are of this kind). The reason is easy to see: For most GNNs, each node only uses
information of the 1-hop neighborhoods to update features by message passing, and it is impossible
for k-layer GNNs to send messages between nodes whose distance is larger than k. More formally,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

