Learning to Play No-Press Diplomacy
with Best Response Policy Iteration
Thomas Anthony∗ , Tom Eccles∗ , Andrea Tacchetti, János Kramár, Ian Gemp,
Thomas C. Hudson, Nicolas Porcel, Marc Lanctot, Julien Pérolat, Richard Everett,
Roman Werpachowski, Satinder Singh, Thore Graepel and Yoram Bachrach
DeepMind

Abstract
Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning (RL) have led to considerable
progress in many 2-player zero-sum games, such as Go, Poker and Starcraft. The
purely adversarial nature of such games allows for conceptually simple and principled application of RL methods. However real-world settings are many-agent,
and agent interactions are complex mixtures of common-interest and competitive
aspects. We consider Diplomacy, a 7-player board game designed to accentuate
dilemmas resulting from many-agent interactions. It also features a large combinatorial action space and simultaneous moves, which are challenging for RL
algorithms. We propose a simple yet effective approximate best response operator,
designed to handle large combinatorial action spaces and simultaneous moves. We
also introduce a family of policy iteration methods that approximate fictitious play.
With these methods, we successfully apply RL to Diplomacy: we show that our
agents convincingly outperform the previous state-of-the-art, and game theoretic
equilibrium analysis shows that the new process yields consistent improvements.

1

Introduction

Artificial Intelligence methods have achieved exceptionally strong competitive play in board games
such as Go, Chess, Shogi [108, 110, 20, 109], Hex [2], Poker [85, 17] and various video games [63, 84,
60, 94, 45, 120, 55, 14]. Despite the scale, complexity and variety of these domains, a common focus
in multi-agent environments is the class of 2-player (or 2-team) zero-sum games: “1 vs 1” contests.
There are several reasons: they are polynomial-time solvable, and solutions both grant worst-case
guarantees and are interchangeable, so agents can approximately solve them in advance [121, 122].
Further, in this case conceptually simple adaptations of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms often
have theoretical guarantees. However, most problems of interest are not purely adversarial: e.g. route
planning around congestion, contract negotiations or interacting with clients all involve compromise
and consideration of how preferences of group members coincide and/or conflict. Even when agents
are self-interested, they may gain by coordinating and cooperating, so interacting among diverse
groups of agents requires complex reasoning about others’ goals and motivations.
We study Diplomacy [19], a 7-player board game. The game was specifically designed to emphasize
tensions between competition and cooperation, so it is particularly well-suited to the study of learning
in mixed-motive settings. The game is played on a map of Europe partitioned into provinces. Each
player controls multiple units, and each turn all players move all their units simultaneously. One unit
may support another unit (owned by the same or another player), allowing it to overcome resistance
by other units. Due to the inter-dependencies between units, players must coordinate the moves of
their own units, and stand to gain by coordinating their moves with those of other players. Figure 1
depicts interactions among several players (moving and supporting units to/from provinces); we
explain the basic rules in Section 2.1. The original game allows cheap-talk negotiation between
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

