CO-Optimal Transport

Ievgen Redko∗
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, UMR 5516
F-42023, Saint-Etienne
ievgen.redko@univ-st-etienne.fr
Rémi Flamary∗
École Polytechnique, CMAP, UMR 7641
F-91120 Palaiseau
remi.flamary@polytechnique.edu

Titouan Vayer∗
Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA
F-56000 Vannes
titouan.vayer@irisa.fr
Nicolas Courty∗
Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA
F-56000 Vannes
nicolas.courty@irisa.fr

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) is a powerful geometric and probabilistic tool for finding
correspondences and measuring similarity between two distributions. Yet, its original formulation relies on the existence of a cost function between the samples of the
two distributions, which makes it impractical when they are supported on different
spaces. To circumvent this limitation, we propose a novel OT problem, named
COOT for CO-Optimal Transport, that simultaneously optimizes two transport
maps between both samples and features, contrary to other approaches that either
discard the individual features by focusing on pairwise distances between samples
or need to model explicitly the relations between them. We provide a thorough theoretical analysis of our problem, establish its rich connections with other OT-based
distances and demonstrate its versatility with two machine learning applications
in heterogeneous domain adaptation and co-clustering/data summarization, where
COOT leads to performance improvements over the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The problem of comparing two sets of samples arises in many fields in machine learning, such as
manifold alignment [1], image registration [2], unsupervised word and sentence translation [3] among
others. When correspondences between the sets are known a priori, one can align them with a global
transformation of the features, e.g, with the widely used Procrustes analysis [4, 5]. For unknown
correspondences, other popular alternatives to this method include correspondence free manifold
alignment procedure [6], soft assignment coupled with a Procrustes matching [7] or Iterative closest
point and its variants for 3D shapes [8, 9].
When one models the considered sets of samples as empirical probability distributions, Optimal
Transport (OT) framework provides a solution to find, without supervision, a soft-correspondence
map between them given by an optimal coupling. OT-based approaches have been used with success
in numerous applications such as embeddings’ alignments [10, 11] and Domain Adaptation (DA)
[12] to name a few. However, one important limit of using OT for such tasks is that the two sets are
assumed to lie in the same space so that the cost between samples across them can be computed.
This major drawback does not allow OT to handle correspondence estimation across heterogeneous
spaces, preventing its application in problems such as, for instance, heterogeneous DA (HDA). To
circumvent this restriction, one may rely on the Gromov-Wasserstein distance (GW) [13]: a nonconvex quadratic OT problem that finds the correspondences between two sets of samples based on
∗

Authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

