Adaptive Learning of Rank-One Models for
Efficient Pairwise Sequence Alignment

Govinda M. Kamath∗ 1 , Tavor Z. Baharav * 2 , and Ilan Shomorony 3
1
Microsoft Research New England, Cambridge, MA
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL
gokamath@microsoft.com, tavorb@stanford.edu, ilans@illinois.edu

Abstract
Pairwise alignment of DNA sequencing data is a ubiquitous task in bioinformatics
and typically represents a heavy computational burden. State-of-the-art approaches
to speed up this task use hashing to identify short segments (k-mers) that are shared
by pairs of reads, which can then be used to estimate alignment scores. However,
when the number of reads is large, accurately estimating alignment scores for all
pairs is still very costly. Moreover, in practice, one is only interested in identifying
pairs of reads with large alignment scores. In this work, we propose a new approach
to pairwise alignment estimation based on two key new ingredients. The first
ingredient is to cast the problem of pairwise alignment estimation under a general
framework of rank-one crowdsourcing models, where the workers’ responses
correspond to k-mer hash collisions. These models can be accurately solved via a
spectral decomposition of the response matrix. The second ingredient is to utilise
a multi-armed bandit algorithm to adaptively refine this spectral estimator only
for read pairs that are likely to have large alignments. The resulting algorithm
iteratively performs a spectral decomposition of the response matrix for adaptively
chosen subsets of the read pairs.

1

Introduction

A key step in many bioinformatics analysis pipelines is the identification of regions of similarity
between pairs of DNA sequencing reads. This task, known as pairwise sequence alignment, is a
heavy computational burden, particularly in the context of third-generation long-read sequencing
technologies, which produce noisy reads [45]. This challenge is commonly addressed via a two-step
approach: first, an alignment estimation procedure is used to identify those pairs that are likely to
have a large alignment. Then, computationally intensive alignment algorithms are applied only to the
selected pairs. This two-step approach can greatly speed up the alignment task because, in practice,
one only cares about the alignment between reads with a large sequence identity or overlap.
Several works have developed ways to efficiently estimate pairwise alignments [6, 29, 30, 36]. The
proposed algorithms typically rely on hashing to efficiently find pairs of reads that share many k-mers
(length-k contiguous substrings). Particularly relevant to our discussion is the MHAP algorithm of
Berlin et al. [6]. Suppose we want to estimate the overlap size between two strings S0 and S1 and let
Γ(Si ) be the set of all k-mers in Si , i = 0, 1. For a hash function h, we can compute a min-hash
h(Si ) , min{h(x) : x ∈ Γ(Si )},
∗

Equal Contributors

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

