Training Stronger Baselines for Learning to Optimize

Tianlong Chen1* , Weiyi Zhang2* , Jingyang Zhou3 , Shiyu Chang4 ,
Sijia Liu4 , Lisa Amini4 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
3
University of Science and Technology of China, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
{tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu,{weiyi.zhang2307,djycn1996}@gmail.com
{shiyu.chang,sijia.liu,lisa.amini}@ibm.com

Abstract
Learning to optimize (L2O) is gaining increased attention because classical optimizers require laborious, problem-specific design and hyperparameter tuning.
However, there are significant performance and practicality gaps between manually
designed optimizers and existing L2O models. Specifically, learned optimizers are
applicable to only a limited class of problems, often exhibit instability, and generalize poorly. As research efforts focus on increasingly sophisticated L2O models,
we argue for an orthogonal, under-explored theme: improved training techniques
for L2O models. We first present a progressive, curriculum-based training scheme,
which gradually increases the optimizer unroll length to mitigate the well-known
L2O dilemma of truncation bias (shorter unrolling) versus gradient explosion
(longer unrolling). Secondly, we present an off-policy imitation learning based
approach to guide the L2O learning, by learning from the behavior of analytical
optimizers. We evaluate our improved training techniques with a variety of state-ofthe-art L2O models and immediately boost their performance, without making any
change to their model structures. We demonstrate that, using our improved training
techniques, one of the earliest and simplest L2O models [1] can be trained to
outperform even the latest and most complex L2O models on a number of tasks.
Our results demonstrate a greater potential of L2O yet to be unleashed, and prompt
a reconsideration of recent L2O model progress. Our codes are publicly available
at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/L2O-Training-Techniques.

1

Introduction

Parameter Update
Learning to optimize (L2O) [1–10], a rising subfield of meta
learning, aims to replace manually designed analytical optiOptimizer
Optimizee
mizers with learned optimizers, i.e., update rules as functions
(e.g. RNN)
Variables
that can be fit from data. An L2O method typically assumes
a model to parameterize the target update rule. A trained
Error Signal
L2O model will act as an algorithm (optimizer) itself, that can
(e.g. gradient)
be applied to training other machine learning models, called
Figure 1: Learning to optimize.
optimizees, sampled from a specific class of similar problem
instances. The training of the L2O model is usually done in a meta-fashion, by enforcing it to decrease
the loss values over sampled optimizees from the same class, via certain training techniques.

Earlier L2O methods refer to black-box hyper-parameter tuning approaches [11–16] but these methods
often scale up poorly [17] when the optimizer’s parameter amounts grow large. The recent mainstream
works in this vein [1, 6–9] leverage a recurrent network as the L2O model, typically long short-term
memory (LSTM). That LSTM is unrolled to mimic the behavior of an iterative optimizer and trained
∗

Equal Contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

