Temporal Positive-unlabeled Learning for Biomedical
Hypothesis Generation via Risk Estimation

Uchenna Akujuobi1,2 Jun Chen1 Mohamed Elhoseiny1
Michael Spranger2 Xiangliang Zhang1
1
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Sony AI, Tokyo
{uchenna.akujuobi,jun.chen,mohamed.elhoseiny,xiangliang.zhang}@kaust.edu.sa
michael.spranger@gmail.com

Abstract
Understanding the relationships between biomedical terms like viruses, drugs, and
symptoms is essential in the fight against diseases. Many attempts have been made
to introduce the use of machine learning to the scientific process of hypothesis
generation (HG), which refers to the discovery of meaningful implicit connections
between biomedical terms. However, most existing methods fail to truly capture
the temporal dynamics of scientific term relations and also assume unobserved
connections to be irrelevant (i.e., in a positive-negative (PN) learning setting). To
break these limits, we formulate this HG problem as future connectivity prediction
task on a dynamic attributed graph via positive-unlabeled (PU) learning. Then,
the key is to capture the temporal evolution of node pair (term pair) relations
from just the positive and unlabeled data. We propose a variational inference
model to estimate the positive prior, and incorporate it in the learning of node
pair embeddings, which are then used for link prediction. Experiment results on
real-world biomedical term relationship datasets and case study analyses on a
COVID-19 dataset validate the effectiveness of the proposed model.

1

Introduction

Recently, the study of co-relationships between biomedical entities is increasingly gaining attention.
The ability to predict future relationships between biomedical entities like diseases, drugs, and genes
enhances the chances of early detection of disease outbreaks and reduces the time required to detect
probable disease characteristics. For instance, in 2020, the COVID-19 outbreak pushed the world to a
halt with scientists working tediously to study the disease characteristics for containment, cure, and
vaccine. An increasing number of articles encompassing new knowledge and discoveries from these
studies were being published daily [1]. However, with the accelerated growth rate of publications,
the manual process of reading to extract undiscovered knowledge increasingly becomes a tedious and
time-consuming task beyond the capability of individual researchers.
In an effort towards an advanced knowledge discovery process, computers have been introduced to
play an ever-greater role in the scientific process with automatic hypothesis generation (HG). The
study of automated HG has attracted considerable attention in recent years [41, 25, 45, 47]. Several
previous works proposed techniques based on association rules [25, 18, 47], clustering and topic
modeling [45, 44, 5], text mining [43, 42], and others [28, 49, 39]. However, these previous works
fail to truly utilize the crucial information encapsulated in the dynamic nature of scientific discoveries
and assume that the unobserved relationships denote a non-relevant relationship (negative).
To model the historical evolution of term pair relations, we formulate HG on a term relationship graph
G = {V, E}, which is decomposed into a sequence of attributed graphlets G = {G1 , G2 , ..., GT },
where the graphlet at time t is defined as,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

