Adaptation Properties Allow Identification of
Optimized Neural Codes

Luke Rast
Harvard University
lukerast@g.harvard.edu

Jan Drugowitsch
Department of Neurobiology
Harvard Medical School
jan drugowitsch@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
The adaptation of neural codes to the statistics of their environment is well captured by efficient coding approaches. Here we solve an inverse problem: characterizing the objective and constraint functions that efficient codes appear to be
optimal for, on the basis of how they adapt to different stimulus distributions. We
formulate a general efficient coding problem, with flexible objective and constraint
functions and minimal parametric assumptions. Solving special cases of this
model, we provide solutions to broad classes of Fisher information-based efficient
coding problems, generalizing a wide range of previous results. We show that
different objective function types impose qualitatively different adaptation behaviors, while constraints enforce characteristic deviations from classic efficient coding signatures. Despite interaction between these effects, clear signatures emerge
for both unconstrained optimization problems and information-maximizing objective functions. Asking for a fixed-point of the neural code adaptation, we find
an objective-independent characterization of constraints on the neural code. We
use this result to propose an experimental paradigm that can characterize both the
objective and constraint functions that an observed code appears to be optimized
for.

1

Introduction

It is well known that neural codes adapt to the distribution of stimulus inputs that they receive on a
variety of timescales. For example, in early fly vision, in addition to being well adapted to unchanging statistics of natural images [1], neural sensitivity adapts to both fast- and medium- timescale
changes in the distribution of stimuli [2–4]. Similar effects have been observed in mammalian vision
[5, 6]. Such adaptation effects are often viewed through the lens of the efficient coding hypothesis
[7, 8], which states that neural codes are well-adapted to their task and environmental contexts, and
so can be modeled as solutions to task and environment dependent optimization problems. This is
a reasonable modeling approach since we expect the result of an adaptation process to be stable in
the sense of a first-order optimality condition: there are no directions that the code will continue to
adapt along once it has come to equilibrium.
Several recent works in efficient coding have focused on optimizing the local Fisher information in
the neural code. Starting from mutual information approximating objective functions and independent Poisson neural populations [9], this approach has been generalized to accommodate a variety
of objective functions [10–13] and metabolic constraints [10, 11, 14] under various parametrized
neural activity models. In an activity distribution agnostic formulation, these Fisher efficient codes
have also been shown to predict general behavioral effects for various objective functions [15–18].
This diversity of result leads to hope that we can fully characterize the influence of objectives, constraints, and activity noise distributions in Fisher efficient codes and, in so doing, describe observed
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

