Domain Adaptation with Conditional Distribution
Matching and Generalized Label Shift
Remi Tachet des Combes∗
Microsoft Research Montreal
Montreal, QC, Canada
retachet@microsoft.com

Han Zhao∗
D. E. Shaw & Co.
New York, NY, USA
han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA, USA
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Geoff Gordon
Microsoft Research Montreal
Montreal, QC, Canada
ggordon@microsoft.com

Abstract
Adversarial learning has demonstrated good performance in the unsupervised
domain adaptation setting, by learning domain-invariant representations. However,
recent work has shown limitations of this approach when label distributions differ
between the source and target domains. In this paper, we propose a new assumption,
generalized label shift (GLS), to improve robustness against mismatched label
distributions. GLS states that, conditioned on the label, there exists a representation
of the input that is invariant between the source and target domains. Under GLS,
we provide theoretical guarantees on the transfer performance of any classifier.
We also devise necessary and sufficient conditions for GLS to hold, by using
an estimation of the relative class weights between domains and an appropriate
reweighting of samples. Our weight estimation method could be straightforwardly
and generically applied in existing domain adaptation (DA) algorithms that learn
domain-invariant representations, with small computational overhead. In particular,
we modify three DA algorithms, JAN, DANN and CDAN, and evaluate their
performance on standard and artificial DA tasks. Our algorithms outperform the
base versions, with vast improvements for large label distribution mismatches. Our
code is available at https://tinyurl.com/y585xt6j.

1

Introduction

In spite of impressive successes, most deep learning models [22] rely on huge amounts of labelled
data and their features have proven brittle to distribution shifts [39, 55]. Building more robust models,
that learn from fewer samples and/or generalize better out-of-distribution is the focus of many recent
works [2, 5, 53]. The research direction of interest to this paper is that of domain adaptation, which
aims at learning features that transfer well between domains. We focus in particular on unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA), where the algorithm has access to labelled samples from a source domain
and unlabelled data from a target domain. Its objective is to train a model that generalizes well to
the target domain. Building on advances in adversarial learning [23], adversarial domain adaptation
(ADA) leverages the use of a discriminator to learn an intermediate representation that is invariant
between the source and target domains. Simultaneously, the representation is paired with a classifier,
trained to perform well on the source domain [20, 32, 49, 60]. ADA is rather successful on a variety
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Work done while HZ was at Carnegie Mellon

University.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

