LoCo: Local Contrastive Representation Learning

Yuwen Xiong
Uber ATG
University of Toronto
yuwen@cs.toronto.edu

Mengye Ren
Uber ATG
University of Toronto
mren@cs.toronto.edu

Raquel Urtasun
Uber ATG
University of Toronto
urtasun@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Deep neural nets typically perform end-to-end backpropagation to learn the
weights, a procedure that creates synchronization constraints in the weight update
step across layers and is not biologically plausible. Recent advances in unsupervised contrastive representation learning invite the question of whether a learning
algorithm can also be made local, that is, the updates of lower layers do not directly
depend on the computation of upper layers. While Greedy InfoMax [39] separately
learns each block with a local objective, we found that it consistently hurts readout
accuracy in state-of-the-art unsupervised contrastive learning algorithms, possibly
due to the greedy objective as well as gradient isolation. In this work, we discover
that by overlapping local blocks stacking on top of each other, we effectively
increase the decoder depth and allow upper blocks to implicitly send feedbacks to
lower blocks. This simple design closes the performance gap between local learning
and end-to-end contrastive learning algorithms for the first time. Aside from standard ImageNet experiments, we also show results on complex downstream tasks
such as object detection and instance segmentation directly using readout features.

1

Introduction

Most deep learning algorithms nowadays are trained using backpropagation in an end-to-end fashion:
training losses are computed at the top layer and weight updates are computed based on the gradient
that flows from the very top. Such an algorithm requires lower layers to “wait” for upper layers, a
synchronization constraint that seems very unnatural in truly parallel distributed processing. Indeed,
there are evidences that weight synapse updates in the human brain are achieved through local
learning, without waiting for neurons in other parts of the brain to finish their jobs [8, 6]. In addition
to biological plausibility aims, local learning algorithms can also significantly reduce memory
footprint during training, as they do not require saving the intermediate activations after each local
module finish its calculation. With these synchronization constraints removed, one can further enable
model parallelism in many deep network architectures [45] for faster parallel training and inference.
One main objection against local learning algorithms has always been the need for supervision from
the top layer. This belief has recently been challenged by the success of numerous self-supervised
contrastive learning algorithms [54, 22, 44, 11], some of which can achieve matching performance
compared to supervised counterparts, meanwhile using zero class labels during the representation
learning phase. Indeed, Löwe et al. [39] show that they can separately learn each block of layers
using local contrastive learning by putting gradient stoppers in between blocks. While the authors
show matching or even sometimes superior performance using local algorithms, we found that their
gradient isolation blocks still result in degradation in accuracy in state-of-the-art self-supervised
learning frameworks, such as SimCLR [11]. We hypothesize that, due to gradient isolation, lower
layers are unaware of the existence of upper layers, and thus failing to deliver the full capacity of a
deep network when evaluating on large scale datasets such as ImageNet [16].
Work done at Uber ATG
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

