Provable Overlapping Community Detection in
Weighted Graphs

Jimit Majmudar
University of Waterloo
jmajmuda@uwaterloo.ca

Stephen Vavasis
University of Waterloo
vavasis@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Community detection is a widely-studied unsupervised learning problem in which
the task is to group similar entities together based on observed pairwise entity
interactions. This problem has applications in diverse domains such as social
network analysis and computational biology. There is a significant amount of
literature studying this problem under the assumption that the communities do
not overlap. When the communities are allowed to overlap, often a pure nodes
assumption is made, i.e. each community has a node that belongs exclusively to
that community. This assumption, however, may not always be satisfied in practice.
In this paper, we provide a provable method to detect overlapping communities in
weighted graphs without explicitly making the pure nodes assumption. Moreover,
contrary to most existing algorithms, our approach is based on convex optimization,
for which many useful theoretical properties are already known. We demonstrate
the success of our algorithm on artificial and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Given a graph, determining subsets of vertices that are closely related in some sense is a problem of
interest to many researchers. The two most common titles, in unsupervised learning, for problems
of such variety are “community detection in graphs” and “graph clustering”. These problems, due
to their fundamental nature, arise in more than one domains. Some examples are: determining
social circles in a social network (Du et al. [2007], Mishra et al. [2007], Bedi and Sharma [2016]),
identifying functional modules in biological networks such as protein-protein interaction networks
(Nepusz et al. [2012]), and finding groups of webpages on the World Wide Web that have content on
similar topics (Dourisboure et al. [2009]).
The Stochastic Block Model (SBM) is a common mathematical framework for community detection,
an in-depth survey of which can be found in Abbe [2017]. The SBM literature has a vast number of
recovery guarantees such as those by Rohe et al. [2011], Lei et al. [2015], Li et al. [2018]. However,
an obvious shortcoming of SBM is that it allows the nodes to belong to exactly one community.
In practice, such an assumption is rarely satisfied. For example, in social network analysis, it is
expected that some agents belong to multiple social circles or interest groups. Similarly, in the
problem of clustering webpages, it is plausible that some webpages span multiple topics. Airoldi et al.
[2008] proposed an extension of SBM, called the Mixed Membership Stochastic Blockmodel (MMSB),
in which nodes are allowed to have memberships in multiple communities. MMSB generalizes
the traditional SBM by positing that each node may have fractional memberships in the different
communities. If n and k denote the number of nodes and the number of communities respectively,
matrix Θ ∈ [0, 1]n×k , called the node-community distribution matrix, is generated such that each of
its rows is drawn from the Dirichlet distribution with parameters α ∈ Rk . Then the n × n probability
matrix is given as
P = ΘBΘT
(1)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

