Variational Interaction Information Maximization
for Cross-domain Disentanglement

HyeongJoo Hwang1 , Geon-Hyeong Kim2 , Seunghoon Hong2 , Kee-Eung Kim1,2
1
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
2
School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{hjhwang, ghkim}@ai.kaist.ac.kr, {seunghoon.hong, kekim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Cross-domain disentanglement is the problem of learning representations partitioned into domain-invariant and domain-specific representations, which is a key
to successful domain transfer or measuring semantic distance between two domains. Grounded in information theory, we cast the simultaneous learning of
domain-invariant and domain-specific representations as a joint objective of multiple information constraints, which does not require adversarial training or gradient
reversal layers. We derive a tractable bound of the objective and propose a generative model named Interaction Information Auto-Encoder (IIAE). Our approach
reveals insights on the desirable representation for cross-domain disentanglement
and its connection to Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE). We demonstrate the validity
of our model in the image-to-image translation and the cross-domain retrieval tasks.
We further show that our model achieves the state-of-the-art performance in the
zero-shot sketch based image retrieval task, even without external knowledge.

1

Introduction

There have been great interests in learning disentangled representation for various purposes, such
as identifying sources of variation [3, 4, 15, 18, 20] for interpretability, obtaining representation
invariant to nuisance factors [1, 8, 30, 34, 39, 40], and domain transfer [12, 26, 28, 35, 44, 47]. In
particular, the cross-domain disentanglement problem [12] assumes the dataset composed of paired
samples (x ∈ X, y ∈ Y ) where every sample has some shared information. The problem requires a
model to learn a representation explicitly separated into three parts: domain-invariant representation
shared across two data domains and domain-specific representations exclusive to each domain. This
task is challenging since those representations must be (1) disentangled so that they are independent
to one another, while (2) informative in such a way that every factor of variation is captured in the
right part of the representation.
In recent studies, many models have been proposed to tackle important tasks related to cross-domain
disentanglement, such as image-to-image translation [12, 26, 28, 35, 44] and Zero-Shot Sketch Based
Image Retrieval (ZS-SBIR) [6, 9, 22, 23, 27, 38]. Although those models perform reasonably well
with realistic datasets, most of them take a heuristic combination of techniques that regularize the
latent space, such as cycle consistency loss [46], cross-reconstruction loss [27], adversarial training
[14, 43], and Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL) [10]. Consequently, it is not obvious to interpret each
module or identify key factors that contribute to disentanglement in their models.
In this paper, we address the cross-domain disentanglement problem with a novel principle based on
information theory. Specifically, we train a generative model named Interaction Information AutoEncoder (IIAE) whose representations are enforced to be informative but disentangled by information
regularization terms that we will describe shortly. Leveraging representations learned by IIAE, we
show that image manipulation tasks such as image translation and synthesis can be done in fine
details. Furthermore, we demonstrate that IIAE outperforms Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
[13] based models in the cross-domain retrieval task. Lastly, we empirically show that our model
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

