Neurosymbolic Reinforcement Learning with
Formally Veriﬁed Exploration
Greg Anderson
UT Austin

Abhinav Verma
UT Austin

Isil Dillig
UT Austin

ganderso@cs.utexas.edu

verma@utexas.edu

isil@cs.utexas.edu

Swarat Chaudhuri
UT Austin
swarat@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We present R EVEL, a partially neural reinforcement learning (RL) framework for
provably safe exploration in continuous state and action spaces. A key challenge
for provably safe deep RL is that repeatedly verifying neural networks within a
learning loop is computationally infeasible. We address this challenge using two
policy classes: a general, neurosymbolic class with approximate gradients and a
more restricted class of symbolic policies that allows efﬁcient veriﬁcation. Our
learning algorithm is a mirror descent over policies: in each iteration, it safely lifts
a symbolic policy into the neurosymbolic space, performs safe gradient updates to
the resulting policy, and projects the updated policy into the safe symbolic subset,
all without requiring explicit veriﬁcation of neural networks. Our empirical results
show that R EVEL enforces safe exploration in many scenarios in which Constrained
Policy Optimization does not, and that it can discover policies that outperform
those learned through prior approaches to veriﬁed exploration.

1

Introduction

Guaranteeing that an agent behaves safely during exploration is a fundamental problem in reinforcement learning (RL) [13, 1]. Most approaches to the problem are based on stochastic deﬁnitions
of safety [23, 7, 1, 7], requiring the agent to satisfy a safety constraint with high probability or in
expectation. However, in applications such as autonomous robotics, unsafe agent actions — no matter
how improbable — can lead to cascading failures with high human and ﬁnancial costs. As a result, it
can be important to ensure that the agent behaves safely even on worst-case inputs.
A number of recent efforts [3, 11] use formal methods to offer such worst-case guarantees during
exploration. Broadly, these methods construct a space of provably safe policies before the learning
process starts. Then, during exploration, a safety monitor observes the learner, forbidding all actions
that cannot result from one of these safe policies. If the learner is about to take a forbidden action, a
safe policy (a safety shield) is executed instead.
So far, these methods have only been used to discover policies over simple, ﬁnite action spaces.
Using them in more complex settings — in particular, continuous action spaces — is much more
challenging. A key problem is that these safety monitors are constructed a priori and are blind to the
internal state of the learner. As we experimentally show later in this paper, such a “one-size-ﬁts-all”
strategy can unnecessarily limit exploration and impede learner performance.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

