Quantitative Propagation of Chaos for SGD in Wide
Neural Networks
Valentin De Bortoli
University of Oxford
debortoli@stats.ox.ac.uk
Xavier Fontaine
Université Paris-Saclay
fontaine@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Alain Durmus
Université Paris-Saclay
alain.durmus@cmla.ens-cachan.fr
Umut Şimşekli
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
umut.simsekli@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the limiting behavior of a continuous-time counterpart
of the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm applied to two-layer overparameterized neural networks, as the number or neurons (i.e., the size of the hidden
layer) N → +∞. Following a probabilistic approach, we show ‘propagation of
chaos’ for the particle system defined by this continuous-time dynamics under
different scenarios, indicating that the statistical interaction between the particles
asymptotically vanishes. In particular, we establish quantitative convergence with
respect to N of any particle to a solution of a mean-field McKean-Vlasov equation
in the metric space endowed with the Wasserstein distance. In comparison to previous works on the subject, we consider settings in which the sequence of stepsizes
in SGD can potentially depend on the number of neurons and the iterations. We
then identify two regimes under which different mean-field limits are obtained,
one of them corresponding to an implicitly regularized version of the minimization
problem at hand. We perform various experiments on real datasets to validate our
theoretical results, assessing the existence of these two regimes on classification
problems and illustrating our convergence results.

1

Introduction

Due to their ability to tackle very challenging problems, neural networks have been extremely
popular and keystones in machine learning [1]. Thanks to their practical success, they have become
the de facto tool in many application domains, such as image processing [2] and natural language
processing [3]. However, the mathematical understanding of these models and their inherent inference
mechanism still remains limited.
Among others, one suprising empirical observation about modern neural networks is that increasing
the number of neurons in a network often leads to better classification testing and training errors [4],
contradicting the classical statistical learning theory [5]. These experimental results suggest that
neural network-based methods exhibit a limiting behavior when the number of neurons is large, i.e.,
when the neural network is overparameterized.
In this paper, we contribute to the recent literature on the theoretical analysis of this phenomenon. To
this end, we consider a simple two-layer (i.e., one hidden layer) neural network that is parametrized
N
by N weights w1:N = {wk,N }N
by Stochastic
k=1 and trained to minimize the structural risk R
Gradient Descent (SGD) using independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) samples (Xi , Yi )i∈N? .
Even in such a simplified setting, the landscape of R N is in many cases arduous to be explored, since
R N is non-convex and might exhibit many local minima and saddle points [6, 7]; hence making the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

