Bayesian Optimization for Iterative Learning
Vu Nguyen ∗
University of Oxford
vu@robots.ox.ac.uk

Sebastian Schulze ∗
University of Oxford
sebastian.schulze@eng.ox.ac.uk

Michael A. Osborne
University of Oxford
mosb@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The performance of deep (reinforcement) learning systems crucially depends on
the choice of hyperparameters. Their tuning is notoriously expensive, typically
requiring an iterative training process to run for numerous steps to convergence.
Traditional tuning algorithms only consider the final performance of hyperparameters acquired after many expensive iterations and ignore intermediate information
from earlier training steps. In this paper, we present a Bayesian optimization (BO)
approach which exploits the iterative structure of learning algorithms for efficient
hyperparameter tuning. We propose to learn an evaluation function compressing learning progress at any stage of the training process into a single numeric
score according to both training success and stability. Our BO framework is then
balancing the benefit of assessing a hyperparameter setting over additional training steps against their computation cost. We further increase model efficiency by
selectively including scores from different training steps for any evaluated hyperparameter set. We demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithm by tuning hyperparameters for the training of deep reinforcement learning agents and convolutional
neural networks. Our algorithm outperforms all existing baselines in identifying
optimal hyperparameters in minimal time.

1

Introduction

Deep learning (DL) and deep reinforcement learning (DRL) have led to impressive breakthroughs in
a broad range of applications such as game play [26, 36], motor control [43], and image recognition
[20]. To maintain general applicability, these algorithms expose sets of hyperparameters to adapt
their behavior to any particular task at hand. This flexibility comes at the price of having to tune an
additional set of parameters – poor settings lead to drastic performance losses [11, 30, 37]. On top
of being notoriously sensitive to these choices, deep (reinforcement) learning systems often have
high training costs, in computational resources and time. For example, a single training run on the
Atari Breakout game took approximately 75 hours on a GPU cluster [26]. Tuning DRL parameters
is further complicated as only noisy evaluations of an agent’s final performance are obtainable.
Bayesian optimization (BO) [12, 28, 35] has recently achieved considerable success in optimizing
these hyperparameters. This approach casts the tuning process as a global optimization problem
based on noisy evaluations of a black-box function f . BO constructs a surrogate model typically
using a Gaussian process (GP) [31], over this unknown function. This GP surrogate is used to build
an acquisition function [13, 44] which suggests the next hyperparameter to evaluate.
In modern machine learning (ML) algorithms [15], the training process is often conducted in an
iterative manner. A natural example is given by deep learning where training is usually based on
stochastic gradient descent and other iterative procedures. Similarly, the training of reinforcement
learning agents is mostly carried out using multiple episodes. The knowledge accumulated during
these training iterations can be useful to inform BO. However, most existing BO approaches [35]
∗ These authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

