Retrieval-Augmented Generation for
Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks
Patrick Lewis†‡ , Ethan Perez? ,
Aleksandra Piktus† , Fabio Petroni† , Vladimir Karpukhin† , Naman Goyal† , Heinrich Küttler† ,
Mike Lewis† , Wen-tau Yih† , Tim Rocktäschel†‡ , Sebastian Riedel†‡ , Douwe Kiela†
†

Facebook AI Research; ‡ University College London; ? New York University;
plewis@fb.com

Abstract
Large pre-trained language models have been shown to store factual knowledge
in their parameters, and achieve state-of-the-art results when fine-tuned on downstream NLP tasks. However, their ability to access and precisely manipulate
knowledge is still limited, and hence on knowledge-intensive tasks, their performance lags behind task-specific architectures. Additionally, providing provenance
for their decisions and updating their world knowledge remain open research problems. Pre-trained models with a differentiable access mechanism to explicit nonparametric memory can overcome this issue, but have so far been only investigated
for extractive downstream tasks. We explore a general-purpose fine-tuning recipe
for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) — models which combine pre-trained
parametric and non-parametric memory for language generation. We introduce
RAG models where the parametric memory is a pre-trained seq2seq model and
the non-parametric memory is a dense vector index of Wikipedia, accessed with
a pre-trained neural retriever. We compare two RAG formulations, one which
conditions on the same retrieved passages across the whole generated sequence,
and another which can use different passages per token. We fine-tune and evaluate
our models on a wide range of knowledge-intensive NLP tasks and set the state of
the art on three open domain QA tasks, outperforming parametric seq2seq models
and task-specific retrieve-and-extract architectures. For language generation tasks,
we find that RAG models generate more specific, diverse and factual language than
a state-of-the-art parametric-only seq2seq baseline.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained neural language models have been shown to learn a substantial amount of in-depth knowledge from data [47]. They can do so without any access to an external memory, as a parameterized
implicit knowledge base [51, 52]. While this development is exciting, such models do have downsides: They cannot easily expand or revise their memory, can’t straightforwardly provide insight into
their predictions, and may produce “hallucinations” [38]. Hybrid models that combine parametric
memory with non-parametric (i.e., retrieval-based) memories [20, 26, 48] can address some of these
issues because knowledge can be directly revised and expanded, and accessed knowledge can be
inspected and interpreted. REALM [20] and ORQA [31], two recently introduced models that
combine masked language models [8] with a differentiable retriever, have shown promising results,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

