Multimodal Generative Learning Utilizing
Jensen-Shannon-Divergence

Thomas M. Sutter, Imant Daunhawer, Julia E. Vogt
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
{thomas.sutter,imant.daunhawer,julia.vogt}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Learning from different data types is a long-standing goal in machine learning
research, as multiple information sources co-occur when describing natural phenomena. However, existing generative models that approximate a multimodal
ELBO rely on difficult or inefficient training schemes to learn a joint distribution
and the dependencies between modalities. In this work, we propose a novel, efficient objective function that utilizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence for multiple
distributions. It simultaneously approximates the unimodal and joint multimodal
posteriors directly via a dynamic prior. In addition, we theoretically prove that
the new multimodal JS-divergence (mmJSD) objective optimizes an ELBO. In
extensive experiments, we demonstrate the advantage of the proposed mmJSD
model compared to previous work in unsupervised, generative learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Replicating the human ability to process and relate information coming from different sources and
learn from these is a long-standing goal in machine learning [2]. Multiple information sources offer
the potential of learning better and more generalizable representations, but pose challenges at the
same time: models have to be aware of complex intra- and inter-modal relationships, and be robust
to missing modalities [18, 31]. However, the excessive labelling of multiple data types is expensive
and hinders possible applications of fully-supervised approaches [6, 11]. Simultaneous observations
of multiple modalities moreover provide self-supervision in the form of shared information which
connects the different modalities. Self-supervised, generative models are a promising approach to
capture this joint distribution and flexibly support missing modalities with no additional labelling cost
attached. Based on the shortcomings of previous work (see Section 2.1), we formulate the following
wish-list for multimodal, generative models:
Scalability. The model should be able to efficiently handle any number of modalities. Translation
approaches [10, 32] have had great success in combining two modalities and translating from one
to the other. However, the training of these models is computationally expensive for more than two
modalities due to the exponentially growing number of possible paths between subsets of modalities.
Missing data. A multimodal method should be robust to missing data and handle any combination
of available and missing data types. For discriminative tasks, the loss in performance should
be minimized. For generation, the estimation of missing data types should be conditioned on
and coherent with available data while providing diversity over modality-specific attributes in the
generated samples.
Information gain. Multimodal models should benefit from multiple modalities for discriminative as
well as for generative tasks.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

