The Value Equivalence Principle
for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning

Christopher Grimm
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Michigan
crgrimm@umich.edu

André Barreto, Satinder Singh, David Silver
DeepMind
{andrebarreto,baveja,davidsilver}@google.com

Abstract
Learning models of the environment from data is often viewed as an essential component to building intelligent reinforcement learning (RL) agents. The common
practice is to separate the learning of the model from its use, by constructing a
model of the environment’s dynamics that correctly predicts the observed state
transitions. In this paper we argue that the limited representational resources of
model-based RL agents are better used to build models that are directly useful
for value-based planning. As our main contribution, we introduce the principle
of value equivalence: two models are value equivalent with respect to a set of
functions and policies if they yield the same Bellman updates. We propose a formulation of the model learning problem based on the value equivalence principle
and analyze how the set of feasible solutions is impacted by the choice of policies
and functions. Specifically, we show that, as we augment the set of policies and
functions considered, the class of value equivalent models shrinks, until eventually collapsing to a single point corresponding to a model that perfectly describes
the environment. In many problems, directly modelling state-to-state transitions
may be both difficult and unnecessary. By leveraging the value-equivalence principle one may find simpler models without compromising performance, saving
computation and memory. We illustrate the benefits of value-equivalent model
learning with experiments comparing it against more traditional counterparts like
maximum likelihood estimation. More generally, we argue that the principle of
value equivalence underlies a number of recent empirical successes in RL, such as
Value Iteration Networks, the Predictron, Value Prediction Networks, TreeQN, and
MuZero, and provides a first theoretical underpinning of those results.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a conceptual framework to tackle a fundamental challenge in
artificial intelligence: how to design agents that learn while interacting with the environment [36]. It
has been argued that truly general agents should be able to learn a model of the environment that
allows for fast re-planning and counterfactual reasoning [32]. Although this is not a particularly
contentious statement, the question of how to learn such a model is far from being resolved. The
common practice in model-based RL is to conceptually separate the learning of the model from its
use. In this paper we argue that the limited representational capacity of model-based RL agents is
better allocated if the future use of the model (e.g., value-based planning) is also taken into account
during its construction [22, 15, 13].
Our primary contribution is to formalize and analyze a clear principle that underlies this new approach
to model-based RL. Specifically, we show that, when the model is to be used for value-based planning,
requirements on the model can be naturally captured by an equivalence relation induced by a set
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

