Breaking the Communication-Privacy-Accuracy
Trilemma
Wei-Ning Chen
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
wnchen@stanford.edu

Peter Kairouz
Google
kairouz@google.com

Ayfer Özgür
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
aozgur@stanford.edu

Abstract
Two major challenges in distributed learning and estimation are 1) preserving
the privacy of the local samples; and 2) communicating them efficiently to a
central server, while achieving high accuracy for the end-to-end task. While there
has been significant interest in addressing each of these challenges separately
in the recent literature, treatments that simultaneously address both challenges
are still largely missing. In this paper, we develop novel encoding and decoding
mechanisms that simultaneously achieve optimal privacy and communication
efficiency in various canonical settings. In particular, we consider the problems of
mean estimation and frequency estimation under "-local differential privacy and
b-bit communication constraints. For mean estimation, we propose a scheme based
on Kashin’s representation and random sampling, with order-optimal estimation
error under both constraints. For frequency estimation, we present a mechanism
that leverages the recursive structure of Walsh-Hadamard matrices and achieves
order-optimal estimation error for all privacy levels and communication budgets.
As a by-product, we also construct a distribution estimation mechanism that is
rate-optimal for all privacy regimes and communication constraints, extending
recent work that is limited to b = 1 and " = O(1). Our results demonstrate that
intelligent encoding under joint privacy and communication constraints can yield a
performance that matches the optimal accuracy achievable under either constraint
alone.

1

Introduction

The rapid growth of large-scale datasets has been stimulating interest in and demands for distributed
learning and estimation, where datasets are often too large and too sensitive to be stored on a
centralized machine. When data is distributed across multiple devices, communication cost often
becomes a bottleneck of modern machine learning tasks [38]. This is even more so in federated
learning type settings, where communication occurs over bandwidth-limited wireless links [31].
Moreover, as more personal data is entrusted to data aggregators, in many applications it carries
sensitive individual information, and hence finding ways to protect individual privacy is of crucial
importance. In particular, local differential privacy (LDP) [18, 21, 34, 49] is a widely adopted privacy
paradigm, which guarantees that the outcome from a privatization mechanism will not release too
much individual information statistically. In this paper, we study the relationship between utility
(often in forms of accuracy for certain statistical tasks), privacy, and communication jointly.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

