Planning with General Objective Functions:
Going Beyond Total Rewards
Ruosong Wang⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu

Peilin Zhong⇤
Columbia University
pz2225@columbia.edu

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Mellon University
rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

Simon S. Du
University of Washington, Seattle
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Lin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Standard sequential decision-making paradigms aim to maximize the cumulative
PH
reward when interacting with the unknown environment., i.e., maximize h=1 rh
where H is the planning horizon. However, this paradigm fails to model important
practical applications, e.g., safe control that aims to maximize the lowest reward,
i.e., maximize minH
h=1 rh . In this paper, based on techniques in sketching algorithms, we propose a novel planning algorithm in deterministic systems which
deals with a large class of objective functions of the form f (r1 , r2 , ...rH ) that are
of interest to practical applications. We show that efficient planning is possible
if f is symmetric under permutation of coordinates and satisfies certain technical
conditions. Complementing our algorithm, we further prove that removing any
of the conditions will make the problem intractable in the worst case and thus
demonstrate the necessity of our conditions.

1

Introduction

Markov decision process (MDP) is arguably the most popular model for sequential decision-making
problems. MDP assumes both the transition function T : S ⇥ A ! S and the reward function
r : S ⇥ A ! R only depend on the current state-action pair where S is the state space and A is the
PH
action space, and the objective of the agent is to maximize the summation of all rewards h=1 rh
where H is the planning horizon and rh = r(sh , ah ).

The drawback of the standard MDP model is that it even fails to capture some simple sequential
decision-making tasks. For example, in self-driving, the goal is not to maximize the total reward but
to maximize the minimum reward on the trajectory, say if one models a car crash as 1 reward and 0
reward otherwise. Note that in this simple example, the state transition function T and the reward
function r still satisfy the Markov property. The only difference is that the objective changes from
PH
maximizing the sum of rewards r=1 rh to maximizing the minimum of rewards minH
h=1 rh .
This “small" difference requires the agent to change the planning strategy significantly because the
agent needs to look at the full history of rewards. This gives rise the following natural problem:
Can we design a provably efficient algorithm for general objective functions?
Here by efficient, we mean the complexity of the algorithm does not scale exponentially in H. This
is a challenging question as existing approaches for MDP models cannot be applied here.
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

