Information Theoretic Regret Bounds
for Online Nonlinear Control
Sham Kakade1,2

1

Kendall Lowrey1
University of Washington

Akshay Krishnamurthy2

2

Motoya Ohnishi1
Microsoft Research NYC

3

Wen Sun3
Cornell University

Abstract
This work studies the problem of sequential control in an unknown, nonlinear dynamical system, where we model the underlying system dynamics as an unknown
function in a known Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space. This framework yields a
general setting that permits discrete and continuous control inputs as well as nonsmooth, non-differentiable dynamics. Our main result, the Lower Confidence√
based Continuous Control (LC3 ) algorithm, enjoys a near-optimal O( T ) regret
bound against the optimal controller in episodic settings, where T is the number of
episodes. The bound has no explicit dependence on dimension of the system dynamics, which could be infinite, but instead only depends on information theoretic
quantities. We empirically show its application to a number of nonlinear control
tasks and demonstrate the benefit of exploration for learning model dynamics.

1

Introduction

The control of uncertain dynamical systems is one of the central challenges in Reinforcement Learning (RL) and continuous control, and recent years has seen a number of successes in demanding
sequential decision making tasks ranging from robotic hand manipulation [Todorov et al., 2012,
Al Borno et al., 2012, Kumar et al., 2016, Tobin et al., 2017, Lowrey et al., 2018, Akkaya et al.,
2019] to game playing [Silver et al., 2016, Bellemare et al., 2016, Pathak et al., 2017, Burda et al.,
2018]. The predominant approaches here are either based on reinforcement learning or continuous
control (or a mix of techniques from both domains).
With regards to provably correct methods which handle both the learning and approximation in
unknown, complex environments, and achieve optimality guarantees, the body of results in the reinforcement learning literature [Russo and Van Roy, 2013, Jiang et al., 2017, Sun et al., 2019, Agarwal
et al., 2019a] is more mature than in the continuous controls literature. In fact, only relatively recently has there been provably correct methods (and sharp bounds) for the learning and control of
the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) model [Mania et al., 2019, Simchowitz and Foster, 2020,
Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári, 2011], arguably the most basic model due to having globally linear
dynamics.
While Markov Decision Processes provide a very general framework after incorporating continuous
states and actions into the model, there are a variety of reasons to directly consider learning in
continuous control settings: even the simple LQR model provides a powerful framework when used
for locally linear planning [Ahn et al., 2007, Todorov and Li, 2005, Tedrake, 2009, Perez et al.,
2012]. More generally, continuous control problems often have continuity properties with respect
Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/lc3algorithm/
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

