Robust-Adaptive Control of Linear Systems:
beyond Quadratic Costs

Edouard Leurent
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, Renault
F-59000 Lille, France
edouard.leurent@inria.fr
Denis Efimov
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL
F-59000 Lille, France
denis.efimov@inria.fr
Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL
F-59000 Lille, France
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider the problem of robust and adaptive model predictive control (MPC) of
a linear system, with unknown parameters that are learned along the way (adaptive),
in a critical setting where failures must be prevented (robust). This problem has
been studied from different perspectives by different communities. However, the
existing theory deals only with the case of quadratic costs (the LQ problem), which
limits applications to stabilisation and tracking tasks only. In order to handle
more general (non-convex) costs that naturally arise in many practical problems,
we carefully select and bring together several tools from different communities,
namely non-asymptotic linear regression, recent results in interval prediction, and
tree-based planning. Combining and adapting the theoretical guarantees at each
layer is non trivial, and we provide the first end-to-end suboptimality analysis for
this setting. Interestingly, our analysis naturally adapts to handle many models and
combines with a data-driven robust model selection strategy, which enables to relax
the modelling assumptions. Last, we strive to preserve tractability at any stage of
the method, that we illustrate on two challenging simulated environments.1

1

Introduction

Despite the recent successes of Reinforcement Learning [e.g. 32, 38], it has hardly been applied in
real industrial issues. This could be attributed to two undesirable properties which limit its practical
applications. First, it depends on a tremendous amount of interaction data that cannot always be
simulated. This issue can be alleviated by model-based methods – which we consider in this work –
that often benefit from better sample efficiencies than their model-free counterparts. Second, it relies
on trial-and-error and random exploration. In order to overcome these shortages, and motivated by
the path planning problem for a self-driving car, in this paper we consider the problem of controlling
an unknown linear system x(t) so as to maximise an arbitrary bounded reward function R, in a
1

Code and videos available at https://eleurent.github.io/robust-beyond-quadratic/.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

