Weighted QMIX: Expanding Monotonic Value
Function Factorisation for Deep Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Tabish Rashid, Gregory Farquhar∗, Bei Peng, Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
{tabish.rashid, gregory.farquhar, bei.peng, shimon.whiteson}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
QMIX is a popular Q-learning algorithm for cooperative MARL in the centralised
training and decentralised execution paradigm. In order to enable easy decentralisation, QMIX restricts the joint action Q-values it can represent to be a monotonic
mixing of each agent’s utilities. However, this restriction prevents it from representing value functions in which an agent’s ordering over its actions can depend on
other agents’ actions. To analyse this representational limitation, we first formalise
the objective QMIX optimises, which allows us to view QMIX as an operator that
first computes the Q-learning targets and then projects them into the space representable by QMIX. This projection returns a representable Q-value that minimises
the unweighted squared error across all joint actions. We show in particular that
this projection can fail to recover the optimal policy even with access to Q∗ , which
primarily stems from the equal weighting placed on each joint action. We rectify
this by introducing a weighting into the projection, in order to place more importance on the better joint actions. We propose two weighting schemes and prove
that they recover the correct maximal action for any joint action Q-values, and
therefore for Q∗ as well. Based on our analysis and results in the tabular setting, we
introduce two scalable versions of our algorithm, Centrally-Weighted (CW) QMIX
and Optimistically-Weighted (OW) QMIX and demonstrate improved performance
on both predator-prey and challenging multi-agent StarCraft benchmark tasks [26].

1

Introduction

Many critical tasks involve multiple agents acting in the same environment. To learn good behaviours
in such problems from agents’ experiences, we may turn to multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL). Fully decentralised policies are often used in MARL, due to practical communication
constraints or as a way to deal with an intractably large joint action space. However, when training
in simulation or under controlled conditions we may have access to additional information, and
agents can freely share their observations and internal states. Exploiting these possibilities can greatly
improve the efficiency of learning [7, 9].
In this paradigm of centralised training for decentralised execution, QMIX [25] is a popular Qlearning algorithm with state-of-the-art performance on the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge [26].
QMIX represents the optimal joint action value function using a monotonic mixing function of
per-agent utilities. This restricted function class Qmix allows for efficient maximisation during
training, and easy decentralisation of the learned policy. However, QMIX is unable to represent joint
action value functions that are characterised as nonmonotonic [16], i.e., an agent’s ordering over its
∗

Now at Google DeepMind.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

