Neural Manifold Ordinary Differential Equations

Aaron Lou*, Derek Lim*, Isay Katsman*, Leo Huang*, Qingxuan Jiang
Cornell University
{al968, dl772, isk22, ah839, qj46}@cornell.edu
Ser-Nam Lim
Facebook AI
sernam@gmail.com

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
To better conform to data geometry, recent deep generative modelling techniques
adapt Euclidean constructions to non-Euclidean spaces. In this paper, we study normalizing flows on manifolds. Previous work has developed flow models for specific
cases; however, these advancements hand craft layers on a manifold-by-manifold
basis, restricting generality and inducing cumbersome design constraints. We
overcome these issues by introducing Neural Manifold Ordinary Differential Equations, a manifold generalization of Neural ODEs, which enables the construction
of Manifold Continuous Normalizing Flows (MCNFs). MCNFs require only local
geometry (therefore generalizing to arbitrary manifolds) and compute probabilities
with continuous change of variables (allowing for a simple and expressive flow
construction). We find that leveraging continuous manifold dynamics produces a
marked improvement for both density estimation and downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models are a powerful class of neural networks
which fit a probability distribution to produce new, unique
samples. While latent variable models such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [18] and Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) [27] are capable of producing reasonable samples, computing the exact modeled data posterior is fundamentally intractable. By comparison, normalizing flows [38] are capable
of learning rich and tractable posteriors by transforming a simple probability distribution through a sequence of invertible
mappings. Formally, in a normalizing flow, a complex distribution p(x) is transformed to a simple distribution π(z) via
a diffeomorphism f (i.e. a differentiable bijective map with
a differentiable inverse) with probability values given by the
change of variables:
∂f −1
log p(x) = log π(z) − log det
,
∂z

z = f (x).

Figure 1: A manifold ODE solution for a given vector field on the
sphere.

To compute this update efficiently, f must be constrained to
allow for fast evaluation of the determinant, which in the absence of additional constraints takes
* indicates equal contribution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

