The Generalized Lasso with Nonlinear
Observations and Generative Priors
Zhaoqiang Liu
National University of Singapore
dcslizha@nus.edu.sg

Jonathan Scarlett
National University of Singapore
scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of signal estimation from noisy non-linear
measurements when the unknown n-dimensional signal is in the range of an LLipschitz continuous generative model with bounded k-dimensional inputs. We
make the assumption of sub-Gaussian measurements, which is satisfied by a wide
range of measurement models, such as linear, logistic, 1-bit, and other quantized
models. In addition, we consider the impact of adversarial corruptions on these
measurements. Our analysis is based on a generalized Lasso approach (Plan and
Vershynin, 2016). We first provide a non-uniform recovery guarantee,
which states

that under i.i.d. Gaussian measurements, roughly O k2 log L samples suffice for
recovery with an `2 -error of , and that this scheme is robust to adversarial noise.
Then, we apply this result to neural network generative models, and discuss various
extensions to other models and non-i.i.d. measurements. Moreover, we show that
our result can be extended to the uniform recovery guarantee under the assumption
of a so-called local embedding property, which is satisfied by the 1-bit and censored
Tobit models.

1

Introduction

In standard compressive sensing (CS) [9, 37], one considers a linear observation model of the form
yi = hai , x∗ i + i ,
∗

n

i = 1, 2, . . . , m,

(1)

n

where x ∈ R is an unknown k-sparse signal vector, ai ∈ R is the i-th measurement vector, and
i ∈ R is the noise term. The goal is to accurately recover x∗ given A and y, where A ∈ Rm×n is
the measurement matrix whose i-th row is aTi , and y ∈ Rm is the vector of observations. To obtain
an estimate of x∗ , a natural idea is to minimize the `2 loss subject to a structural constraint:
minimize kAx − yk2

subject to x ∈ K,

(2)

where K captures the structure of x∗ ; this may be set to be the set of all k-sparse vectors in Rn , or for
computational reasons, may instead be the scaled `1 -ball, giving rise to the constrained Lasso [33].
We refer to (2) as the K-Lasso (with observations y and measurement matrix A).
Despite the far-reaching utility of standard CS, in many real-world applications the assumption of a
linear model is too restrictive. To address this problem, the semi-parametric single index model (SIM)
is considered in various papers [10, 25, 26]:
yi = f (hai , x∗ i),

i = 1, 2, . . . , m,

(3)

where f : R → R is an unknown (possibly random) function that is independent of ai . In general, f
plays the role of a nonlinearity, and we aim to estimate the signal x∗ despite this unknown nonlinearity.
Note that the norm of x∗ is sacrificed in SIM, since it may be absorbed into the unknown function f .
Hence, for simplicity of presentation, we assume that x∗ is a unit vector in Rn . In this paper, similar
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

