Variational Inference for Graph Convolutional
Networks in the Absence of Graph Data and
Adversarial Settings

Pantelis Elinas∗
pantelis.elinas@data61.csiro.au
CSIRO’s Data61

Edwin V. Bonilla∗
edwin.bonilla@data61.csiro.au
CSIRO’s Data61 & The University of Sydney

Louis C. Tiao
louis.tiao@sydney.edu.au
The University of Sydney & CSIRO’s Data61

Abstract
We propose a framework that lifts the capabilities of graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) to scenarios where no input graph is given and increases their robustness
to adversarial attacks. We formulate a joint probabilistic model that considers a
prior distribution over graphs along with a GCN-based likelihood and develop
a stochastic variational inference algorithm to estimate the graph posterior and
the GCN parameters jointly. To address the problem of propagating gradients
through latent variables drawn from discrete distributions, we use their continuous
relaxations known as Concrete distributions. We show that, on real datasets, our
approach can outperform state-of-the-art Bayesian and non-Bayesian graph neural
network algorithms on the task of semi-supervised classification in the absence of
graph data and when the network structure is subjected to adversarial perturbations.

1

Introduction

Graphs represent the elements of a system and their relationships as a set of nodes and edges, respectively. By exploiting the inter-dependencies of these elements, many applications of machine
learning have achieved significant success, for example in the areas of social networks [15], document
classification [25, 40] and bioinformatics [12]. In particular, motivated by the incredible success of
convolutional neural networks [CNNs, 26] on regular-grid data, researchers have generalized some of
their fundamental properties (such as their ability to learn local stationary structures efficiently) to
graph-structured data [7, 17, 10]. These approaches mainly focused on exploiting feature dependencies explicitly defined by a graph in an analogous way to how convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
model long-range correlations through local interactions across pixels in an image. The seminal work
by [25] leveraged these ideas to model dependencies across instances (instead of features) to be able
to incorporate knowledge of the instances’ relationships in a semi-supervised learning setting, going
beyond the standard i.i.d. assumption.
In this work we focus precisely on the problem of semi-supervised classification based on the method
developed in [25], which is now commonly referred to as graph convolutional networks (GCNs).
These networks can be seen as a first-order approximation of the spectral graph convolutional
networks developed by [10], which itself built upon the pioneering work of [7, 17]. The great
popularity of graph convolutional networks (GCNs) is mainly due to their practical performance
∗

Joint first author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

