Displacement-Invariant Matching Cost Learning
for Accurate Optical Flow Estimation

*

Jianyuan Wang1 , * Yiran Zhong1,5 , Yuchao Dai2 , Kaihao Zhang1,4 , Pan Ji3 , Hongdong Li1,5
1
Australian National University, 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University,
3
NEC Labs America, 4 Tencent AI Lab, 5 ACRV
{yiran.zhong, kaihao.zhang, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au,
jywang.js@gmail.com, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn, panji@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Learning matching costs has been shown to be critical to the success of the stateof-the-art deep stereo matching methods, in which 3D convolutions are applied
on a 4D feature volume to learn a 3D cost volume. However, this mechanism
has never been employed for the optical flow task. This is mainly due to the
significantly increased search dimension in the case of optical flow computation,
i.e., a straightforward extension would require dense 4D convolutions in order to
process a 5D feature volume, which is computationally prohibitive. This paper
proposes a novel solution that is able to bypass the requirement of building a
5D feature volume while still allowing the network to learn suitable matching
costs from data. Our key innovation is to decouple the connection between 2D
displacements and learn the matching costs at each 2D displacement hypothesis
independently, i.e., displacement-invariant cost learning. Specifically, we apply the
same 2D convolution-based matching net independently on each 2D displacement
hypothesis to learn a 4D cost volume. Moreover, we propose a displacement-aware
projection layer to scale the learned cost volume, which reconsiders the correlation
between different displacement candidates and mitigates the multi-modal problem
in the learned cost volume. The cost volume is then projected to optical flow
estimation through a 2D soft-argmin layer. Extensive experiments show that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on various datasets, and outperforms
all published optical flow methods on the Sintel benchmark. The code is available
at https://github.com/jytime/DICL-Flow.

1

Introduction

Both the optical flow estimation and stereo matching aim to find per-pixel dense correspondences
between a pair of input images. In essence, stereo matching can be viewed as a special case of
optical flow where the general 2D flow vector search reduces to 1D search along the epipolar lines.
Despite this similarity, current leading deep stereo matching methods [15, 44, 41] and leading deep
optical flow methods [12, 29, 37] seem to follow very different matching strategies and network
architectures. In particular, while both stereo matching and optical flow estimation rely on the cost
volume representation, they differ in how to build the cost volumes.
The state-of-the-art deep stereo matching methods [15, 44, 41] learn the matching costs between
shifted features of left and right images, whereas most existing deep optical flow methods often rely on
non-learned metrics such as dot product [12, 29] and cosine similarity [37]. With the introduction of
* Indicates equal contribution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

