Robust Meta-learning for Mixed Linear Regression
with Small Batches
Weihao Kong∗

Raghav Somani†

Sham Kakade‡

Sewoong Oh§

Abstract
A common challenge faced in practical supervised learning, such as medical
image processing and robotic interactions, is that there are plenty of tasks but each
task cannot afford to collect enough labeled examples to be learned in isolation.
However, by exploiting the similarities across those tasks, one can hope to overcome
such data scarcity. Under a canonical scenario where each task is drawn from a
mixture of k linear regressions, we study a fundamental question: can abundant
small-data tasks compensate for the lack of big-data tasks? Existing second moment
based approaches of [42] show that such a trade-off is efficiently achievable,
with the help of medium-sized tasks with Ω(k 1/2 ) examples each. However, this
algorithm is brittle in two important scenarios. The predictions can be arbitrarily
bad (i) even with only a few outliers in the dataset; or (ii) even if the medium-sized
tasks are slightly smaller with o(k 1/2 ) examples each. We introduce a spectral
approach that is simultaneously robust under both scenarios. To this end, we first
design a novel outlier-robust principal component analysis algorithm that achieves
an optimal accuracy. This is followed by a sum-of-squares algorithm to exploit the
information from higher order moments. Together, this approach is robust against
outliers and achieves a graceful statistical trade-off; the lack of Ω(k 1/2 )-size tasks
can be compensated for with smaller tasks, which can now be as small as O(log k).

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning tasks and corresponding training datasets exhibit a long-tailed behavior
[73], where a large number of tasks do not have enough training examples to be trained to the
desired accuracy. Collecting high-quality labeled data can be time consuming or require expertise.
Consequently, in domains such as annotating medical images or processing robotic interactions,
there might be a large number of related but distinct tasks, yet each task is associated with only a
small batch of training data. However, one can hope to meta-train across those tasks, exploiting their
similarities, and collaboratively achieve accuracy far greater than what can be achieved for each task
in isolation [29, 58, 41, 52, 68, 61]. This is the goal of meta-learning [62, 67].
Meta-learning is especially challenging under two practically important settings: (i) a few-shot
learning scenario where each task is associated with an extremely small dataset; and (ii) an adversarial
scenario where a fraction of those datasets are corrupted. We design a novel meta-learning approach
that is robust to such data scarcity and adversarial corruption, under a canonical scenario where the
tasks are linear regressions in d-dimensions and the model parameters are drawn from a discrete
distribution of a support size k.
∗

kweihao@gmail.com. University of Washington
raghavs@cs.washington.edu. University of Washington
‡
sham@cs.washington.edu. University of Washington & Microsoft Research
§
sewoong@cs.washington.edu. University of Washington
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

