-Models: Generative Temporal Difference Learning
for Infinite-Horizon Prediction
Michael Janner 1
Igor Mordatch 2
Sergey Levine 12
1
2
UC Berkeley
Google Brain
{janner, svlevine}@eecs.berkeley.edu
imordatch@google.com

Abstract
We introduce the -model, a predictive model of environment dynamics with an
infinite probabilistic horizon. Replacing standard single-step models with -models
leads to generalizations of the procedures central to model-based control, including
the model rollout and model-based value estimation. The -model, trained with a
generative reinterpretation of temporal difference learning, is a natural continuous
analogue of the successor representation and a hybrid between model-free and
model-based mechanisms. Like a value function, it contains information about
the long-term future; like a standard predictive model, it is independent of task
reward. We instantiate the -model as both a generative adversarial network and
normalizing flow, discuss how its training reflects an inescapable tradeoff between
training-time and testing-time compounding errors, and empirically investigate its
utility for prediction and control.

1

Introduction

The common ingredient in all of model-based reinforcement learning is the dynamics model: a
function used for predicting future states. The choice of the model’s prediction horizon constitutes
a delicate trade-off. Shorter horizons make the prediction problem easier, as the near-term future
increasingly begins to look like the present, but may not provide sufficient information for decisionmaking. Longer horizons carry more information, but present a more difficult prediction problem, as
errors accumulate rapidly when a model is applied to its own previous outputs (Janner et al., 2019).
Can we avoid choosing a prediction horizon altogether? Value functions already do so by modeling the
cumulative return over a discounted long-term future instead of an immediate reward, circumventing
the need to commit to any single finite horizon. However, value prediction folds two problems into
one by entangling environment dynamics with reward structure, making value functions less readily
adaptable to new tasks in known settings than their model-based counterparts.
In this work, we propose a model that predicts over an infinite horizon with a geometrically-distributed
timestep weighting (Figure 1). This -model, named for the dependence of its probabilistic horizon
on a discount factor , is trained with a generative analogue of temporal difference learning suitable
for continuous spaces. The -model bridges the gap between canonical model-based and model-free
mechanisms. Like a value function, it is policy-conditioned and contains information about the distant
future; like a conventional dynamics model, it is independent of reward and may be reused for new
tasks within the same environment. The -model may be instantiated as both a generative adversarial
network (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and a normalizing flow (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015).
The shift from standard single-step models to infinite-horizon -models carries several advantages:
Constant-time prediction Single-step models must perform an Opnq operation to predict n steps
into the future; -models amortize the work of predicting over extended horizons during training
such that long-horizon prediction occurs with a single feedforward pass of the model.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

