Choice Bandits
Nicholas Johnson∗
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
njohnson@cs.umn.edu

Arpit Agarwal
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
aarpit@seas.upenn.edu

Shivani Agarwal
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
ashivani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
There has been much interest in recent years in the problem of dueling bandits,
where on each round the learner plays a pair of arms and receives as feedback
the outcome of a relative pairwise comparison between them. Here we study a
natural generalization, that we term choice bandits, where the learner plays a set
of up to k ≥ 2 arms, and receives limited relative feedback in the form of a single
multiway choice among the pulled arms, drawn from an underlying multiway
choice model. We study choice bandits under a very general class of choice
models that is characterized by the existence of a unique ‘best’ arm (which we
term generalized Condorcet winner), and includes as special cases the well-studied
multinomial logit (MNL) and multinomial probit (MNP) choice models, and more
generally, the class of random utility models with i.i.d. noise (IID-RUMs). We
propose an algorithm for choice bandits, termed Winner Beats All (WBA), with a
distribution dependent O(log T ) regret bound under all these choice models. The
challenge in our setting is that the decision space is Θ(nk ), which is large for
even moderate k. Our algorithm addresses this challenge by extracting just O(n2 )
statistics from multiway choices and exploiting the existence of a unique ‘best’ arm
to find arms that are competitive to this arm in order to construct sets with low regret.
Since these statistics are extracted from the same choice observations, one needs a
careful martingale analysis in order to show that these statistics are concentrated.
We complement our upper bound result with a lower bound result, which shows
that our upper bound is order-wise optimal. Our experiments demonstrate that
for the special case of k = 2, our algorithm is competitive with previous dueling
bandit algorithms, and for the more general case k > 2, outperforms the recently
proposed MaxMinUCB algorithm designed for the MNL model.

1

Introduction

The dueling bandit problem has received a lot of interest in recent years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14]. Here there are n arms {1, . . . , n}; on each trial t, the learner pulls a pair of arms
(it , jt ), and receives relative feedback indicating which of the two arms has a better quality/reward.
In the regret minimization setting, the goal is to identify the ‘best’ arm(s) while also minimizing the
regret due to playing sub-optimal arms in the learning (exploration) phase.
∗

Work done while at the University of Pennsylvania.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

