A Convolutional Auto-Encoder for Haplotype
Assembly and Viral Quasispecies Reconstruction

Ziqi Ke and Haris Vikalo
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
ziqike@utexas.edu, hvikalo@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Haplotype assembly and viral quasispecies reconstruction are challenging tasks concerned with analysis of genomic mixtures using sequencing data. High-throughput
sequencing technologies generate enormous amounts of short fragments (reads)
which essentially oversample components of a mixture; the representation redundancy enables reconstruction of the components (haplotypes, viral strains). The
reconstruction problem, known to be NP-hard, boils down to grouping together
reads originating from the same component in a mixture. Existing methods struggle to solve this problem with required level of accuracy and low runtimes; the
problem is becoming increasingly more challenging as the number and length of
the components increase. This paper proposes a read clustering method based
on a convolutional auto-encoder designed to first project sequenced fragments
to a low-dimensional space and then estimate the probability of the read origin
using learned embedded features. The components are reconstructed by finding
consensus sequences that agglomerate reads from the same origin. Mini-batch
stochastic gradient descent and dimension reduction of reads allow the proposed
method to efficiently deal with massive numbers of long reads. Experiments on
simulated, semi-experimental and experimental data demonstrate the ability of the
proposed method to accurately reconstruct haplotypes and viral quasispecies, often
demonstrating superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods. Source
codes are available at https://github.com/WuLoli/CAECseq.

1

Introduction

Genetic material in living cells and viruses experiences mutations which lead to unique blueprints
and/or may create potentially diverse and complex genomic communities. In humans, genetic
mutations impact an individual’s health by causing genetic diseases and rendering the individual
predisposed to complex diseases. In general, genetic material of eukaryotic organisms is organized
in chromosomes, each with two or more copies present in a cell; variations between chromosomal
copies have major implications on cellular functions. Beyond the living organisms, genetic variations
also occur in viruses where they lead to emergence of rich viral populations that co-exist as the
so-called quasispecies; spectrum of such quasispecies is reflective of the proliferative advantage that
particular mutations may provide to viral strains present in the community. Therefore, inferring the
composition and studying evolution of genomic communities that emerge due to occurrence and
accumulation of mutations provide valuable information about genetic signatures of diseases, and
generally suggest directions for medical and pharmaceutical research. High-throughput sequencing
technologies enable sampling of such genomic communities/mixtures (Schwartz, 2010; Clark, 2004;
Sabeti et al., 2002); however, the composition inference is computationally challenging and of limited
accuracy due to sequencing errors and relatively short lengths of sequencing reads.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

