Conservative Q-Learning
for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Aviral Kumar1 , Aurick Zhou1 , George Tucker2 , Sergey Levine1,2
1
UC Berkeley, 2 Google Research, Brain Team
aviralk@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Effectively leveraging large, previously collected datasets in reinforcement learning (RL) is a key challenge for large-scale real-world applications. Offline RL
algorithms promise to learn effective policies from previously-collected, static
datasets without further interaction. However, in practice, offline RL presents a
major challenge, and standard off-policy RL methods can fail due to overestimation
of values induced by the distributional shift between the dataset and the learned
policy, especially when training on complex and multi-modal data distributions. In
this paper, we propose conservative Q-learning (CQL), which aims to address these
limitations by learning a conservative Q-function such that the expected value of a
policy under this Q-function lower-bounds its true value. We theoretically show
that CQL produces a lower bound on the value of the current policy and that it
can be incorporated into a policy learning procedure with theoretical improvement
guarantees. In practice, CQL augments the standard Bellman error objective with a
simple Q-value regularizer which is straightforward to implement on top of existing
deep Q-learning and actor-critic implementations. On both discrete and continuous
control domains, we show that CQL substantially outperforms existing offline RL
methods, often learning policies that attain 2-5 times higher final return, especially
when learning from complex and multi-modal data distributions.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in reinforcement learning (RL), especially when combined with expressive deep network function approximators, have produced promising results in domains ranging from robotics [29]
to strategy games [4] and recommendation systems [35]. However, applying RL to real-world
problems consistently poses practical challenges: in contrast to the kinds of data-driven methods
that have been successful in supervised learning [22, 10], RL is classically regarded as an active
learning process, where each training run requires active interaction with the environment. Interaction
with the real world can be costly and dangerous, and the quantities of data that can be gathered
online are substantially lower than the offline datasets that are used in supervised learning [9], which
only need to be collected once. Offline RL, also known as batch RL, offers an appealing alternative [11, 15, 30, 3, 27, 54, 34]. Offline RL algorithms learn from large, previously collected datasets,
without interaction. This in principle can make it possible to leverage large datasets, but in practice
fully offline RL methods pose major technical difficulties, stemming from the distributional shift
between the policy that collected the data and the learned policy. This has made current results fall
short of the full promise of such methods.
Directly utilizing existing value-based off-policy RL algorithms in an offline setting generally results
in poor performance, due to issues with bootstrapping from out-of-distribution actions [30, 15] and
overfitting [13, 30, 3]. This typically manifests as erroneously optimistic value function estimates. If
we can instead learn a conservative estimate of the value function, which provides a lower bound on
the true values, this overestimation problem could be addressed. In fact, because policy evaluation
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

