Efficient Planning in Large MDPs with
Weak Linear Function Approximation

Roshan Shariff
University of Alberta & Amii
roshan.shariff@ualberta.ca

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind & University of Alberta & Amii
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Large-scale Markov decision processes (MDPs) require planning algorithms with
runtime independent of the number of states of the MDP. We consider the planning
problem in MDPs using linear value function approximation with only weak
requirements: low approximation error for the optimal value function, and a small
set of “core” states whose features span those of other states. In particular, we
make no assumptions about the representability of policies or value functions of
non-optimal policies. Our algorithm produces almost-optimal actions for any state
using a generative oracle (simulator) for the MDP, while its computation time scales
polynomially with the number of features, core states, and actions and the effective
horizon.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDPs) are commonly used to model sequential decision making under
uncertainty and have a wide range of applications [see 42, 33, 7, for example]. We consider planning in
large-scale, expected discounted total reward MDPs. Computing an optimal policy in the discounted
setting is known to require “reading” all states at least once [6]. As the state space for most interesting
applications is intractably large if not infinite (“Bellman’s curse of dimensionality”), it is common
to consider restrictions to the problem that can allow efficient calculation of near-optimal actions.
One such relaxation is online planning — the MDP can be accessed through a simulator and we ask
only for a good action at a given state [25, 29]. While in this problem the complexity of computing
a “good action” can be independent of the number of states, the complexity is exponential in the
planning horizon [25]. An alternative idea, which can be traced back to at least the work of Schweitzer
and Seidmann [35], is to assume that one has access to a feature representation (that is, a vector
of features for each state) and the planner needs to work well for those MDPs where the optimal
value function of the MDP can be uniformly well approximated over all states by some appropriate
weighted combination of the features. Since an accurate approximation of the optimal value function
is known to be sufficient to generate near-optimal behavior,1 the problem simplifies to producing a
good estimate of the unknown feature weights with a computation cost that is independent of the
number of states.
In this paper we consider the intersection of these two problem formulations. More precisely, our goal
is to construct planning algorithms that produce an action for any given input state, using black-box
access to the MDP through a simulator which takes a state and an action as input and produces a
random next state and immediate reward. The planner can also access the feature representation of
any state as a 𝑑-dimensional feature vector. Assume that the optimal value function of the MDP can
be uniformly well approximated — to an accuracy of 𝜀 approx — as a linear combination of the features
with fixed, but unknown, coefficients. Our goal is a randomized planning algorithm that interacts with
1See Proposition 1; or, for example, Szepesvári [39, Lemma 5.17], Kearns et al. [25, Lemma 5], Kallenberg
[24, Theorem 3.7].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

