Minimax Optimal Nonparametric Estimation of
Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

Zijun Gao
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Email: zijungao@stanford.edu

Yanjun Han
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford Univeristy
Email: yjhan@stanford.edu

Abstract
A central goal of causal inference is to detect and estimate the treatment effects of a
given treatment or intervention on an outcome variable of interest, where a member
known as the heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE) is of growing popularity in
recent practical applications such as the personalized medicine. In this paper, we
model the HTE as a smooth nonparametric difference between two less smooth
baseline functions, and determine the tight statistical limits of the nonparametric
HTE estimation as a function of the covariate geometry. In particular, a two-stage
nearest-neighbor-based estimator throwing away observations with poor matching
quality is near minimax optimal. We also establish the tight dependence on the
density ratio without the usual assumption that the covariate densities are bounded
away from zero, where a key step is to employ a novel maximal inequality which
could be of independent interest.

1

Introduction and Main Results

Causal inference aims to draw a causal relationship between some treatment and target responses.
Nowadays, personalized medicine and huge available data make heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE)
estimation meaningful and possible. While there are various practical approaches of estimating the
HTE [AI16, PQJ+ 17, WA18, KSBY19], some important theoretical questions remain unanswered.
In this paper, we consider the Neyman-Rubin potential outcome model [Rub74] for the treatment
effect. Assume for simplicity that there are n individuals in the treatment group and the control
group, respectively, where the generalizations to different group sizes are straightforward. For each
individual i ∈ [n] in the control group, we observe a vector of covariates Xi0 ∈ Rd and her potential
outcome Yi0 ∈ R for not receiving the treatment. Similarly, for individual i in the treatment group,
the covariates Xi1 and the potential outcome Yi1 under the treatment are observed. We assume the
following model for the potential outcomes: for any i ∈ [n],
Yi0 = µ0 (Xi0 ) + ε0i ,

Yi1 = µ1 (Xi1 ) + ε1i ,

(1)

where µ0 , µ1 : Rd → R are the baseline functions for the control and treatment groups, respectively,
and ε0i , ε1i are modeling errors. The heterogeneous treatment effect τ is defined to be the difference
of the baseline functions:
τ (x) , µ1 (x) − µ0 (x).

(2)

In other words, the treatment effect τ (x) is the expected change in the outcomes after an individual
with covariate x receives the treatment, which is usually heterogeneous as τ (x) typically varies in
x. The target is to find an estimator τ̂ which comes close to the true HTE τ under the L2 norm of
functions, based on the control and treatment observations {(Xi0 , Yi0 )}i∈[n] , {(Xi1 , Yi1 )}i∈[n] .
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

