Learning Manifold Implicitly via Explicit
Heat-Kernel Learning

Yufan Zhou, Changyou Chen, Jinhui Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
State University of New York at Buffalo
{yufanzho, changyou, jinhui}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Manifold learning is a fundamental problem in machine learning with numerous
applications. Most of the existing methods directly learn the low-dimensional
embedding of the data in some high-dimensional space, and usually lack the
flexibility of being directly applicable to down-stream applications. In this paper,
we propose the concept of implicit manifold learning, where manifold information
is implicitly obtained by learning the associated heat kernel. A heat kernel is the
solution of the corresponding heat equation, which describes how “heat” transfers
on the manifold, thus containing ample geometric information of the manifold. We
provide both practical algorithm and theoretical analysis of our framework. The
learned heat kernel can be applied to various kernel-based machine learning models,
including deep generative models (DGM) for data generation and Stein Variational
Gradient Descent for Bayesian inference. Extensive experiments show that our
framework can achieve state-of-the-art results compared to existing methods for
the two tasks.

1

Introduction

Manifold is an important concept in machine learning, where a typical assumption is that data are
sampled from a low-dimensional manifold embedded in some high-dimensional space. There have
been extensive research trying to utilize the hidden geometric information of data samples [1, 2, 3].
For example, Laplacian eigenmap [1], a popular dimensionality reduction algorithm, represents the
low-dimensional manifold by a graph built based on the neighborhood information of the data. Each
data point serves as a node in the graph, edges are determined by methods like k-nearest neighbors,
and weights are computed using Gaussian kernel. With this graph, one can then compute its essential
information such as graph Laplacian and eigenvalues, which can help embed the data points to a
k-dimensional space (by using the k smallest non-zero eigenvalues and eigenvectors), following the
principle of preserving the proximity of data points in both the original and the embedded spaces.
Such an approach ensures that as the number of data samples goes to infinity, graph Laplacian
converges to the Laplacian-Beltrami operator, a key operator defining the heat equation used in our
approach.
In deep learning, there are also some methods try to directly learn the Riemannian metric of manifold
other than its embedding. For example, [4] and [5] approximate the Riemannian metric by using the
Jacobian matrix of a function, which maps latent variables to data samples.
Different from the aforementioned existing results that try to learn the embedding or Riemannian
metric directly, we propose to learn the manifold implicitly by explicitly learning its associated heat
kernel. The heat kernel describes the heat diffusion on a manifold and thus encodes a great deal of
geometric information of the manifold. Note that unlike Laplacian eigenmap that relies on graph
construction, our proposed method targets at a lower-level problem of directly learning the geometry34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

