Leverage the Average: an Analysis of KL
Regularization in Reinforcement Learning
Nino Vieillard
Google Research, Brain Team
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria
IECL, F-54000 Nancy, France
vieillard@google.com

Tadashi Kozunoú
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
tadashi.kozuno@oist.jp

Bruno Scherrer
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria
IECL, F-54000 Nancy, France
bruno.scherrer@inria.fr
Rémi Munos
DeepMind
munos@google.com

Olivier Pietquin
Google Research, Brain Team
pietquin@google.com
Matthieu Geist
Google Research, Brain Team
mfgeist@google.com

Abstract
Recent Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms making use of KullbackLeibler (KL) regularization as a core component have shown outstanding
performance. Yet, only little is understood theoretically about why KL
regularization helps, so far. We study KL regularization within an approximate value iteration scheme and show that it implicitly averages q-values.
Leveraging this insight, we provide a very strong performance bound, the
very first to combine two desirable aspects: a linear dependency to the
horizon (instead of quadratic) and an error propagation term involving an
averaging effect of the estimation errors (instead of an accumulation effect).
We also study the more general case of an additional entropy regularizer. The
resulting abstract scheme encompasses many existing RL algorithms. Some
of our assumptions do not hold with neural networks, so we complement
this theoretical analysis with an extensive empirical study.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization consists in penalizing
a new policy from being too far from the previous one, as measured by the KL divergence.
It is at the core of efficient deep RL algorithms, such as Trust Region Policy Optimization
(TRPO) [37] (motivated by trust region constraints) or Maximum a Posteriori Policy Optimization (MPO) [2] (arising from the view of control as probabilistic inference [26, 16]), but
without much theoretical guarantees. Recently, Geist et al. [20] have analyzed algorithms
operating in the larger scope of regularization by Bregman divergences. They concluded that
regularization doesn’t harm in terms of convergence, rate of convergence, and propagation
of errors, but these results are not better than the corresponding ones in unregularized
approximate dynamic programming (ADP).
ú

Work done while at DeepMind.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

