GOCor: Bringing Globally Optimized
Correspondence Volumes into Your Neural Network

Prune Truong∗ , Martin Danelljan∗ , Luc Van Gool, Radu Timofte
{prune.truong, martin.danelljan, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
The feature correlation layer serves as a key neural network module in numerous
computer vision problems that involve dense correspondences between image pairs.
It predicts a correspondence volume by evaluating dense scalar products between
feature vectors extracted from pairs of locations in two images. However, this
point-to-point feature comparison is insufficient when disambiguating multiple
similar regions in an image, severely affecting the performance of the end task. We
propose GOCor, a fully differentiable dense matching module, acting as a direct
replacement to the feature correlation layer. The correspondence volume generated
by our module is the result of an internal optimization procedure that explicitly
accounts for similar regions in the scene. Moreover, our approach is capable of
effectively learning spatial matching priors to resolve further matching ambiguities. We analyze our GOCor module in extensive ablative experiments. When
integrated into state-of-the-art networks, our approach significantly outperforms
the feature correlation layer for the tasks of geometric matching, optical flow, and
dense semantic matching. The code and trained models will be made available at
github.com/PruneTruong/GOCor.

1

Introduction

Finding pixel-wise correspondences between pairs of images is a fundamental problem in many
computer vision domains, including optical flow [14, 19, 21, 28, 51, 52, 55], geometric matching [13,
37, 41, 42, 55], and disparity estimation [11, 33, 40, 61]. Most recent state-of-the-art approaches rely
on feature correlation layers, evaluating dense pair-wise similarities between deep representations
of two images. The resulting four-dimensional correspondence volume captures dense matching
confidences between every pair of image locations. It serves as a powerful cue in the prediction of, for
instance, optical flow. This encapsulation of dense correspondences has further achieved wide success
within semantic matching [9, 12, 18, 23, 25, 26, 27, 43, 55], video object segmentation [10, 17, 39, 57],
and few-shot segmentation [36, 58]. The feature correlation layer thus serves as a key building block
when designing network architectures for a diverse range of important computer vision applications.
In the feature correlation layer, each confidence value in the correspondence volume is obtained as
the scalar product between two feature vectors, extracted from specific locations in the two images,
here called the reference and the query images. However, the sole reliance on point-to-point feature
comparisons is often insufficient in order to disambiguate multiple similar regions in an image.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, in the case of repetitive patterns, the feature correlation layer generates
undistinctive and inaccurate matching confidences (Fig. 1d), severely affecting the performance of the
end task. This remains the key limitation of feature correlation layers, since repetitive patterns, lowtextured regions, and co-occurring similar objects are all pervasive in computer vision applications.
We design a new dense matching module, aiming to address the aforementioned issues by exploring
information not exploited by the feature correlation layer. We observe that a confidence value in
∗

Both authors contributed equally

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

