Pointer Graph Networks
Petar Veličković, Lars Buesing, Matthew C. Overlan,
Razvan Pascanu, Oriol Vinyals and Charles Blundell
DeepMind
{petarv,lbuesing,moverlan,razp,vinyals,cblundell}@google.com

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are typically applied to static graphs that are
assumed to be known upfront. This static input structure is often informed purely
by insight of the machine learning practitioner, and might not be optimal for the
actual task the GNN is solving. In absence of reliable domain expertise, one
might resort to inferring the latent graph structure, which is often difficult due
to the vast search space of possible graphs. Here we introduce Pointer Graph
Networks (PGNs) which augment sets or graphs with additional inferred edges for
improved model generalisation ability. PGNs allow each node to dynamically point
to another node, followed by message passing over these pointers. The sparsity of
this adaptable graph structure makes learning tractable while still being sufficiently
expressive to simulate complex algorithms. Critically, the pointing mechanism
is directly supervised to model long-term sequences of operations on classical
data structures, incorporating useful structural inductive biases from theoretical
computer science. Qualitatively, we demonstrate that PGNs can learn parallelisable
variants of pointer-based data structures, namely disjoint set unions and link/cut
trees. PGNs generalise out-of-distribution to 5⇥ larger test inputs on dynamic
graph connectivity tasks, outperforming unrestricted GNNs and Deep Sets.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have seen recent successes in applications such as quantum chemistry
[14], social networks [32] and physics simulations [1, 23, 34]. For problems where a graph structure
is known (or can be approximated), GNNs thrive. This places a burden upon the practitioner: which
graph structure should be used? In many applications, particularly with few nodes, fully connected
graphs work well, but on larger problems, sparsely connected graphs are required. As the complexity
of the task imposed on the GNN increases and, separately, the number of nodes increases, not
allowing the choice of graph structure to be data-driven limits the applicability of GNNs.
Classical algorithms [5] span computations that can be substantially more expressive than typical
machine learning subroutines (e.g. matrix multiplications), making them hard to learn, and a good
benchmark for GNNs [4, 8]. Prior work has explored learning primitive algorithms (e.g. arithmetic)
by RNNs [57, 20, 45], neural approximations to NP-hard problems [50, 25], making GNNs learn (and
transfer between) graph algorithms [47, 13], recently recovering a single neural core [55] capable of
sorting, path-finding and binary addition. Here, we propose Pointer Graph Networks (PGNs), a
framework that further expands the space of general-purpose algorithms that can be neurally executed.
Idealistically, one might imagine the graph structure underlying GNNs should be fully learnt from
data, but the number of possible graphs grows super-exponentially in the number of nodes [39],
making searching over this space a challenging (and interesting) problem. In addition, applying GNNs
further necessitates the learning of the messages passed on top of the learnt structure, making it hard to
disambiguate errors from having either the wrong structure or the wrong message. Several approaches
have been proposed for searching over the graph structure [27, 16, 23, 21, 52, 9, 36, 19, 28]. Our
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

