Dialog without Dialog Data: Learning Visual Dialog
Agents from VQA Data

Michael Cogswell5∗ Jiasen Lu3∗ Rishabh Jain 1 Stefan Lee2 Dhruv Batra4,1 Devi Parikh4,1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Oregon State University
3
Allen Institute for AI 4 Facebook AI Research 5 SRI International
michael.cogswell@sri.com jiasenl@allenai.org leestef@oregonstate.edu
{rishabhjain, dbatra, parikh}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Can we develop visually grounded dialog agents that can efficiently adapt to new
tasks without forgetting how to talk to people? Such agents could leverage a
larger variety of existing data to generalize to new task, minimizing expensive
data collection and annotation. In this work, we study a setting we call “Dialog
without Dialog”, which requires agents to develop visually grounded dialog models
that can adapt to new tasks without language level supervision. By factorizing
intention and language, our model minimizes linguistic drift after fine-tuning for
new tasks. We present qualitative results, automated metrics, and human studies
that all show our model can adapt to new tasks and maintain language quality.
Baselines either fail to perform well at new tasks or experience language drift,
becoming unintelligible to humans. Code has been made available at: https:
//github.com/mcogswell/dialog_without_dialog.

1

Introduction

One goal of AI is to enable humans and computers to communicate naturally with each other in
grounded language to achieve a collaborative objective. Recently the community has studied goal
oriented dialog, where agents communicate for tasks like booking a flight or searching for images [1].
A popular approach to these tasks has been to observe humans engaging in dialogs like the ones
we would like to automate and then train agents to mimic these human dialogs [2, 3]. Mimicking
human dialogs allows agents to generate intelligible language (i.e., meaningful English, not gibberish).
However, these models are typically fragile and generalize poorly to new tasks. As such, each new
task requires collecting new human dialogs, which is a laborious and costly process often requiring
many iterations before high quality dialogs are elicited [4, 5].
A promising alternative is to use goal completion as a supervisory signal to adapt agents to new tasks.
Specifically, this is realized by pre-training dialog agents via human dialog supervision on one task
and then fine-tuning them on a new task by rewarding the agents for solving the task regardless of the
dialog’s content. This approach can indeed improve task performance, but language quality suffers
even for similar tasks. It tends to drifts from human language, becoming ungrammatical and loosing
human intelligible semantics – sometimes even turning into unintelligible code. Such code may allow
communication with other bots, but is largely incomprehensible to humans. This trade off between
task performance and language drift has been observed in prior dialog work [2, 3].
The goal of this paper is to develop visually grounded dialog models that can adapt to new tasks
while exhibiting less linguistic drift, thereby reducing the need to collect new data for the new tasks.
To test this we consider an image guessing game demonstrated in Fig. 1 (right). In each episode, one
agent (A-bot in red) secretly selects a target image y (starred) from a pool of images. The other agent
∗

Equal contribution. Work carried out mainly at Georgia Tech.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

