MOReL: Model-Based Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Rahul Kidambi∗
Cornell University, Ithaca
rkidambi@cornell.edu

Aravind Rajeswaran∗
University of Washington, Seattle
Google Research, Brain Team
aravraj@cs.washington.edu

Praneeth Netrapalli
Microsoft Research, India
praneeth@microsoft.com

Thorsten Joachims
Cornell University, Ithaca
tj@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
In offline reinforcement learning (RL), the goal is to learn a highly rewarding
policy based solely on a dataset of historical interactions with the environment.
The ability to train RL policies offline would greatly expand where RL can be
applied, its data efficiency, and its experimental velocity. Prior work in offline
RL has been confined almost exclusively to model-free RL approaches. In this
work, we present MOReL, an algorithmic framework for model-based offline RL.
This framework consists of two steps: (a) learning a pessimistic MDP (P-MDP)
using the offline dataset; (b) learning a near-optimal policy in this P-MDP. The
learned P-MDP has the property that for any policy, the performance in the real
environment is approximately lower-bounded by the performance in the P-MDP.
This enables it to serve as a good surrogate for purposes of policy evaluation and
learning, and overcome common pitfalls of model-based RL like model exploitation.
Theoretically, we show that MOReL enjoys strong performance guarantees for offline
RL. Through experiments, we show that MOReL matches or exceeds state-of-the-art
results in widely studied offline RL benchmarks. Moreover, the modular design
of MOReL enables future advances in its components (e.g., in model learning,
planning etc.) to directly translate into improvements for offline RL. Project
webpage: https://sites.google.com/view/morel

1

Introduction

The fields of computer vision and NLP have seen tremendous advances by utilizing large-scale
offline datasets [1, 2, 3] for training and deploying deep learning models [4, 5, 6, 7]. In contrast,
reinforcement learning (RL) [8] is typically viewed as an online learning process. The RL agent
iteratively collects data through interactions with the environment while learning the policy. Unfortunately, a direct embodiment of this trial and error learning is often inefficient and feasible only
with a simulator [9, 10, 11]. Similar to progress in other fields of AI, the ability to learn from offline
datasets may hold the key to unlocking the sample efficiency and widespread use of RL agents.
Offline RL, also known as batch RL [12], involves learning a highly rewarding policy using only a
static offline dataset collected by one or more data logging (behavior) policies. Since the data has
already been collected, offline RL abstracts away data collection or exploration, and allows prime
focus on data-driven learning of policies. This abstraction is suitable for safety sensitive applications
∗

Equal Contributions. Correspond to rkidambi@cornell.edu and aravraj@cs.washington.edu.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

