Inference for Batched Bandits
Kelly W. Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University
kellywzhang@seas.harvard.edu

Lucas Janson
Departments of Statistics
Harvard University
ljanson@fas.harvard.edu

Susan A. Murphy
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science
Harvard University
samurphy@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
As bandit algorithms are increasingly utilized in scientific studies and industrial
applications, there is an associated increasing need for reliable inference methods
based on the resulting adaptively-collected data. In this work, we develop methods
for inference on data collected in batches using a bandit algorithm. We first prove
that the ordinary least squares estimator (OLS), which is asymptotically normal on
independently sampled data, is not asymptotically normal on data collected using
standard bandit algorithms when there is no unique optimal arm. This asymptotic
non-normality result implies that the naive assumption that the OLS estimator is
approximately normal can lead to Type-1 error inflation and confidence intervals
with below-nominal coverage probabilities. Second, we introduce the Batched OLS
estimator (BOLS) that we prove is (1) asymptotically normal on data collected
from both multi-arm and contextual bandits and (2) robust to non-stationarity in
the baseline reward.

1

Introduction

Due to their regret minimizing guarantees bandit algorithms have been increasingly used in in realworld sequential decision-making problems, like online advertising [27], mobile health [42], and
online education [34]. However, for many real-world problems it is not enough to just minimize
regret on a particular problem instance. For example, suppose we have run an online education
experiment using a bandit algorithm where we test different types of teaching strategies. When
designing a new online course, ideally we could use the data from the previous experiment to inform
the design, e.g., under-performing arms could be eliminated or modified. Moreover, to help others
designing online courses we would like to be able to publish our findings about how different teaching
strategies compare in their performance. This example demonstrates the need for statistical inference
methods on bandit data, which allow practitioners to draw generalizable knowledge from the data
they have collected (e.g., how much better one teaching strategy is compared to another) for the sake
of scientific discovery and informed decision making.
In this work we will focus on methods to construct confidence intervals for the margin—the difference
in expected rewards of two bandit arms—from batched bandit data. Rather than constructing high
probability confidence intervals, we are interested in constructing confidence intervals by using the
asymptotic distribution of estimators to approximate their finite sample distribution. Asymptotic
approximation methods for statistical inference has a long history of being successful in science and
leads to much narrower confidence intervals than those constructed using high probability bounds.
Most statistical inference methods based on asymptotic approximation assume that treatments
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

