Generative View Synthesis: From Single-view
Semantics to Novel-view Images

Tewodros Habtegebrial1,4 Varun Jampani2 Orazio Gallo3 Didier Stricker1,4
1
TU Kaiserslautern 2 Google Research 3 NVIDIA 4 DFKI

Abstract
Content creation, central to applications such as virtual reality, can be tedious and
time-consuming. Recent image synthesis methods simplify this task by offering
tools to generate new views from as little as a single input image, or by converting
a semantic map into a photorealistic image. We propose to push the envelope further, and introduce Generative View Synthesis (GVS) that can synthesize multiple
photorealistic views of a scene given a single semantic map. We show that the
sequential application of existing techniques, e.g., semantics-to-image translation
followed by monocular view synthesis, fail at capturing the scene’s structure. In
contrast, we solve the semantics-to-image translation in concert with the estimation
of the 3D layout of the scene, thus producing geometrically consistent novel views
that preserve semantic structures. We first lift the input 2D semantic map onto a 3D
layered representation of the scene in feature space, thereby preserving the semantic labels of 3D geometric structures. We then project the layered features onto the
target views to generate the final novel-view images. We verify the strengths of our
method and compare it with several advanced baselines on three different datasets.
Our approach also allows for style manipulation and image editing operations, such
as the addition or removal of objects, with simple manipulations of the input style
images and semantic maps respectively. For code and additional results, visit the
project page at https://gvsnet.github.io

1

Introduction

The rising demand for digital content, together with the widespread availability of high-quality digital
cameras, has fueled the need for tools and algorithms to democratize content creation. A prominent
example of one such technology is novel view synthesis (NVS), which allows the artist to render a
scene from new viewpoints using as few as two images [11, 36], or even just one [34]. Photorealistic
images can also be generated by editing a simplified representation of the scene, such as a semantic
map, followed by image-to-image translation [25], but the viewpoint cannot be manipulated.
In this work, we propose Generative View Synthesis (GVS), which combines the advantages of both
approaches. Given a single semantic map, which is easy to edit and requires no image capture, GVS
can generate RGB images of the same layout, but from new, arbitrary viewpoints. Not surprisingly,
GVS also inherits the challenges of both: generating RGB values from a bare semantic map is
an ill-posed problem that is further complicated by the need for the different output views to be
photometrically and geometrically consistent. One could tackle this problem with the sequential
application of existing techniques. That is, we can first convert the single-view semantic map into
an RGB image using image-to-image translation techniques [20], and generate novel RGB views
using monocular novel view synthesis techniques [34]. However, we observe that this may fail at
preserving the scene’s structure accurately, as shown in the animation in Figure 1.
Our key insight is that semantic maps are particularly informative about the structure of a scene,
despite offering no information about its photometric properties. Semantic segments, in fact, carry
more unambiguous information about occlusion boundaries. This is in contrast with RGB images,
where edges can also result from texture. We leverage this observation to preserve geometric
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

