Dynamic Fusion of Eye Movement Data and Verbal
Narrations in Knowledge-Rich Domains

Qi Yu∗
Rui Li
Pengcheng Shi
Anne Haake
Rochester Institute of Technology
{mxz5733, qi.yu, rxlics, spcast, arhics}@rit.edu

Ervine Zheng

Abstract
We propose to jointly analyze experts’ eye movements and verbal narrations to
discover important and interpretable knowledge patterns to better understand their
decision-making processes. The discovered patterns can further enhance datadriven statistical models by fusing experts’ domain knowledge to support complex
human-machine collaborative decision-making. Our key contribution is a novel
dynamic Bayesian nonparametric model that assigns latent knowledge patterns
into key phases involved in complex decision-making. Each phase is characterized
by a unique distribution of word topics discovered from verbal narrations and
their dynamic interactions with eye movement patterns, indicating experts’ special
perceptual behavior within a given decision-making stage. A new split-mergeswitch sampler is developed to efficiently explore the posterior state space with
an improved mixing rate. Case studies on diagnostic error prediction and disease
morphology categorization help demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
model and discovered knowledge patterns.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen an increasing application of automatic computational systems in supporting
humans in visual-based decision-making tasks. Machine learning models are applied to process largescale data in the forms of images, videos, and texts for discovering statistical regularities and making
predictions [1, 2]. However, human expertise is still essential in providing meaningful interpretations
of the semantics for tasks in specialized domains, such as medicine, science, and security intelligence.
Domain expertise, such as conceptual and perceptual skills, are usually developed through long-term
training and practice. It allows human experts to perform better than fully automatic systems, which
interpret images or videos solely based on low-level features [3, 4]. Therefore, it is beneficial to
incorporate human behavioral data for visual-based tasks in knowledge-rich domains.
Modern technologies have made it possible to record human behavioral data [5, 6]. For instance, eye
tracking measures the gaze and the motion of eyes to indicate how human perceptually processes
images and audio recording digitally inscribes and re-creates human speeches as input for studying
semantic conception. Analysis of eye gaze exposes cognitive processing at the level of visual
perception, while verbal expression reflects semantic conception. These elements, both of which are
significantly relevant to domain expertise, interact in visual-based decision-making process [7, 8].
In this paper, we propose to perform dynamic multimodal knowledge data fusion to synergize human
domain expertise and statistical modeling, enabling them to tackle highly challenging visual-based
tasks collectively. Inspired by psychological studies of important phases in humans’ decision-making
[9], we develop a phase-aware dynamic Bayesian nonparametric model that assigns latent knowledge
patterns into key phases involved in complex decision-making. In particular, an expert’s decisionmaking process is automatically partitioned into a sequence of latent decision phases, whose temporal
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

