Limits on Testing Structural Changes in Ising Models

Aditya Gangrade
Boston University
gangrade@bu.edu

Bobak Nazer
Boston University
bobak@bu.edu

Venkatesh Saligrama
Boston University
srv@bu.edu

Abstract
We present novel information-theoretic limits on detecting sparse changes in Ising
models, a problem that arises in many applications where network changes can
occur due to some external stimuli. We show that the sample complexity for
detecting sparse changes, in a minimax sense, is no better than learning the entire
model even in settings with local sparsity. This is a surprising fact in light of prior
work rooted in sparse recovery methods, which suggest that sample complexity
in this context scales only with the number of network changes. To shed light on
when change detection is easier than structured learning, we consider testing of
edge deletion in forest-structured graphs, and high-temperature ferromagnets as
case studies. We show for these that testing of small changes is similarly hard, but
testing of large changes is well-separated from structure learning. These results
imply that testing of graphical models may not be amenable to concepts such as
restricted strong convexity leveraged for sparsity pattern recovery, and algorithm
development instead should be directed towards detection of large changes.

1

Introduction

Recent technological advances have lead to the emergence of high-dimensional datasets in a wide
range of scientific disciplines [YY17; Cos+10; PF95; Bre15; Lok+18; WSD19; Ban18], where the
observations are modeled as arising from a probabilistic graphical model (GM), and the goal is to
recover the network [Orl+15]. While full network recovery is sometimes useful, and there has been a
flurry of activity [DM17; SW12] in this context, we are often interested in changes in network structure in response to external stimuli, such as changes in protein-protein interactions across different
disease states [IK12] or changes in neuronal connectivity as a subject learns a task [Moh+16].
A baseline approach is to estimate the network at each stage, and then compare the differences.
However, such observations exhibit significant variability, and the amount of data available may be
too small for this approach to yield meaningful results. On the other hand, reliably recovering network changes should be easier than full reconstruction. While prior works have proposed inference
algorithms to explore this possibility [ZCL14; XCC15; FB16; BVB16; BZN18; Zha+19; Cai+19],
we do not have a good mathematical understanding of when this is indeed easier.
To shed light on this question, we propose to derive information-theoretic limits for two structural
inference problems over degree-bounded Ising models. The first is goodness-of-fit testing (GOF).
Let G(P ) be the network structure (see §2) of an Ising model P . GOF is posed as follows.
GOF : Given an Ising model P and i.i.d. samples from another Ising model Q,
determine if P = Q or if G(P ) and G(Q) differ in at least s edges.
The second is a related estimation problem, termed error-of-fit (EOF), that demands localising differences in G(P ) and G(Q) (if distinct).
EOF: Given an Ising model P and i.i.d. samples from another Ising model Q that
is either equal to P , or has a network structure that differs from that of P in s
edges or more, determine the edges where G(P ) and G(Q) differ.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

