Recurrent Switching Dynamical Systems Models for
Multiple Interacting Neural Populations

Joshua I. Glaser1,2,3 , Matthew Whiteway2,3 ,
John P. Cunningham1,2,3 , Liam Paninski1,2,3 , Scott W. Linderman4
1

Department of Statistics, Columbia University
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University
3
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University
4
Department of Statistics and Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University
2

{j.glaser, m.whiteway, jpc2181}@columbia.edu
liam@stat.columbia.edu
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

Abstract
Modern recording techniques can generate large-scale measurements of multiple
neural populations over extended time periods. However, it remains a challenge to
model non-stationary interactions between high-dimensional populations of neurons. To tackle this challenge, we develop recurrent switching linear dynamical
systems models for multiple populations. Here, each high-dimensional neural
population is represented by a unique set of latent variables, which evolve dynamically in time. Populations interact with each other through this low-dimensional
space. We allow the nature of these interactions to change over time by using a
discrete set of dynamical states. Additionally, we parameterize these discrete state
transition rules to capture which neural populations are responsible for switching between interaction states. To fit the model, we use variational expectationmaximization with a structured mean-field approximation. After validating the
model on simulations, we apply it to two different neural datasets: spiking activity
from motor areas in a non-human primate, and calcium imaging from neurons in
the nematode C. elegans. In both datasets, the model reveals behaviorally-relevant
discrete states with unique inter-population interactions and different populations
that predict transitioning between these states.

1

Introduction

With high-density silicon probes [1] and large-scale calcium imaging methods [2–4], neuroscientists now commonly record thousands of neurons at a time with single-cell resolution. Unlike past
recording methods, which were often limited by small fields of view, sparse coverage, or low spatial
resolution, these new techniques can simultaneously capture large numbers of neurons from many
different brain areas and multiple cell types. With these expanding capabilities, interactions between
populations of neurons can be assessed with greater precision than previously possible.
Initial multi-population studies point to three recurring themes [5]. First, though populations may
consist of hundreds of neurons, the neural activity within each population may be correlated [6, 7],
reflecting a lower-dimensional, latent population “state” [8], especially during simple behaviors [9]
(except see [10]). Second, the interactions between populations—often quantified by the crosscorrelation between neurons in one population and another—may also occur in a low-dimensional
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

