Recurrent Quantum Neural Networks

Johannes Bausch

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks are the foundation of many sequence-to-sequence models in machine learning, such as machine translation and speech synthesis. With
applied quantum computing in its infancy, there already exist quantum machine
learning models such as variational quantum eigensolvers which have been used
e.g. in the context of energy minimization tasks. Yet, to date, no viable recurrent
quantum network has been proposed.
In this work we construct the first quantum recurrent neural network (QRNN)
with demonstrable performance on non-trivial tasks such as sequence learning and
integer digit classification. The QRNN cell is built from parametrized quantum
neurons, which, in conjunction with amplitude amplification, creates a nonlinear
activation of polynomials of its inputs and cell state, and allows the extraction of
a probability distribution over predicted classes at each step.
To study the model’s performance, we provide an implementation in pytorch,
which allows the relatively efficient optimization of parametrized quantum circuits with tens of thousands of parameters, and which demonstrates that the model
does not appear to suffer from the vanishing gradient problem that plagues many
existing quantum classifiers and classical RNNs. We establish a QRNN training
setup by benchmarking optimization hyperparameters, and analyse suitable network topologies for simple memorisation and sequence prediction tasks from Elman’s seminal paper (1990). We then proceed to evaluate the QRNN on MNIST
classification, by feeding the QRNN each image pixel-by-pixel; with a network
utilizing only 12 qubits we reach a test set accuracy over 95% when discriminating between the digits ‘0’ and ‘1’.

1

Introduction

Optimizing recurrent neural networks for long sequences is a challenging task: applying the same
RNN cell operator iteratively often suffers from the well-studied vanishing or exploding gradients
problem, which results in poor training performance [PMB12]. While long short-term memories or
gated recurrent units (LSTMs and GRUs) with their linear operations acting on the cell state have
been proposed as a way of circumventing this problem, they too are typically limited to capturing
about 200 tokens of context, and e.g. start to ignore word order with increasing sequence lengths
(more than 50 tokens away) [ZQH15; Dab08; Kha+18].
This failure of existing recurrent models to capture very long sequences surely played a role in
the advent of alternative, non-recurrent models applicable to sequence-to-sequence tasks, such as
transformer-type architectures with self-attention. Yet while these alternatives often outperformg
LSTMs, they feature a fixed-width context window that does not easily scale with the sequence
length; extensions thereof are an active field of research [Al-+19; Dai+19; KKL20].
Beyond training modifications such as truncated backpropagation [AFF19] which attempt to mitigate the vanishing gradient problem for recurrent neural networks directly, there have been numerous
proposals to parametrize recurrent models in a way which limits or eliminates gradient decay, by ensuring the transfer operation at each step preserves the gradient norm; examples include orthogonal
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

