Refactoring Policy for Compositional Generalizability
using Self-Supervised Object Proposals

Tongzhou Mu1∗ Jiayuan Gu1∗ Zhiwei Jia1 Hao Tang2 Hao Su1
1
2
University of California, San Diego
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{t3mu,jigu,zjia,haosu}@eng.ucsd.edu tanghaosjtu@gmail.com

Abstract
We study how to learn a policy with compositional generalizability. We propose
a two-stage framework, which refactorizes a high-reward teacher policy into a
generalizable student policy with strong inductive bias. Particularly, we implement
an object-centric GNN-based student policy, whose input objects are learned from
images through self-supervised learning. Empirically, we evaluate our approach on
four difficult tasks that require compositional generalizability, and achieve superior
performance compared to baselines.

1

Introduction

Obtaining policies that would work in different environments is a fundamental challenge of artificial
intelligence. While reinforcement learning and imitation learning have made remarkable progress
to solve challenging tasks (e.g., Go [31], Montezuma’s Revenge [10]), their cross-environment
generalizability is still limited, affecting applications in complicated and changing scenarios. In fact,
to enable such applications, the policy function has to be adaptive to many factors, such as nuisances
in visual appearance and physical attributes, change of rewards, and variation in the quantity and
arrangement of objects.
In this paper, we aim to learn a generalizable policy network across environments composed by a flexible number of objects. To make the problem tractable, we further assume that policies of consistency
across environments can be discovered, in the sense that a policy with consistent behavior achieves
high cumulative reward following the same reasoning rationale in different environments. While this
statement lacks rigor mathematically, it describes a common use case in our daily experiences: Take
the classical Pacman game for example – it is not hard to write down a greedy policy that achieves
high rewards, no matter how many dots and ghosts there are and where they are located.
We notice that, when talking about policy learning, we often aim to achieve two goals that are both
quire challenging but not exactly aligned: 1) to address the optimization challenge for maximizing
the reward in the training environments, which often involves high variance due to the randomness
of environment dynamics and exploration strategy; and 2) to address the generalization challenge,
which aims at achieving desired cross-environment generalizability. We conjecture that solving the
two misaligned goals independently may result in two easier problems than solving the coupled
problem, and there are richer options to solve each problem independently.
For this reason, we explore a strategy to break the policy learning into two stages in the compositional
generalizability setup: The first stage focuses on overfitting the training environments with no
generalizability concern, while the second stage focuses on designing the policy network architecture
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Project website: https://jiayuan-gu.github.io/policy-refactorization.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

