Natural Graph Networks

Pim de Haan
Qualcomm AI Research˚
University of Amsterdam QUVA Lab

Taco Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research

Max Welling
Qualcomm AI Research
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
A key requirement for graph neural networks is that they must process a graph in
a way that does not depend on how the graph is described. Traditionally this has
been taken to mean that a graph network must be equivariant to node permutations.
Here we show that instead of equivariance, the more general concept of naturality
is sufficient for a graph network to be well-defined, opening up a larger class of
graph networks. We define global and local natural graph networks, the latter of
which are as scalable as conventional message passing graph neural networks while
being more flexible. We give one practical instantiation of a natural network on
graphs which uses an equivariant message network parameterization, yielding good
performance on several benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is among the most ubiquitous forms of structured data used in machine learning
and efficient practical neural network algorithms for processing such data have recently received
much attention [Wu et al., 2020]. Because of their scalability to large graphs, graph convolutional
neural networks or message passing networks are widely used. However, it has been shown [Xu et al.,
2018] that such networks, which pass messages along the edges of the graph and aggregate them in a
permutation invariant manner, are fundamentally limited in their expressivity.

(a) A global isomorphism.

(b) Induced local isomorphisms.

Figure 1: A global graph isomorphism corresponds for each edge to a local isomorphism on its neighbourhood,
shown for three example edges - denoted with arrows. Hence, when a message passing kernel satisfies the
naturality condition for local isomorphisms of the edge neighbourhood (Eq. 4), it also satisfies the global
naturality condition (Eq. 2).
˚

Qualcomm AI Research in an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

