Learning Strategy-Aware Linear Classifiers

Yiling Chen
Harvard University
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Yang Liu
UC Santa Cruz
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Chara Podimata
Harvard University
podimata@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
We address the question of repeatedly learning linear classifiers against agents
who are strategically trying to game the deployed classifiers, and we use the
Stackelberg regret to measure the performance of our algorithms. First, we show
that Stackelberg and external regret for the problem of strategic classification are
strongly incompatible: i.e., there exist worst-case scenarios, where any sequence
of actions providing sublinear external regret might result in linear Stackelberg regret and vice versa. Second, we present a strategy-aware algorithm for minimizing
the Stackelberg regret for which we prove nearly matching upper and lower regret
bounds. Finally, we provide simulations to complement our theoretical analysis.
Our results advance the growing literature of learning from revealed preferences,
which has so far focused on “smoother” assumptions from the perspective of the
learner and the agents respectively.

1

Introduction

As Machine Learning (ML) algorithms become increasingly involved in real-life decision making,
the agents that they interact with tend to be neither stochastic nor adversarial. Rather, they are
strategic. For example, consider a college that wishes to deploy an ML algorithm to make admissions decisions. Student candidates might try to manipulate their test scores in an effort to fool the
classifier. Or think about email spammers who are trying to manipulate their emails in an effort to
fool the ML classifier and land in the non-spam inboxes. Importantly, in both examples the agents
(students and spammers respectively) do not want to sabotage the classification algorithm only for
the sake of harming its performance. They merely want to game it for their own benefit. And this is
precisely what differentiates them from being fully adversarial.
Motivated by the problem of classifying spam emails, we focus on the problem of learning an unknown linear classifier, when the training data come in an online fashion from strategic agents, who
can alter their feature vectors to game the classifier. We model the interplay between the learner and
the strategic agents1 as a repeated Stackelberg game over T timesteps. In a repeated Stackelberg
game, the learner (“leader”) commits to an action, and then, the agent (“follower”) best-responds to
it, i.e., reports something that maximizes his underlying utility. The learner’s goal is to minimize
her Stackelberg regret, which is the difference between her cumulative loss and the cumulative loss
of her best-fixed action in hindsight, had she given the agent the opportunity to best-respond to it.
Our Contributions.
• We study a general model of learning interaction in strategic classification settings where the
agents’ true datapoint remains hidden from the learner, the agents can misreport within a ball of
radius δ of their true datapoint (termed δ-bounded, myopically rational (δ-BMR) agents), and the
learner measures her performance using the binary loss. This model departs significantly from
the smooth utility and loss functions used so far for strategic classification (Sec. 2).
1

We refer to the learner as a female (she/her/hers) and to the agents as male (he/his/him).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

