GNNG UARD: Defending Graph Neural Networks
against Adversarial Attacks

Xiang Zhang
Harvard University
xiang_zhang@hms.harvard.edu

Marinka Zitnik
Harvard University
marinka@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Deep learning methods for graphs achieve remarkable performance across a variety
of domains. However, recent findings indicate that small, unnoticeable perturbations of graph structure can catastrophically reduce performance of even the
strongest and most popular Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Here, we develop
GNNG UARD, a general algorithm to defend against a variety of training-time
attacks that perturb the discrete graph structure. GNNG UARD can be straightforwardly incorporated into any GNN. Its core principle is to detect and quantify
the relationship between the graph structure and node features, if one exists, and
then exploit that relationship to mitigate negative effects of the attack. GNNG UARD learns how to best assign higher weights to edges connecting similar nodes
while pruning edges between unrelated nodes. The revised edges allow for robust
propagation of neural messages in the underlying GNN. GNNG UARD introduces
two novel components, the neighbor importance estimation, and the layer-wise
graph memory, and we show empirically that both components are necessary for a
successful defense. Across five GNNs, three defense methods, and four datasets,
including a challenging human disease graph, experiments show that GNNG UARD
outperforms existing defense approaches by 15.3% on average. Remarkably, GNNG UARD can effectively restore state-of-the-art performance of GNNs in the face
of various adversarial attacks, including targeted and non-targeted attacks, and can
defend against attacks on heterophily graphs.

1

Introduction

Deep learning on graphs and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), in particular, have achieved remarkable
success in a variety of application areas [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The key to the success of GNNs is the neural
message passing scheme [6] in which neural messages are propagated along edges of the graph
and typically optimized for performance on a downstream task. In doing so, the GNN is trained
to aggregate information from neighbors for every node in each layer, which allows the model to
eventually generate representations that capture useful node feature as well as topological structure
information [7]. While the aggregation of neighbor nodes’ information is a powerful principle of
representation learning, the way that GNNs exchange that information between nodes makes them
vulnerable to adversarial attacks [8].
Adversarial attacks on graphs, which carefully rewire the graph topology by selecting a small number
of edges or inject carefully designed perturbations to node features, can contaminate local node
neighborhoods, degrade learned representations, confuse the GNN to misclassify nodes in the graph,
and can catastrophically reduce the performance of even the strongest and most popular GNNs [9, 10].
The lack of GNN robustness is a critical issue in many application areas, including those where
adversarial perturbations can undermine public trust [11], interfere with human decision making [12],
and affect human health and livelihoods [13]. For this reason, it is vital to develop GNNs that are
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

