Not All Unlabeled Data are Equal:
Learning to Weight Data in Semi-supervised Learning
Zhongzheng Ren⇤, Raymond A. Yeh⇤, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{zr5, yeh17, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Existing semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms use a single weight to balance
the loss of labeled and unlabeled examples, i.e., all unlabeled examples are equally
weighted. But not all unlabeled data are equal. In this paper we study how to
use a different weight for every unlabeled example. Manual tuning of all those
weights – as done in prior work – is no longer possible. Instead, we adjust those
weights via an algorithm based on the influence function, a measure of a model’s
dependency on one training example. To make the approach efficient, we propose
a fast and effective approximation of the influence function. We demonstrate that
this technique outperforms state-of-the-art methods on semi-supervised image and
language classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Unlabeled data helps to reduce the cost of supervised learning, particularly in fields where it is
expensive to obtain annotations. For instance, labels for biomedical tasks need to be provided by
domain experts, which are expensive to hire. Besides the hiring cost, labeling tasks are often labor
intensive, e.g., dense labeling of video data requires to review many frames. Hence, a significant
amount of effort has been invested to develop novel semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms,
i.e., algorithms which utilize both labeled and unlabeled data. See the seminal review (specifically
Sec. 1.1.2.) by Chapelle et al. [6] and references therein.
Classical semi-supervised techniques [26, 36, 38, 42] based on expectation-maximization [11, 16]
iterate between (a) inferring a label-estimate for the unlabeled portion of the data using the current
model and (b) using both labels and label-estimates to update the model. Methods for deep nets
have also been explored [20, 29, 32, 33]. More recently, data augmentation techniques are combined
with label-estimation for SSL. The key idea is to improve the model via consistency losses which
encourage labels to remain identical after augmentation [4, 41].
Formally, the standard SSL setup consists of three datasets: a labeled training set, an unlabeled
training set, and a validation set. In practice, SSL algorithms train the model parameters on both the
labeled and unlabeled training sets and tune the hyperparameters manually based on the validation set
performance. Specifically, a key hyperparameter adjusts the trade-off between labeled and unlabeled
data. All aforementioned SSL methods use a single scalar for this, i.e., an identical weight is assigned
to all unlabeled data points. To obtain good performance, in practice, this weight is carefully tuned
using the validation set, and changes over the training iterations [4].
We think not all unlabeled data are equal. For instance, when the label-estimate of an unlabeled
example is incorrect, training on that particular label-estimate hurts overall performance. In this case,
using a single scalar to weight the labeled and unlabeled data loss term is suboptimal. To address
this, we study use of an individual weight for each of the unlabeled examples. To facilitate such a
⇤

Indicates equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

