Metric-Free Individual Fairness in Online Learning

Yahav Bechavod
Hebrew University
yahav.bechavod@cs.huji.ac.il

Christopher Jung
University of Pennsylvania
chrjung@seas.upenn.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
We study an online learning problem subject to the constraint of individual fairness,
which requires that similar individuals are treated similarly. Unlike prior work on
individual fairness, we do not assume the similarity measure among individuals
is known, nor do we assume that such measure takes a certain parametric form.
Instead, we leverage the existence of an auditor who detects fairness violations
without enunciating the quantitative measure. In each round, the auditor examines
the learner’s decisions and attempts to identify a pair of individuals that are treated
unfairly by the learner. We provide a general reduction framework that reduces
online classification in our model to standard online classification, which allows
us to leverage existing online learning algorithms to achieve sub-linear regret and
number of fairness violations. Surprisingly, in the stochastic setting where the
data are drawn independently from a distribution, we are also able to establish
PAC-style fairness and accuracy generalization guarantees (Rothblum and Yona
(2018)), despite only having access to a very restricted form of fairness feedback.
Our fairness generalization bound qualitatively matches the uniform convergence
bound of Rothblum and Yona (2018), while also providing a meaningful accuracy
generalization guarantee. Our results resolve an open question by Gillen et al.
(2018) by showing that online learning under an unknown individual fairness
constraint is possible even without assuming a strong parametric form of the
underlying similarity measure.

1

Introduction

As machine learning increasingly permeates many critical aspects of society, including education,
healthcare, criminal justice, and lending, there is by now a vast literature that studies how to make
machine learning algorithms fair (see, e.g., Chouldechova and Roth (2018); Podesta et al. (2014);
Corbett-Davies and Goel (2018)). Most of the work in this literature tackles the problem by taking the
statistical group fairness approach that first fixes a small collection of high-level groups defined by
protected attributes (e.g., race or gender) and then asks for approximate parity of some statistic of the
predictor, such as positive classification rate or false positive rate, across these groups (see, e.g., Hardt
et al. (2016); Chouldechova (2017); Kleinberg et al. (2017); Agarwal et al. (2018)). While notions of
group fairness are easy to operationalize, they are aggregate in nature without fairness guarantees for
finer subgroups or individuals (Dwork et al., 2012; Hébert-Johnson et al., 2018; Kearns et al., 2018).
In contrast, the individual fairness approach aims to address this limitation by asking for explicit
fairness criteria at an individual level. In particular, the compelling notion of individual fairness
proposed in the seminal work of Dwork et al. (2012) requires that similar people are treated similarly.
The original formulation of individual fairness assumes that the algorithm designer has access to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

