Model-based Policy Optimization with
Unsupervised Model Adaptation

Jian Shen‡ , Han Zhao?∗, Weinan Zhang‡† , Yong Yu‡
‡
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, ? D. E. Shaw & Co
{rockyshen, wnzhang, yyu}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn
han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning methods learn a dynamics model with real data
sampled from the environment and leverage it to generate simulated data to derive
an agent. However, due to the potential distribution mismatch between simulated
data and real data, this could lead to degraded performance. Despite much effort
being devoted to reducing this distribution mismatch, existing methods fail to solve
it explicitly. In this paper, we investigate how to bridge the gap between real and
simulated data due to inaccurate model estimation for better policy optimization.
To begin with, we first derive a lower bound of the expected return, which naturally
inspires a bound maximization algorithm by aligning the simulated and real data
distributions. To this end, we propose a novel model-based reinforcement learning
framework AMPO, which introduces unsupervised model adaptation to minimize
the integral probability metric (IPM) between feature distributions from real and
simulated data. Instantiating our framework with Wasserstein-1 distance gives a
practical model-based approach. Empirically, our approach achieves state-of-theart performance in terms of sample efficiency on a range of continuous control
benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, model-free reinforcement learning (MFRL) has achieved tremendous success
on a wide range of simulated domains, e.g., video games [Mnih et al., 2015], complex robotic
tasks [Haarnoja et al., 2018], just to name a few. However, model-free methods are notoriously data
inefficient and often require a massive number of samples from the environment. In many high-stakes
real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving, online education, etc., it is often expensive, or
even infeasible, to collect such large-scale datasets. On the other hand, model-based reinforcement
learning (MBRL), in contrast, is considered to be an appealing alternative that is able to substantially
reduce sample complexity [Sun et al., 2018, Langlois et al., 2019].
At a colloquial level, model-based approaches build a predictive model of the environment dynamics and generate simulated rollouts from it to derive a policy [Janner et al., 2019, Luo et al., 2018,
Kaiser et al., 2019] or a planner [Chua et al., 2018, Hafner et al., 2019]. However, the asymptotic
performance of MBRL methods often lags behind their model-free counterparts, mainly due to the
fact that the model learned from finite data can still be far away from the underlying dynamics of
the environment. To be precise, even equipped with a high-capacity model, such model error still
exists due to the potential distribution mismatch between the training and generating phases, i.e.,
the state-action input distribution used to train the model is different from the one generated by
the model [Talvitie, 2014]. Because of this gap, the learned model may give inaccurate predictions
∗

Work done while at Carnegie Mellon University. † Weinan Zhang is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

