MMA Regularization: Decorrelating Weights of
Neural Networks by Maximizing the Minimal Angles

Zhennan Wang†, Canqun Xiang†, Wenbin Zou†∗, Chen Xu‡
Shenzhen University
{wangzhennan2017, xiangcanqun2018}@email.szu.edu.cn, {wzou, xuchen_szu}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
The strong correlation between neurons or filters can significantly weaken the
generalization ability of neural networks. Inspired by the well-known Tammes
problem, we propose a novel diversity regularization method to address this issue,
which makes the normalized weight vectors of neurons or filters distributed on a
hypersphere as uniformly as possible, through maximizing the minimal pairwise
angles (MMA). This method can easily exert its effect by plugging the MMA
regularization term into the loss function with negligible computational overhead.
The MMA regularization is simple, efficient, and effective. Therefore, it can be used
as a basic regularization method in neural network training. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that MMA regularization is able to enhance the generalization ability
of various modern models and achieves considerable performance improvements
on CIFAR100 and TinyImageNet datasets. In addition, experiments on face
verification show that MMA regularization is also effective for feature learning.
Code is available at: https://github.com/wznpub/MMA_Regularization.

1

Introduction

Although neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art results in a variety of tasks, they contain
redundant neurons or filters due to the over-parametrization issue [41, 21], which is prevalent in
networks [39]. The redundance can lead to catching limited directions in feature space and poor
generalization performance [27].
To address the redundancy problem and make neurons more discriminative, some methods are
developed to encourage the angular diversity between pairwise weight vectors of neurons or filters in
a layer, which can be categorized into the following three types. The first type reduces the redundancy
by dropping some weights and then retraining them iteratively during optimization [35, 12, 36], which
suffers from complex training scheme and very long training phase. The second type is the widely
used orthogonal regularization [38, 52, 23, 51], which exploits a regularization term in loss function
to enforce the pairwise weight vectors as orthogonal as possible. However, it has been proven that
orthogonal regularization tends to group neurons closer, especially when the number of neurons is
greater than the dimension [24], and therefore it only produces marginal improvements [35]. The third
type also utilizes a regularization term but to encourage the weight vectors uniformly spaced through
minimizing the hyperspherical potential energy [24, 22] inspired from the Thomson problem [47, 44].
Nonetheless, its disadvantage is that both the time complexity and the space complexity are very
†

The authors are with Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Machine Learning and Applications,
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Artificial Intelligence and
Advanced Communication, College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University.
‡
The author is with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Advanced Communication, College of
Mathematics and Statistics, Shenzhen University.
∗
Corresponding author: Wenbin Zou.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

