Deep Relational Topic Modeling via
Graph Poisson Gamma Belief Network

Chaojie Wang∗,

Hao Zhang∗, Bo Chen†, Dongsheng Wang, Zhengjue Wang
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710071, China
xd_silly@163.com, zhanghao_xidian@163.com, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn
wds_dana@163.com, zhengjuewang@163.com
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
To analyze a collection of interconnected documents, relational topic models
(RTMs) have been developed to describe both the link structure and document content, exploring their underlying relationships via a single-layer latent representation
with limited expressive capability. To better utilize the document network, we first
propose graph Poisson factor analysis (GPFA) that constructs a probabilistic model
for interconnected documents and also provides closed-form Gibbs sampling update equations, moving beyond sophisticated approximate assumptions of existing
RTMs. Extending GPFA, we develop a novel hierarchical RTM named graph Poisson gamma belief network (GPGBN), and further introduce two different Weibull
distribution based variational graph auto-encoders for efficient model inference
and effective network information aggregation. Experimental results demonstrate
that our models extract high-quality hierarchical latent document representations,
leading to improved performance over baselines on various graph analytic tasks.

1

Introduction

A wide variety of network data, such as citation networks [1], chemical molecular structures [2],
and social networks [3], can be represented as a graph composed of a set of objects (nodes), each of
which is characterized by a set of node features (attributes), and their relationships (edges). The node
features and edges are usually characterized as count, binary, or positive variables. In many graph
analytic applications, such as link prediction, modeling uncertainty [4] in the latent space rather than
only providing deterministic node embeddings, is of crucial importance [5–7] and can be realized via
probabilistic generative models (PGMs).
Various network decomposition methods have been proposed to discover the underlying relationships
of the nodes from the link structure [8–11]. These methods, however, often ignore the information
provided by the node features. Inspired by the efficiency of latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [12]
in exploring the hidden structure of count-valued data, a series of relational topic models (RTMs)
[3, 13–17] were introduced to explore the relationships between the nodes and edges in a latent space.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

