BlockGAN: Learning 3D Object-aware
Scene Representations from Unlabelled Images

Thu Nguyen-Phuoc
University of Bath

Christian Richardt
University of Bath

Yong-Liang Yang
University of Bath

Long Mai
Adobe Research

Niloy Mitra
Adobe Research & UCL

Abstract
We present BlockGAN, an image generative model that learns object-aware 3D
scene representations directly from unlabelled 2D images. Current work on scene
representation learning either ignores scene background or treats the whole scene
as one object. Meanwhile, work that considers scene compositionality treats scene
objects only as image patches or 2D layers with alpha maps. Inspired by the computer
graphics pipeline, we design BlockGAN to learn to first generate 3D features of
background and foreground objects, then combine them into 3D features for the
whole scene, and finally render them into realistic images. This allows BlockGAN to
reason over occlusion and interaction between objects’ appearance, such as shadow
and lighting, and provides control over each object’s 3D pose and identity, while
maintaining image realism. BlockGAN is trained end-to-end, using only unlabelled
single images, without the need for 3D geometry, pose labels, object masks, or
multiple views of the same scene. Our experiments show that using explicit 3D
features to represent objects allows BlockGAN to learn disentangled representations
both in terms of objects (foreground and background) and their properties (pose and
identity). Our code is available at https://github.com/thunguyenphuoc/BlockGAN.

1

Introduction

The computer graphics pipeline has achieved impressive results in generating high-quality images,
while offering users a great level of freedom and controllability over the generated images. This
has many applications in creating and editing content for the creative industries, such as films,
games, scientific visualisation, and more recently, in generating training data for computer vision
tasks. However, the current pipeline, ranging from generating 3D geometry and textures, rendering,
compositing and image post-processing, can be very expensive in terms of labour, time, and costs.
Recent image generative models, in particular generative adversarial networks [GANs; 14], have
greatly improved the visual fidelity and resolution of generated images [5, 23, 24]. Conditional GANs
[36] allow users to manipulate images, but require labels during training. Recent work on unsupervised
disentangled representations using GANs [9, 24, 38] relaxes this need for labels. The ability to produce
high-quality, controllable images has made GANs an increasingly attractive alternative to the traditional
graphics pipeline for content generation. However, most work focuses on property disentanglement,
such as shape, pose and appearance, without considering the compositionality of the images, i.e., scenes
being made up of multiple objects. Therefore, they do not offer control over individual objects in a way
that respects the interaction of objects, such as consistent lighting and shadows. This is a major limitation
of current image generative models, compared to the graphics pipeline, where 3D objects are modelled
individually in terms of geometry and appearance, and combined into 3D scenes with consistent lighting.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

