A shooting formulation of deep learning

François-Xavier Vialard
LIGM, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS
francois-xavier.vialard@u-pem.fr

Susan Wei
School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Melbourne
susan.wei@unimelb.edu.au

Roland Kwitt
Department of Computer Science
University of Salzburg
Roland.Kwitt@sbg.ac.at
Marc Niethammer
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
mn@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
A residual network may be regarded as a discretization of an ordinary differential
equation (ODE) which, in the limit of time discretization, defines a continuousdepth network. Although important steps have been taken to realize the advantages
of such continuous formulations, most current techniques assume identical layers. Indeed, existing works throw into relief the myriad difficulties of learning
an infinite-dimensional parameter in a continuous-depth neural network. To this
end, we introduce a shooting formulation which shifts the perspective from parameterizing a network layer-by-layer to parameterizing over optimal networks
described only by a set of initial conditions. For scalability, we propose a novel
particle-ensemble parameterization which fully specifies the optimal weight trajectory of the continuous-depth neural network. Our experiments show that our
particle-ensemble shooting formulation can achieve competitive performance. Finally, though the current work is inspired by continuous-depth neural networks, the
particle-ensemble shooting formulation also applies to discrete-time networks and
may lead to a new fertile area of research in deep learning parameterization.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are closely related to optimal control (OC) where the sought-for
control variable corresponds to the parameters of the DNN [24, 23, 19]. To be able to talk about
an optimal control requires the definition of a control cost, i.e., a norm on the control variable.
We explore the ramifications of such a control cost in the context of DNN parameterization. For
simplicity, we focus on continuous formulations in the spirit of neural ODEs [13]. However, both
discrete and continuous OC formulations exist [12, 4, 37]; our approach could be developed for both.
Initial work on continuous DNN formulations was motivated by the realization that a ResNet
[20, 21] resembles Euler forward time-integration [19, 23]. Specifically, the forward pass of some
input vector x̃ ∈ Rd through a network with L layers, specified as x(0) = x̃ and x(j + 1) =
x(j) + f (x(j), θ(j)), j = 0, 1, . . . , L, closely relates to an explicit Euler [36] discretization of the
ODE
ẋ(t) = f (t, x(t), θ(t)), x(0) = x̃, 0 ≤ t ≤ T .
(1.1)
In the continuous DNN formulation, we seek an optimal θ such that the terminal prediction given by
x(T ), i.e., the solution to Eq. (1.1) at time T , minimizes `(x(T )) for a task-specific loss function `.
Although Eq. (1.1) with time-varying parameter θ(t) can be considered as a neural network with an
infinite number of layers, current implementations of ODE-inspired networks largely assume the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

