CSER: Communication-efficient SGD with
Error Reset
Cong Xie ∗ 1,2
cx2@illinois.edu

Shuai Zheng 2
shzheng@amazon.com

Indranil Gupta 1
indy@illinois.edu

Mu Li 2
mli@amazon.com

1

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Oluwasanmi Koyejo 1
sanmi@illinois.edu
Haibin Lin 2
haibin.lin.aws@gmail.com

2

Amazon Web Services

Abstract
The scalability of Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is today limited
by communication bottlenecks. We propose a novel SGD variant: Communicationefficient SGD with Error Reset, or CSER. The key idea in CSER is first a new
technique called “error reset” that adapts arbitrary compressors for SGD, producing bifurcated local models with periodic reset of resulting local residual errors.
Second we introduce partial synchronization for both the gradients and the models,
leveraging advantages from them. We prove the convergence of CSER for smooth
non-convex problems. Empirical results show that when combined with highly
aggressive compressors, the CSER algorithms accelerate the distributed training by
nearly 10× for CIFAR-100, and by 4.5× for ImageNet.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the sizes of both machine-learning models and datasets have been increasing rapidly.
To accelerate the training, it is common to distribute the computation on multiple machines. We
focus on Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). SGD and its variants are commonly used for training
large-scale deep neural networks. A common way to distribute SGD is to synchronously compute
the gradients at multiple worker nodes, and then aggregate the global average. This is akin to
single-threaded SGD with large mini-batch sizes [5, 27–29]. Increasing the number of workers is
attractive because it holds the potential to reduce training time. However, more workers also means
more communication, and overwhelmed communication links hurt scalability.
The state-of-the-art work in communication-efficient SGD is called QSparse-local-SGD [3], which
combines two prevailing techniques: message compression and infrequent synchronization. Message
compression methods use compressors such as quantization [2, 4, 9, 17, 21, 26, 33] and sparsification [1, 8, 20] to reduce the number of bits in each synchronization round. This necessitates error
feedback (EF-SGD) [9, 33] to correct for the residual errors incurred by the compressors, and to
guarantee theoretical convergence. On the other hand, infrequent synchronization methods such as
local SGD [13, 19, 25, 30, 31] would decrease the overall number of synchronization rounds. The
former, QSparse-local-SGD, periodically synchronizes the model parameters like local SGD, and
compresses the synchronization messages to further reduce the communication overhead. Similar to
EF-SGD, it also uses error feedback to correct for the residual errors of compression.
∗

The work was done when Cong Xie was a (part-time) intern in Amazon Web Services.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

