Fast Epigraphical Projection-based Incremental Algorithms for
Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Support Vector Machine

Jiajin Li
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
jjli@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Caihua Chen∗
School of Management and Engineering
Nanjing University
chchen@nju.edu.cn
Anthony Man-Cho So
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) is concerned with ﬁnding decisions that perform well on data that are drawn from the worst-case probability distribution within a Wasserstein ball centered at a certain nominal distribution. In recent years, it has been shown that various DRO formulations of learning
models admit tractable convex reformulations. However, most existing works propose to solve these convex reformulations by general-purpose solvers, which are
not well-suited for tackling large-scale problems. In this paper, we focus on a
family of Wasserstein distributionally robust support vector machine (DRSVM)
problems and propose two novel epigraphical projection-based incremental algorithms to solve them. The updates in each iteration of these algorithms can be
computed in a highly efﬁcient manner. Moreover, we show that the DRSVM problems considered in this paper satisfy a Hölderian growth condition with explicitly
determined growth exponents. Consequently, we are able to establish the convergence rates of the proposed incremental algorithms. Our numerical results indicate
that the proposed methods are orders of magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art,
and the performance gap grows considerably as the problem size increases.

1

Introduction

Wasserstein distance-based distributionally robust optimization (DRO) has recently received significant attention in the machine learning community. This can be attributed to its ability to improve
generalization performance by robustifying the learning model against unseen data [13, 22]. The
DRO approach offers a principled way to regularize empiricial risk minimization problems and provides a transparent probabilistic interpretation of a wide range of existing regularization techniques;
see, e.g., [4, 10, 22] and the references therein. Moreover, many representative distributionally
robust learning models admit equivalent reformulations as tractable convex programs via strong duality [22, 12, 18, 27, 11]. Currently, a standard approach to solving these reformulations is to use
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

