Ridge Rider: Finding Diverse Solutions by Following
Eigenvectors of the Hessian
Jack Parker-Holder⇤
University of Oxford
Adam Lerer
FAIR

Luke Metz
Google Research, Brain Team

Alistair Letcher

Alex Peysakhovich
FAIR

Cinjon Resnick
NYU

Hengyuan Hu
FAIR

Aldo Pacchiano
BAIR

Jakob Foerster⇤
FAIR

Abstract
Over the last decade, a single algorithm has changed many facets of our lives Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In the era of ever decreasing loss functions,
SGD and its various offspring have become the go-to optimization tool in machine
learning and are a key component of the success of deep neural networks (DNNs).
While SGD is guaranteed to converge to a local optimum (under loose assumptions),
in some cases it may matter which local optimum is found, and this is often contextdependent. Examples frequently arise in machine learning, from shape-versustexture-features to ensemble methods and zero-shot coordination. In these settings,
there are desired solutions which SGD on ‘standard’ loss functions will not find,
since it instead converges to the ‘easy’ solutions. In this paper, we present a
different approach. Rather than following the gradient, which corresponds to a
locally greedy direction, we instead follow the eigenvectors of the Hessian, which
we call “ridges”. By iteratively following and branching amongst the ridges, we
effectively span the loss surface to find qualitatively different solutions. We show
both theoretically and experimentally that our method, called Ridge Rider (RR),
offers a promising direction for a variety of challenging problems.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are extremely popular in many applications of machine learning
ranging from vision [23, 49] to reinforcement learning [47]. Optimizing them is a non-convex
problem and so the use of gradient methods (e.g. stochastic gradient descent, SGD) leads to finding
local minima. While recent evidence suggests [9] that in supervised problems these local minima
obtain loss values close to the global minimum of the loss, there are a number of problem settings
where optima with the same value can have very different properties. For example, in Reinforcement
Learning (RL), two very different policies might obtain the same reward on a given task, but one of
them might be more robust to perturbations. Similarility, it is known that in supervised settings some
minima generalize far better than others [28, 24]. Thus, being able to find a specific type or class of
minimum is an important problem.
At this point it is natural to ask what the benefit of finding diverse solutions is? Why not optimize the
property we care about directly? The answer is Goodhart’s law: “When a measure becomes a target,
it ceases to be a good measure.” [48]. Generalization and zero-shot coordination are two examples of
these type of objectives, whose very definition prohibits direct optimization.
⇤

Equal contribution. Correspondence to jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk , jnf@fb.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

