A Graph Similarity for Deep Learning

Seongmin Ok
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
Suwon, South Korea
seongmin.ok@gmail.com

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been successful in learning representations
from graphs. Many popular GNNs follow the pattern of aggregate-transform:
they aggregate the neighbors’ attributes and then transform the results of aggregation with a learnable function. Analyses of these GNNs explain which pairs of
non-identical graphs have different representations. However, we still lack an understanding of how similar these representations will be. We adopt kernel distance
and propose transform-sum-cat as an alternative to aggregate-transform to reflect
the continuous similarity between the node neighborhoods in the neighborhood aggregation. The idea leads to a simple and efficient graph similarity, which we name
Weisfeiler–Leman similarity (WLS). In contrast to existing graph kernels, WLS is
easy to implement with common deep learning frameworks. In graph classification experiments, transform-sum-cat significantly outperforms other neighborhood
aggregation methods from popular GNN models. We also develop a simple and
fast GNN model based on transform-sum-cat, which obtains, in comparison with
widely used GNN models, (1) a higher accuracy in node classification, (2) a lower
absolute error in graph regression, and (3) greater stability in adversarial training
of graph generation.

1

Introduction

Graphs are the most popular mathematical abstractions for relational data structures. One of the
core problems of graph theory is to identify which graphs are identical (i.e. isomorphic). Since its
introduction, the Weisfeiler–Leman (WL) algorithm (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968) has been extensively
studied as a test of isomorphism between graphs. Although it is easy to find a pair of non-isomorphic
graphs that the WL-algorithm cannot distinguish, many graph similarity measures and graph neural
networks (GNNs) have adopted the WL-algorithm at the core, due to its algorithmic simplicity.
The WL-algorithm boils down to the neighborhood aggregation. One of the most famous GNNs,
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), uses degree-normalized averaging as its aggregation. GraphSAGE
(Hamilton et al. , 2017) applies simple averaging. GIN (Xu et al. , 2019) uses the sum instead of the
average. Other GNN models such as GAT (Veličković et al. , 2018), GatedGCN (Bresson & Laurent,
2017), and MoNet (Monti et al. , 2017) assign different weights to the neighbors depending on their
attributes before aggregation.
All the methods mentioned above follow the pattern of aggregate-transform. Xu et al. (2019) note
that many GNNs based on graph convolution employ the same strategy: aggregate first and then
transform. In this paper, we identify a problematic aspect of aggregate-transform when applied to
graphs with continuous node attributes. Instead, we propose transform-sum-cat, where cat indicates
concatenation with the information from the central node. We justify our proposal by applying the
well-established theory of kernel distance to the WL algorithm. It naturally leads to a simple and fast
graph similarity, which we name Weisfeiler–Leman similarity (WLS).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

