SEVIR : A Storm Event Imagery Dataset for Deep
Learning Applications in Radar and Satellite
Meteorology

Mark S. Veillette∗

Siddharth Samsi∗

Christopher J. Mattioli

MIT Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA 02420
mark.veillette@ll.mit.edu

MIT Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA 02420
sid@mit.edu

Amazon Web Services †
cmmattio@amazon.com

Abstract
Modern deep learning approaches have shown promising results in meteorological applications like precipitation nowcasting, synthetic radar generation, front
detection and several others. In order to effectively train and validate these complex algorithms, large and diverse datasets containing high-resolution imagery
are required. Petabytes of weather data, such as from the Geostationary Environmental Satellite System (GOES) and the Next-Generation Radar (NEXRAD)
system, are available to the public; however, the size and complexity of these
datasets is a hindrance to developing and training deep models. To help address
this problem, we introduce the Storm EVent ImagRy (SEVIR) dataset - a single,
rich dataset that combines spatially and temporally aligned data from multiple
sensors, along with baseline implementations of deep learning models and evaluation metrics, to accelerate new algorithmic innovations. SEVIR is an annotated,
curated and spatio-temporally aligned dataset containing over 10,000 weather
events that each consist of 384 km x 384 km image sequences spanning 4 hours
of time. Images in SEVIR were sampled and aligned across five different data
types: three channels (C02, C09, C13) from the GOES-16 advanced baseline
imager, NEXRAD vertically integrated liquid mosaics, and GOES-16 Geostationary Lightning Mapper (GLM) flashes. Many events in SEVIR were selected
and matched to the NOAA Storm Events database so that additional descriptive
information such as storm impacts and storm descriptions can be linked to the rich
imagery provided by the sensors. We describe the data collection methodology
and illustrate the applications of this dataset with two examples of deep learning
in meteorology: precipitation nowcasting and synthetic weather radar generation.
In addition, we also describe a set of metrics that can be used to evaluate the
outputs of these models. As of this writing, the SEVIR dataset can be downloaded
from https://registry.opendata.aws/sevir/. Baseline implementations of selected
applications are also available at https://github.com/MIT-AI-Accelerator/neurips2020-sevir.

1

Introduction

The Earth’s weather is continuously monitored by sensors that collect terabytes of data every day.
Over the US, satellite observations provided by GOES-R series satellites (GOES-16 & GOES-17),
and weather radar data provided by the national network of WSR-88D (NEXRAD) radars are two
∗
†

Equal contributors to this work
Contributions to this work were made prior to affiliation with AWS

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

