Unsupervised object-centric video generation
and decomposition in 3D

Paul Henderson
IST Austria
paul@pmh47.net

Christoph H. Lampert
IST Austria
chl@ist.ac.at

Abstract
A natural approach to generative modeling of videos is to represent them as a
composition of moving objects. Recent works model a set of 2D sprites over a
slowly-varying background, but without considering the underlying 3D scene that
gives rise to them. We instead propose to model a video as the view seen while
moving through a scene with multiple 3D objects and a 3D background. Our model
is trained from monocular videos without any supervision, yet learns to generate
coherent 3D scenes containing several moving objects. We conduct detailed
experiments on two datasets, going beyond the visual complexity supported by
state-of-the-art generative approaches. We evaluate our method on depth-prediction
and 3D object detection—tasks which cannot be addressed by those earlier works—
and show it out-performs them even on 2D instance segmentation and tracking.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been considerable interest in object-centric generative models of images
and videos—that is, generative models whose latent structure explicitly represents their composition
from multiple objects or regions (e.g. [12, 13, 15, 24, 29]). These methods allow segmentation of
input videos or images into objects, and generation of new ones. This is a natural structure to adopt,
as it mirrors the way humans understand the world [33], as well as capturing important aspects of the
causal process by which images are formed. Existing approaches treat objects either as components
of 2D spatial mixtures, or as 2.5D stacks of sprites, which reflects how they appear when imaged by a
camera. Crucially however, it does not reflect the underlying physical structure of the world, which
of course consists of solid 3D objects situated in 3D space.
In this work, we take the natural next step—we develop an object-centric generative model over
videos that explicitly models the 3D scenes they show. Our model is trained purely from unannotated
monocular videos, without any 3D data. Nonetheless, it learns to decompose videos into multiple 3D
foreground objects and a 3D background, and learns to generate videos showing coherent scenes.
To achieve this, we design a novel generative model that represents videos as the view from a camera
moving through a 3D scene composed of multiple objects and a background (Sec. 2). It has a
single latent embedding that learns to capture the space of allowable scene structures, which is
important to avoid sampling implausible layouts such as intersecting objects [12]. This embedding is
interpreted by a structured decoder that processes objects independently and compositionally. Each
object is endowed with an appearance embedding, and a temporally-varying 3D location and pose.
After decoding their appearance embeddings to 3D shapes and textures, the objects and background
are differentiably rendered to give the final frames. This lets us train the model like a variational
autoencoder (VAE) [28], to reconstruct its training videos in terms of their latent embeddings (Sec. 3).
By decoding objects independently, and disentangling pose from appearance, we introduce inductive
biases that allow a distribution of videos to be represented efficiently and compositionally [45, 46],
without needing to separately model all possible combinations of objects, shapes, textures, and poses.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

