Non-Convex SGD Learns Halfspaces with
Adversarial Label Noise
Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Vasilis Kontonis
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Christos Tzamos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
tzamos@wisc.edu

Nikos Zarifis
University of Wisconsin-Madison
zarifis@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of agnostically learning homogeneous halfspaces in the
distribution-specific PAC model. For a broad family of structured distributions,
including log-concave distributions, we show that non-convex SGD efficiently
converges to a solution with misclassification error O(opt) + , where opt is the
misclassification error of the best-fitting halfspace. In sharp contrast, we show
that optimizing any convex surrogate inherently leads to misclassification error of
ω(opt), even under Gaussian marginals.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and Motivation

Learning in the presence of noisy data is a central challenge in machine learning. In this work, we
study the efficient learnability of halfspaces when a fraction of the training labels is adversarially
corrupted. As our main contribution, we show that non-convex SGD efficiently learns homogeneous
halfspaces in the presence of adversarial label noise with respect to a broad family of well-behaved
distributions, including log-concave distributions. Before we state our contributions, we provide
some background and motivation for this work.
A (homogeneous) halfspace is any function f : Rd → {±1} of the form f (x) = sign(hw, xi),
where the vector w ∈ Rd is called the weight vector of f , and the function sign : R → {±1}
is defined as sign(t) = 1 if t ≥ 0 and sign(t) = −1 otherwise. Halfspaces are arguably the
most fundamental concept class and have been studied since the beginning of machine learning,
starting with the Perceptron algorithm [Ros58, Nov62]. In the realizable setting, halfspaces are
efficiently learnable in the distribution-independent PAC model [Val84] via linear programming (see,
e.g., [MT94]). On the other hand, in the agnostic model [Hau92, KSS94], even weak distributionindependent learning is computationally intractable [GR06, FGKP06, Dan16]. The distributionspecific agnostic (or adversarial label noise) setting – where the label noise is adversarial but we have
some prior knowledge about the structure of the marginal distribution on examples – lies in between
these two extremes. In this setting, computationally efficient noise-tolerant learning algorithms are
known [KKMS08, KLS09a, ABL17, Dan15, DKS18] under various distributional assumptions. We
start by defining the distribution-specific agnostic model.
Definition 1.1 (Distribution-Specific PAC Learning with Adversarial Label Noise). Given i.i.d.
labeled examples (x, y) from a distribution D on Rd × {±1}, such that the marginal distribution Dx
is promised to belong in a known family F but the labels y can be arbitrary, the goal of the learner
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

