Locally-Adaptive Nonparametric Online Learning

Ilja Kuzborskij ∗
DeepMind
iljak@google.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Dept. of Computer Science & DSRC
University of Milan, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Abstract
One of the main strengths of online algorithms is their ability to adapt to arbitrary
data sequences. This is especially important in nonparametric settings, where
performance is measured against rich classes of comparator functions that are
able to fit complex environments. Although such hard comparators and complex
environments may exhibit local regularities, efficient algorithms, which can provably take advantage of these local patterns, are hardly known. We fill this gap by
introducing efficient online algorithms (based on a single versatile master algorithm) each adapting to one of the following regularities: (i) local Lipschitzness
of the competitor function, (ii) local metric dimension of the instance sequence,
(iii) local performance of the predictor across different regions of the instance
space. Extending previous approaches, we design algorithms that dynamically
grow hierarchical ε-nets on the instance space whose prunings correspond to different “locality profiles” for the problem at hand. Using a technique based on tree
experts, we simultaneously and efficiently compete against all such prunings, and
prove regret bounds each scaling with a quantity associated with a different type of
local regularity. When competing against “simple” locality profiles, our technique
delivers regret bounds that are significantly better than those proven using the
previous approach. On the other hand, the time dependence of our bounds is not
worse than that obtained by ignoring any local regularities.

1

Introduction

In online convex optimization [34, 10], a learner interacts with an unknown environment in a sequence
of rounds. In the specific setting considered in this paper, at each round t = 1, 2, . . . the learner
observes an instance xt ∈ X ⊂ Rd and outputs a prediction ybt for the label yt ∈ Y associated with the
instance. After predicting, the learner incurs the loss `t (b
yt ). We consider two basic learning problems:
2
regression with square loss, where Y ≡ [0, 1] and `t (b
yt ) = 12 (yt − ybt ) , and binary classification
with absolute loss, where Y ≡ {0, 1} and `t (b
yt ) = |yt − ybt | (or, equivalently, `t (b
yt ) = P(yt 6= Yt )
for randomized predictions Yt with P(Yt = 1) = ybt ). The performance of a learner is measured
through the notion of regret, which is defined as the amount by which the cumulative loss of the
learner predicting with yb1 , yb2 , . . . exceeds the cumulative loss —on the same sequence of instances
and labels— of any function f in a given reference class of functions F. Formally,
RT (f ) =

T
X


`t (b
yt ) − `t f (xt )

∀f ∈ F .

(1)

t=1

In order to capture complex environments, we focus on nonparametric classes F of Lipschitz functions
f : X → Y. The specific approach adopted in this paper is inspired by the simple and versatile
∗

Work partly done while at the University of Milan, Italy.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

