Compositional Explanations of Neurons
Jesse Mu
Stanford University
muj@stanford.edu

Jacob Andreas
MIT CSAIL
jda@mit.edu

Abstract
We describe a procedure for explaining neurons in deep representations by identifying compositional logical concepts that closely approximate neuron behavior.
Compared to prior work that uses atomic labels as explanations, analyzing neurons
compositionally allows us to more precisely and expressively characterize their
behavior. We use this procedure to answer several questions on interpretability in
models for vision and natural language processing. First, we examine the kinds of
abstractions learned by neurons. In image classification, we find that many neurons
learn highly abstract but semantically coherent visual concepts, while other polysemantic neurons detect multiple unrelated features; in natural language inference
(NLI), neurons learn shallow lexical heuristics from dataset biases. Second, we see
whether compositional explanations give us insight into model performance: vision
neurons that detect human-interpretable concepts are positively correlated with task
performance, while NLI neurons that fire for shallow heuristics are negatively correlated with task performance. Finally, we show how compositional explanations
provide an accessible way for end users to produce simple “copy-paste” adversarial
examples that change model behavior in predictable ways.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we describe a procedure for automatically explaining logical and perceptual abstractions
encoded by individual neurons in deep networks. Prior work in neural network interpretability
has found that neurons in models trained for a variety of tasks learn human-interpretable concepts,
e.g. faces or parts-of-speech, often without explicit supervision [5, 10, 11, 27]. Yet many existing
interpretability methods are limited to ad-hoc explanations based on manual inspection of model
visualizations or inputs [10, 26, 27, 35, 38, 39]. To instead automate explanation generation, recent
work [5, 11] has proposed to use labeled “probing datasets” to explain neurons by identifying concepts
(e.g. dog or verb) closely aligned with neuron behavior.
However, the atomic concepts available in probing datasets may be overly simplistic explanations of
neurons. A neuron might robustly respond to images of dogs without being exclusively specialized
for dog detection; indeed, some have noted the presence of polysemantic neurons in vision models
that detect multiple concepts [12, 27]. The extent to which these neurons have learned meaningful
perceptual abstractions (versus detecting unrelated concepts) remains an open question. More
generally, neurons may be more accurately characterized not just as simple detectors, but rather as
operationalizing complex decision rules composed of multiple concepts (e.g. dog faces, cat bodies,
and car windows). Existing tools are unable to surface such compositional concepts automatically.
We propose to generate explanations by searching for logical forms defined by a set of composition
operators over primitive concepts (Figure 1). Compared to previous work [5], these explanations
serve as better approximations of neuron behavior, and identify behaviors that help us answer a
variety of interpretability questions across vision and natural language processing (NLP) models.
First, what kind of logical concepts are learned by deep models in vision and NLP? Second, do the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

