Election Coding for Distributed Learning:
Protecting SignSGD against Byzantine Attacks

Jy-yong Sohn
jysohn1108@kaist.ac.kr

Dong-Jun Han
djhan93@kaist.ac.kr

Beongjun Choi
bbzang10@kaist.ac.kr

Jaekyun Moon
jmoon@kaist.edu

School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

Abstract
Current distributed learning systems suffer from serious performance degradation
under Byzantine attacks. This paper proposes E LECTION C ODING, a codingtheoretic framework to guarantee Byzantine-robustness for distributed learning
algorithms based on signed stochastic gradient descent (SignSGD) that minimizes
the worker-master communication load. The suggested framework explores new
information-theoretic limits of finding the majority opinion when some workers
could be attacked by adversary, and paves the road to implement robust and
communication-efficient distributed learning algorithms. Under this framework, we
construct two types of codes, random Bernoulli codes and deterministic algebraic
codes, that tolerate Byzantine attacks with a controlled amount of computational
redundancy and guarantee convergence in general non-convex scenarios. For the
Bernoulli codes, we provide an upper bound on the error probability in estimating
the signs of the true gradients, which gives useful insights into code design for
Byzantine tolerance. The proposed deterministic codes are proven to perfectly
tolerate arbitrary Byzantine attacks. Experiments on real datasets confirm that
the suggested codes provide substantial improvement in Byzantine tolerance of
distributed learning systems employing SignSGD.

1

Introduction

The modern machine learning paradigm is moving toward parallelization and decentralization [4,
12, 18] to speed up the training and provide reliable solutions to time-sensitive real-world problems.
There has been extensive work on developing distributed learning algorithms [1, 16, 21, 22, 24, 25]
to exploit large-scale computing units. These distributed algorithms are usually implemented in
parameter-server (PS) framework [17], where a central PS (or master) aggregates the computational
results (e.g., gradient vectors minimizing empirical losses) of distributed workers to update the shared
model parameters. In recent years, two issues have emerged as major drawbacks that limit the
performance of distributed learning: Byzantine attacks and communication burden.
Nodes affected by Byzantine attacks send arbitrary messages to PS, which would mislead the model
updating process and severely degrade learning capability. To counter the threat of Byzantine
attacks, much attention has been focused on robust solutions [2, 13, 14]. Motivated by the fact that a
naive linear aggregation at PS cannot even tolerate Byzantine attack on a single node, the authors
of [7, 10, 31] considered median-based aggregation methods. However, as data volume and the
number of workers increase, computing the median involves a large cost [7] far greater than the cost
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

