A Topological Filter for Learning with Label Noise

Pengxiang Wu1∗ , Songzhu Zheng2∗ , Mayank Goswami3 , Dimitris Metaxas1 , Chao Chen2
1
Rutgers University, {pw241,dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu
2
Stony Brook University, {zheng.songzhu,chao.chen.1}@stonybrook.edu
3
City University of New York, mayank.isi@gmail.com

Abstract
Noisy labels can impair the performance of deep neural networks. To tackle this
problem, in this paper, we propose a new method for filtering label noise. Unlike
most existing methods relying on the posterior probability of a noisy classifier,
we focus on the much richer spatial behavior of data in the latent representational
space. By leveraging the high-order topological information of data, we are able
to collect most of the clean data and train a high-quality model. Theoretically
we prove that this topological approach is guaranteed to collect the clean data
with high probability. Empirical results show that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-arts and is robust to a broad spectrum of noise types and levels.

1

Introduction

Corrupted labels are ubiquitous in real world data, and can severely impair the performance of deep
neural networks with strong memorization ability [30, 12, 51]. Label noise may arise in mistakes of
human annotators or automatic label extraction tools, such as crowd sourcing and web crawling for
images [48, 42]. Improving the robustness of deep neural networks to label corruption is critical in
many applications [29, 45], yet still remains a challenging problem and largely under-studied.
To combat label noise, state-of-the-art methods often segregate the clean data (i.e., samples with
uncorrupted labels) from the noisy ones. These methods collect clean data iteratively and eventually
train a high-quality model. The major challenge is to ensure that the data selection procedure is
(1) careful enough to not accumulate errors; and (2) aggressive enough to collect sufficient clean
data to train a strong model. Existing methods under this category [27, 21, 16, 43, 31] typically
select clean data based on the prediction of the noisy classifier. It is generally assumed that if the
noisy classifiers have strong and consistent confidence on a particular label, this label is likely true.
However, most of these heuristics do not have a theoretical foundation and thus are not guaranteed to
generalize to unseen datasets or noise patterns.
In this paper, we propose to investigate the problem in a novel topological perspective. We stipulate
that while a noisy classifier’s prediction is useful, its latent space representation of the data also
contains rich information and should be exploited. Our method is motivated by the following
observation: given an ideal feature representation, the clean data are clustered together while the
corrupted data are spread out and isolated. This intuition is illustrated in Figure 1(a). We show the
spatial distribution pattern of a corrupted dataset with an ideal representation, i.e., the penultimate
layer activation (the layer before softmax) of a neural net trained on the original uncorrupted dataset.
As is shown in Figure 1(a)(left), the data are well separated into clusters, corresponding to their true
labels. Meanwhile, noisy-labeled data (colorful crumbs sprinkled on each cluster) are surrounded by
uncorrupted data and thus are isolated.
The above observation inspires us to utilize the spatial topological pattern for label noise filtering.
We propose a new method, TopoFilter, that collects clean data by selecting the largest connected
∗

Equal contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

