Efficient Marginalization of
Discrete and Structured Latent Variables via Sparsity

Gonçalo M. Correiaä
goncalo.correia@lx.it.pt

Vlad Niculaeæ∗
vlad@vene.ro

Wilker Azizå
w.aziz@uva.nl

André F. T. Martinsä Èã
andre.t.martins@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
ä

È

Instituto de Telecomunicações, Lisbon, Portugal
LUMLIS (Lisbon ELLIS Unit), Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal
ã
Unbabel, Lisbon, Portugal
å
ILLC, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
æ
IvI, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract
Training neural network models with discrete (categorical or structured) latent
variables can be computationally challenging, due to the need for marginalization
over large or combinatorial sets. To circumvent this issue, one typically resorts
to sampling-based approximations of the true marginal, requiring noisy gradient
estimators (e.g., score function estimator) or continuous relaxations with lowervariance reparameterized gradients (e.g., Gumbel-Softmax). In this paper, we
propose a new training strategy which replaces these estimators by an exact yet efficient marginalization. To achieve this, we parameterize discrete distributions over
latent assignments using differentiable sparse mappings: sparsemax and its structured counterparts. In effect, the support of these distributions is greatly reduced,
which enables efficient marginalization. We report successful results in three tasks
covering a range of latent variable modeling applications: a semisupervised deep
generative model, a latent communication game, and a generative model with a
bit-vector latent representation. In all cases, we obtain good performance while
still achieving the practicality of sampling-based approximations.

1

Introduction

Neural latent variable models are powerful and expressive tools for finding patterns in highdimensional data, such as images or text [1–3]. Of particular interest are discrete latent variables,
which can recover categorical and structured encodings of hidden aspects of the data, leading to
compact representations and, in some cases, superior explanatory power [4, 5]. However, with
discrete variables, training can become challenging, due to the need to compute a gradient of a large
sum over all possible latent variable assignments, with each term itself being potentially expensive.
This challenge is typically tackled by estimating the gradient with Monte Carlo methods [MC; 6],
which rely on sampling estimates. The two most common strategies for MC gradient estimation are
the score function estimator [SFE; 7, 8], which suffers from high variance, or surrogate methods that
rely on the continuous relaxation of the latent variable, like straight-through [9] or Gumbel-Softmax
[10, 11] which potentially reduce variance but introduce bias and modeling assumptions.
∗

Work partially done while VN was at the Instituto de Telecomunicações, Lisbon.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

