Deep learning versus kernel learning: an empirical
study of loss landscape geometry and the time
evolution of the Neural Tangent Kernel
Stanislav Fort1⇤ Gintare Karolina Dziugaite2⇤ Mansheej Paul1
Sepideh Kharaghani2
Daniel M. Roy3,4
Surya Ganguli1
1 Stanford University 2 Element AI 3 University of Toronto 4 Vector Institute

Abstract
In suitably initialized wide networks, small learning rates transform deep neural
networks (DNNs) into neural tangent kernel (NTK) machines, whose training
dynamics is well-approximated by a linear weight expansion of the network at initialization. Standard training, however, diverges from its linearization in ways that
are poorly understood. We study the relationship between the training dynamics of
nonlinear deep networks, the geometry of the loss landscape, and the time evolution of a data-dependent NTK. We do so through a large-scale phenomenological
analysis of training, synthesizing diverse measures characterizing loss landscape
geometry and NTK dynamics. In multiple neural architectures and datasets, we find
these diverse measures evolve in a highly correlated manner, revealing a universal
picture of the deep learning process. In this picture, deep network training exhibits
a highly chaotic rapid initial transient that within 2 to 3 epochs determines the final
linearly connected basin of low loss containing the end point of training. During
this chaotic transient, the NTK changes rapidly, learning useful features from the
training data that enables it to outperform the standard initial NTK by a factor of 3
in less than 3 to 4 epochs. After this rapid chaotic transient, the NTK changes at
constant velocity, and its performance matches that of full network training in 15%
to 45% of training time. Overall, our analysis reveals a striking correlation between
a diverse set of metrics over training time, governed by a rapid chaotic to stable
transition in the first few epochs, that together poses challenges and opportunities
for the development of more accurate theories of deep learning.
The remarkable empirical success of deep learning across a range of domains stands in stark contrast
to our theoretical understanding of the mechanisms underlying this same success [1]. Indeed, we are
currently far from a mature, unified mathematical theory of deep learning that is powerful enough to
universally guide engineering design choices. As in many other fields of inquiry, a key prerequisite to
any such theory is careful empirical measurements of the deep learning process, with the scientific
aim of unearthing combinations of variables that obey correlated dynamical laws that can serve as the
inspiration for future theories. Indeed, a large body of work has studied, mainly in isolation, diverse
and intriguing phenomenological properties, as well as extreme simplifying theoretical limits, of deep
learning. In particular, we focus on 3 intertwined aspects of deep learning that have previously been
studied largely in isolation: (1) the large scale structure of deep learning loss surfaces, (2) the local
geometry of such loss surfaces, and (3) and the performance of linearized training methods, like the
neural tangent kernel (NTK), that has gained attention through its ability to theoretically describe
an infinite width low learning rate limit of deep learning in terms of kernel machines with random
data-independent kernels. The fundamental goal of this work is to obtain a more integrative view of
the intertwined relations between loss landscape geometry at multiple scales of organization and the
⇤ Equal contributions. Correspondence to: sfort1@stanford.edu, karolina.dziugaite@elementai.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

