Probabilistic Linear Solvers for Machine Learning

Jonathan Wenger
Philipp Hennig
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
{jonathan.wenger, philipp.hennig}@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Linear systems are the bedrock of virtually all numerical computation. Machine
learning poses specific challenges for the solution of such systems due to their
scale, characteristic structure, stochasticity and the central role of uncertainty in
the field. Unifying earlier work we propose a class of probabilistic linear solvers
which jointly infer the matrix, its inverse and the solution from matrix-vector
product observations. This class emerges from a fundamental set of desiderata
which constrains the space of possible algorithms and recovers the method of
conjugate gradients under certain conditions. We demonstrate how to incorporate
prior spectral information in order to calibrate uncertainty and experimentally
showcase the potential of such solvers for machine learning.

1

Introduction

Arguably one of the most fundamental problems in machine learning, statistics and scientific computation at large is the solution of linear systems of the form Ax∗ = b, where A ∈ Rn×n
sym is a
symmetric positive definite matrix [1–3]. Such matrices usually arise in the context of second-order
or quadratic optimization problems and as Gram matrices. Some of the numerous application areas
in machine learning and related fields are least-squares regression [4], kernel methods [5], Kalman
filtering [6], Gaussian (process) inference [7], spectral graph theory [8], (linear) differential equations
[9] and (stochastic) second-order methods [10].
Linear systems in machine learning are typically large-scale, have characteristic structure arising
from generative processes, and are subject to noise. These distinctive features call for linear solvers
that can explicitly make use of such structural information. While classic solvers are highly optimized
for general problems, they lack key functionality for machine learning. In particular, they do not
consider generative prior information about the matrix.
An important example are kernel Gram matrices, which exhibit specific sparsity structure and spectral
properties, depending on the kernel choice and the generative process of the data. Exploiting such
prior information is a prime application for probabilistic linear solvers, which aim to quantify
numerical uncertainty arising from limited computational resources. Another key challenge, which
we will not yet address here, are noisy matrix evaluations arising from data subsampling. Ultimately,
linear algebra for machine learning should integrate all sources of uncertainty in a computational
pipeline – aleatoric, epistemic and numerical – into one coherent probabilistic framework.
Contribution This paper sets forth desiderata for probabilistic linear solvers which establish first
principles for such methods. From these, we derive an algorithm incorporating prior information
on the matrix A or its inverse A−1 , which jointly estimates both via repeated application of A.
This results in posterior beliefs over the two operators and the solution which quantify numerical
uncertainty. Our approach unifies and extends earlier formulations and constitutes a new way of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

