Provably adaptive reinforcement learning in metric
spaces
Tongyi Cao
University of Massachusetts Amherst
tcao@cs.umass.edu

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research NYC
akshaykr@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning in continuous state and action spaces endowed
with a metric. We provide a refined analysis of the algorithm of Sinclair, Banerjee,
and Yu (2019) and show that its regret scales with the zooming dimension of the
instance. This parameter, which originates in the bandit literature, captures the
size of the subsets of near optimal actions and is always smaller than the covering
dimension used in previous analyses. As such, our results are the first provably
adaptive guarantees for reinforcement learning in metric spaces.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent learns to selects actions to navigate a state space and
accumulate reward. In terms of theoretical results, the majority of results address the tabular setting,
where the number of states and actions are finite and comparatively small. However, tabular problems
are rarely encountered in practical applications, as state and action spaces are often large and may
even be continuous. To address these practically relevant settings, a growing body of work has
developed algorithmic principles and guarantees for reinforcement learning in continuous spaces.
In this paper, we contribute to this line of work on reinforcement learning in continuous spaces. We
consider episodic RL where the joint state-action space is endowed with a metric and we posit that the
optimal Q? function is Lipschitz continuous with respect to this metric. This setup has been studied
in several recent works establishing worst case regret bounds that scale with the covering dimension
of the metric space (Song and Sun, 2019; Sinclair et al., 2019; Touati et al., 2020). While these
results are encouraging, the guarantees are overly pessimistic, and intuition from the special case of
Lipschitz bandits suggests that much more adaptive guarantees are achievable. In particular, while
the Lipschitz contextual bandits setting of Slivkins (2014) is a special case of this setup, no existing
analysis recovers his adaptive guarantee that scales with the zooming dimension of the problem.
Our contribution. We give the first analysis for reinforcement learning in metric spaces that scales
with the zooming dimension of the instance instead of the covering dimension of the metric space.
The zooming dimension, originally defined by Kleinberg et al. (2019) in the context of Lipschitz
bandits, measures the size of the set of near-optimal actions, and can be much smaller than the
covering dimension in favorable instances. For reinforcement learning, the natural generalization
is to measure near-optimality relative to the Q? function; this recovers the definition of Kleinberg
et al. (2019) and Slivkins (2014) for bandits and contextual bandits, respectively as special cases.
As a consequence, our guarantees also strictly generalize theirs to the multi-step reinforcement
learning setting. In addition, our guarantee addresses an open problem of Sinclair et al. (2019) by
characterizing problems where refined guarantees are possible.
Our result is based on a refined analysis of the algorithm of Sinclair et al. (2019). This algorithm
uses optimism to select actions and an adaptive discretization scheme to carefully refine a coarse
partition of the state-action space to focus (“zoom in”) on promising regions. Adaptive discretization
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

