Biased Stochastic First-Order Methods for
Conditional Stochastic Optimization and Applications
in Meta Learning

Yifan Hu∗
UIUC
yifanhu3@illinois.edu

Siqi Zhang∗
UIUC
siqiz4@illinois.edu

Xin Chen
UIUC
xinchen@illinois.edu

Niao He
UIUC & ETH Zurich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Conditional stochastic optimization covers a variety of applications ranging from
invariant learning and causal inference to meta-learning. However, constructing
unbiased gradient estimators for such problems is challenging due to the composition structure. As an alternative, we propose a biased stochastic gradient descent
(BSGD) algorithm and study the bias-variance tradeoff under different structural
assumptions. We establish the sample complexities of BSGD for strongly convex,
convex, and weakly convex objectives under smooth and non-smooth conditions.
Our lower bound analysis shows that the sample complexities of BSGD cannot
be improved for general convex objectives and nonconvex objectives except for
smooth nonconvex objectives with Lipschitz continuous gradient estimator. For
this special setting, we propose an accelerated algorithm called biased SpiderBoost
(BSpiderBoost) that matches the lower bound complexity. We further conduct
numerical experiments on invariant logistic regression and model-agnostic metalearning to illustrate the performance of BSGD and BSpiderBoost.

1

Introduction

We study a class of optimization problems, called conditional stochastic optimization (CSO):
min F (x) := Eξ fξ (Eη|ξ gη (x, ξ)),
x∈X

(1)

where X ⊆ Rd , gη (·, ξ) : Rd → Rk is a vector-valued function dependent on both random vectors
ξ and η, fξ (·) : Rk → R depends on the random vector ξ, and the inner expectation is taken with
respect to the conditional distribution of η|ξ. Throughout, we assume access to samples from the
distribution P (ξ) and the conditional distribution P (η|ξ).
CSO includes the classical stochastic optimization as a special case when gη (x, ξ) = x but is much
more general. It has been recently utilized to solve a variety of applications in machine learning,
ranging from the policy evaluation and control in reinforcement learning [12, 13, 35], the optimal
control in linearly-solvable Markov decision process [12], to instrumental variable regression in
causal inference [41, 34].
One common challenge with these applications is that in the extreme case, a few or only one sample
is available from the conditional distribution of η|ξ for each given ξ. To deal with this limitation, a
∗

The first two authors have equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

