Gaussian Process Bandit Optimization of the
Thermodynamic Variational Objective

Vu Nguyen
University of Oxford
vu@robots.ox.ac.uk

Vaden Masrani
University of British Columbia
vadmas@cs.ubc.ca

Michael A. Osborne
University of Oxford
mosb@robots.ox.ac.uk

Rob Brekelmans
USC Information Sciences Institute
brekelma@usc.edu

Frank Wood
University of British Columbia
fwood@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Achieving the full promise of the Thermodynamic Variational Objective (TVO),
a recently proposed variational lower bound on the log evidence involving a onedimensional Riemann integral approximation, requires choosing a “schedule” of
sorted discretization points. This paper introduces a bespoke Gaussian process
bandit optimization method for automatically choosing these points. Our approach not only automates their one-time selection, but also dynamically adapts
their positions over the course of optimization, leading to improved model learning and inference. We provide theoretical guarantees that our bandit optimization
converges to the regret-minimizing choice of integration points. Empirical validation of our algorithm is provided in terms of improved learning and inference in
Variational Autoencoders and Sigmoid Belief Networks.

1

Introduction

The Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework has formed the basis for a number of recent advances
in unsupervised representation learning [17, 35, 41]. Assuming a generative model involving latent
variables, VAEs perform maximum likelihood parameter estimation by optimizing the tractable Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) on the logarithm of the model evidence. In doing so, the VAE framework
introduces an inference network, which seeks to approximate the true posterior over latent variables.
While the ELBO is a common choice of variational inference objective, recent work has sought to
improve the model learning [7, 38, 30, 25] or inference aspects [34, 18, 8, 12] of this task.
In this work, we build upon the recent Thermodynamic Variational Objective (TVO), which frames
log-likelihood estimation as a one-dimensional integral over the unit interval [26]. The integral is
estimated using a Riemann sum approximation, as visualized in Figure 1, yielding a natural family
of variational inference objectives which generalize and tighten the ELBO.
The choice of a d-dimensional vector of points β = [β0 , β1 , ..., βd−1 ]T at which to construct this
numerical approximation is an important hyperparameter for the TVO, which we refer to as an “integration schedule” throughout this work. Previous work [26] uses a static integration schedule, and
requires grid search over the choice of initial β1 . However, since the shape of the integrand reflects
the quality of the inference network (§2), recent work [6] suggests that this scheduling procedure
may be improved by dynamically choosing β over the course of training. Our proposed approach
also allows the TVO to be adapted to different model architectures and schedule dimensionality
without the need for grid search.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

