Efficient Clustering Based On A Unified View Of
K-means And Ratio-cut
Shenfei Pei
School of Computer Science and
Center for OPTIMAL
Northwestern Polytechnical University
shenfeipei@gmail.com

Feiping Nie∗
School of Computer Science and
Center for OPTIMAL
Northwestern Polytechnical University
feipingnie@gmail.com

Rong Wang
School of Cybersecurity and
Center for OPTIMAL
Northwestern Polytechnical University
wangrong07@tsinghua.org.cn

Xuelong Li
School of Computer Science and
Center for OPTIMAL
Northwestern Polytechnical University
li@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Spectral clustering and k-means, both as two major traditional clustering methods,
are still attracting a lot of attention, although a variety of novel clustering algorithms
have been proposed in recent years. Firstly, a unified framework of k-means and
ratio-cut is revisited, and a novel and efficient clustering algorithm is then proposed
based on this framework. The time and space complexity of our method are both
linear with respect to the number of samples, and are independent of the number
of clusters to construct, more importantly. These properties mean that it is easily
scalable and applicable to large practical problems. Extensive experiments on 12
real-world benchmark and 8 facial datasets validate the advantages of the proposed
algorithm compared to the state-of-the-art clustering algorithms. In particular, over
15x and 7x speed-up can be obtained with respect to k-means on the synthetic
dataset of 1 million samples and the benchmark dataset (CelebA) of 200k samples,
respectively [GitHub].

1

Introduction

As one of fundamental technologies in the fields of pattern recognition, machine learning, data
mining, and others, clustering is getting more and more attention in recent years [29, 31]. A series of
algorithms have been proposed for cluster analysis and applied to various areas successfully, such as
document clustering [18], image segmentation [17], and social networks [20].
Given a set of input patterns, the purpose of clustering is to group the data into a certain number of
clusters so that the samples in the same cluster are similar to each other, and the samples in different
clusters are not. Among various algorithms, the classical ratio-cut and k-means are almost the two
most popular clustering approaches.
Ratio-cut and its related algorithms: Given a set of samples X = [x1 , · · · , xn ]T ∈ Rn×d and
the number c of clusters to construct, the classical ratio-cut usually consists of the following four steps:
1. Calculate the similarity matrix W ∈ Rn×n where wij denotes the similarity between P
xi and xj .
n
2. Compute the Laplacian matrix L = ∆−W, where ∆ is a diagonal matrix, and ∆ii = j=1 wij .
∗

Corresponding author: Feiping Nie

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

