Color Visual Illusions: A Statistics-based
Computational Model

Elad Hirsch and Ayellet Tal
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
{eladhirsch@campus,ayellet@ee}.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Visual illusions may be explained by the likelihood of patches in real-world images,
as argued by input-driven paradigms in Neuro-Science. However, neither the data
nor the tools existed in the past to extensively support these explanations. The
era of big data opens a new opportunity to study input-driven approaches. We
introduce a tool that computes the likelihood of patches, given a large dataset to
learn from. Given this tool, we present a model that supports the approach and
explains lightness and color visual illusions in a unified manner. Furthermore,
our model generates visual illusions in natural images, by applying the same tool,
reversely.

synthetic [16]
manipulated leaf
(a) Simultaneous-Contrast Illusion

synthetic [3]

manipulated carpet
(b) White’s Illusion

Figure 1: Examples of visual illusions. (a) Look at the central rectangles. Do they have the same
intensity/color? It seems they do not, but they actually do. (b) The same effect happens for the gray
long rectangles—they are perceived as having different intensities, although their intensities are equal.
This paper provides a general, data-driven explanation to these (and other) illusions. It also presents
a model that generates illusions by modifying given natural images in accordance with the above
explanation (the right illusions in (a) & (b)). Please watch the illusions on a computer screen.

1

Introduction

The physical state of the world differs from our subjective measure of its properties, such as lightness,
color, and size, as demonstrated in Fig. 1. This gap leads to visual illusions, which is a fascinating
phenomenon that plays a major role in the study of vision and cognition [7]. This, in turn, has made
human-made illusions very popular; they are used for education, in business, and as a form of (op-)art
and of entertainment (e.g. "Illusion of the Year Contest") [39, 50, 51].
A variety of explanations for visual illusions have been proposed in Psychology and Neuro-biology.
The top-down approach argues that past experience is involved in visual processing, therefore affecting
perception (and visual illusions) [20, 21, 29, 30]. Conversely, bottom-up models propose explanations
for common visual illusions that do not rely on cognition or on prior knowledge [5, 6, 15, 31, 32, 40,
42]. Instead, they focus on biological mechanisms present in the human visual cortex. Input-driven
changes of visual sensitivity, however, may occur in such models over time or evolution [14, 36].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

