Learning to Utilize Shaping Rewards:
A New Approach of Reward Shaping

Yujing Hu1 , Weixun Wang1,2 , Hangtian Jia1 , Yixiang Wang1,3 , Yingfeng Chen1∗,
Jianye Hao2,4 , Feng Wu3 , Changjie Fan1
1
Netease Fuxi AI Lab, Netease, Inc., Hangzhou, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
4
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, China
huyujing@corp.netease.com, wxwang@tju.edu.cn, jiahangtian@corp.netease.com
yixiangw@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenyingfeng1@corp.netease.com
jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn, wufeng02@ustc.edu.cn, fanchangjie@corp.netease.com

Abstract
Reward shaping is an effective technique for incorporating domain knowledge into
reinforcement learning (RL). Existing approaches such as potential-based reward
shaping normally make full use of a given shaping reward function. However,
since the transformation of human knowledge into numeric reward values is often
imperfect due to reasons such as human cognitive bias, completely utilizing the
shaping reward function may fail to improve the performance of RL algorithms. In
this paper, we consider the problem of adaptively utilizing a given shaping reward
function. We formulate the utilization of shaping rewards as a bi-level optimization problem, where the lower level is to optimize policy using the shaping rewards
and the upper level is to optimize a parameterized shaping weight function for true
reward maximization. We formally derive the gradient of the expected true reward
with respect to the shaping weight function parameters and accordingly propose
three learning algorithms based on different assumptions. Experiments in sparsereward cartpole and MuJoCo environments show that our algorithms can fully
exploit beneﬁcial shaping rewards, and meanwhile ignore unbeneﬁcial shaping
rewards or even transform them into beneﬁcial ones.

1

Introduction

A common way for addressing the sample efﬁciency issue of RL is to transform possible domain
knowledge into additional rewards and guide learning algorithms to learn faster and better with the
combination of the original and new rewards, which is known as reward shaping (RS). Early work
of reward shaping can be dated back to the attempt of using hand-crafted reward function for robot
behavior learning [3] and bicycle driving [15]. The most well-known work in the reward shaping
domain is the potential-based reward shaping (PBRS) method [12], which is the ﬁrst to show that
policy invariance can be guaranteed if the shaping reward function is in the form of the difference
of potential values. Recently, reward shaping has also been successfully applied in more complex
problems such as Doom [8, 18] and Dota 2 [13].
Existing reward shaping approaches such as PBRS and its variants [2, 5, 6, 24] mainly focus on
the way of generating shaping rewards (e.g., using potential values) and normally assume that the
shaping rewards transformed from prior knowledge are completely helpful. However, such an assumption is not practical since the transformation of human knowledge (e.g., rules) into numeric
∗

Corresponding Author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

