Optimal Variance Control of the Score Function
Gradient Estimator for Importance Weighted Bounds
Valentin Liévin 1
Andrea Dittadi1
Anders Christensen1
Ole Winther1, 2, 3
1
Section for Cognitive Systems, Technical University of Denmark
2
Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
3
Centre for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital
{valv,adit}@dtu.dk, anders.christensen321@gmail.com, olwi@dtu.dk

Abstract
This paper introduces novel results for the score function gradient estimator of the
importance weighted variational bound (IWAE). We prove that in the limit of large
K (number of importance samples) one can choose thepcontrol variate such that the
Signal-to-Noise ratio (SNR) of the estimator grows as K. This is inpcontrast to the
standard pathwise gradient estimator where the SNR decreases as 1/ K. Based on
our theoretical findings we develop a novel control variate that extends on VIMCO.
Empirically, for the training of both continuous and discrete generative models,
the proposed method yields superior variance reduction, resulting in an SNR
for IWAE that increases with K without relying on the reparameterization trick.
The novel estimator is competitive with state-of-the-art reparameterization-free
gradient estimators such as Reweighted Wake-Sleep (RWS) and the thermodynamic
variational objective (TVO) when training generative models.

1

Introduction

Gradient-based learning is now widespread in the field of machine learning, in which recent advances
have mostly relied on the backpropagation algorithm, the workhorse of modern deep learning. In
many instances, for example in the context of unsupervised learning, it is desirable to make models
more expressive by introducing stochastic latent variables. Backpropagation thus has to be augmented
with methodologies for marginalization over latent variables.
Variational inference using an inference model (amortized inference) has emerged as a key method
for training and inference in latent variable models [1–7]. The pathwise gradient estimator, based on
the reparameterization trick [2, 3], often gives low-variance estimates of the gradient for continuous
distributions. However, since discrete distributions cannot be reparameterized, these methods are not
applicable to inference in complex simulators with discrete variables, such as reinforcement learning
or advanced generative processes [8–11]. While the score function (or Reinforce) estimator [12] is
more generally applicable, it is well known to suffer from large variance. Consequently, most of
the recent developments focus on reducing the variance using control variates [13–18] and using
alternative variational objectives [9, 19–21].
Recently, variational objectives tighter than the traditional evidence lower bound (ELBO) have been
proposed [21, 22]. In importance weighted autoencoders (IWAE) [22] the tighter bound comes with
the price of a K-fold increase in the required number of samples from the inference network. Despite
yielding a tighter bound, using more samples can be detrimental to the learning of the inference
model [23]. In fact, the Signal-to-Noise ratio (the ratio of the expected gradient to its standard
deviation) of the pathwise estimator has been shown to decrease at a rate O(K 1/2 ) [23]. Although
this can be improved to O(K 1/2 ) by exploiting properties of the gradient to cancel high-variance
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

