AdaTune: Adaptive Tensor Program Compilation
Made Efficient
Menghao Li∗

Minjia Zhang∗
Chi Wang
Mingqin Li
Microsoft Corporation
{t-meli,minjiaz,wang.chi,mingqli}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Deep learning models are computationally intense, and implementations often have
to be highly optimized by experts or hardware vendors to be usable in practice.
The DL compiler, together with Learning-to-Compile has proven to be a powerful
technique for optimizing tensor programs. However, a limitation of this approach
is that it still suffers from unbearably long overall optimization time. In this
paper, we present a new method, called AdaTune, that significantly reduces the
optimization time of tensor programs for high-performance deep learning inference.
In particular, we propose an adaptive evaluation method that statistically early
terminates a costly hardware measurement without losing much accuracy. We
further devise a surrogate model with uncertainty quantification that allows the
optimization to adapt to hardware and model heterogeneity better. Finally, we
introduce a contextual optimizer that provides adaptive control of the exploration
and exploitation to improve the transformation space searching effectiveness. We
evaluate and compare the levels of optimization obtained by AutoTVM, a stateof-the-art Learning-to-Compile technique on top of TVM, and AdaTune. The
experiment results show that AdaTune obtains up to 115% higher GFLOPS than
the baseline under the same optimization time budget. Furthermore, AdaTune
provides 1.3–3.9× speedup in optimization time over the baseline to reach the same
optimization quality for a range of models across different hardware architectures.

1

Introduction

The enormous computational intensity of Deep Neural Network (DNN) models has attracted great
interest in optimizing their performance. In particular, popular deep learning (DL) frameworks such
as TensorFlow [6] and PyTorch [32] adopt custom optimized kernels such as Nvidia cuDNN [15] or
Intel MKL-DNN [2] as back-end. However, given the increasing complexity of tensor operations in
DNNs and the volatility of DL algorithms, it calls for developing fast and automated compilation
frameworks to handle the unprecedented amount of innovations. To imitate or even surpass the
success of hand-optimized libraries, recent research has developed neural network compilers, such
as XLA [4], Halide [36], Glow [37], Tensor Comprehension [40], and TVM [13]. Among them,
TVM has shown superior performance improvements using a technique called Learning-to-Compile
(AutoTVM) [14]. AutoTVM optimizes the code by generating many versions of a tensor program
and chooses the best through simulated annealing search over a large space of code transformation
choices. Furthermore, it employs a learned cost model trained by actual hardware performance
measures to predict the performance of diverse inference computations on real hardware targets.
While the Learning-to-Compile approach produces highly optimized code of DNN models, they
may suffer from excessively long optimization time. As an example, although AutoTVM is able to
demonstrate close to 2× performance improvement over TensorFlow on ResNet-18, the compilation
time can still take several hours or even tens of hours [14]. With the active research that has been
pushing the model size to millions or even billion-scale parameters with a training time of only a
∗
Both authors contributed equally. Order of appearance is random.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

