Kernel Based Progressive Distillation for Adder
Neural Networks
Yixing Xu1 , Chang Xu2 , Xinghao Chen1 , Wei Zhang1 , Chunjing Xu1 , Yunhe Wang∗1
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
2
The University of Sydney
{yixing.xu, xinghao.chen, wz.zhang, xuchunjing, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com
c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Adder Neural Networks (ANNs) which only contain additions bring us a new way
of developing deep neural networks with low energy consumption. Unfortunately,
there is an accuracy drop when replacing all convolution filters by adder filters.
The main reason here is the optimization difficulty of ANNs using `1 -norm, in
which the estimation of gradient in back propagation is inaccurate. In this paper,
we present a novel method for further improving the performance of ANNs without
increasing the trainable parameters via a progressive kernel based knowledge
distillation (PKKD) method. A convolutional neural network (CNN) with the same
architecture is simultaneously initialized and trained as a teacher network, features
and weights of ANN and CNN will be transformed to a new space to eliminate
the accuracy drop. The similarity is conducted in a higher-dimensional space
to disentangle the difference of their distributions using a kernel based method.
Finally, the desired ANN is learned based on the information from both the groundtruth and teacher, progressively. The effectiveness of the proposed method for
learning ANN with higher performance is then well-verified on several benchmarks.
For instance, the ANN-50 trained using the proposed PKKD method obtains a
76.8% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet dataset, which is 0.6% higher than that of the
ResNet-50.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with a large number of learnable parameters and massive
multiplications have shown extraordinary performance on computer vision tasks, such as image
classification [18, 37, 23, 17, 15], image generation [8, 7], object detection [30], semantic segmentation [26], low-level image tasks [33, 45, 35, 31, 36, 42], etc. However, the huge energy consumption
brought by these multiplications limits the deployment of CNNs on portable devices such as cell
phones and video cameras. Thus, the recent research on deep learning tends to explore efficient
method for reducing the computational costs required by convolutional neural networks [47, 4, 34, 38].
There are several existing algorithms presented to derive computational-efficient deep neural networks.
For example, weight pruning methods [24, 47, 20, 19, 22] removed unimportant parameters or filters
from a pre-trained neural network with negligible loss of accuracy. Knowledge Distillation (KD)
methods [12, 5, 3] directly learned a student model by imitating the output distribution of a teacher
model. Tensor decomposition methods [28, 43, 40] decomposed the model tensor into several
low-rank tensors in order to speed up the inference time.
Another direction for developing efficient neural networks is to reduce the bit of weights and
activations to save the memory usage and energy consumption [9]. Hubara et.al. [14] proposed a
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

