Stochasticity of Deterministic Gradient Descent:
Large Learning Rate for Multiscale Objective Function

Lingkai Kong
School of Mathematics
University of Science and Technology of China
and Georgia Institute of Technology

Molei Tao
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
mtao@gatech.edu

Abstract
This article suggests that deterministic Gradient Descent, which does not use any
stochastic gradient approximation, can still exhibit stochastic behaviors. In particular, it shows that if the objective function exhibit multiscale behaviors, then in a
large learning rate regime which only resolves the macroscopic but not the microscopic details of the objective, the deterministic GD dynamics can become chaotic
and convergent not to a local minimizer but to a statistical distribution. In this
sense, deterministic GD resembles stochastic GD even though no stochasticity is
injected. A sufficient condition is also established for approximating this long-time
statistical limit by a rescaled Gibbs distribution, which for example allows escapes
from local minima to be quantified. Both theoretical and numerical demonstrations
are provided, and the theoretical part relies on the construction of a stochastic map
that uses bounded noise (as opposed to Gaussian noise).

1

Introduction

Among first-order optimization methods which are a central ingredient of machine learning, arguably
the most used is gradient descent method (GD), or rather one of its variants, stochastic gradient
descent method (SGD). Designed for objective functions that sum a large amount of terms, which
for instance can originate from big data, SGD introduces a randomization mechanism of gradient
subsampling to improve the scalability of GD (e.g., Zhang [2004], Moulines and Bach [2011], Roux
et al. [2012]). Consequently, the iteration of SGD, unlike GD, is not deterministic even when it is
started at a fixed initial condition. In fact, if one fixes the learning rate (LR) in SGD, the iteration
does not converge to a local minimizer like in the case of GD; instead, it converges to a statistical
distribution with variance controlled by the LR (e.g., Borkar and Mitter [1999], Mandt et al. [2017],
Li et al. [2017]). Diminishing LR was thus proposed to ensure that SGD remains as an optimization
algorithm (e.g., Robbins and Monro [1951]). On the other hand, more recent perspectives include that
the noise in SGD may actually facilitate escapes from bad local minima and improve generalization
(see Sec.1.2 and references therein). In addition, non-diminishing LRs often correspond to faster
computations, and therefore are of practical relevance1 . Meanwhile, GD does not need the LR to be
small in order to reduce the stochasticity, although in practices the LR is often chosen small enough
to fully resolve the landscape of the objective, corresponding to a stability upper bound of 1/L under
the common L-smooth assumption of the objective function.
We consider deterministic GD2 with fixed large LR, based on the conventional belief that it optimizes
more efficiently than small LR. The goal is to understand if large LR works, and if yes, in what sense.
1

Optimizing LR is an important subarea but out of our scope; see e.g., Smith [2017] and references therein.
Despite of the importance of SGD, there are still contexts in which deterministic GD is worth studying; e.g.,
for training with scarce data, for low-rank approximation (e.g., Tu et al. [2015]) and robust PCA (e.g., Yi et al.
[2016]), and for theoretical understandings of large neural networks (e.g, Du et al. [2018, 2019b]).
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

