Subgroup-based Rank-1 Lattice Quasi-Monte Carlo

Yueming Lyu∗
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute
University of Technology Sydney
yueminglyu@gmail.com

Yuan Yuan
CSAIL
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
miayuan@mit.edu

Ivor W. Tsang∗
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute
University of Technology Sydney
Ivor.Tsang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) is an essential tool for integral approximation, Bayesian
inference, and sampling for simulation in science, etc. In the QMC area, the rank-1
lattice is important due to its simple operation, and nice properties for point set
construction. However, the construction of the generating vector of the rank-1
lattice is usually time-consuming because of an exhaustive computer search. To
address this issue, we propose a simple closed-form rank-1 lattice construction
method based on group theory. Our method reduces the number of distinct pairwise
distance values to generate a more regular lattice. We theoretically prove a lower
and an upper bound of the minimum pairwise distance of any non-degenerate
rank-1 lattice. Empirically, our methods can generate a near-optimal rank-1 lattice
compared with the Korobov exhaustive search regarding the l1 -norm and l2 -norm
minimum distance. Moreover, experimental results show that our method achieves
superior approximation performance on benchmark integration test problems and
kernel approximation problems.

1

Introduction

Integral operation is critical in a large amount of interesting machine learning applications, e.g.
kernel approximation with random feature maps [29], variational inference in Bayesian learning [3],
generative modeling and variational autoencoders [15]. Directly calculating an integral is usually
infeasible in these real applications. Instead, researchers usually try to find an approximation for
the integral. A simple and conventional approximation is Monte Carlo (MC) sampling, in which the
integral is approximated by calculating the average of the i.i.d. sampled integrand values. Monte
Carlo (MC) methods [12] are widely studied with many techniques to reduce the approximation error,
which includes importance sampling and variance reduction techniques and more [1].
To further reduce the approximation error, Quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) methods utilize a low discrepancy point set instead of the i.i.d. sampled point set used in the standard Monte Carlo method.
There are two main research lines in the area of QMC [8, 25], i.e., the digital nets/sequences and
lattice rules. The Halton sequence and the Sobol sequence are the widely used representatives of
digital sequences [8]. Compared with digital nets/sequences, the points set of lattice rules preserve
the properties of lattice. The points partition the space into small repeating cells. Among previous
research on the lattice rules, Korobov introduced integration lattice rules in [16] for an integral
approximation of the periodic integrands. [33] proves that there also exist good lattice rules for
∗

Correspondence to: yueminglyu@gmail.com and Ivor.Tsang@uts.edu.au

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

