Distance Encoding: Design Provably More Powerful
Neural Networks for Graph Representation Learning

Pan Li
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
panli@purdue.edu

Yanbang Wang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
ywangdr@cs.stanford.edu

Hongwei Wang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
hongweiw@cs.stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Learning representations of sets of nodes in a graph is crucial for applications ranging from node-role discovery to link prediction and molecule classification. Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved great success in graph representation learning. However, expressive power of GNNs is limited by the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman
(WL) test and thus GNNs generate identical representations for graph substructures
that may in fact be very different. More powerful GNNs, proposed recently by
mimicking higher-order-WL tests, only focus on representing entire graphs and
they are computationally inefficient as they cannot utilize sparsity of the underlying
graph. Here we propose and mathematically analyze a general class of structurerelated features, termed Distance Encoding (DE). DE assists GNNs in representing
any set of nodes, while providing strictly more expressive power than the 1-WL
test. DE captures the distance between the node set whose representation is to be
learned and each node in the graph. To capture the distance DE can apply various
graph-distance measures such as shortest path distance or generalized PageRank
scores. We propose two ways for GNNs to use DEs (1) as extra node features, and
(2) as controllers of message aggregation in GNNs. Both approaches can utilize the
sparse structure of the underlying graph, which leads to computational efficiency
and scalability. We also prove that DE can distinguish node sets embedded in
almost all regular graphs where traditional GNNs always fail. We evaluate DE on
three tasks over six real networks: structural role prediction, link prediction, and
triangle prediction. Results show that our models outperform GNNs without DE
by up-to 15% in accuracy and AUROC. Furthermore, our models also significantly
outperform other state-of-the-art methods especially designed for the above tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph representation learning aims to learn representation vectors of graph-structured data [1].
Representations of node sets in a graph can be leveraged for a wide range of applications, such as
discovery of functions/roles of nodes based on individual node representations [2–6], link or link type
prediction based on node-pair representations [7–10] and graph comparison or molecule classification
based on entire-graph representations [11–17].
Graph neural networks (GNNs), inheriting the power of neural networks [18], have become the
de facto standard for representation learning in graphs [19]. Generaly, GNNs use message passing procedure over the input graph, which can be summarized in three steps: (1) Initialize node
representations with their initial attributes (if given) or structural features such as node degrees;
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

