Nimble: Lightweight and Parallel GPU Task
Scheduling for Deep Learning

Woosuk Kwon∗, Gyeong-In Yu∗, Eunji Jeong, Byung-Gon Chun†
Seoul National University
{kws9603,gyeongin,ejjeong,bgchun}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep learning (DL) frameworks take advantage of GPUs to improve the speed
of DL inference and training. Ideally, DL frameworks should be able to fully utilize the computation power of GPUs such that the running time depends on the
amount of computation assigned to GPUs. Yet, we observe that in scheduling GPU
tasks, existing DL frameworks suffer from inefficiencies such as large scheduling
overhead and unnecessary serial execution. To this end, we propose Nimble, a DL
execution engine that runs GPU tasks in parallel with minimal scheduling overhead. Nimble introduces a novel technique called ahead-of-time (AoT) scheduling.
Here, the scheduling procedure finishes before executing the GPU kernel, thereby
removing most of the scheduling overhead during run time. Furthermore, Nimble
automatically parallelizes the execution of GPU tasks by exploiting multiple GPU
streams in a single GPU. Evaluation on a variety of neural networks shows that
compared to PyTorch, Nimble speeds up inference and training by up to 22.34×
and 3.61×, respectively. Moreover, Nimble outperforms state-of-the-art inference
systems, TensorRT and TVM, by up to 2.81× and 1.70×, respectively.

1

Introduction

In recent years, growing demands for deep learning (DL) have facilitated the advance of DL frameworks such as Caffe2 [23], MXNet [13], PyTorch [27], and TensorFlow [9]. These frameworks
provide implementations of GPU-based neural network computations along with high-level APIs,
with which users can express the semantics of neural networks as usual Python programs. Furthermore, such frameworks allow users to describe the training and inference procedure of their networks
without the need to control GPUs directly. DL frameworks then automatically handle GPU intricacies
such as copying neural network weights to GPUs and launching DL operators on GPUs. Operators
indicate numerical computations, like convolution and batch normalization, and consist of one or
more GPU tasks (i.e., GPU kernels and GPU memory operations).
Before a GPU processes a task, DL frameworks must first go through a series of preparation steps
(GPU task scheduling), and then submit the task to the GPU (GPU task submission). We note that
current DL frameworks conduct GPU task scheduling during run time. For instance, TensorFlow,
Caffe2, and MXNet represent a neural network as a computation graph of DL operators, and schedule
the GPU tasks of an operator at run time once the operator’s dependencies are met. Meanwhile,
for PyTorch and TensorFlow Eager [10], GPU tasks are scheduled at run time as Python code is
interpreted line by line.
∗
†

First two authors have equal contribution
Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

