BERT Loses Patience:
Fast and Robust Inference with Early Exit

Wangchunshu Zhou1∗, Canwen Xu2∗ , Tao Ge3 , Julian McAuley2 , Ke Xu1 , Furu Wei3
1
Beihang University 2 University of California, San Diego 3 Microsoft Research Asia
1
zhouwangchunshu@buaa.edu.cn,kexu@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn
2
{cxu,jmcauley}@ucsd.edu 3 {tage,fuwei}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Patience-based Early Exit, a straightforward yet effective
inference method that can be used as a plug-and-play technique to simultaneously
improve the efficiency and robustness of a pretrained language model (PLM). To
achieve this, our approach couples an internal-classifier with each layer of a PLM
and dynamically stops inference when the intermediate predictions of the internal
classifiers remain unchanged for a pre-defined number of steps. Our approach
improves inference efficiency as it allows the model to make a prediction with
fewer layers. Meanwhile, experimental results with an ALBERT model show that
our method can improve the accuracy and robustness of the model by preventing
it from overthinking and exploiting multiple classifiers for prediction, yielding a
better accuracy-speed trade-off compared to existing early exit methods.2

1

Introduction

In Natural Language Processing (NLP), pretraining and fine-tuning have become a new norm for many
tasks. Pretrained language models (PLMs) (e.g., BERT [1], XLNet [2], RoBERTa [3], ALBERT [4])
contain many layers and millions or even billions of parameters, making them computationally
expensive and inefficient regarding both memory consumption and latency. This drawback hinders
their application in scenarios where inference speed and computational costs are crucial. Another
bottleneck of overparameterized PLMs that stack dozens of Transformer layers is the “overthinking”
problem [5] during their decision-making process. That is, for many input samples, their shallow
representations at an earlier layer are adequate to make a correct classification, whereas the representations in the final layer may be otherwise distracted by over-complicated or irrelevant features that
do not generalize well. The overthinking problem in PLMs leads to wasted computation, hinders
model generalization, and may also make them vulnerable to adversarial attacks [6].
In this paper, we propose a novel Patience-based Early Exit (PABEE) mechanism to enable models
to stop inference dynamically. PABEE is inspired by the widely used Early Stopping [7, 8] strategy
for model training. It enables better input-adaptive inference of PLMs to address the aforementioned
limitations. Specifically, our approach couples an internal classifier with each layer of a PLM and
dynamically stops inference when the intermediate predictions of the internal classifiers remain
unchanged for t times consecutively (see Figure 1b), where t is a pre-defined patience. We first show
that our method is able to improve the accuracy compared to conventional inference under certain
assumptions. Then we conduct extensive experiments on the GLUE benchmark and show that PABEE
outperforms existing prediction probability distribution-based exit criteria by a large margin. In addition, PABEE can simultaneously improve inference speed and adversarial robustness of the original
∗
2

Equal contribution. Work done during these two authors’ internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Code available at https://github.com/JetRunner/PABEE.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

