OOD-MAML: Meta-Learning for Few-Shot
Out-of-Distribution Detection and Classification
Taewon Jeong Heeyoung Kim
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
KAIST
Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
{papilion89,heeyoungkim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a few-shot learning method for detecting out-of-distribution (OOD)
samples from classes that are unseen during training while classifying samples
from seen classes using only a few labeled examples. For detecting unseen classes
while generalizing to new samples of known classes, we synthesize fake samples,
i.e., OOD samples, but that resemble in-distribution samples, and use them along
with real samples. Our approach is based on an extension of model-agnostic meta
learning (MAML) and is denoted as OOD-MAML, which not only learns a model
initialization but also the initial fake samples across tasks. The learned initial
fake samples can be used to quickly adapt to new tasks to form task-specific fake
samples with only one or a few gradient update steps using MAML. For testing,
OOD-MAML converts a K-shot N -way classification task into N sub-tasks of
K-shot OOD detection with respect to each class. The joint analysis of N sub-tasks
facilitates simultaneous classification and OOD detection and, furthermore, offers
an advantage, in that it does not require re-training when the number of classes for
a test task differs from that for training tasks; it is sufficient to simply assume as
many sub-tasks as the number of classes for the test task. We also demonstrate the
effective performance of OOD-MAML over benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated excellent performances in many machine learning
tasks such as speech recognition [20], object detection [8], and image classification [10]. However,
they usually require large amounts of training data to perform well. When the amount of training
data is small, DNNs often provide low levels of performance. This is a critical issue, because a large
number of problems in the real world are confronted with the lack of training data. For example, the
drug discovery problem involves the prediction of whether a molecule increases the pharmaceutical
activity [1]. However, often only a small amount of data relating to molecules are available, which
makes it difficult to use DNNs for this task. The learning problem under the circumstance wherein
only a few labeled examples are available is referred to as few-shot learning, and it has attracted
significant interest recently [24, 3, 21, 7]. “K-shot N -way" classification is one of the major tasks
that few-shot learning deals with, wherein a small number of samples K (such as 1,5, or 10) per each
of N classes are available for training to classify a new sample into one of the N classes. Several
methods, e.g., siamese network [13] and prototypical network (PN) [22], were proposed for K-shot
N -way problems.
In general, in few-shot classification algorithms, it is assumed that the training and test data are
drawn from the same distribution, and the algorithm requires a test sample to be classified into one
of the known classes encountered during training. However, in many real-world applications, it is
unreasonable to assume the same distribution for the training and test data [5, 23, 4]. If the test data
are drawn from a different distribution, it is more desirable to have classification algorithms that
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

