Towards Interaction Detection Using Topological
Analysis on Neural Networks

Zirui Liu
Dept. of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
tradigrada@tamu.edu

Qingquan Song
Dept. of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
song_3134@tamu.edu

Kaixiong Zhou
Dept. of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
zkxiong@tamu.edu

Ting-Hsiang Wang
Dept. of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
thwang1231@tamu.edu

Ying Shan
Tencent
Beijing, China
yingsshan@tencent.com

Xia Hu
Dept. of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
hu@cse.tamu.edu

Abstract
Detecting statistical interactions between input features is a crucial and challenging
task. Recent advances demonstrate that it is possible to extract learned interactions
from trained neural networks. It has also been observed that, in neural networks, any
interacting features must follow a strongly weighted connection to common hidden
units. Motivated by the observation, in this paper, we propose to investigate the
interaction detection problem from a novel topological perspective by analyzing
the connectivity in neural networks. Specially, we propose a new measure for
quantifying interaction strength, based upon the well-received theory of persistent
homology. Based on this measure, a Persistence Interaction Detection (PID)
algorithm is developed to efficiently detect interactions. Our proposed algorithm is
evaluated across a number of interaction detection tasks on several synthetic and
real world datasets with different hyperparameters. Experimental results validate
that the PID algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Statistical interaction describes a subset of input features that interact with each other to have an
effect on outcomes. For example, using Phenelzine together with Fluoxetine may lead to serotonin
syndrome [1]. Interaction detection problem is to quantify the influence of any subset of input
features that may potentially be an interaction. The quantified influence in the problem is called
interaction strength. With detected interactions, we may formulate hypotheses that could lead to new
data collection and experiments. Traditional methods often need to conduct individual tests for all
interaction candidates [2, 3] or pre-specify all functional forms of interests [4, 5]. Recent efforts
have been dedicated to extracting learned interactions in neural networks by designing measures for
quantifying interaction strength based on predefined conditions in a heuristic way [6]. It has been
shown to be an effective way to detect interactions and avoid the drawbacks of traditional methods.
One key observation in the state-of-the-art methods is that any interacting features must follow
strongly weighted connections to a common hidden unit before reaching the final output layer [6,
7]. Based on this, the strength of interactions can be modeled by the connectivity between these
interacting features and output units of a trained neural network. This motivates us to solve the
problem from a novel topological perspective. Specifically, our framework builds upon computational
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

