Continuous Surface Embeddings
Natalia Neverova

David Novotny Vasil Khalidov Marc Szafraniec
Patrick Labatut Andrea Vedaldi
{nneverova, dnovotny, vkhalidov, mszafraniec, plabatut, vedaldi} fb.com
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
In this work, we focus on the task of learning and representing dense correspondences in deformable object categories. While this problem has been considered
before, solutions so far have been rather ad-hoc for specific object types (i.e.,
humans), often with significant manual work involved. However, scaling the geometry understanding to all objects in nature requires more automated approaches
that can also express correspondences between related, but geometrically different objects. To this end, we propose a new, learnable image-based representation
of dense correspondences. Our model predicts, for each pixel in a 2D image, an
embedding vector of the corresponding vertex in the object mesh, therefore establishing dense correspondences between image pixels and 3D object geometry. We
demonstrate that the proposed approach performs on par or better than the state-ofthe-art methods for dense pose estimation for humans, while being conceptually
simpler. We also collect a new in-the-wild dataset of dense correspondences for
animal classes and demonstrate that our framework scales naturally to the new
deformable object categories.

1

Introduction

Understanding the geometry of natural objects, such as humans and other animals, must start from
the notion of correspondence. Correspondences tell us which parts of different objects are geometrically equivalent, and thus form the basis on which an understanding of geometry can be developed.
In this paper, we are interested in particular in learning and computing correspondence starting from
2D images of the objects, a preliminary step for 3D reconstruction and other applications.
While the correspondence problem has been considered many times before, most solutions still
involve a significant amount of manual work. Consider for example a state-of-the-art method such
as DensePose [17]. Given a new object category to model with DensePose, one must start by defining
a canonical shape S, a sort of ‘average’ 3D shape used as a reference to express correspondences.
Then, a dataset of images of the object must be collected and annotated with millions of manual
point correspondences between the images and the canonical 3D model. Finally, the model must be
manually partitioned into a number of parts, or charts, and a deep neural network must be trained to
segment the image and regress the uv coordinates for each chart, guided by the manual annotations,
yielding a DensePose predictor. Given a new category, this process must be repeated from scratch.
There are some obvious scalability issues with this approach. The most significant one is that the
entire process must be repeated for each new object category one wishes to model. This includes the
laborious step of collecting annotations for the new class. However, categories such as animals share
significant similarities between them; for instance, recently [44] has shown that DensePose trained
on humans transfers well on chimpanzees. Thus, a much better scalable solution can be obtained
by sharing training data and models between classes. This brings us to the second shortcoming of
DensePose: the nature of the model makes it difficult to realize this information sharing. In par34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

