A Bandit Learning Algorithm and Applications to
Auction Design

Nguyễn Kim Thắng
IBISC, Univ. Evry, University Paris-Saclay, France
kimthang.nguyen@univ-evry.fr

Abstract
We consider online bandit learning in which at every time step, an algorithm has to
make a decision and then observe only its reward. The goal is to design efficient
(polynomial-time) algorithms that achieve a total reward approximately close to
that of the best fixed decision in hindsight. In this paper, we introduce a new notion
of (λ, µ)-concave functions and present a bandit learning algorithm that achieves
a performance guarantee which is characterized as a function of the concavity
parameters λ and µ. The algorithm is based on the mirror descent algorithm in
which the update directions follow the gradient of the multilinear extensions
of the
√
reward functions. The regret bound induced by our algorithm is e
O( T ) which is
nearly optimal.
We apply our algorithm to auction design, specifically to welfare maximization,
revenue maximization, and no-envy learning in auctions. In welfare maximization,
we show that a version of fictitious play in smooth auctions guarantees a competitive regret bound which is determined by the smooth parameters. In revenue
maximization, we consider the simultaneous second-price auctions with reserve
prices in multi-parameter environments. We give a bandit algorithm which achieves
the total revenue at least 1/2 times that of the best fixed reserve prices in hindsight. In no-envy learning, we study the bandit item selection problem where the
player valuation is submodular and provide an efficient 1/2-approximation no-envy
algorithm.

1

Introduction

In online learning, the goal is to design algorithms which are robust in dynamically evolving environments by applying optimization methods that learn from experience and observations. Characterizing
conditions, or in general discovering regularity properties, under which efficient online learning
algorithms with performance guarantee exist is a major research agenda in online learning. In this
paper, we consider this line of research and present a new regularity condition for the design of
efficient online learning algorithms. Subsequently, we establish the applicability of our approach in
auction design.
General online problem. At each time step t = 1, 2, . . ., an algorithm chooses xt ∈ [0, 1]n . After
the algorithm has committed to its choice, an adversary selects a function f t : [0, 1]n → [0, 1] that
subsequently induces the reward of f t (xt ) for the algorithm. In the problem, we are interested in
the bandit setting that at every time t, the algorithm observes only its reward f t (xt ). The goal is to
efficiently achieve the total gain approximately close to that obtained by the best decision in hindsight.
We consider the following notion of regret which measures the performance of algorithms. An
algorithm is (r, R(T ))-regret if for arbitrary total number of time steps T and for any sequence of
PT
PT
reward functions f 1 , . . . , f T ∈ F, t=1 f t (xt ) ≥ r · maxx∈[0,1]n t=1 f t (x) − R(T ). We also
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

