WoodFisher: Efficient Second-Order Approximation
for Neural Network Compression

Sidak Pal Singh∗
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
contact@sidakpal.com

Dan Alistarh
IST Austria & Neural Magic, Inc.
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Second-order information, in the form of Hessian- or Inverse-Hessian-vector products, is a fundamental tool for solving optimization problems. Recently, there
has been significant interest in utilizing this information in the context of deep
neural networks; however, relatively little is known about the quality of existing
approximations in this context. Our work examines this question, identifies issues
with existing approaches, and proposes a method called WoodFisher to compute a
faithful and efficient estimate of the inverse Hessian.
Our main application is to neural network compression, where we build on
the classic Optimal Brain Damage/Surgeon framework. We demonstrate that
WoodFisher significantly outperforms popular state-of-the-art methods for oneshot pruning. Further, even when iterative, gradual pruning is allowed, our method
results in a gain in test accuracy over the state-of-the-art approaches, for standard
image classification datasets such as ImageNet ILSVRC. We examine how our
method can be extended to take into account first-order information, as well as
illustrate its ability to automatically set layer-wise pruning thresholds and perform
compression in the limited-data regime. The code is available at the following link,
https://github.com/IST-DASLab/WoodFisher.

1

Introduction

The recent success of deep learning, e.g. [1, 2] has brought about significant accuracy improvement in
areas such as computer vision [3, 4] or natural language processing [5, 6]. Central to this performance
progression has been the size of the underlying models, with millions or even billions of trainable
parameters [4, 5], a trend which seems likely to continue for the foreseeable future [7].
Deploying such large models is taxing from the performance perspective. This has fuelled a line of
work where researchers compress such parameter-heavy deep neural networks into “lighter,” easier to
deploy variants. This challenge is not new, and in fact, results in this direction can be found in the
early work on neural networks, e.g. [8–10]. Thus, most of the recent work to tackle this challenge can
find its roots in these classic references [11], and in particular in the Optimal Brain Damage/Surgeon
(OBD/OBS) framework [8, 10]. Roughly, the main idea behind this framework is to build a local
quadratic model approximation based on the second-order Taylor series expansion to determine the
optimal set of parameters to be removed. (We describe it precisely in Section 4.)
A key requirement to apply this approach is to have an accurate estimate of the inverse Hessian
matrix, or at least to accurate inverse-Hessian-vector-products (IHVPs). In fact, IHVPs are a central
ingredient in many parts of machine learning, most prominently for optimization [12–15], but also in
other applications such as influence functions [16] or continual learning [17]. Applying second-order
methods at the scale of model sizes described above might appear daunting, and so is often done via
∗

Work done while at IST Austria.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

