Manifold structure in graph embeddings
Patrick Rubin-Delanchy
University of Bristol
patrick.rubin-delanchy@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Statistical analysis of a graph often starts with embedding, the process of representing its nodes as points in space. How to choose the embedding dimension is
a nuanced decision in practice, but in theory a notion of true dimension is often
available. In spectral embedding, this dimension may be very high. However, this
paper shows that existing random graph models, including graphon and other latent
position models, predict the data should live near a much lower-dimensional set.
One may therefore circumvent the curse of dimensionality by employing methods
which exploit hidden manifold structure.

1

Introduction

The hypothesis that high-dimensional data tend to live near a manifold of low dimension is an important theme of modern statistics and machine learning, often held to explain why high-dimensional
learning is realistically possible [66, 6, 17, 15, 21, 47]. The object of this paper is to show that, for
a theoretically tractable but rich class of random graph models, such a phenomenon occurs in the
spectral embedding of a graph.
Manifold structure is shown to arise when the graph follows a latent position model [31], wherein
connections are posited to occur as a function of the nodes’ underlying positions in space. Because of
their intuitive appeal, such models have been employed in a great diversity of disciplines, including
social science [38, 45, 24], neuroscience [19, 55], statistical mechanics [37], information technology
[74], biology [56] and ecology [22]. In many more endeavours latent position models are used — at
least according to Definition 1 (to follow) — but are known by a different name; examples include
the standard [32], mixed [2] and degree-corrected [35] stochastic block models, random geometric
graphs [53], and the graphon model [42], which encompasses them.
Spectral embedding obtains a vector representation of each node by eigencomposition of the adjacency
or normalised Laplacian matrix of the graph, and it is not obvious that a meaningful connection to
the latent positions of a given model should exist. One contribution of this article is to make the
link clear, although existing studies already take us most of the way: Tang and co-authors [65] and
Lei [40] construct identical maps respectively assuming a positive-definite kernel (here generalised
to indefinite) and a graphon model (here extended to d dimensions). Through this connection, the
notion of a true embedding dimension D emerges, which is the large-sample rank of the expected
adjacency matrix, and it is potentially much greater than the latent space dimension d.
The main contribution of this article is to demonstrate that, though high-dimensional, the data live
‘close’ to a low-dimensional structure — a distortion of latent space — of dimension governed by
the curvature of the latent position model kernel along its diagonal. One should have in mind, as
the typical situation, a d-dimensional manifold embedded in infinite-dimensional ambient space.
However, it would be a significant misunderstanding to believe that graphon models, acting on
the unit interval, so that d = 1, could produce only one-dimensional manifolds. Instead, common
Hölder ↵-smoothness assumptions on the graphon [71, 26, 40] limit the maximum possible manifold
dimension to 2/↵.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

