Modeling Continuous Stochastic Processes with
Dynamic Normalizing Flows

Ruizhi Deng1,2∗ Bo Chang1 Marcus A. Brubaker1,3,4 Greg Mori1,2 Andreas M. Lehrmann1
1
Borealis AI 2 Simon Fraser University 3 York University 4 Vector Institute

Abstract
Normalizing flows transform a simple base distribution into a complex target
distribution and have proved to be powerful models for data generation and density
estimation. In this work, we propose a novel type of normalizing flow driven
by a differential deformation of the Wiener process. As a result, we obtain a
rich time series model whose observable process inherits many of the appealing
properties of its base process, such as efficient computation of likelihoods and
marginals. Furthermore, our continuous treatment provides a natural framework for
irregular time series with an independent arrival process, including straightforward
interpolation. We illustrate the desirable properties of the proposed model on
popular stochastic processes and demonstrate its superior flexibility to variational
RNN and latent ODE baselines in a series of experiments on synthetic and realworld data.

1

Introduction

Expressive models for sequential data form the statistical basis for downstream tasks in a wide range
of domains, including computer vision, robotics, and finance. Recent advances in deep generative
architectures, especially the concept of reversibility, have led to tremendous progress in this area
and created a new perspective on many of the long-standing limitations that are typical in traditional
approaches based on structured decompositions (e.g., state-space models).
We argue that the power of a time series model depends on its properties in the following areas: (1 –
Resolution) Common time series models are discrete with respect to time. As a result, they make
the implicit assumption of a uniformly spaced temporal grid, which precludes their application from
asynchronous tasks with a separate arrival process. (2 – Structural assumptions) The expressiveness
of a temporal model is determined by the dependencies and shapes of its variables. In particular,
the topological structure should be rich enough to capture the dynamics of the underlying process
but sparse enough to allow for robust learning and efficient inference. (3 – Generation) A good
time series model must be able to generate unbiased samples from the true underlying process in an
efficient way. (4 – Inference) Given a trained model, it should support standard inference tasks, such
as interpolation, forecasting, and likelihood calculation.
Recently, deep generative modeling has enabled vastly increased flexibility while keeping generation
and inference tractable, owing to novel techniques like amortized variational inference [28, 12],
reversible generative models [41, 29], and networks based on differential equations [9, 34].
In this work, we approach the modeling of continuous and irregular time series with a reversible generative model for stochastic processes. Our approach builds upon ideas from normalizing flows; however, instead of a static base distribution, we transform a dynamic base process into an observable one.
In particular, we introduce the continuous-time flow process (CTFP), a novel type of generative model
∗

Work developed during an internship at Borealis AI. Correspond to wsdmdeng@gmail.com.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

