Escaping the Gravitational Pull of Softmax

Jincheng Mei 1 4
Chenjun Xiao 1 4
Bo Dai 4
Lihong Li 3∗
21
41
Csaba Szepesvári
Dale Schuurmans
1

University of Alberta

2

DeepMind

{jmei2,chenjun,daes}@ualberta.ca

3

Amazon

4

Google Research, Brain Team

{bodai,szepi}@google.com

llh@amazon.com

Abstract
The softmax is the standard transformation used in machine learning to map realvalued vectors to categorical distributions. Unfortunately, this transform poses
serious drawbacks for gradient descent (ascent) optimization. We reveal this difficulty by establishing two negative results: (1) optimizing any expectation with
respect to the softmax must exhibit sensitivity to parameter initialization (“softmax
gravity well”), and (2) optimizing log-probabilities under the softmax must exhibit
slow convergence (“softmax damping”). Both findings are based on an analysis
of convergence rates using the Non-uniform Łojasiewicz (NŁ) inequalities. To
circumvent these shortcomings we investigate an alternative transformation, the
escort mapping, that demonstrates better optimization properties. The disadvantages of the softmax and the effectiveness of the escort transformation are further
explained using the concept of NŁ coefficient. In addition to proving bounds on
convergence rates to firmly establish these results, we also provide experimental
evidence for the superiority of the escort transformation.

1

Introduction

The probability transformation plays an essential role in machine learning, used whenever the output
of a learned model needs to be mapped to a probability distribution. For example, in reinforcement
learning (RL), a probability transformation is used to parameterize policy representations that
provide a conditional distribution over a finite set of actions given an input state or observation
[16]. In supervised learning (SL), particularly classification, a probability transformation is used
to parameterize classifiers that provide a conditional distribution over a finite set of classes given
an input observation [7]. Attention models [19] also use probability transformations to provide
differentiable forms of memory addressing.
Among the myriad ways one might map vectors to probability distributions, the softmax transform
is the most common.
For θ ∈ RK , the transformation πθ = softmax(θ) is defined
P
Pby πθ (a) =
exp{θ(a)}/ a0 exp{θ(a0 )} for all a ∈ {1, ..., K}, which ensures πθ (a) > 0 and a πθ (a) = 1
[4]. The softmax transform can also be extended to continuous output spaces through the concept of
a Gibbs function [11], but for concreteness we restrict attention to finite output sets.
Despite the ubiquity of the softmax in machine learning, it is not clear why it should be the default
choice of probability transformation. Some alternative transformations have been investigated in the
literature [6, 10], but a comprehensive understanding of why one choice might be advantageous over
another remains incomplete. It is natural to ask what options might be available and what properties
are desirable. In fact, we find that the softmax is a particularly undesirable choice from the perspective
of gradient descent (ascent) optimization. Moreover, better alternatives are readily available at no
∗

Work done when Lihong Li was with Google. Correspondence to: Jincheng Mei.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

