Deep Wiener Deconvolution:
Wiener Meets Deep Learning for Image Deblurring

Jiangxin Dong
MPI Informatics
jdong@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Stefan Roth
TU Darmstadt
stefan.roth@visinf.tu-darmstadt.de
Bernt Schiele
MPI Informatics
schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
We present a simple and effective approach for non-blind image deblurring, combining classical techniques and deep learning. In contrast to existing methods that
deblur the image directly in the standard image space, we propose to perform an
explicit deconvolution process in a feature space by integrating a classical Wiener
deconvolution framework with learned deep features. A multi-scale feature refinement module then predicts the deblurred image from the deconvolved deep
features, progressively recovering detail and small-scale structures. The proposed
model is trained in an end-to-end manner and evaluated on scenarios with both
simulated and real-world image blur. Our extensive experimental results show
that the proposed deep Wiener deconvolution network facilitates deblurred results
with visibly fewer artifacts. Moreover, our approach quantitatively outperforms
state-of-the-art non-blind image deblurring methods by a wide margin.

1

Introduction

Image deblurring is a classical image restoration problem, which has attracted widespread attention [e.g., 1, 3, 9, 10, 56]. It is usually formulated as
y = x ∗ k + n,

(1)

where y, x, k, and n denote the blurry input image, the desired clear image, the blur kernel, and image
noise, respectively. ∗ is the convolution operator. Traditional methods usually separate this problem
into two phases, blur kernel estimation and image restoration (i.e., non-blind image deblurring). The
goal of non-blind image deblurring is to restore the clear image x from its corrupted observation y
given the blur kernel k. Early non-blind deblurring methods include the Wiener filter [49] and the
Richardson-Lucy algorithm [33]. Later work commonly relied on a probabilistic formulation, most
often maximum a-posteriori approaches, and much research has been devoted to developing effective
image priors [15, 37, 50, 56] or sophisticated data terms [8, 32]. However, the optimization problems
resulting from such advanced models are difficult to solve, which limits their practical appeal.
In recent years, convolutional neural networks have been exploited for image deblurring and shown
promising results. To effectively exploit a-priori knowledge for non-blind image deblurring, one
line of work [40, 42, 54, 55] decomposes this problem into image denoising (which is achieved by
learned deep models) and image deconvolution1 (performed in the standard image space). However,
the underlying deep models for image denoising are not specifically optimized for image deblurring,
1

Note that deconvolution is a particular way of solving image deblurring given the blur model in Eq. (1).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

