Perturbing Across the Feature Hierarchy to Improve
Standard and Strict Blackbox Attack Transferability

Nathan Inkawhich, Kevin J Liang, Binghui Wang, Matthew Inkawhich,
Lawrence Carin and Yiran Chen
Duke University
nathan.inkawhich@duke.edu

Abstract
We consider the blackbox transfer-based targeted adversarial attack threat model in
the realm of deep neural network (DNN) image classifiers. Rather than focusing
on crossing decision boundaries at the output layer of the source model, our
method perturbs representations throughout the extracted feature hierarchy to
resemble other classes. We design a flexible attack framework that allows for multilayer perturbations and demonstrates state-of-the-art targeted transfer performance
between ImageNet DNNs. We also show the superiority of our feature space
methods under a relaxation of the common assumption that the source and target
models are trained on the same dataset and label space, in some instances achieving
a 10× increase in targeted success rate relative to other blackbox transfer methods.
Finally, we analyze why the proposed methods outperform existing attack strategies
and show an extension of the method in the case when limited queries to the
blackbox model are allowed.

1

Introduction

The adversarial machine learning community has devised many ways to cause Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) to behave unexpectedly [32, 7, 2, 21, 19]. However, the knowledge assumptions and threat
models considered by an adversary are critical to attack success. In settings where access to and
familiarity with the target model is restricted, there is significant room for improving adversarial
methods in terms of potency and efficiency, which is the central motivation for this work.
We focus on the blackbox transfer-based adversarial threat model for DNN image classifiers. In
the standard case, blackbox means the attacker does not have access to the gradients of the target model and makes no assumptions about its architecture. Transfer-based indicates that adversarial examples are created by computing adversarial perturbations using a substitute whitebox
model and then attacking the target blackbox model with the resulting examples, leveraging the
notion of transferability [23, 24, 33]. Within this threat model, our specific goal is targeted adversarial attacks, meaning the objective is to induce the target model to output a specific class.
These are significantly more challenging
than un-targeted attacks, which seek to
simply cause an incorrect prediction. In
addition, we consider a set of more “strict”
blackbox threat models in which we make
varying degrees of assumptions about access to the blackbox model’s training data
distribution. This includes cases when the
label spaces of the whitebox and blackbox models differ, and when there is zero Figure 1: Visualization of forward pass construction to
training data overlap.
optimize our feature space attack objective.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

