A General Method for Robust Learning from Batches

Ayush Jain and Alon Orlitsky
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{ayjain, aorlitsky}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
In many applications, data is collected in batches, some of which may be corrupt
or even adversarial. Recent work derived optimal robust algorithms for estimating
finite distributions in this setting. We develop a general framework of robust
learning from batches, and determine the limits of both distribution estimation, and
notably, classification, over arbitrary, including continuous, domains.
Building on this framework, we derive the first robust agnostic: (1) polynomial-time
distribution estimation algorithms for structured distributions, including piecewisepolynomial, monotone, log-concave, and gaussian-mixtures, and also significantly
improve their sample complexity; (2) classification algorithms, and also establish
their near-optimal sample complexity; (3) computationally-efficient algorithms for
the fundamental problem of interval-based classification that underlies nearly all
natural-1-dimensional classification problems.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

In many learning applications, some samples are inadvertently or maliciously corrupted. A simple
and intuitive example shows that this erroneous data limits the extent to which a distribution can
be learned, even with infinitely many samples. Consider p that could be one of two possible binary
distributions: ( 12 − β2 , 12 + β2 ) and ( 12 + β2 , 12 − β2 ). Given any number of samples from p, an adversary
who observes a 1 − β fraction of the samples and can determine the rest, could use the observed
samples to learn p, and set the remaining samples to make the distribution always appear to be
(0.5, 0.5). Even with arbitrarily many samples, any estimator for p fails to decide which p is in effect,
hence incurs a total-variation (TV) distance ≥ β2 , that we call the adversarial lower bound.
The example may seem to suggest the pessimistic conclusion that if an adversary can corrupt a β
fraction of the data, a TV-loss of ≥ β2 is inevitable. Fortunately, in many applications it can be avoided.
In the following applications, and many others, data is collected in batches, most of which are genuine,
but some possibly corrupted. Data may be gathered by sensors, each providing a large amount of
data, and some sensors may be faulty. The word frequency of an author may be estimated from
several large texts, some of which are mis-attributed. User preferences may be learned by querying
several individuals, some intentionally biasing their feedback. Multiple agents may contribute to a
crowd-sourcing platform, but some may be unreliable or malicious. Interestingly, for data arriving in
batches, even when a β-fraction of which are corrupted, more can be said.
Recently, [QV17] formalized the problem for finite domains. They considered estimating a distribution p over [k] in TV-distance when the samples are provided in batches of size ≥ n. Out of a total of
m batches, a fraction ≤ β may be arbitrarily and adversarially corrupted, while in every other batch b
the samples are drawn according to a distribution p.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

