Evaluating Attribution for Graph Neural Networks
Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling1,5 , Jennifer Wei1 , Brian Lee1 , Emily Reif1 , Peter Y. Wang2 , Wesley
Wei Qian1,3 , Kevin McCloskey1 , Lucy Colwell1,4 , and Alexander Wiltschko1,5
1

2

Google Research
Stanford University, work done while a resident at X.
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
4
University of Cambridge
5
Email: {bmsanchez, alexbw}@google.com

Abstract
Interpretability of machine learning models is critical to scientific understanding,
AI safety, and debugging. Attribution is one approach to interpretability, which
highlights input dimensions that are influential to a neural network’s prediction.
Evaluation of these methods is largely qualitative for image and text models,
because acquiring ground truth attributions requires expensive and unreliable
human judgment. Attribution has been comparatively understudied for graph neural
networks (GNNs), a model class of growing importance that makes predictions on
arbitrarily-sized graphs. Graph-valued data offer an opportunity to quantitatively
benchmark attribution methods, because challenging synthetic graph problems
have computable ground-truth attributions. In this work we adapt commonly-used
attribution methods for GNNs and quantitatively evaluate them using the axes of
attribution accuracy, stability, faithfulness and consistency. We make concrete
recommendations for which attribution methods to use, and provide the data and
code for our benchmarking suite. Rigorous and open source benchmarking of
attribution methods in graphs could enable new methods development and broader
use of attribution in real-world ML tasks.

1

Introduction

With the increasing use of automated decision making aided by machine learning models, the
credibility of the models we produce takes on a heightened importance, particularly for fields such
as drug discovery. Credibility describes the extent to which a user trusts a model’s output, and this
concept can be difficult to formalize [17]. In the absence of a concrete definition of credibility, we
may provide a window into the model’s “decision making process”, or provide interpretability. In
fact, a new wide-reaching European regulatory framework for the application of ML (GDPR; [1]),
explicitly requires interpretability of some kind for deployed models. There are many ways to provide
interpretations of a model (which we review below), but in this work we focus on perhaps the simplest
— attribution.
An attribution is a credit assignment on each individual input feature xi of a data input x (e.g. for
images, each pixel; for text, each character or word) that measures how important the feature is to
the model’s prediction of a target property y, often presented to users as a heatmap overlaid on the
original data. The attribution heatmap visually indicates what aspects of a particular data example
has the greatest influence on the model’s prediction of property y.
Attributions can expose the statistical regularities that the model leverages to make a prediction [47].
If these patterns match our intuition, they can bolster our confidence in the model’s predictions. If
attributions instead reveal that the model is exploiting spurious correlations, or plainly violates a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

