From Trees to Continuous Embeddings and Back:
Hyperbolic Hierarchical Clustering
Ines Chami‡
‡

Albert Gu†

Vaggos Chatziafratis††

Christopher Ré†

†
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University
††
Google Research, NY
{chami, albertgu, vaggos, chrismre}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Similarity-based Hierarchical Clustering (HC) is a classical unsupervised machine
learning algorithm that has traditionally been solved with heuristic algorithms like
Average-Linkage. Recently, Dasgupta [25] reframed HC as a discrete optimization
problem by introducing a global cost function measuring the quality of a given
tree. In this work, we provide the first continuous relaxation of Dasgupta’s discrete
optimization problem with provable quality guarantees. The key idea of our method,
H YP HC, is showing a direct correspondence from discrete trees to continuous
representations (via the hyperbolic embeddings of their leaf nodes) and back (via a
decoding algorithm that maps leaf embeddings to a dendrogram), allowing us to
search the space of discrete binary trees with continuous optimization. Building on
analogies between trees and hyperbolic space, we derive a continuous analogue
for the notion of lowest common ancestor, which leads to a continuous relaxation
of Dasgupta’s discrete objective. We can show that after decoding, the global
minimizer of our continuous relaxation yields a discrete tree with a (1 + ε)-factor
approximation for Dasgupta’s optimal tree, where ε can be made arbitrarily small
and controls optimization challenges. We experimentally evaluate H YP HC on a
variety of HC benchmarks and find that even approximate solutions found with
gradient descent have superior clustering quality than agglomerative heuristics or
other gradient based algorithms. Finally, we highlight the flexibility of H YP HC
using end-to-end training in a downstream classification task.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical Clustering (HC) is a fundamental problem in data analysis, where given datapoints and
their pairwise similarities, the goal is to construct a hierarchy over clusters, in the form of a tree
whose leaves correspond to datapoints and internal nodes correspond to clusters. HC naturally arises
in standard applications where data exhibits hierarchical structure, ranging from phylogenetics [26]
and cancer gene sequencing [47, 48] to text/image analysis [49], community detection [36] and
everything in between. A family of easy to implement, yet slow, algorithms includes agglomerative
methods (e.g., Average-Linkage) that build the tree in a bottom-up manner by iteratively merging
pairs of similar datapoints or clusters together. In contrast to “flat” clustering techniques like k-means,
HC provides fine-grained interpretability and rich cluster information at all levels of granularity and
alleviates the requirement of specifying a fixed number of clusters a priori.
Despite the abundance of HC algorithms, the HC theory was underdeveloped, since no “global”
objective function was associated with the final tree output. A well-formulated objective allows us to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

