Learning Search Space Partition for Black-box
Optimization using Monte Carlo Tree Search
Linnan Wang
Brown University
linnan_wang@brown.edu

Rodrigo Fonseca
Brown University
rfonseca@cs.brown.edu

Yuandong Tian
Facebook AI Research
yuandong@fb.com

Abstract
High dimensional black-box optimization has broad applications but remains a challenging problem to solve. Given a set of samples {xi , yi }, building a global model
(like Bayesian Optimization (BO)) suffers from the curse of dimensionality in the
high-dimensional search space, while a greedy search may lead to sub-optimality.
By recursively splitting the search space into regions with high/low function values,
recently LaNAS [1] shows good performance in Neural Architecture Search (NAS),
reducing the sample complexity empirically. In this paper, we coin LA-MCTS that
extends LaNAS to other domains. Unlike previous approaches, LA-MCTS learns
the partition of the search space using a few samples and their function values in an
online fashion. While LaNAS uses linear partition and performs uniform sampling
in each region, our LA-MCTS adopts a nonlinear decision boundary and learns a
local model to pick good candidates. If the nonlinear partition function and the
local model fit well with ground-truth black-box function, then good partitions
and candidates can be reached with much fewer samples. LA-MCTS serves as a
meta-algorithm by using existing black-box optimizers (e.g., BO, TuRBO [2]) as its
local models, achieving strong performance in general black-box optimization and
reinforcement learning benchmarks, in particular for high-dimensional problems.

1

Introduction

Black-box optimization has been extensively used in many scenarios, including Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) [3, 1, 4], planning in robotics [5, 6], hyper-parameter tuning in large scale databases [7]
and distributed systems [8], integrated circuit design [9], etc.. In black-box optimization, we have a
function f without explicit formulation and the goal is to find x⇤ such that
x⇤ = arg max f (x)
x2X

(1)

with the fewest samples (x). In this paper, we consider the case that f is deterministic.
Without knowing any structure of f (except for the local smoothness such as Lipschitzcontinuity [10]), in the worst-case, solving Eqn. 1 takes exponential time, i.e. the optimizer needs
to search every x to find the optimum. One way to address this problem is through learning: from
a few samples we learn a surrogate regressor fˆ 2 H and optimize fˆ instead. If the model class H
is small and f can be well approximated within H, then fˆ is a good approximator of f with much
fewer samples.
Many previous works go that route, such as Bayesian Optimization (BO) and its variants [11, 12, 13,
14]. However, in the case that f is highly nonlinear and high-dimensional, we need to use a very
large model class H, e.g. Gaussian Processes (GP) or Deep Neural Networks (DNN), that requires
many samples to fit before generalizing well. For example, Oh et al [15] observed that the myopic
acquisition in BO over-explores the boundary of a search space, especially in high dimensional
problems. To address this issue, recent works start to explore space partitioning [5, 16, 17] and local
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

