Curriculum learning for multilevel budgeted
combinatorial problems

Adel Nabli
Margarida Carvalho
CIRRELT and Département d’Informatique et de Recherche Opérationnelle
Université de Montréal
adel.nabli@umontreal.ca
carvalho@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract
Learning heuristics for combinatorial optimization problems through graph neural
networks have recently shown promising results on some classic NP-hard problems.
These are single-level optimization problems with only one player. Multilevel
combinatorial optimization problems are their generalization, encompassing situations with multiple players taking decisions sequentially. By framing them in
a multi-agent reinforcement learning setting, we devise a value-based method to
learn to solve multilevel budgeted combinatorial problems involving two players in
a zero-sum game over a graph. Our framework is based on a simple curriculum: if
an agent knows how to estimate the value of instances with budgets up to B, then
solving instances with budget B + 1 can be done in polynomial time regardless of
the direction of the optimization by checking the value of every possible afterstate.
Thus, in a bottom-up approach, we generate datasets of heuristically solved instances with increasingly larger budgets to train our agent. We report results close
to optimality on graphs up to 100 nodes and a 185× speedup on average compared
to the quickest exact solver known for the Multilevel Critical Node problem, a
max-min-max trilevel problem that has been shown to be at least Σp2 -hard.

1

Introduction

The design of heuristics to tackle real-world instances of NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems over graphs has attracted the attention of many Computer Scientists over the years [29]. With
advances in Deep Learning [30] and Graph Neural Networks [63], the idea of leveraging the recurrent
structures appearing in the combinatorial objects belonging to a distribution of instances of a given
problem to learn efficient heuristics with a Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework has received an
increased interest [6, 48]. Although these approaches show promising results on many fundamental
NP-hard problems over graphs, such as Maximum Cut [4] or the Traveling Salesman Problem [37],
the range of combinatorial challenges on which they are directly applicable is still limited.
Indeed, most of the combinatorial problems over graphs solved heuristically with Deep Learning
[2, 4, 5, 13, 15, 37, 41, 47] are classic NP-hard problems for which the canonical optimization
formulation is a single-level Mixed Integer Linear Program: there is one decision-maker1 seeking
to minimize a linear cost subject to linear constraints and integer requirements. However, in many
real-world situations, decision-makers interact with each other. A particular case of such setting are
sequential games with a hierarchy between players: an upper level authority (a leader) optimizes its
goal subject to the response of a sequence of followers seeking to optimize their own objectives given
1
We will use interchangeably the words decision-maker, agent and player. Note that decision-maker, player
and agent are usually used in Operations Research, Game Theory and Reinforcement Learning, respectively.
Similarly for the words decision, strategy and policy.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

