Provably Efficient Reward-Agnostic Navigation
with Linear Value Iteration
Andrea Zanette
Stanford University
zanette@stanford.edu

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research
lazaric@fb.com

Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Stanford University
mykel@stanford.edu

Emma Brunskill
Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
There has been growing progress on theoretical analyses for provably efficient
learning in MDPs with linear function approximation, but much of the existing work
has made strong assumptions to enable exploration by conventional exploration
frameworks. Typically these assumptions are stronger than what is needed to
find good solutions in the batch setting. In this work, we show how under a
more standard notion of low inherent Bellman error, typically employed in leastsquare value iteration-style algorithms, we can provide strong PAC guarantees on
learning a near optimal value function provided that the linear space is sufficiently
“explorable”. We present a computationally tractable algorithm for the reward-free
setting and show how it can be used to learn a near optimal policy for any (linear)
reward function, which is revealed only once learning has completed. If this reward
function is also estimated from the samples gathered during pure exploration, our
results also provide same-order PAC guarantees on the performance of the resulting
policy for this setting.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to solve complex multi-step decision problems with stochastic
outcomes framed as a Markov decision process (MDP). RL algorithms often need to explore large
state and action spaces where function approximations become necessity. In this work, we focus on
exploration with linear predictors for the action value function, which can be quite expressive [Sutton
and Barto, 2018].
Existing guarantees for linear value functions Exploration has been widely studied in the tabular
setting [Azar et al., 2017, Zanette and Brunskill, 2019, Efroni et al., 2019, Jin et al., 2018, Dann
et al., 2019], but obtaining formal guarantees for exploration with function approximation appears to
be a challenge even in the linear case. The minimal necessary and sufficient conditions to reliably
learn a linear predictor are not fully understood even with access to a generative model [Du et al.,
2019b]. We know that when the best policy is unique and the predictor is sufficiently accurate it can
be identified [Du et al., 2019c, 2020], but in general we are interested in finding only near-optimal
policies using potentially misspecified approximators.
To achieve this goal, several ideas from tabular exploration and linear bandits [Lattimore and
Szepesvári, 2020] have been combined to obtain provably efficient algorithms in low-rank MDPs
[Yang and Wang, 2020, Zanette et al., 2020a, Jin et al., 2020b] and their extension [Wang et al., 2019,
2020b]. We shall identify the core assumption of the above works as optimistic closure: all these
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

