Graph Geometry Interaction Learning

Shichao Zhu1, 3 , Shirui Pan4 , Chuan Zhou2, 3 , Jia Wu5 , Yanan Cao1, 3∗, Bin Wang6
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
5
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
6
Xiaomi AI Lab, Beijing, China
zhushichao@iie.ac.cn, shirui.pan@monash.edu, zhouchuan@amss.ac.cn,
jia.wu@mq.edu.au, caoyanan@iie.ac.cn, wangbin11@xiaomi.com

Abstract
While numerous approaches have been developed to embed graphs into either
Euclidean or hyperbolic spaces, they do not fully utilize the information available
in graphs, or lack the flexibility to model intrinsic complex graph geometry. To
utilize the strength of both Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries, we develop a
novel Geometry Interaction Learning (GIL) method for graphs, a well-suited and
efficient alternative for learning abundant geometric properties in graph. GIL
captures a more informative internal structural features with low dimensions while
maintaining conformal invariance of each space. Furthermore, our method endows
each node the freedom to determine the importance of each geometry space via a
flexible dual feature interaction learning and probability assembling mechanism.
Promising experimental results are presented for five benchmark datasets on node
classification and link prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Learning from graph-structured data is an important task in machine learning, for which graph neural
networks (GNNs) have shown unprecedented performance [1]. It is common for GNNs to embed data
in the Euclidean space [2, 3, 4], due to its intuition-friendly generalization with powerful simplicity
and efficiency. The Euclidean space has closed-form formulas for basic operations, and the space
satisfies the commutative and associative laws for basic operations such as addition. According to the
associated vector space operations and invariance to node and edge permutations required in GNNs
[5], it is sufficient to operate directly in this space and feed the Euclidean embeddings as input to
GNNs, which has led to impressive performance on standard tasks, including node classification,
link prediction and etc. A surge of GNN models, from both spectral perspective [2, 6] or spatial
perspective [3, 5, 7], as well as generalization of them for inductive learning for unseen nodes or
other applications [4, 8, 9, 10], have been emerged recently.
Many real-word complex graphs exhibit a non-Euclidean geometry such as scale-free or hierarchical
structure [11, 12, 13, 14]. Typical applications include Internet [15], social network [16] and
biological network. In these cases, the Euclidean spaces suffer from large distortion embeddings,
while hyperbolic spaces offer an efficient alternative to embed these graphs with low dimensions,
where the nodes and distances increase exponentially with the depth of the tree [17]. HGNN [18] and
HGCN [19] are the most recent methods to generalize hyperbolic neural networks [20, 21] to graph
domains, by moving the aggregation operation to the tangent space, where the operations satisfy the
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

