The Diversified Ensemble Neural Network
Shaofeng Zhang1 , Meng Liu1 , Junchi Yan2∗
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Department of CSE, and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{sfzhang,2017221004027}@std.uestc.edu.cn, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Ensemble is a general way of improving the accuracy and stability of learning
models, especially for the generalization ability on small datasets. Compared with
tree-based methods, relatively less works have been devoted to an in-depth study
on effective ensemble design for neural networks. In this paper, we propose a
principled ensemble technique by constructing the so-called diversified ensemble
layer to combine multiple networks as individual modules. Through comprehensive
theoretical analysis, we show that each individual model in our ensemble layer
corresponds to weights in the ensemble layer optimized in different directions.
Meanwhile, the devised ensemble layer can be readily integrated into popular
neural architectures, including CNNs, RNNs, and GCNs. Extensive experiments
are conducted on public tabular datasets, images, and texts. By adopting weight
sharing approach, the results show our method can notably improve the accuracy
and stability of the original neural networks with ignorable extra time and space
overhead.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown expressive representation power based on the cascading
structure. However, their high model capacity also leads to the overfitting issue and making DNNs a
less popular choice on small datasets, especially compared with decision tree-based methods.
In particular, ensemble has been a de facto engineering protocol for more stable prediction, by
combining the outputs of multiple modules. In ensemble learning, it is desirable that the modules can
be complementary to each other, and module diversity has been a direct pursuit for this purpose. In
tree-based methods such as LightGBM [1] and XGBoost [2], diversity can be effectively achieved by
different sampling and boosting techniques. However, such strategies are not so popular for neural
networks, and the reasons may include: i) neural networks (and their ensemble) are less efficient; ii)
the down-sampling strategy may not work well on neural networks as each of them can be more prone
to overfitting (e.g., by using only part of the training dataset), which affects the overall performance.
In contrast, decision tree models are known more robust to overfitting, and also more efficient.
We are aimed to devise a neural network based ensemble model to be computationally efficient and
stable. In particular, the individual models is trained for maximizing their diversity such that the
ensemble can be less prone to overfitting. To this end, we propose the so-called diversified ensemble
layer, which can be used as a plug in with different popular network architectures, including CNNs [3],
RNNs [4], and GCNs [5]. Meanwhile, due to its partial weight sharing strategy, it incurs relatively
small extra time overhead in both training and inference. The main contributions are as follows:
1) Instead of adopting existing popular down-sampling and feature selection strategies, we propose
another principled technique, whereby each individual model can use full features and samples for
∗

Junchi Yan is the correspondence author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

