On 1/n neural representation and robustness
Josue Nassar⇤
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Stony Brook University
josue.nassar@stonybrook.edu
Piotr Aleksander Sokol⇤
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior
Stony Brook University
piotr.sokol@stonybrook.edu
Kenneth D. Harris
UCL Institute of Neurology
University College London
kenneth.harris@ucl.ac.uk

SueYeon Chung
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Columbia University
sueyeon.chung@columbia.edu

Il Memming Park
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior
Stony Brook University
memming.park@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Understanding the nature of representation in neural networks is a goal shared by
neuroscience and machine learning. It is therefore exciting that both fields converge
not only on shared questions but also on similar approaches. A pressing question
in these areas is understanding how the structure of the representation used by
neural networks affects both their generalization, and robustness to perturbations.
In this work, we investigate the latter by juxtaposing experimental results regarding
the covariance spectrum of neural representations in the mouse V1 (Stringer et al)
with artificial neural networks. We use adversarial robustness to probe Stringer
et al’s theory regarding the causal role of a 1/n covariance spectrum. We empirically investigate the benefits such a neural code confers in neural networks, and
illuminate its role in multi-layer architectures. Our results show that imposing
the experimentally observed structure on artificial neural networks makes them
more robust to adversarial attacks. Moreover, our findings complement the existing
theory relating wide neural networks to kernel methods, by showing the role of
intermediate representations.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks and theoretical neuroscience have a shared ancestry of models they use and
develop, this includes the McCulloch-Pitts model [33], Boltzmann machines [1] and convolutional
neural networks [16, 31]. The relation between the disciplines, however, goes beyond the use of
cognate mathematical models and includes a diverse set of shared interests – importantly, the overlap
in interests increased as more theoretical questions came to the fore in deep learning. As such, the
two disciplines have settled on similar questions about the nature of ‘representations’ or neural codes:
how they develop during learning; how they enable generalization to new data and new tasks; their
dimensionality and embedding structure; what role attention plays in their modulation; how their
properties guard against illusions and adversarial examples.
⇤

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

