Learning Causal Effects via
Weighted Empirical Risk Minimization

Yonghan Jung
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
jung222@purdue.edu

Jin Tian
Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
jtian@iastate.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Learning causal effects from data is a fundamental problem across the sciences.
Determining the identifiability of a target effect from a combination of the observational distribution and the causal graph underlying a phenomenon is wellunderstood in theory. However, in practice, it remains a challenge to apply the
identification theory to estimate the identified causal functionals from finite samples. Although a plethora of effective estimators have been developed under the
setting known as the back-door (also called conditional ignorability), there exists
still no systematic way of estimating arbitrary causal functionals that are both
computationally and statistically attractive. This paper aims to bridge this gap,
from causal identification to causal estimation. We note that estimating functionals
from limited samples based on the empirical risk minimization (ERM) principle
has been pervasive in the machine learning literature, and these methods have
been extended to causal inference under the back-door setting. In this paper, we
develop a learning framework that marries two families of methods, benefiting
from the generality of the causal identification theory and the effectiveness of
the estimators produced based on the principle of ERM. Specifically, we develop
a sound and complete algorithm that generates causal functionals in the form of
weighted distributions that are amenable to the ERM optimization. We then provide
a practical procedure for learning causal effects from finite samples and a causal
graph. Finally, experimental results support the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Inferring causal effects from data is a fundamental challenge that cuts across the empirical sciences
[35, 47, 36]. There exists a growing literature trying to delineate the conditions under which causal
conclusions can be drawn from non-experimental data. One common task in the field is known as
the problem of causal effect identification (identification, for short). Identification asks whether
a causal distribution P (Y = y|do(X = x)) (for short, P (y|do(x))) can be uniquely computed
from a combination of the observational distribution P (V ) and qualitative knowledge about the
domain, which is usually encoded as a causal graph G [35, Def. 3.2.4]. Causal identification has been
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

