CryptoNAS: Private Inference on a ReLU Budget

Zahra Ghodsi, Akshaj Veldanda, Brandon Reagen, Siddharth Garg
New York University
{zg451, akv275, bjr5, sg175}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Machine learning as a service has given raise to privacy concerns surrounding
clients’ data and providers’ models and has catalyzed research in private inference
(PI): methods to process inferences without disclosing inputs. Recently, researchers
have adapted cryptographic techniques to show PI is possible, however all solutions
increase inference latency beyond practical limits. This paper makes the observation that existing models are ill-suited for PI and proposes a novel NAS method,
named CryptoNAS, for finding and tailoring models to the needs of PI. The key
insight is that in PI operator latency costs are inverted: non-linear operations (e.g.,
ReLU) dominate latency, while linear layers become effectively free. We develop
the idea of a ReLU budget as a proxy for inference latency and use CryptoNAS to
build models that maximize accuracy within a given budget. CryptoNAS improves
accuracy by 3.4% and latency by 2.4× over the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

User privacy has recently emerged as a first-order constraint, sparking interest in private inference
(PI) using deep learning models: techniques that preserve data and model confidentiality without
compromising user experience (i.e., inference accuracy). In response to this concern, highly-secure
solutions for PI have been proposed using cryptographic primitives, namely with homomorphic
encryption (HE) and secure multi-party computation (MPC). However, both solutions incur substantial
slowdown to the point where even state-of-the-art techniques that combine HE and MPC cannot
achieve practical inference latency. Most prior work has focused on developing new systems (e.g.,
Cheetah [1]) and security protocols (e.g., MiniONN[2]) for privacy, while little effort has been made
to find new network architectures tailored to the needs of PI. Realizing practical PI requires a better
understanding of latency bottlenecks and new deep learning model optimizations to address them
directly.
Prior work on PI [3, 2, 4] has developed cryptographic protocols optimized for common CNN
operators. High-performance protocols take a hybrid approach to combine the strengths–and avoid
the pitfalls–of different cryptographic methods. Most protocols today use one method for linear (e.g.,
secret sharing [5] for convolutions) and another for non-linear layers (e.g., Yao’s garbled circuit [6]
for ReLUs). Figure 1 compares the cryptographic latency of ReLU and linear layers for the MiniONN
PI protocol [2] (details in Section 2). The data highlights how a layer’s “plaintext” latency has little
bearing on its corresponding cryptographic latency: ReLU operations dominate latency, taking up
to 10,000× longer to process than convolution layers. Given the inversion of operator latency costs,
enabling efficient PI requires developing new models that maximize accuracy while minimizing
ReLU operations, which we refer to as a model’s ReLU budget. This stands in stark contrast to
existing neural architecture search (NAS) approaches that focus only on optimizing the number of
floating point operations (FLOPs).
Based on this insight we propose two optimization techniques: ReLU reduction and ReLU balancing. ReLU reduction describes methods to reduce the ReLU counts starting from a ReLU-heavy
baseline network, for which two solutions are developed: ReLU pruning and ReLU shuffling.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

