On the universality of deep learning
Emmanuel Abbe
Mathematics Institute
EPFL
Lausanne, 1005 Switzerland

Colin Sandon
Department of Mathematics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139

Abstract
This paper shows that deep learning, i.e., neural networks trained by SGD, can learn
in polytime any function class that can be learned in polytime by some algorithm,
including parities. This universal result is further shown to be robust, i.e., it holds
under possibly poly-noise on the gradients, which gives a separation between deep
learning and statistical query algorithms, as the latter are not comparably universal
due to cases like parities. This also shows that SGD-based deep learning does not
suffer from the limitations of the perceptron discussed by Minsky-Papert ’69. The
paper further complements this result with a lower-bound on the generalization
error of descent algorithms, which implies in particular that the robust universality
breaks down if the gradients are averaged over large enough batches of samples as
in full-GD, rather than fewer samples as in SGD.

1

Introduction

It is known that the class of neural networks (NNs) with polynomial network size can express
any function that can be implemented in a given polynomial time [Par94, Sip06], and that their
sample complexity scales polynomially with the network size [AB09]. Thus NNs have favorable
approximation and estimation errors. However there is no known efficient training algorithm for
NNs with general and provable guarantees, in particular, it is NP-hard to implement the ERM rule
[KS09, DSS16]. The success behind deep learning is to train deep NNs with stochastic gradient
descent or the like, which gives record performances in various applications [KSH12, HDY+ 12,
LBBH98, LBH15, GBC16].
It is thus natural to ask whether SGD can also control efficiently the third pillar of statistical learning,
i.e., the optimization error, turning deep learning into a universal learning paradigm that can learn
efficiently any efficiently learnable class; see [SSBD14] for further discussions on this question.
This paper answers this question in the affirmative, with the following contributions and implications:
1. It is shown1 that poly-size neural nets trained by SGD with poly-many steps can learn any
function class that is learnable by an algorithm that runs in polytime and with poly-many
samples; see Theorem 1. This part is resolved using a net initialization that is implemented
in polytime (and not dependent on the function to be learned nor the data) and that emulates
with SGD any efficient learning algorithm. This shows in particular that SGD-based deep
learning is P-complete: any algorithm in P can be reduced to training with SGD a neural net
initialized in polytime with a proper non-linearity and evaluating the net (see Remark 2).
1

This paper discusses results that are asymptotic in the dimension n of the data, i.e., the number of inputs
to the neural net. The term ‘poly’ is used to emphasize that the considered quantities scale polynomially with
n, i.e., nc for a constant c. This can be polynomially large if c 0 or polynomially small if c < 0. In some
parts, we make abuse of terminologies and simply say poly/polynomially when it is clear from the context which
direction is considered; e.g., only a noise variance that is polynomially small is interesing in our context, not a
noise variance that is polynomially large (which would be a huge noise).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

