Characterizing Optimal Mixed Policies:
Where to Intervene and What to Observe
Sanghack Lee
Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Columbia University
{sanghacklee,eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Intelligent agents are continuously faced with the challenge of optimizing a policy
based on what they can observe (see) and which actions they can take (do) in
the environment where they are deployed. Most policies can be parametrized in
terms of these two dimensions, i.e., as a function of what can be seen and done
given a certain situation, which we call a mixed policy. In this paper, we investigate
several properties of the class of mixed policies and provide an efficient and
effective characterization, including optimality and non-redundancy. Specifically,
we introduce a graphical criterion to identify unnecessary contexts for a set of
actions, leading to a natural characterization of non-redundancy of mixed policies.
We then derive sufficient conditions under which one strategy can dominate the
other with respect to their maximum achievable expected rewards (optimality). This
characterization leads to a fundamental understanding of the space of mixed policies
and a possible refinement of the agent’s strategy so that it converges to the optimum
faster and more robustly. One surprising result of the causal characterization is that
the agent following a more standard approach—intervening on all intervenable
variables and observing all available contexts—may be hurting itself, and will
never achieve an optimal performance.

1

Introduction

Agents are deployed in complex and uncertain environments where they are bombarded with high
volumes of information and are expected to operate efficiently, safely, and rationally. The discipline
of causal inference (CI) offers a compelling set of tools and a language that allows one to reason with
the structural invariances present in complex environments [1–5]. Whenever the causal mechanisms
of an underlying environment are sufficiently well-understood, the agent can design very precise
interventions, bringing a certain desired state of affairs about swiftly and cleanly (e.g., personalized
medical treatments, inequality-reducing tax policies). In the field of ML, bandits and reinforcement
learning (RL) constitute the de facto framework in which agents are designed such that a certain
policy is optimized and the corresponding goals can be efficiently achieved [6–8].
There is a growing literature exploring how these two frameworks (RL and CI) are related, and how
this understanding can be translated into more efficient decision-making in more challenging and
realistic settings. Recently, the more explicit connection between these frameworks has been made by
eliciting how causal knowledge—unobserved confounders and the causal relations between actions,
contexts, and rewards—can be used to improve decision-making in a variety of settings, including
for both interventional [9–11] and counterfactual [12, 13] reasoning (see also [14–17] and [18–21]).
Outside more traditional RL, causal inference researchers have embraced the idea of sequential
decision making in terms of conditional plans or dynamic treatment regimes, while focusing on, e.g.,
the identifiability of causal effects from observational data [22–27].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

