MATE: Plugging in Model Awareness to Task
Embedding for Meta Learning

Xiaohan Chen, Zhangyang Wang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
{xiaohan.chen, atlaswang}@utexas.edu

Siyu Tang
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
siyu.tang@inf.ethz.ch

Krikamol Muandet
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
krikamol@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Meta-learning improves generalization of machine learning models when faced
with previously unseen tasks by leveraging experiences from different, yet related prior tasks. To allow for better generalization, we propose a novel task
representation called model-aware task embedding (MATE) that incorporates not
only the data distributions of different tasks, but also the complexity of the tasks
through the models used. The task complexity is taken into account by a novel
variant of kernel mean embedding, combined with an instance-adaptive attention
mechanism inspired by an SVM-based feature selection algorithm. Together with
conditioning layers in deep neural networks, MATE can be easily incorporated
into existing meta learners as a plug-and-play module. While MATE is widely
applicable to general tasks where the concept of task/environment is involved, we
demonstrate its effectiveness in few-shot learning by improving a state-of-the-art
model consistently on two benchmarks. Source codes for this paper are available
at https://github.com/VITA-Group/MATE.

1

Introduction

Human can often quickly learn new concepts after seeing only a few examples or having minutes
of experience. Prevalent deep neural networks, on the other hand, require enormous amount of
data to learn to generalize well [32]. To avoid overfitting, these gigantic deep learning models must
integrate prior knowledge like humans do. For example, we can quickly learn to distinguish between
several characters in a brand-new language we have never learned before because we can exploit past
experiences and concepts that we have acquired in our native language. In machine learning, computer
vision, and robotics, prior experience often comes in the form of tasks and their relationships. For
example, after teaching a robot to walk, we expect that it should be able to learn to run faster by
exploiting the related skills acquired from the previous task. Therefore, it is vital for more efficient
meta-learning to find a method that can summarize and make use of the prior experience.
The key of meta-learning, or learning to learn, is to learn an inductive bias for the new task using
data from previous tasks [3, 46]. In principle, machine learning problems can be viewed as a
problem of searching for the best hypothesis in a hypothesis space F that characterizes the inductive
bias. Maximum margin bias for support vector machine (SVM) [52] and minimum feature bias
for the feature selection algorithms [8] are examples of how the inductive bias can be incorporated.
Furthermore, the architectures of deep neural networks used, e.g., the popular 2D-convolution blocks
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

