Learning by Minimizing the Sum of Ranked Range

Shu Hu
University at Buffalo, SUNY
shuhu@buffalo.edu

Yiming Ying
University at Albany, SUNY
yying@albany.edu

Xin Wang
CuraCloud Corporation
xinw@curacloudcorp.com

Siwei Lyu
University at Buffalo, SUNY
siweilyu@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In forming learning objectives, one oftentimes needs to aggregate a set of individual
values to a single output. Such cases occur in the aggregate loss, which combines
individual losses of a learning model over each training sample, and in the individual loss for multi-label learning, which combines prediction scores over all class
labels. In this work, we introduce the sum of ranked range (SoRR) as a general
approach to form learning objectives. A ranked range is a consecutive sequence of
sorted values of a set of real numbers. The minimization of SoRR is solved with the
difference of convex algorithm (DCA). We explore two applications in machine
learning of the minimization of the SoRR framework, namely the AoRR aggregate
loss for binary classification and the TKML individual loss for multi-label/multi-class
classification. Our empirical results highlight the effectiveness of the proposed
optimization framework and demonstrate the applicability of proposed losses using
synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Learning objective is a fundamental component in any
machine learning system. In forming learning objectives,
we often need to aggregate a set of individual values to a
single numerical value. Such cases occur in the aggregate
loss, which combines individual losses of a learning model
over each training sample, and in the individual loss for
multi-label learning, which combines prediction scores
over all class labels. For a set of real numbers representing individual values, the ranking order reflects the most
basic relation among them. Therefore, designing learning
objectives can be achieved by choosing operations defined Figure 1: Illustrative examples of different
approaches to aggregate individual values to
based on the ranking order of the individual values.
form learning objectives in machine learning.
Straightforward choices for such operations are the aver- The red dot corresponds to a potential outlier.
age and the maximum. Both are widely used in forming
aggregate losses [35, 30] and multi-label losses [22], yet each has its own drawbacks. The average is
insensitive to minority sub-groups while the maximum is sensitive to outliers, which usually appear
as the top individual values. The average top-k loss is introduced as a compromise between the
average and the maximum for aggregate loss [11] and multi-label individual loss [12]. However, it
dilutes but not exclude the influences of the outliers. The situation is graphically illustrated in Fig.1.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

