Semantic Visual Navigation by
Watching YouTube Videos

Matthew Chang
Arjun Gupta
Saurabh Gupta
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{mc48, arjung2, saurabhg}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Semantic cues and statistical regularities in real-world environment layouts can
improve efficiency for navigation in novel environments. This paper learns and
leverages such semantic cues for navigating to objects of interest in novel environments, by simply watching YouTube videos. This is challenging because YouTube
videos don’t come with labels for actions or goals, and may not even showcase optimal behavior. Our method tackles these challenges through the use of Q-learning
on pseudo-labeled transition quadruples (image, action, next image, reward). We
show that such off-policy Q-learning from passive data is able to learn meaningful
semantic cues for navigation. These cues, when used in a hierarchical navigation
policy, lead to improved efficiency at the ObjectGoal task in visually realistic
simulations. We observe a relative improvement of 15 − 83% over end-to-end RL,
behavior cloning, and classical methods, while using minimal direct interaction.

1

Introduction

Consider the task of finding your way to the bathroom while at a new restaurant. As humans, we
can efficiently solve such tasks in novel environments in a zero-shot manner. We leverage common
sense patterns in the layout of environments, which we have built from our past experience of similar
environments. For finding a bathroom, such cues will be that they are typically towards the back
of the restaurant, away from the main seating area, behind a corner, and might have signs pointing
to their locations (see Figure 1). Building computational systems that can similarly leverage such
semantic regularities for navigation has been a long-standing goal.
Hand-specifying what these semantic cues are, and how they should be used by a navigation policy
is challenging. Thus, the dominant paradigm is to directly learn what these cues are, and how to
use them for navigation tasks, in an end-to-end manner via reinforcement learning. While this is a
promising approach to this problem, it is sample inefficient, and requires many million interaction
samples with dense reward signals to learn reasonable policies.
But, is this the most direct and efficient way of learning about such semantic cues? At the end of the
day, these semantic cues are just based upon spatial consistency in co-occurrence of visual patterns
next to one another. That is, if there is always a bathroom around the corner towards the back of
the restaurant, then we can learn to find this bathroom, by simply finding corners towards the back
of the restaurant. This observation motivates our work, where we pursue an alternate paradigm to
learn semantic cues for navigation: learning about this spatial co-occurrence in indoor environments
through video tours of indoor spaces. People upload such videos to YouTube (see project video)
to showcase real estate for renting and selling. We develop techniques that leverage such YouTube
videos to learn semantic cues for effective navigation to semantic targets in indoor home environments
(such as finding a bed or a toilet).
Project website with code, models, and videos: https://matthewchang.github.io/value-learning-from-videos/.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

