Learning to Select the Best Forecasting Tasks for
Clinical Outcome Prediction
Yuan Xue* , Nan Du* , Anne Mottram, Martin Seneviratne, Andrew M. Dai
Google
{yuanxue, dunan, annemottram, martsen, adai}@google.com

Abstract
The paradigm of ‘pretraining’ from a set of relevant auxiliary tasks and then
‘finetuning’ on a target task has been successfully applied in many different domains.
However, when the auxiliary tasks are abundant, with complex relationships to
the target task, using domain knowledge or searching over all possible pretraining
setups is inefficient and suboptimal. To address this challenge, we propose a
method to automatically select from a large set of auxiliary tasks, which yields a
representation most useful to the target task. In particular, we develop an efficient
algorithm that uses automatic auxiliary task selection within a nested-loop metalearning process. We have applied this algorithm to the task of clinical outcome
predictions in electronic medical records, learning from a large number of selfsupervised tasks related to forecasting patient trajectories. Experiments on a real
clinical dataset demonstrate the superior predictive performance of our method
compared to direct supervised learning, naive pretraining and simple multitask
learning, in particular in low-data scenarios when the primary task has very few
examples. With detailed ablation analysis, we further show that the selection rules
are interpretable and able to generalize to unseen target tasks with new data.

1

Introduction

The wide adoption of electronic medical record (EMR) systems has generated large repositories of
patient data in the form of multivariate time-series. These data are increasingly used for supervised
learning, with the goal of providing decision support to clinicians by predicting clinical outcomes for
individual patients [1]. Recent examples have focused on the prediction of inpatient mortality [2],
acute kidney injury [3], circulatory shock [4], etc.
One major challenge with EMR modeling is that the raw data is high-dimensional, noisy, sparse and
heterogeneous, as it is generated in the course of routine clinical care [5]. Furthermore, accurately
labeling clinical endpoints can be extremely challenging and often requires time-consuming manual
chart review by clinicians, meaning that modeling must be data efficient. Even in cases where the
outcome label is more clearly encoded, e.g. mortality, data availability is often still an issue as there
are only a limited number of patients with that outcome in a selected cohort.
To tackle these issues of data quality and label shortage, a common approach widely applied in
computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) domains is pretraining and finetuning.
Pretraining involves learning a compact representation on related tasks with abundant data. These
learned representations can then be finetuned on the primary task with limited labels, assisting
supervised performance by leveraging prior knowledge.
EMRs contain thousands of different laboratory tests, observations, medications, procedures etc., for
each patient over time. Using the trajectories of these time series data as self-supervised objectives
provides a promising way to learn a useful patient representation. However, naively pretraining across
*

Authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

