Learning Dynamic Belief Graphs to Generalize
on Text-Based Games
†∗

♡∗

♡∗

Ashutosh Adhikari
Xingdi Yuan
Marc-Alexandre Côté
‡
♡
Mikuláš Zelinka
Marc-Antoine Rondeau
♡
†¶
♠♣
Romain Laroche
Pascal Poupart
Jian Tang
♡
♢♣
Adam Trischler
William L. Hamilton
†
♡
‡
University of Waterloo
Microsoft Research, Montréal
Charles University
♣
♢
♠
¶
Mila
McGill University
HEC Montréal
Vector Institute
eric.yuan@microsoft.com

Abstract
Playing text-based games requires skills in processing natural language and sequential decision making. Achieving human-level performance on text-based games
remains an open challenge, and prior research has largely relied on hand-crafted
structured representations and heuristics. In this work, we investigate how an agent
can plan and generalize in text-based games using graph-structured representations
learned end-to-end from raw text. We propose a novel graph-aided transformer
agent (GATA) that infers and updates latent belief graphs during planning to enable
effective action selection by capturing the underlying game dynamics. GATA is
trained using a combination of reinforcement and self-supervised learning. Our
work demonstrates that the learned graph-based representations help agents converge to better policies than their text-only counterparts and facilitate effective
generalization across game configurations. Experiments on 500+ unique games
from the TextWorld suite show that our best agent outperforms text-based baselines
by an average of 24.2%.

1

Introduction

Text-based games are complex, interactive simulations in which the game state is described with
text and players act using simple text commands (e.g., light torch with match). They serve as a
proxy for studying how agents can exploit language to comprehend and interact with the environment.
Text-based games are a useful challenge in the pursuit of intelligent agents that communicate with
humans (e.g., in customer service systems).
Solving text-based games requires a combination of reinforcement learning (RL) and natural language
processing (NLP) techniques. However, inherent challenges like partial observability, long-term
2
dependencies, sparse rewards, and combinatorial action spaces make these games very difficult. For
instance, Hausknecht et al. [16] show that a state-of-the-art model achieves a mere 2.56% of the total
possible score on a curated set of text-based games for human players [5]. On the other hand, while
text-based games exhibit many of the same difficulties as linguistic tasks like open-ended dialogue,
they are more structured and constrained.
To design successful agents for text-based games, previous works have relied largely on heuristics that
exploit games’ inherent structure. For example, several works have proposed rule-based components
∗
2

Equal contribution.
We challenge readers to solve this representative game: https://aka.ms/textworld-tryit.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

