Auto Learning Attention

Benteng Ma1,2∗

Jing Zhang2∗
Yong Xia1,3
Dacheng Tao2
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
The University of Sydney, Australia
3
Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University, Shenzhen
{mabenteng@mail,yxia@}.nwpu.edu.cn
{jing.zhang1, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au
1

Abstract
Attention modules have been demonstrated effective in strengthening the representation ability of a neural network via reweighting spatial or channel features
or stacking both operations sequentially. However, designing the structures of
different attention operations requires a bulk of computation and extensive expertise. In this paper, we devise an Auto Learning Attention (AutoLA) method,
which is the first attempt on automatic attention design. Specifically, we define a
novel attention module named high order group attention (HOGA) as a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) where each group represents a node, and each edge represents an operation of heterogeneous attentions. A typical HOGA architecture
can be searched automatically via the differential AutoLA method within 1 GPU
day using the ResNet-20 backbone on CIFAR10. Further, the searched attention
module can generalize to various backbones as a plug-and-play component and
outperforms popular manually designed channel and spatial attentions for many
vision tasks, including image classification on CIFAR100 and ImageNet, object
detection and human keypoint detection on COCO dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/btma48/AutoLA.

1

Introduction

Attention learning has been increasingly incorporated into convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1],
aiming to compact the image representation and strengthen its discriminatory power [2, 3, 4, 5]. It
has been widely recognized that attention learning is beneficial for many computer vision tasks, such
as image classification, segmentation, and object detection.
There are two types of typical attention mechanisms. The channel attention is able to reinforce
the informative channels and to suppress irrelevant channels of feature maps [2], while the spatial
attention enables CNNs to dynamically concentrate processing resources at the location of interest,
resulting in better and more effective processing of information [4]. Let either the channel attention
or spatial attention be treated as the first-order attention. The combination of both channel attention
and spatial attention constitutes the second-order attention, which has been proven in benchmarks
to produce better performance than either first-order attention by modulating the feature maps in
both channel-wise and spatial-wise [4]. Accordingly, we propose to extend attention modules from
the first- or second-order to a higher order, i.e., arranging more basic attention units structurally.
However, considering the highly variable structures and hyperparameters of basic attention units,
exhaustively searching the architecture of high order attention module is an exponential explosion in
complexity.
∗

indicates equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

