Large-Scale Adversarial Training for
Vision-and-Language Representation Learning

Zhe Gan1 , Yen-Chun Chen1 , Linjie Li1 , Chen Zhu2 , Yu Cheng1 , Jingjing Liu1
1
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research, 2 University of Maryland, College Park
{zhe.gan,yen-chun.chen,lindsey.li,yu.cheng,jingjl}@microsoft.com
chenzhu@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We present V ILLA, the first known effort on large-scale adversarial training for
vision-and-language (V+L) representation learning. V ILLA consists of two training
stages: (i) task-agnostic adversarial pre-training; followed by (ii) task-specific
adversarial finetuning. Instead of adding adversarial perturbations on image pixels
and textual tokens, we propose to perform adversarial training in the embedding
space of each modality. To enable large-scale training, we adopt the “free” adversarial training strategy, and combine it with KL-divergence-based regularization to
promote higher invariance in the embedding space. We apply V ILLA to current
best-performing V+L models, and achieve new state of the art on a wide range
of tasks, including Visual Question Answering, Visual Commonsense Reasoning,
Image-Text Retrieval, Referring Expression Comprehension, Visual Entailment,
and NLVR2 .1

1

Introduction

Inspired by the success of BERT [11] on natural language understanding, there has been a surging research interest in developing multimodal pre-training methods for vision-and-language representation
learning (e.g., ViLBERT [35], LXMERT [58], and UNITER [10]). When finetuned on downstream
tasks, these pre-trained models have achieved state-of-the-art performance across diverse V+L tasks,
such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) [4, 15], Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) [72],
and Referring Expression Comprehension [69]. However, due to the immense capacity of large-scale
pre-trained models yet limited amount of labeled data in downstream tasks, aggressive finetuning
often falls into the overfitting trap [22]. Adversarial training, a method to combat adversarial attacks
in order to create robust neural networks [57, 14], has recently shown great potential in improving the
generalization ability of pre-trained language models [76, 22] and image classifiers [64]. A natural
question that came to our mind: can we apply similar adversarial training techniques to V+L problems
to improve model performance?
We propose V ILLA (Vision-and-Language Large-scale Adversarial training), which advocates the
use of adversarial training for V+L representation learning. As illustrated in Figure 1, V ILLA consists
of two training stages: (i) task-agnostic adversarial pre-training (APT); followed by (ii) task-specific
adversarial fine-tuning (AFT). Intuitively, if well-designed, multimodal pre-training tasks such as
image-conditioned masked language modeling and image-text matching can resonate well with many
downstream tasks that require visual grounding and reasoning abilities. This leads to our hypothesis
that the improved generalization ability of pre-trained models learned during APT stage can be readily
transferred to the AFT stage for diverse tasks. In other words, APT is able to uniformly lift model
performance for all downstream tasks in a task-agnostic way, while AFT can further enhance the
finetuned models by leveraging task-specific supervision signals.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/zhegan27/VILLA.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

