HiPPO: Recurrent Memory with
Optimal Polynomial Projections

Albert Gu∗† , Tri Dao∗† , Stefano Ermon † , Atri Rudra ‡ , Christopher Ré †
†
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
{albertgu,trid}@stanford.edu, ermon@cs.stanford.edu, atri@buffalo.edu, chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
A central problem in learning from sequential data is representing cumulative
history in an incremental fashion as more data is processed. We introduce a general
framework (HiPPO) for the online compression of continuous signals and discrete
time series by projection onto polynomial bases. Given a measure that specifies the
importance of each time step in the past, HiPPO produces an optimal solution to a natural online function approximation problem. As special cases, our framework yields
a short derivation of the recent Legendre Memory Unit (LMU) from first principles,
and generalizes the ubiquitous gating mechanism of recurrent neural networks
such as GRUs. This formal framework yields a new memory update mechanism
(HiPPO-LegS) that scales through time to remember all history, avoiding priors on
the timescale. HiPPO-LegS enjoys the theoretical benefits of timescale robustness,
fast updates, and bounded gradients. By incorporating the memory dynamics into
recurrent neural networks, HiPPO RNNs can empirically capture complex temporal
dependencies. On the benchmark permuted MNIST dataset, HiPPO-LegS sets a new
state-of-the-art accuracy of 98.3%. Finally, on a novel trajectory classification task
testing robustness to out-of-distribution timescales and missing data, HiPPO-LegS
outperforms RNN and neural ODE baselines by 25-40% accuracy.

1

Introduction

Modeling and learning from sequential data is a fundamental problem in modern machine learning,
underlying tasks such as language modeling, speech recognition, video processing, and reinforcement
learning. A core aspect of modeling long-term and complex temporal dependencies is memory,
or storing and incorporating information from previous time steps. The challenge is learning a
representation of the entire cumulative history using bounded storage, which must be updated online
as more data is received.
One established approach is to model a state that evolves over time as it incorporates more information.
The deep learning instantiation of this approach is the recurrent neural network (RNN), which is
known to suffer from a limited memory horizon [34, 38, 56] (e.g., the “vanishing gradients” problem).
Although various heuristics have been proposed to overcome this, such as gates in the successful LSTM
and GRU [16, 34], or higher-order frequencies in the recent Fourier Recurrent Unit [79] and Legendre
Memory Unit (LMU) [71], a unified understanding of memory remains a challenge. Furthermore,
existing methods generally require priors on the sequence length or timescale and are ineffective
outside this range [66, 71]; this can be problematic in settings with distribution shift (e.g. arising from
different instrument sampling rates in medical data [62, 63]). Finally, many of them lack theoretical
guarantees on how well they capture long-term dependencies, such as gradient bounds. To design
∗

Equal contribution. Order determined by coin flip.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

