Finding Second-Order Stationary Points Efficiently in
Smooth Nonconvex Linearly Constrained
Optimization Problems

Songtao Lu
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
songtao@ibm.com
Bo Yang ∗
Amazon Alexa
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
amzbyang@amazon.com

Meisam Razaviyayn
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
razaviya@usc.edu

Kejun Huang
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
kejun.huang@ufl.edu

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes two efficient algorithms for computing approximate secondorder stationary points (SOSPs) of problems with generic smooth non-convex
objective functions and generic linear constraints. While finding (approximate)
SOSPs for the class of smooth non-convex linearly constrained problems is computationally intractable, we show that generic problem instances in this class
can be solved efficiently. Specifically, for a generic problem instance, we show
that certain strict complementarity (SC) condition holds for all Karush-KuhnTucker (KKT) solutions. Based on this condition, we design an algorithm
named Successive Negative-curvature grAdient Projection (SNAP), which performs either conventional gradient projection or some negative curvature based
projection steps to find SOSPs. SNAP is a second-order algorithm that requires
e
e hides
O(max{1/ϵ2G , 1/ϵ3H }) iterations to compute an (ϵG , ϵH )-SOSP, where O
the iteration complexity for eigenvalue-decomposition. Building on SNAP, we
propose a first-order
algorithm, named SNAP+ , that requires O(1/ϵ2.5 ) iterations
√
to compute (ϵ, ϵ)-SOSP. The per-iteration computational complexities of our algorithms are polynomial in the number of constraints and problem dimension. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that first-order algorithms with
polynomial per-iteration complexity and global sublinear rate are designed to find
SOSPs of the important class of non-convex problems with linear constraints (almost surely).

1

Introduction

We consider the following class of non-convex linearly constrained optimization problems
minimize
x

f (x),

subject to x ∈ X , {x | Ax ≤ b}

(1)

where f : Rd → R is twice differentiable (possibly non-convex); A ∈ Rm×d and b ∈ Rm are some
given matrix and vector. Such a class of problems finds many applications in machine learning and
data science. For example, in the nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) problem, a given data
∗

contributed to this work when he was working as a Ph.D. student at the University of Minnesota.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

