Spin-Weighted Spherical CNNs

Carlos Esteves
GRASP Laboratory
University of Pennsylvania
machc@seas.upenn.edu

Ameesh Makadia
Google Research
makadia@google.com

Kostas Daniilidis
GRASP Laboratory
University of Pennsylvania
kostas@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
Learning equivariant representations is a promising way to reduce sample and
model complexity and improve the generalization performance of deep neural networks. The spherical CNNs are successful examples, producing SO(3)-equivariant
representations of spherical inputs. There are two main types of spherical CNNs.
The first type lifts the inputs to functions on the rotation group SO(3) and applies
convolutions on the group, which are computationally expensive since SO(3) has
one extra dimension. The second type applies convolutions directly on the sphere,
which are limited to zonal (isotropic) filters, and thus have limited expressivity.
In this paper, we present a new type of spherical CNN that allows anisotropic
filters in an efficient way, without ever leaving the spherical domain. The key
idea is to consider spin-weighted spherical functions, which were introduced in
physics in the study of gravitational waves. These are complex-valued functions on
the sphere whose phases change upon rotation. We define a convolution between
spin-weighted functions and build a CNN based on it. The spin-weighted functions
can also be interpreted as spherical vector fields, allowing applications to tasks
where the inputs or outputs are vector fields. Experiments show that our method
outperforms previous methods on tasks like classification of spherical images,
classification of 3D shapes and semantic segmentation of spherical panoramas.

1

Introduction

Learning representations from data enables a variety of applications that are not possible with other
methods. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are powerful tools in representation learning, in
great part due to their translation equivariance property that allows weight-sharing, exploiting the
natural structure of audio, image, or video inputs.
Recently, there has been significant work extending equivariance to other groups of transformations [20, 9, 13, 44, 33, 17, 45, 40, 43, 18, 4] and designing equivariant CNNs on non-Euclidean
domains [11, 16, 26, 37, 35, 8, 27, 37, 48]. Successful applications have been demonstrated in
tasks such as 3D shape analysis [16, 18], medical imaging [42, 3], satellite/aerial imaging [13, 21],
cosmology [13, 35], physics/chemistry [11, 26, 1]. Favorable results were also shown on popular
upright natural image datasets such as CIFAR10/100 [39].
Rotation equivariant CNNs are the natural way to learn feature representations on spherical data.
There are two prevailing designs, (a) convolution between spherical functions and zonal (isotropic;
constant per latitude) filters [16], and (b) convolutions on SO(3) after lifting spherical functions to
the rotation group [11]. There is a clear distinction between these two designs: (a) is more efficient
allowing to build representational capacity through deeper networks, and (b) has more expressive
filters but is computationally expensive and thus is constrained to shallower networks. The question
we consider in this paper is: how can we achieve the expressivity/representation capacity of SO(3)
convolutions with the efficiency and scalability of spherical convolutions?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

