Reciprocal Adversarial Learning via Characteristic
Functions
Shengxi Li∗

Zeyang Yu
Min Xiang
Danilo Mandic
Imperial College London
{shengxi.li17, z.yu17, m.xiang13, d.mandic}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Generative adversarial nets (GANs) have become a preferred tool for tasks involving complicated distributions. To stabilise the training and reduce the mode
collapse of GANs, one of their main variants employs the integral probability metric (IPM) as the loss function. This provides extensive IPM-GANs with theoretical
support for basically comparing moments in an embedded domain of the critic.
We generalise this by comparing the distributions rather than their moments via a
powerful tool, i.e., the characteristic function (CF), which uniquely and universally
comprising all the information about a distribution. For rigour, we first establish
the physical meaning of the phase and amplitude in CF, and show that this provides
a feasible way of balancing the accuracy and diversity of generation. We then
develop an efficient sampling strategy to calculate the CFs. Within this framework,
we further prove an equivalence between the embedded and data domains when a
reciprocal exists, where we naturally develop the GAN in an auto-encoder structure, in a way of comparing everything in the embedded space (a semantically
meaningful manifold). This efficient structure uses only two modules, together
with a simple training strategy, to achieve bi-directionally generating clear images,
which is referred to as the reciprocal CF GAN (RCF-GAN). Experimental results
demonstrate the superior performances of the proposed RCF-GAN in terms of both
generation and reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial nets (GANs) owe their success to their powerful capability in capturing
complicated data distributions [1]. In practical applications, however, their significant potential still
remains under-explored as GANs typically suffer from unstable training and mode collapse issues [2].
An effective yet elegant way to address these issues is to replace the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence
in measuring the discrepancy in the original form of GANs [3] by another class of metrics called the
integral probability metric (IPM) [4] given by,
d(Pd , Pg ) = sup |Ex∼Pd [f (x)] − Ex∼Pg [f (x)]|,

(1)

f ∈F

where the symbol F in IPMs represents a collection of (typically real) bounded functions, Pg denotes
the generated distribution, and Pd is the real data distribution. Using IPMs to improve GANs has been
justified by the fact that in real-world data distributions are typically embedded in low-dimensional
manifolds, which is intuitive because data preserve semantic information instead of being a collection
of rather random pixels. Thus, the divergence measure (“bin-to-bin” comparison) of the original GAN
could easily max out, whereas the IPMs such as the Wasserstein distance (“cross-bin” comparison)
can consistently yield a meaningful measure between the generated and real data distributions [3].
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

