On the Ergodicity, Bias and Asymptotic Normality of
Randomized Midpoint Sampling Method
Ye He
University of California, Davis
leohe@ucdavis.edu

Krishnakumar Balasubramanian
University of California, Davis
kbala@ucdavis.edu

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto and Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
The randomized midpoint method, proposed by [40], has emerged as an optimal discretization procedure for simulating the continuous time underdamped
Langevin diffusion. In this paper, we analyze several probabilistic properties of
the randomized midpoint discretization method, considering both overdamped and
underdamped Langevin dynamics. We first characterize the stationary distribution of the discrete chain obtained with constant step-size discretization and show
that it is biased away from the target distribution. Notably, the step-size needs
to go to zero to obtain asymptotic unbiasedness. Next, we establish the asymptotic normality of numerical integration using the randomized midpoint method
and highlight the relative advantages and disadvantages over other discretizations.
Our results collectively provide several insights into the behavior of the randomized midpoint discretization method, including obtaining confidence intervals for
numerical integrations.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of computing the following expectation
E⇡ ['(x)] where ⇡(x) = Z1f e f (x) ,

(1)

for a potential
f : Rd ! R and a test function ' : Rd ! R, when the normalization conR function
f (x)
stant Zf = e
dx is unknown. This problem frequently arises in statistics and machine learning with numerous applications to high-dimensional Bayesian inference [45, 24, 30, 10], numerical
integration [21, 19], volume computation [43], optimization and learning [37, 17, 32], graphical
models [20], and molecular dynamics [34, 22]. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods provide a powerful framework for computing the integral in (1), and have been successfully deployed
in various scientific fields [26].
In particular, MCMC algorithms that are based on diffusion processes have received a lot of attention recently. The fundamental idea behind such algorithms is that a continuous-time diffusion with its invariant measure as the target ⇡ is approximately simulated via a numerical sampler. The intuition behind the success of these methods is that by appropriately selecting the
step-size parameter, the discrete approximation resulting from the numerical sampler tracks the
continuous-time diffusion. Thus, rapid convergence properties of the diffusion process (see, for example, [38, 23, 14, 15, 27, 12]) is inherited by the discrete algorithm with an invariant measure that
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

