A Unified Switching System Perspective and
Convergence Analysis of Q-Learning Algorithms

Donghwan Lee
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
donghwan@kaist.ac.kr

Niao He
UIUC & ETH Zurich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
This paper develops a novel and unified framework to analyze the convergence
of a large family of Q-learning algorithms from the switching system perspective.
We show that the nonlinear ODE models associated with Q-learning and many of
its variants can be naturally formulated as affine switching systems. Building on
their asymptotic stability, we obtain a number of interesting results: (i) we provide
a simple ODE analysis for the convergence of asynchronous Q-learning under
relatively weak assumptions; (ii) we establish the first convergence analysis of the
averaging Q-learning algorithm, and (iii) we derive a new sufficient condition for
the convergence of Q-learning with linear function approximation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) addresses the optimal control problem for unknown systems through
experiences [30]. Q-learning, originally introduced by Watkins [36], is one of the most popular and
fundamental reinforcement learning algorithms for unknown systems described by Markov decision
processes. The convergence of Q-learning has been extensively studied in the literature and proven
via several different approaches, including the original proof [36], the stochastic approximation and
contraction mapping-based approach [14, 33, 2, 9, 32, 9, 1, 38], and the ODE (ordinary differential
equation) approach [4].
The ODE approach analyzes the convergence of general stochastic recursions by examining stability
of the associated ODE model [3, 17, 4] and has been used as a convenient analysis tool to prove
convergence of many RL algorithms, especially the temporal difference (TD) learning algorithm [29]
and its variants [23, 31, 19, 10]. However, its application to Q-learning has been limited due to
the presence of the max-operator, which makes the associated ODE model a complex nonlinear
system. In contrast, the associated ODE of TD learning for policy evaluation is a linear system,
whose asymptotic stability is much easier to analyze in general. While [4] gave the convergence
proof of Q-learning based on a nonlinear ODE model, to the authors’ knowledge, substantial analysis
is required to prove the stability of the corresponding nonlinear ODE [5] by using the max-norm
contraction of the Bellman operator. In addition, the result in [4] only applies to synchronous Qlearning, where every state-action pair is visited at each iteration, instead of the commonly used
asynchronous Q-learning. Last but not least, the stability analysis does not immediately extend to
other Q-learning variants, such as double Q-learning [11], averaging Q-learning [19], and Q-learning
with linear function approximation, etc.
In this paper, we provide a simple and unified framework to analyze Q-learning and its variants
through switched linear system (SLS) models [21] of the associated ODE. SLSs are an important
class of nonlinear hybrid systems, where the system dynamics matrix switches within a finite set
of subsystem matrices (or modes) according to a switching signal. The study of SLSs has attracted
tremendous attention in the past years and their stability behaviors have been well established in the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

