Statistical Guarantees of Distributed Nearest
Neighbor Classification

Jiexin Duan
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
duan32@purdue.edu
Xingye Qiao
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Binghamton University
New York, USA
qiao@math.binghamton.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
chengg@purdue.edu

Abstract
Nearest neighbor is a popular nonparametric method for classification and regression with many appealing properties. In the big data era, the sheer volume and
spatial/temporal disparity of big data may prohibit centrally processing and storing
the data. This has imposed considerable hurdle for nearest neighbor predictions
since the entire training data must be memorized. One effective way to overcome
this issue is the distributed learning framework. Through majority voting, the
distributed nearest neighbor classifier achieves the same rate of convergence as its
oracle version in terms of the regret, up to a multiplicative constant that depends
solely on the data dimension. The multiplicative difference can be eliminated
by replacing majority voting with the weighted voting scheme. In addition, we
provide sharp theoretical upper bounds of the number of subsamples in order for
the distributed nearest neighbor classifier to reach the optimal convergence rate. It
is interesting to note that the weighted voting scheme allows a larger number of
subsamples than the majority voting one. Our findings are supported by numerical
studies.

1

Introduction

Classification is one of the pillars of statistical learning. The nearest neighbor classifier is among
the conceptually simplest and most popular of all classification methods. However, it is a memoryintensive method in that the entire training data must be memorized to make a prediction. Instead of
spending long time to learn a simple rule from the training data, the nearest neighbor classifier defers
the computational burden to the prediction stage. The asymptotic properties of the nearest neighbor
classification have been studied in [24, 14, 17, 46, 34, 11, 27, 25, 22, 52], among others. [18, 6, 12]
provided extensive surveys of the existing literature regarding k-NN classifiers.
In the era of big data, due to the unprecedented growth of the sample size and dimension of the
data, denoted as N and d, the time and space complexities of nearest neighbor methods are huge.
A naive algorithm for k-nearest neighbor (kNN) classification would compute distances from each
query point to all the N training data points, sort the distances, and identify the k smallest distances.
Using this naive approach, a single search query has running time between O(N ) to O(N log(N ))
depending on the efficiency of the sort method [31]. With a large number of training data, having
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

