Preference-based Reinforcement Learning
with Finite-Time Guarantees
Yichong Xu1∗, Ruosong Wang2 , Lin F. Yang3 , Aarti Singh2 , Artur Dubrawski2
1
Microsoft
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
University of California, Los Angles
yicxu@microsoft.com, {ruosongw,aarti,awd}@cs.cmu.edu, linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (PbRL) replaces reward values in traditional reinforcement learning by preferences to better elicit human opinion on
the target objective, especially when numerical reward values are hard to design or
interpret. Despite promising results in applications, the theoretical understanding
of PbRL is still in its infancy. In this paper, we present the first finite-time analysis
for general PbRL problems. We first show that a unique optimal policy may not
exist if preferences over trajectories are deterministic for PbRL. If preferences
are stochastic, and the preference probability relates to the hidden reward values,
we present algorithms for PbRL, both with and without a simulator, that are able
to identify the best policy up to accuracy ε with high probability. Our method
explores the state space by navigating to under-explored states, and solves PbRL
using a combination of dueling bandits and policy search. Experiments show the
efficacy of our method when it is applied to real-world problems.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent typically interacts with an unknown environment to maximize the cumulative reward. It is often assumed that the agent has access to numerical reward
values. However, in practice, reward functions might not be readily available or hard to design, and
hand-crafted rewards might lead to undesired behaviors, like reward hacking [8, 1]. On the other
hand, preference feedback is often straightforward to specify in many RL applications, especially
those involving human evaluations. Such preferences help shape the reward function and avoid
unexpected behaviors. Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (PbRL, [28]) is a framework to
solve RL using preferences, and has been widely applied in multiple areas including robot teaching
[20, 19, 11], game playing [29, 31], and in clinical trials [36].
Despite its wide applicability, the theoretical understanding of PbRL is largely open. To the best
of our knowledge, the only prior work with a provable theoretical guarantee is the recent work
by Novoseller et al. [25]. They proposed the Double Posterior Sampling (DPS) method, which
uses Bayesian linear regression to derive posteriors on reward values and transition distribution.
Combining with Thompson sampling, DPS has an asymptotic regret rate sublinear in T (number of
time steps). However, this rate is based on the asymptotic convergence of the estimates of reward
and transition function, whose complexity could be exponential in the time horizon H. Also, the
Thompson sampling method in [25] can be very time-consuming, making the algorithm applicable
only to MDPs with a few states. To fill this gap, we naturally ask the following question:
Is it possible to derive efficient algorithms for PbRL with finite-time guarantees?
∗

Work done while at Carnegie Mellon University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

