Why Do Deep Residual Networks Generalize Better
than Deep Feedforward Networks? — A Neural
Tangent Kernel Perspective

Kaixuan Huang∗
Peking University
hackyhuang@pku.edu.cn

Yuqing Wang∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
ywang3398@gatech.edu

Molei Tao
Georgia Institute of Technology
mtao@gatech.edu

Tuo Zhao
Georgia Institute of Technology
tourzhao@gatech.edu

Abstract
Deep residual networks (ResNets) have demonstrated better generalization performance than deep feedforward networks (FFNets). However, the theory behind
such a phenomenon is still largely unknown. This paper studies this fundamental
problem in deep learning from a so-called “neural tangent kernel” perspective.
Specifically, we first show that under proper conditions, as the width goes to infinity, training deep ResNets can be viewed as learning reproducing kernel functions
with some kernel function. We then compare the kernel of deep ResNets with that
of deep FFNets and discover that the class of functions induced by the kernel of
FFNets is asymptotically not learnable, as the depth goes to infinity. In contrast,
the class of functions induced by the kernel of ResNets does not exhibit such
degeneracy. Our discovery partially justifies the advantages of deep ResNets over
deep FFNets in generalization abilities. Numerical results are provided to support
our claim.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have made significant progress in a variety of real-world applications,
such as computer vision [1, 2, 3], speech recognition, natural language processing [4, 5, 6], recommendation systems, etc. Among various network architectures, Residual Networks (ResNets, [7]) are
undoubtedly a breakthrough. Residual Networks are equipped with residual connections, which skip
layers in the forward step. Similar ideas based on gating mechanisms are also adopted in Highway
Networks [8], and further inspire many follow-up works such as Densely Connected Networks [9].
Compared with conventional Feedforward Networks (FFNets), residual networks demonstrate surprising generalization abilities. Existing literature rarely considers deep feedforward networks with more
than 30 layers. This is because many experimental results have suggested that very deep feedforward
networks yield worse generalization performance than their shallow counterparts [7]. In contrast, we
can train residual networks with hundreds of layers, and achieve better generalization performance
than that of feedforward networks. For example, ResNet-152 [7], achieving a 19.38% top-1 error
on the ImageNet data set, consists of 152 layers; ResNet-1001 [10], achieving a 4.92% error on the
CIFAR-10 data set, consists of 1000 layers.
Despite the great success and popularity of the residual networks, the reason why they generalize so
well is still largely unknown. There have been several lines of research attempting to demystify this
phenomenon. One line of research focuses on empirical studies of residual networks, and provides
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

