How to Learn a Useful Critic? Model-based
Action-Gradient-Estimator Policy Optimization

Pierluca D’Oro∗
MILA, Université de Montréal
pierluca.doro@mila.quebec

Wojciech Jaśkowski
NNAISENSE
wojciech@nnaisense.com

Abstract
Deterministic-policy actor-critic algorithms for continuous control improve the
actor by plugging its actions into the critic and ascending the action-value gradient,
which is obtained by chaining the actor’s Jacobian matrix with the gradient of
the critic with respect to input actions. However, instead of gradients, the critic
is, typically, only trained to accurately predict expected returns, which, on their
own, are useless for policy optimization. In this paper, we propose MAGE, a
model-based actor-critic algorithm, grounded in the theory of policy gradients,
which explicitly learns the action-value gradient. MAGE backpropagates through
the learned dynamics to compute gradient targets in temporal difference learning,
leading to a critic tailored for policy improvement. On a set of MuJoCo continuouscontrol tasks, we demonstrate the efficiency of the algorithm in comparison to
model-free and model-based state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [36, 52] studies sequential decision making problems, in which an agent
aims at maximizing the cumulative reward it collects in an environment. One of the most popular
classes of algorithms for RL are policy gradient methods [10, 53], which involve differentiable control
policies improved by gradient ascent. They feature suitability to environments with continuous state
and action spaces, and compatibility with state-of-the-art deep learning [42] methods. Policy gradient
algorithms often employ an actor-critic [26] scheme: an actor, which determines the control policy,
is evaluated using a critic. Thus, the degree of actor’s improvement is limited by the information
provided by the critic, naturally raising the question of how the critic should be trained.
Typically, algorithms that use powerful function approximators [18, 28] learn the critic by temporal
difference [50], optimizing for an accurate prediction of the expected return of the actor. For
deterministic-policy continuous-control [28, 47], however, the value provided by the critic is neither
used for improving the policy nor for acting in the environment [53]. Instead, only the action-gradient
of the value function, i.e., the gradient of the critic w.r.t. the action performed by the actor, is employed
during policy optimization. Specifically, the policy gradient is obtained through the computation of
the action-value gradient, by chaining the actor’s Jacobian with the action-gradient of the critic.
Learning the critic by value rather than by action-gradient of the value relies on hazy smoothness
assumptions on the real value function [47]. This means that, in conventional temporal difference
learning, the critic learns action-value gradients implicitly, which could harm the performance of a
deterministic policy gradient algorithm.
In this paper, we propose Model-based Action-Gradient-Estimator Policy Optimization (MAGE), a
continuos-control deterministic-policy actor-critic algorithm that explicitly trains the critic to provide
accurate action-gradients for the use in the policy improvement step. Motivated by both the theory on
∗

Work done while at NNAISENSE.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

