Neural Networks with Small Weights and
Depth-Separation Barriers

Gal Vardi
Weizmann Institute of Science
gal.vardi@weizmann.ac.il

Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
In studying the expressiveness of neural networks, an important question is whether
there are functions which can only be approximated by sufficiently deep networks,
assuming their size is bounded. However, for constant depths, existing results
are limited to depths 2 and 3, and achieving results for higher depths has been an
important open question. In this paper, we focus on feedforward ReLU networks,
and prove fundamental barriers to proving such results beyond depth 4, by reduction
to open problems and natural-proof barriers in circuit complexity. To show this,
we study a seemingly unrelated problem of independent interest: Namely, whether
there are polynomially-bounded functions which require super-polynomial weights
in order to approximate with constant-depth neural networks. We provide a negative
and constructive answer to that question, by showing that if a function can be
approximated by a polynomially-sized, constant depth k network with arbitrarily
large weights, it can also be approximated by a polynomially-sized, depth 3k + 3
network, whose weights are polynomially bounded.

1

Introduction

The expressive power of feedforward neural networks has been extensively studied in recent years. It
is well-known that sufficiently large depth-2 neural networks, using reasonable activation functions,
can approximate any continuous function on a bounded domain ([5, 9, 15, 2]). However, the required
size of such networks can be exponential in the input dimension, which renders them impractical.
From a learning perspective, both theoretically and in practice, the main interest is in neural networks
whose size is at most polynomial in the input dimension.
When considering the expressive power of neural networks of bounded size, a key question is what
are the tradeoffs between the width and the depth. Overwhelming empirical evidence indicates that
deeper networks tend to perform better than shallow ones, a phenomenon supported by the intuition
that depth, providing compositional expressibility, is necessary for efficiently representing some
functions. From the theoretical viewpoint, quite a few works in the past few years have explored the
beneficial effect of depth on increasing the expressiveness of neural networks. A main focus is on
depth separation, namely, showing that there is a function f : Rd → R that can be approximated
by a poly(d)-sized network of a given depth, with respect to some input distribution, but cannot be
approximated by poly(d)-sized networks of a smaller depth. Depth separation between depth 2 and 3
was shown by [7] and [6]. However, despite much effort, no such separation result is known for any
constant greater than 2. Thus, it is an open problem whether there is separation between depth 3 and
some constant depth greater than 3. Separation between networks of a constant depth and networks
with poly(d) depth was shown by [30] (see related work section below for more details).
In fact, a similar question has been extensively studied by the theoretical computer science community
over the past decades, in the context of Boolean and threshold circuits of bounded size. Showing
limitations for the expressiveness of such circuits (i.e. circuit lower bounds) can contribute to our
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

