Temporal Spike Sequence Learning via
Backpropagation for Deep Spiking Neural Networks

Wenrui Zhang
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
wenruizhang@ucsb.edu

Peng Li
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
lip@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are well suited for spatio-temporal learning and
implementations on energy-efficient event-driven neuromorphic processors. However, existing SNN error backpropagation (BP) methods lack proper handling of
spiking discontinuities and suffer from low performance compared with the BP
methods for traditional artificial neural networks. In addition, a large number of
time steps are typically required to achieve decent performance, leading to high latency and rendering spike based computation unscalable to deep architectures. We
present a novel Temporal Spike Sequence Learning Backpropagation (TSSL-BP)
method for training deep SNNs, which breaks down error backpropagation across
two types of inter-neuron and intra-neuron dependencies and leads to improved
temporal learning precision. It captures inter-neuron dependencies through presynaptic firing times by considering the all-or-none characteristics of firing activities,
and captures intra-neuron dependencies by handling the internal evolution of each
neuronal state in time. TSSL-BP efficiently trains deep SNNs within a much shortened temporal window of a few steps while improving the accuracy for various
image classification datasets including CIFAR10.

1

Introduction

Spiking neural networks (SNNs), a brain-inspired computational model, have gathered significant
interests [9]. The spike-based operational principles of SNNs not only allow information coding
based on efficient temporal codes and give rise to promising spatiotemporal computing power but
also render energy-efficient VLSI neuromorphic chips such as IBM’s TrueNorth [1] and Intel’s
Loihi [6]. Despite the recent progress in SNNs and neuromorphic processor designs, fully leveraging
the theoretical computing advantages of SNNs over traditional artificial neural networks (ANNs) [17]
to achieve competitive performance in wide ranges of challenging real-world tasks remains difficult.
Inspired by the success of error backpropagation (BP) and its variants in training conventional deep
neural networks (DNNs), various SNNs BP methods have emerged, aiming at attaining the same level
of performance [4, 16, 24, 13, 21, 28, 11, 2, 3, 29]. Although many appealing results are achieved
by these methods, developing SNNs BP training methods that are on a par with the mature BP tools
widely available for training ANNs today is a nontrivial problem [22].
Training of SNNs via BP are challenged by two fundamental issues. First, from an algorithmic
perspective, the complex neural dynamics in both spatial and temporal domains make the BP process
obscure. Moreover, the errors are hard to be precisely backpropagated due to the non-differentiability
of discrete spike events. Second, a large number of time steps are typically required for emulating
SNNs in time to achieve decent performance, leading to high latency and rendering spike based
computation unscalable to deep architectures. It is desirable to demonstrate the success of BP in
training deeper SNNs achieving satisfactory performances on more challenging datasets. We propose a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

