Exemplar VAE: Linking Generative Models,
Nearest Neighbor Retrieval, and Data Augmentation
Sajad Norouzi1,2
David J. Fleet1,2,3
Mohamamd Norouzi3
sajadn@cs.toronto.edu fleet@cs.toronto.edu mnorouzi@google.com
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Google Research

Abstract
We introduce Exemplar VAEs, a family of generative models that bridge the
gap between parametric and non-parametric, exemplar based generative models.
Exemplar VAE is a variant of VAE with a non-parametric prior in the latent space
based on a Parzen window estimator. To sample from it, one first draws a random
exemplar from a training set, then stochastically transforms that exemplar into a
latent code and a new observation. We propose retrieval augmented training (RAT)
as a way to speed up Exemplar VAE training by using approximate nearest neighbor
search in the latent space to define a lower bound on log marginal likelihood. To
enhance generalization, model parameters are learned using exemplar leave-oneout and subsampling. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of Exemplar
VAEs on density estimation and representation learning. Importantly, generative
data augmentation using Exemplar VAEs on permutation invariant MNIST and
Fashion MNIST reduces classification error from 1.17% to 0.69% and from 8.56%
to 8.16%. Code is available at https://github.com/sajadn/Exemplar-VAE.

1

Introduction

Non-parametric, exemplar based methods use large, diverse sets of exemplars, and relatively simple
learning algorithms such as Parzen window estimation [44] and CRFs [34], to deliver impressive
results on image generation (e.g., texture synthesis [15], image super resolution [16], and inpaiting [10,
25]). These approaches generate new images by randomly selecting an exemplar from an existing
dataset, and modifying it to form a new observation. Sample quality of such models improves
as dataset size increases, and additional training data can be incorporated easily without further
optimization. However, exemplar based methods require a distance metric to define neighborhood
structures, and metric learning in high dimensional spaces is a challenge in itself [28, 57].
Conversely, conventional parametric generative models based on deep neural nets enable learning
complex distributions (e.g., [43, 47]). One can use standard generative frameworks [13, 14, 18, 32, 49]
to optimize a decoder network to convert noise samples drawn from a factored Gaussian distribution
into real images. When training is complete, one would discard the training dataset and generate new
samples using the decoder network alone. Hence, the burden of generative modeling rests entirely on
the model parameters, and additional data cannot be incorporated without training.
This paper combines the advantages of exemplar based and parametric methods using amortized
variational inference, yielding a new generative model called Exemplar VAE. It can be viewed as a
variant of Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [32, 49] with a non-parametric Gaussian mixture (Parzen
window) prior on latent codes.
To sample from the Exemplar VAE, one first draws a random exemplar from a training set, then
stochastically transforms it into a latent code. A decoder than transforms the latent code into a
new observation. Replacing the conventional Gaussian prior into a non-parameteric Parzen window
improves the representation quality of VAEs as measured by kNN classification, presumably because
a Gaussian mixture prior with many components captures the manifold of images and their attributes
better. Exemplar VAE also improves density estimation on MNIST, Fashion MNIST, Omniglot, and
CelebA, while enabling controlled generation of images guided by exemplars.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

