CodeCMR: Cross-Modal Retrieval For
Function-Level Binary Source Code Matching

Zeping Yu1 , Wenxin Zheng12 , Jiaqi Wang1 , Qiyi Tang1 , Sen Nie1 , Shi Wu1∗
1
Tencent Security Keen Lab, Shanghai, China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{ravinyu, dodgetang, snie, shiwu}@tencent.com {zwx9810, yakkiwa}@gmail.com

Abstract
Binary source code matching, especially on function-level, has a critical role in
the field of computer security. Given binary code only, finding the corresponding
source code improves the accuracy and efficiency in reverse engineering. Given
source code only, related binary code retrieval contributes to known vulnerabilities
confirmation. However, due to the vast difference between source and binary
code, few studies have investigated binary source code matching. Previously
published studies focus on code literals extraction such as strings and integers,
then utilize traditional matching algorithms such as the Hungarian algorithm for
code matching. Nevertheless, these methods have limitations on function-level,
because they ignore the potential semantic features of code and a lot of code
lacks sufficient code literals. Also, these methods indicate a need for expert
experience for useful feature identification and feature engineering, which is timeconsuming. This paper proposes an end-to-end cross-modal retrieval network
for binary source code matching, which achieves higher accuracy and requires
less expert experience. We adopt Deep Pyramid Convolutional Neural Network
(DPCNN) for source code feature extraction and Graph Neural Network (GNN)
for binary code feature extraction. We also exploit neural network-based models to
capture code literals, including strings and integers. Furthermore, we implement
"norm weighted sampling" for negative sampling. We evaluate our model on two
datasets, where it outperforms other methods significantly.

1

Introduction

Binary source code matching is an essential task in computer security. Most applications focus on
binary to source matching, including code clone detection [1], open-source code reuse identification
[2, 3, 4], and reverse engineering [5, 6]. At the same time, source to binary matching is also useful.
When we have source code, it is significant for us to know whether its corresponding binary code is
included in a binary file, so that we could use it for vulnerability risk warning. The binary source code
matching task is difficult because the differences between source code and binary code are enormous.
Previous methods usually extract the code literals, including strings, integers, if/else numbers [2],
recursions [5], etc. Then traditional matching algorithms, such as the Hungarian algorithm [7], are
adopted to compute the code similarity. However, these methods have two main problems. Firstly,
they could not achieve high accuracy, because only the code literals of the code are used. The
potential features, which may contain much more information, are ignored. Secondly, these methods
need expert experience to choose the features and do feature engineering, which costs a lot of time.
Our model is built on function-level. Compared with previous library-level tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6],
function-level inputs have fewer strings, and fewer integers, so the designed model needs to be more
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

