Lipschitz-Certifiable Training with a Tight Outer
Bound
Sungyoon Lee
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
goman1934@snu.ac.kr

Jaewook Lee
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
jaewook@snu.ac.kr

Saerom Park
Sungshin Women’s University
Seoul, Korea
psr6275@sungshin.ac.kr

Abstract
Verifiable training is a promising research direction for training a robust network.
However, most verifiable training methods are slow or lack scalability. In this study,
we propose a fast and scalable certifiable training algorithm based on Lipschitz
analysis and interval arithmetic. Our certifiable training algorithm provides a tight
propagated outer bound by introducing the box constraint propagation (BCP), and
it efficiently computes the worst logit over the outer bound. In the experiments, we
show that BCP achieves a tighter outer bound than the global Lipschitz-based outer
bound. Moreover, our certifiable training algorithm is over 12 times faster than the
state-of-the-art dual relaxation-based method; however, it achieves comparable or
better verification performance, improving natural accuracy. Our fast certifiable
training algorithm with the tight outer bound can scale to Tiny ImageNet with
verification accuracy of 20.1% (`2 -perturbation of  = 36/255). Our code is
available at https://github.com/sungyoon-lee/bcp.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has shown successful results in many applications. However, it has been demonstrated
that deep neural networks are vulnerable to small but adversarially designed perturbations in the input
which can mislead a network to predict a wrong label [33]. There have been many studies on such
adversarial attacks and defenses against them [12, 19, 28, 27, 24, 4, 35, 41, 14].
However, Athalye et al. [1] have shown that many of these defense methods are designed to defend
against specific predefined adversarial attacks, and, in turn, the models can yet be broken by unseen
stronger adaptive adversaries. Thus, many verification methods are proposed to guarantee stable
prediction of input within a perturbation set [18, 5, 9, 16, 38, 34, 23, 11, 3, 30, 8, 43, 2]. Verification of
a neural network provides either lower bounds on the norm of the input perturbations required to fool
the network or upper bounds on the worst-case errors of the network against specified perturbations.
In particular, verifiable training incorporates the verification procedure using the upper bound into
the training loop and yields a robust model [39, 40, 7, 8, 29, 30].
Verifiable training methods are mainly categorized into two approaches: dual relaxation and layerwise bound propagation approaches. The dual relaxation approach formulates the verifiable training
as a convex optimization and uses duality to build a relaxed bound of the optimization problem and to
relieve the computational load [39, 40, 29, 7, 30]. Although these verifiable training methods can provide relatively exact robustness bounds for verification, they still involve expensive computations and
poor scalability. In contrast, the layer-wise bound propagation approach calculates the upper bounds
on the worst case error through relaxation on the layer-wise operations and forward propagation for
the perturbation set that can be made of `∞ - or `2 -balls [13, 44, 36, 25, 32, 37]. These layer-wise
methods are computationally efficient but have loose bounds in the initial phase of training, hindering
the application to larger networks.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

