Bidirectional Convolutional Poisson Gamma
Dynamical Systems

Wenchao Chen∗, Chaojie Wang∗, Bo Chen†, Yicheng Liu, Hao Zhang
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710071, China
wcchen_xidian@163.com, xd_silly@163.com, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn,
moooooore66@gmail.com, zhanghao_xidian@163.com
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712, USA
mingyuan.Zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Incorporating the natural document-sentence-word structure into hierarchical
Bayesian modeling, we propose convolutional Poisson gamma dynamical systems (PGDS) that introduce not only word-level probabilistic convolutions, but
also sentence-level stochastic temporal transitions. With word-level convolutions
capturing phrase-level topics and sentence-level transitions capturing how the topic
usages evolve over consecutive sentences, we aggregate the topic proportions of
all sentences of a document as its feature representation. To consider not only
forward but also backward sentence-level information transmissions, we further
develop a bidirectional convolutional PGDS to incorporate the full contextual
information to represent each sentence. For efficient inference, we construct a
convolutional-recurrent inference network, which provides both sentence-level
and document-level representations, and introduce a hybrid Bayesian inference
scheme combining stochastic-gradient MCMC and amortized variational inference.
Experimental results on a variety of document corpora demonstrate that the proposed models can extract expressive multi-level latent representations, including
interpretable phrase-level topics and sentence-level temporal transitions as well
as discriminative document-level features, achieving state-of-the-art document
categorization performance while being memory and computation efficient.

1

Introduction

How to represent documents to capture their underlying semantic structures is a key research problem
in text analysis and language modeling [1–4]. It has been a long-standing challenge to capture
long-range dependency in sequential data, especially for the word sequences of long documents that
take discrete values for a large vocabulary. A simple remedy that helps capture long-range word
dependency, but at the expense of sacrificing local structure, is to simplify the representation of
each document as a bag of words (BoW) that ignores word order. Under this simplified BoW text
representation, probabilistic topic models, such as latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [5, 6], Poisson
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

