Robust Optimization for Fairness
with Noisy Protected Groups

Serena Wang ∗
UC Berkeley
Google Research
serenalwang@berkeley.edu

Wenshuo Guo ∗
UC Berkeley
wsguo@berkeley.edu

Harikrishna Narasimhan
Google Research
hnarasimhan@google.com

Andrew Cotter
Google Research
acotter@google.com

Maya Gupta
Google Research
mayagupta@google.com

Michael I. Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Many existing fairness criteria for machine learning involve equalizing some metric
across protected groups such as race or gender. However, practitioners trying to
audit or enforce such group-based criteria can easily face the problem of noisy or
biased protected group information. First, we study the consequences of naïvely
relying on noisy protected group labels: we provide an upper bound on the fairness
violations on the true groups G when the fairness criteria are satisfied on noisy
groups Ĝ. Second, we introduce two new approaches using robust optimization that,
unlike the naïve approach of only relying on Ĝ, are guaranteed to satisfy fairness
criteria on the true protected groups G while minimizing a training objective. We
provide theoretical guarantees that one such approach converges to an optimal
feasible solution. Using two case studies, we show empirically that the robust
approaches achieve better true group fairness guarantees than the naïve approach.

1

Introduction

As machine learning becomes increasingly pervasive in real-world decision making, the question of
ensuring fairness of ML models becomes increasingly important. The definition of what it means to
be “fair” is highly context dependent. Much work has been done on developing mathematical fairness
criteria according to various societal and ethical notions of fairness, as well as methods for building
machine-learning models that satisfy those fairness criteria [see, e.g., 21, 32, 49, 41, 54, 14, 25, 51].
Many of these mathematical fairness criteria are group-based, where a target metric is equalized or
enforced over subpopulations in the data, also known as protected groups. For example, the equality
of opportunity criterion introduced by Hardt et al. [32] specifies that the true positive rates for a binary
classifier are equalized across protected groups. The demographic parity [21] criterion requires that a
classifier’s positive prediction rates are equal for all protected groups.
One important practical question is whether or not these fairness notions can be reliably measured
or enforced if the protected group information is noisy, missing, or unreliable. For example, survey
∗

First two authors have equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

