Learning Disentangled Representations and Group
Structure of Dynamical Environments

Robin Quessard1,2∗

Thomas D. Barrett3∗ William R. Clements1∗
Indust.ai, Paris, France
2
École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France
3
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
1

robin.quessard@ens.fr, thomas.barrett@physics.ox.ac.uk, william.clements@indust.ai

Abstract
Learning disentangled representations is a key step towards effectively discovering
and modelling the underlying structure of environments. In the natural sciences,
physics has found great success by describing the universe in terms of symmetry preserving transformations. Inspired by this formalism, we propose a framework, built upon the theory of group representation, for learning representations
of a dynamical environment structured around the transformations that generate
its evolution. Experimentally, we learn the structure of explicitly symmetric environments without supervision from observational data generated by sequential
interactions. We further introduce an intuitive disentanglement regularisation to
ensure the interpretability of the learnt representations. We show that our method
enables accurate long-horizon predictions, and demonstrate a correlation between
the quality of predictions and disentanglement in the latent space.

1

Introduction

Representation learning occupies a central place in the machine learning literature (Bengio et al.
(2013); Ridgeway (2016)). A good representation should ideally reflect and disentangle the underlying data generation mechanisms, and can be used to efficiently predict, classify, or generalize. For
example, a robot learning to grasp a variety of objects would benefit from having access to a representation that distinguishes between scene properties such as object color, size, or orientation (Suter
et al. (2019)). However, learning interpretable representations of data that explicitly disentangle the
underlying mechanisms structuring observational data is still a challenge.
To address this challenge, one can begin by drawing a parallel between the pursuit of underlying
structure in machine learning and in physics. In machine learning, data is structured by its underlying generative factors, which can be understood as the degrees of freedom that, when changed,
independently and tractably modify the generated data. Physics often searches for structure using
group representation theory by considering the infinitesimal transformations that generate the symmetry group of a physical environment (Lie (1893); Weinberg (1995)). In both physics and machine
learning, one has to find a faithful – and, ideally, interpretable – representation of these generative
factors to structure the representation one has of the environment. This connection between representation learning in machine learning and representations in physics was previously highlighted in
Higgins et al. (2018). However, although Higgins et al. (2018) formalise a definition of disentangled
representations by analogy to physics, if and how such disentangled representations can be learnt
from environmental observations remains an open question.
∗

All authors contributed equally

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

