Neurosymbolic Transformers for Multi-Agent
Communication
Jeevana Priya Inala 1∗
Osbert Bastani 2
1

Yichen Yang 1∗

Vijay Kumar 2

MIT CSAIL

James Paulos 2

Martin Rinard 1
2

Yewen Pu 1

Armando Solar-Lezama 1

University of Pennsylvania

{jinala,yicheny,yewenpu,rinard,asolar}@csail.mit.edu
{jpaulos, obastani, kumar}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of inferring communication structures that can solve cooperative multi-agent planning problems while minimizing the amount of communication. We quantify the amount of communication as the maximum degree of
the communication graph; this metric captures settings where agents have limited
bandwidth. Minimizing communication is challenging due to the combinatorial nature of both the decision space and the objective; for instance, we cannot solve this
problem by training neural networks using gradient descent. We propose a novel
algorithm that synthesizes a control policy that combines a programmatic communication policy used to generate the communication graph with a transformer
policy network used to choose actions. Our algorithm first trains the transformer
policy, which implicitly generates a “soft” communication graph; then, it synthesizes a programmatic communication policy that “hardens” this graph, forming
a neurosymbolic transformer. Our experiments demonstrate how our approach
can synthesize policies that generate low-degree communication graphs while
maintaining near-optimal performance.

1

Introduction

Many real-world robotics systems are distributed, with teams of agents needing to coordinate to
share information and solve problems. Reinforcement learning has recently been demonstrated as a
promising approach to automatically solve such multi-agent planning problems [28, 16, 8, 18, 9, 13].
A key challenge in (cooperative) multi-agent planning is how to coordinate with other agents, both
deciding whom to communicate with and what information to share. One approach is to let agents
communicate with all other agents; however, letting agents communicate arbitrarily can lead to
poor generalization [12, 21]; furthermore, it cannot account for physical constraints such as limited
bandwidth. A second approach is to manually impose a communication graph on the agents, typically
based on distance [12, 29, 21, 26]. However, this manual structure may not reflect the optimal
communication structure—for instance, one agent may prefer to communicate with another one that
is farther away but in its desired path. A third approach is to use a transformer [31] as the policy
network [4], which uses attention to choose which other agents to focus on. However, since the
attention is soft, each agent still communicates with every other agent.
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

