Towards Learning Convolutions from Scratch
Behnam Neyshabur
Google
neyshabur@google.com

Abstract
Convolution is one of the most essential components of architectures used in
computer vision. As machine learning moves towards reducing the expert bias
and learning it from data, a natural next step seems to be learning convolution-like
structures from scratch. This, however, has proven elusive. For example, current
state-of-the-art architecture search algorithms use convolution as one of the existing
modules rather than learning it from data. In an attempt to understand the inductive
bias that gives rise to convolutions, we investigate minimum description length as a
guiding principle and show that in some settings, it can indeed be indicative of the
performance of architectures. To find architectures with small description length,
we propose - LASSO, a simple variant of LASSO algorithm that, when applied
on fully-connected networks for image classification tasks, learns architectures
with local connections and achieves state-of-the-art accuracies for training fullyconnected nets on CIFAR-10 (85.19%), CIFAR-100 (59.56%) and SVHN (94.07%)
bridging the gap between fully-connected and convolutional nets.

1

Introduction

Since its inception, machine learning has moved from inserting expert knowledge as explicit inductive
bias toward general-purpose methods that learn these biases from data, a trend significantly accelerated
by the advent of deep learning [16]. This trend is pronounced in areas such as computer vision [14],
speech recognition [1], natural language processing [31] and computational biology [31]. In computer
vision, for example, tools such as deformable part models [9], SIFT features [21] and Gabor filters [22]
have all been replaced with deep convolutional architectures. Crucially, in certain cases, these generalpurpose models learn similar biases to the ones present in the traditional, expert-designed tools.
Gabor filters in convolutional nets are a prime example of this phenomenon: convolutional networks
learn Gabor-like filters in their first layer [38]. However, simply replacing the first convolutional
layer by a Gabor filter worsens performance, showing that the learned parameters differ from the
Gabor filter in a helpful way. A natural analogy can then be drawn between Gabor filters and the
use of convolution itself: convolution is a ‘hand-designed’ bias which expresses local connectivity
and weight sharing. Is it possible to learn these convolutional biases from scratch, the same way
convolutional networks learn to express Gabor filters?
Reducing inductive bias requires more data, more computation, and larger models—consider replacing
a convolutional network with a fully-connected one with the same expressive capacity. Therefore it
is important to reduce the bias in a way that does not damage the efficiency significantly, keeping
only the core bias which enables high performance. Is there a core inductive bias that gives rise to
local connectivity and weight sharing when applied to images, enabling the success of convolutions?
The answer to this question would enable the design of algorithms which can learn, e.g., to apply
convolutions to images, and apply more appropriate biases for other types of data.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

