Kernel methods through the roof:
handling billions of points efficiently

Giacomo Meanti
MaLGa, DIBRIS
Università degli Studi di Genova
giacomo.meanti@edu.unige.it

Luigi Carratino
MaLGa, DIBRIS
Università degli Studi di Genova
luigi.carratino@dibris.unige.it

Lorenzo Rosasco
MaLGa, DIBRIS, IIT & MIT
Università degli Studi di Genova
lrosasco@mit.edu

Alessandro Rudi
INRIA - École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Abstract
Kernel methods provide an elegant and principled approach to nonparametric
learning, but so far could hardly be used in large scale problems, since naïve implementations scale poorly with data size. Recent advances have shown the benefits
of a number of algorithmic ideas, for example combining optimization, numerical
linear algebra and random projections. Here, we push these efforts further to
develop and test a solver that takes full advantage of GPU hardware. Towards this
end, we designed a preconditioned gradient solver for kernel methods exploiting
both GPU acceleration and parallelization with multiple GPUs, implementing
out-of-core variants of common linear algebra operations to guarantee optimal
hardware utilization. Further, we optimize the numerical precision of different
operations and maximize efficiency of matrix-vector multiplications. As a result
we can experimentally show dramatic speedups on datasets with billions of points,
while still guaranteeing state of the art performance. Additionally, we make our
software available as an easy to use library1 .

1

Introduction

Kernel methods provide non-linear/non-parametric extensions of many classical linear models in
machine learning and statistics [45, 49]. The data are embedded via a non-linear map into a high
dimensional feature space, so that linear models in such a space effectively define non-linear models
in the original space. This approach is appealing, since it naturally extends to models with infinitely
many features, as long as the inner product in the feature space can be computed. In this case, the
inner product is replaced by a positive definite kernel, and infinite dimensional models are reduced to
finite dimensional problems. The mathematics of kernel methods has its foundation in the rich theory
of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces [47], and the connection to linear models provides a gateway to
deriving sharp statistical results [53, 10, 54, 6, 4, 56]. Further, kernel methods are tightly connected to
Gaussian processes [40], and have recently being used to understand the properties of deep learning
models [23, 29]. It is not a surprise that kernel methods are among the most theoretically studied
models. From a numerical point of view, they reduce to convex optimization problems that can
be solved with strong guarantees. The corresponding algorithms provide excellent results on a
variety of data-sets, but most implementations are limited to problems of small/medium size, see
1

https://github.com/FalkonML/falkon

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

