Learning Linear Programs from Optimal Decisions
Yingcong Tan1 , Daria Terekhov1 , Andrew Delong2
1
Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace Engineering
2
Computer Science and Software Engineering
Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science
Concordia University, Montréal, Canada
{yingcong.tan, daria.terekhov, andrew.delong}@concordia.ca

Abstract
We propose a flexible gradient-based framework for learning linear programs from
optimal decisions. Linear programs are often specified by hand, using prior knowledge of relevant costs and constraints. In some applications, linear programs must
instead be learned from observations of optimal decisions. Learning from optimal
decisions is a particularly challenging bilevel problem, and much of the related
inverse optimization literature is dedicated to special cases. We tackle the general
problem, learning all parameters jointly while allowing flexible parametrizations
of costs, constraints, and loss functions. We also address challenges specific to
learning linear programs, such as empty feasible regions and non-unique optimal
decisions. Experiments show that our method successfully learns synthetic linear
programs and minimum-cost multi-commodity flow instances for which previous
methods are not directly applicable. We also provide a fast batch-mode PyTorch
implementation of the homogeneous interior point algorithm, which supports
gradients by implicit differentiation or backpropagation.

1

Introduction

In linear programming, the goal is to make an optimal decision given a linear objective and subject to
linear constraints. Traditionally, a linear program is designed using knowledge of relevant costs and
constraints. More recently, methodologies that are data-driven have emerged.
Inverse optimization (IO) [Burton and Toint, 1992, Troutt, 1995, Ahuja and Orlin, 2001], in contrast,
learns linear programs from observations of optimal decisions rather than of the costs or constraints
themselves. The IO approach is particularly important when observations come from optimizing
agents (e.g., experts [Chan et al., 2014, Bärmann et al., 2017] or customers [Dong et al., 2018]) who
make near-optimal decisions with respect to their internal (unobserved) optimization models.
From a machine learning perspective, the IO setup is as follows: we are given feature vectors
{u1 , u2 , . . . , uN } representing conditions (e.g., time, prices, weather) and we observe the correobs
obs
sponding decision targets {xobs
1 , x2 , . . . , xN } (e.g., quantities, actions) determined by an unknown
optimization process, which in our case is assumed linear. We view IO as the problem of inferring a
constrained optimization model that gives identical (or equivalent) decisions, and which generalizes
to novel conditions u. The family of candidate models is assumed parametrized by some vector w.
Learning a constrained optimizer that makes the observations both feasible and optimal poses multiple
challenges that have not been explicitly addressed. For instance, parameter setting w1 in Figure 1
makes the observed decision xobs
optimal but not feasible, w2 produces exactly the opposite result,
1
and some w values (black-hatched region in Figure 1) are not even admissible because they will result
in empty feasible regions. Finding a parameter such as w3 that is consistent with the observations
can be difficult. We formulate the learning problem in a novel way, and tackle it with gradient-based
methods despite the inherent bilevel nature of learning. Using gradients from backpropagation or
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

