An Unsupervised Information-Theoretic
Perceptual Quality Metric
Sangnie Bhardwaj
Google Research
sangnie@google.com

Ian Fischer
Google Research
iansf@google.com

Johannes Ballé
Google Research
jballe@google.com

Troy Chinen
Google Research
tchinen@google.com

Abstract
Tractable models of human perception have proved to be challenging to build.
Hand-designed models such as MS-SSIM remain popular predictors of human
image quality judgements due to their simplicity and speed. Recent modern deep
learning approaches can perform better, but they rely on supervised data which
can be costly to gather: large sets of class labels such as ImageNet, image quality
ratings, or both. We combine recent advances in information-theoretic objective
functions with a computational architecture informed by the physiology of the
human visual system and unsupervised training on pairs of video frames, yielding
our Perceptual Information Metric (PIM)1 . We show that PIM is competitive with
supervised metrics on the recent and challenging BAPPS image quality assessment
dataset and outperforms them in predicting the ranking of image compression methods in CLIC 2020. We also perform qualitative experiments using the ImageNet-C
dataset, and establish that PIM is robust with respect to architectural details.

1

Introduction

Many vision tasks require the assessment of subjective image quality for evaluation, including
compression and restoration problems such as denoising, deblurring, colorization, etc. The success
of many such techniques is measured in how similar the reconstructed image appears to human
observers, compared to the often unobserved original image (the image before compression is applied,
the actual scene luminances without the noise of the sensor, etc.). Predicting subjective image quality
judgements is a difficult problem.
So far, the field has been dominated by simple models with few parameters that are hand-adjusted to
correlate well with human mean opinion scores (MOS), such as SSIM and variants (Wang, Bovik,
et al., 2004; Wang, Simoncelli, and Bovik, 2003). This class of models captures well-documented
phenomena observed in visual psychology, such as spatial frequency dependent contrast sensitivity
(Van Nes and Bouman, 1967), or are based on models of early sensory neurons, such as divisive
normalization, which explains luminance and/or contrast adaptivity (Heeger, 1992). It is remarkable
these models perform as well as they do given their simplicity. However, it is also clear that these
models can be improved upon by modeling more complex and, at this point, potentially less well
understood properties of human visual perception. Examples for this can be found in the recent
literature (R. Zhang et al., 2018; Chinen et al., 2018). The underlying hypothesis in these models is
that the same image features extracted for image classification are also useful for other tasks, including
1

Code available at https://github.com/google-research/perceptual-quality.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

