The Advantage of Conditional Meta-Learning for
Biased Regularization and Fine Tuning
Giulia Denevi 1,⇤

1

Massimiliano Pontil 1,2

Carlo Ciliberto 3

University College of London (UK)
2
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy)
3
Imperial College of London (UK)
⇤
Work done while the first author was with Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy)
g.denevi@ucl.ac.uk, massimiliano.pontil@iit.it, c.ciliberto@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Biased regularization and fine tuning are two recent meta-learning approaches.
They have been shown to be effective to tackle distributions of tasks, in which the
tasks’ target vectors are all close to a common meta-parameter vector. However,
these methods may perform poorly on heterogeneous environments of tasks, where
the complexity of the tasks’ distribution cannot be captured by a single metaparameter vector. We address this limitation by conditional meta-learning, inferring
a conditioning function mapping task’s side information into a meta-parameter
vector that is appropriate for that task at hand. We characterize properties of the
environment under which the conditional approach brings a substantial advantage
over standard meta-learning and we highlight examples of environments, such as
those with multiple clusters, satisfying these properties. We then propose a convex
meta-algorithm providing a comparable advantage also in practice. Numerical
experiments confirm our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Biased regularization and fine tuning [5, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 23, 24, 28, 31, 33] are two recent
optimization-based meta-learning techniques that transfer knowledge across an environment of tasks
by leveraging a common meta-parameter vector. Their origin and inspiration go back to multi-task
and transfer learning methods [10, 15, 27], designed to address a prescribed set of tasks with low
variance. These techniques can be described as a nested optimization scheme: while at the within-task
level, an inner algorithm performs tasks’ specific optimization with the current meta-parameter vector,
at the meta-level a meta-algorithm updates the aforementioned meta-parameter by leveraging the
experience accumulated from the tasks observed so far. In biased regularization the inner algorithm is
given by the within-task regularized empirical risk minimizer and the meta-parameter vector plays the
role of a bias in the regularizer, while fine tuning employs online gradient descent as the within-task
algorithm and the meta-parameter vector is the associated starting point.
Despite their success, the above methods may fail to adapt to heterogenous environments of tasks,
in which the complexity of the tasks’ distribution cannot be captured by a single meta-parameter
vector. In literature, a variety of methods have tried to address this limitation by clustering the tasks
and, then, leveraging tasks’ similarities within each cluster [2, 4, 21, 29, 30]. However, such methods
usually lead to non-convex formulations [2, 4] or provide only partial guarantees on surrogate convex
problems [21, 30]. As alternative, recent approaches in meta-learning literature advocated learning a
conditioning function that maps a task’s dataset into a meta-parameter vector that is appropriate for
the task at hand [9, 22, 35, 39–41]. This perspective has been shown to be promising in applications,
however theoretical investigations are still lacking. The authors of [40] have recently made a first
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

