Task-Robust Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning

Liam Collins
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
liamc@utexas.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Sanjay Shakkottai
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
sanjay.shakkottai@utexas.edu

Abstract
Meta-learning methods have shown an impressive ability to train models that
rapidly learn new tasks. However, these methods only aim to perform well in
expectation over tasks coming from some particular distribution that is typically
equivalent across meta-training and meta-testing, rather than considering worstcase task performance. In this work we introduce the notion of “task-robustness” by
reformulating the popular Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) objective [12]
such that the goal is to minimize the maximum loss over the observed meta-training
tasks. The solution to this novel formulation is task-robust in the sense that it
places equal importance on even the most difficult and/or rare tasks. This also
means that it performs well over all distributions of the observed tasks, making
it robust to shifts in the task distribution between meta-training and meta-testing.
We present an algorithm to solve the proposed min-max problem, and show that it
converges to an -accurate point at the optimal rate of O(1/2 ) in the convex setting
and to an (, δ)-stationary point at the rate of O(max{1/5 , 1/δ 5 }) in nonconvex
settings. We also provide an upper bound on the new task generalization error that
captures the advantage of minimizing the worst-case task loss, and demonstrate
this advantage in sinusoid regression and image classification experiments.

1

Introduction

Despite continual advances in computational power and data collection, many scenarios remain in
which machine learning models must rapidly adapt to previously unseen tasks. Motivated by such
scenarios, meta-learning techniques aim to learn how to learn quickly from few samples by leveraging
knowledge acquired while learning prior tasks [4, 35]. The recent successes of these techniques in
areas such as few-shot learning [12, 31, 33, 37] and reinforcement learning [8, 34, 38] have sparked
tremendous interest in meta-learning.
Following the setting introduced in [3], most offline meta-learning methods try to minimize the
expected loss on new tasks drawn from the same, but unknown, distribution as a finite set of metatraining tasks. For example, in gradient-based meta-learning, the learning method is typically a
small number of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) steps, and the means to learn quickly is having
a favorable initialization. Standard methods thus try to find an initialization that enables the model
fine-tuned via task-specific SGD to perform well in expectation over new tasks. Since they assume
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

