Winning the Lottery with Continuous Sparsification

Pedro Savarese∗
TTI-Chicago
savarese@ttic.edu

Hugo Silva∗
University of Alberta
hugoluis@ualberta.ca

Michael Maire
University of Chicago
mmaire@uchicago.edu

Abstract
The search for efficient, sparse deep neural network models is most prominently
performed by pruning: training a dense, overparameterized network and removing
parameters, usually via following a manually-crafted heuristic. Additionally, the
recent Lottery Ticket Hypothesis conjectures that, for a typically-sized neural network, it is possible to find small sub-networks which, when trained from scratch on
a comparable budget, match the performance of the original dense counterpart. We
revisit fundamental aspects of pruning algorithms, pointing out missing ingredients
in previous approaches, and develop a method, Continuous Sparsification, which
searches for sparse networks based on a novel approximation of an intractable `0
regularization. We compare against dominant heuristic-based methods on pruning
as well as ticket search – finding sparse subnetworks that can be successfully
re-trained from an early iterate. Empirical results show that we surpass the state-ofthe-art for both objectives, across models and datasets, including VGG trained on
CIFAR-10 and ResNet-50 trained on ImageNet. In addition to setting a new standard for pruning, Continuous Sparsification also offers fast parallel ticket search,
opening doors to new applications of the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks have become ubiquitous in fields such as computer vision and
natural language processing, extreme overparameterization is typically required to achieve stateof-the-art results, incurring higher training costs and hindering applications limited by memory or
inference time. Recent theoretical work suggest that overparameterization plays a key role in network
training dynamics [1] and generalization [2]. However, it remains unclear whether, in practice,
overparameterization is truly necessary to train networks to state-of-the-art performance.
Concurrently, empirical approaches have been successful in finding compact neural networks, either
by shrinking trained models [3, 4, 5] or through efficient architectures, yielding less overparameterized
models that can be trained from scratch [6]. Recently, combining these two strategies has lead to
new methods which discover efficient architectures through optimization instead of design [7, 8].
Nonetheless, parameter efficiency is typically maximized by pruning an already trained network.
Despite the fact that the search for sparse solutions to optimization problems can be naturally
described by `0 regularization, the vast majority of pruning methods rely on manually-designed
strategies that are not based on the `0 penalty [3, 4, 9, 10]. The approaches that aim to approximate
an `0 -regularized problem in order to find sparse, less overparameterized networks are limited in
number [11, 12] and fail to perform competitively against heuristic-based pruning methods.
Prior work has shown that pruned networks are hard to train from scratch [3], suggesting that while
overparameterization is not necessary for a model’s capacity, it might be required for successful
training. Frankle and Carbin [13] put this idea into question by training heavily pruned networks
∗

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

