Cream of the Crop: Distilling Prioritized Paths For
One-Shot Neural Architecture Search
Houwen Peng1∗† , Hao Du2∗, Hongyuan Yu3∗ , Qi Li4 , Jing Liao2 , Jianlong Fu1†
1
Microsoft Research Asia, 2 City University of Hong Kong,
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 4 Tsinghua University

Abstract
One-shot weight sharing methods have recently drawn great attention in neural
architecture search due to high efficiency and competitive performance. However,
weight sharing across models has an inherent deficiency, i.e., insufficient training
of subnetworks in hypernetworks. To alleviate this problem, we present a simple
yet effective architecture distillation method. The central idea is that subnetworks
can learn collaboratively and teach each other throughout the training process,
aiming to boost the convergence of individual models. We introduce the concept
of prioritized path, which refers to the architecture candidates exhibiting superior
performance during training. Distilling knowledge from the prioritized paths is
able to boost the training of subnetworks. Since the prioritized paths are changed
on the fly depending on their performance and complexity, the final obtained paths
are the cream of the crop. We directly select the most promising one from the
prioritized paths as the final architecture, without using other complex search methods, such as reinforcement learning or evolution algorithms. The experiments on
ImageNet verify such path distillation method can improve the convergence ratio
and performance of the hypernetwork, as well as boosting the training of subnetworks. The discovered architectures achieve superior performance compared to the
recent MobileNetV3 and EfficientNet families under aligned settings. Moreover,
the experiments on object detection and more challenging search space show the
generality and robustness of the proposed method. Code and models are available
at https://github.com/microsoft/cream.git2 .

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is an exciting field which facilitates the automatic design of deep
networks. It has achieved state-of-the-art performance on a variety of tasks, surpassing manually
designed counterparts [e.g., 1–3]. Recently, one-shot NAS methods became popular due to low
computation overhead and competitive performance. Rather than training thousands of separate
models from scratch, one-shot methods only train a single large hypernetwork capable of emulating
any architecture in the search space. The weights are shared across architecture candidates, i.e.,
subnetworks. Such strategy is able to reduce the search cost from thousands of GPU days to a few.
However, all architectures sharing a single set of weights cannot guarantee each individual subnetwork
obtains sufficient training. Although one-shot models are typically only used to sort architectures in
the search space, the capacity of weight sharing is still limited. As revealed by recent works [4], weight
sharing degrades the ranking of architectures to the point of not reflecting their true performance, thus
reducing the effectiveness of the search process. There are a few recent works addressing this issue
from the perspective of knowledge distillation [5–7]. They commonly introduce a high-performing
teacher network to boost the training of subnetworks. Nevertheless, these methods require the teacher
model to be trained beforehand, such as a large pretrained model [5] or a third-party model [6]. This
limits the flexibility of search algorithms, especially when the search tasks or data are entirely new
and there may be no available teacher models.
∗
2

Equal contribution. Work done when Hao and Hongyuan were interns at MSRA. † Corresponding authors.
We also provide another implementation based upon Microsoft NNI AutoML open source toolkit at here.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

