Finding All ✏-Good Arms in Stochastic Bandits
Blake Mason
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
bmason3@wisc.edu

Lalit Jain
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98115
lalitj@uw.edu

Ardhendu Tripathy
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
astripathy@wisc.edu

Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
The pure-exploration problem in stochastic multi-armed bandits aims to find one
or more arms with the largest (or near largest) means. Examples include finding
an ✏-good arm, best-arm identification, top-k arm identification, and finding all
arms with means above a specified threshold. However, the problem of finding all
✏-good arms has been overlooked in past work, although arguably this may be the
most natural objective in many applications. For example, a virologist may conduct
preliminary laboratory experiments on a large candidate set of treatments and
move all ✏-good treatments into more expensive clinical trials. Since the ultimate
clinical efficacy is uncertain, it is important to identify all ✏-good candidates.
Mathematically, the all-✏-good arm identification problem presents significant new
challenges and surprises that do not arise in the pure-exploration objectives studied
in the past. We introduce two algorithms to overcome these and demonstrate their
great empirical performance on a large-scale crowd-sourced dataset of 2.2M ratings
collected by the New Yorker Caption Contest as well as a dataset testing hundreds
of possible cancer drugs.

1

Introduction

We propose a new multi-armed bandit problem where the objective is to return all arms that are ✏-good
relative to the best-arm. Concretely, if the arms have means µ1 , · · · , µn , with µ1 = max1in µi ,
then the goal is to return the set {i : µi µ1 ✏} in the additive case, and {i : µi (1 ✏)µ1 } in
the multiplicative case. The ALL -✏ problem is a novel setting in the bandits literature, adjacent to two
other methods for finding many good arms: T OP -k where the goal is to return the arms with the k
highest means, and threshold bandits where the goal is to identify all arms above a fixed threshold.
Building on a metaphor given by [1], if T OP -k is a “contest” and thresholding bandits is an “exam”,
ALL -✏ organically decides which arms are “above the bar” relative to the highest score. We argue
that the ALL -✏ problem formulation is more appropriate in many applications, and we show that it
presents some unique challenges that make its solution distinct from T OP -k and threshold bandits.
A Natural and Robust Objective. A motivating example is drug discovery, where pharmacologists
want to identify a set of highly-potent drug candidates from potentially millions of compounds using
various in vitro and in silico assays, and only the selected undergo more expansive testing [2]. Since
performing the assays can be costly, one would like to use an adaptive, sequential experiment design
that requires fewer experiments than a fixed experiment design. In sequential experiment design, it
is important to fix the objective at the beginning as that choice affects the experimentation process.
Both the objectives of finding the top-k performing drugs, or all drugs above a threshold can result
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

