Implicit Graph Neural Networks

Fangda Gu1∗
gfd18@berkeley.edu
Wenwu Zhu3
wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Heng Chang2∗
changh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Somayeh Sojoudi1,2
sojoudi@berkeley.edu

Laurent El Ghaoui1,2
elghaoui@berkeley.edu

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley
2
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are widely used deep learning models that learn
meaningful representations from graph-structured data. Due to the finite nature of
the underlying recurrent structure, current GNN methods may struggle to capture
long-range dependencies in underlying graphs. To overcome this difficulty, we
propose a graph learning framework, called Implicit Graph Neural Networks
(IGNN2 ), where predictions are based on the solution of a fixed-point equilibrium
equation involving implicitly defined “state” vectors. We use the Perron-Frobenius
theory to derive sufficient conditions that ensure well-posedness of the framework.
Leveraging implicit differentiation, we derive a tractable projected gradient descent
method to train the framework. Experiments on a comprehensive range of tasks
show that IGNNs consistently capture long-range dependencies and outperform
the state-of-the-art GNN models.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Zhou et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020) have been widely used on
graph-structured data to obtain a meaningful representation of nodes in the graph. By iteratively
aggregating information from neighboring nodes, GNN models encode graph-relational information
into the representation, which then benefits a wide range of tasks, including biochemical structure
discovery (Gilmer et al., 2017; Wan et al., 2019), computer vision (Kampffmeyer et al., 2018),
and recommender systems (Ying et al., 2018). Recently, newer convolutional GNN structures (Wu
et al., 2019b) have drastically improved the performance of GNNs by employing various techniques,
including renormalization (Kipf and Welling, 2016), attention (Veličković et al., 2017), and simpler
activation (Wu et al., 2019a).
The aforemetioned modern convolutional GNN models capture relation information up to T -hops
away by performing T iterations of graph convolutional aggregation. Such information gathering
procedure is similar to forward-feeding schemes in popular deep learning models, such as multi-layer
perceptron and convolutional neural networks. However, despite their simplicity, these computation
strategies cannot discover the dependency with a range longer than T -hops away from any given
node.
One approach tackling this problem is to develop recurrent GNNs that iterate graph convolutional
aggregation until convergence, without any a priori limitation on the number of hops. This idea
∗
2

Equal contributions. Work done during Heng’s visit to University of California at Berkeley.
Code available at https://github.com/SwiftieH/IGNN.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

