Myersonian Regression
Allen Liu
MIT
cliu568@mit.edu

Renato Paes Leme
Google Research
renatoppl@google.com

Jon Schneider
Google Research
jschnei@google.com

Abstract
Motivated by pricing applications in online advertising, we study a variant of linear
regression with a discontinuous loss function that we term Myersonian regression.
In this variant, we wish to find a linear function f : Rd ! R that well approximates
a set of points (xi , vi ) 2 Rd ⇥ [0, 1] in the following sense: we receive a loss of vi
when f (xi ) > vi and a loss of vi f (xi ) when f (xi )  vi . This arises naturally
in the economic application of designing a pricing policy for differentiated items
(where the loss is the gap between the performance of our policy and the optimal
Myerson prices).
We show that Myersonian regression is NP-hard to solve exactly and furthermore
that no fully polynomial-time approximation scheme exists for Myersonian regression conditioned on the Exponential Time Hypothesis being true. In contrast to
this, we demonstrate a polynomial-time approximation scheme for Myersonian regression that obtains an ✏m additive approximation to the optimal possible revenue
and can be computed in time O(exp(poly(1/✏))poly(m, n)). We show that this
algorithm is stable and generalizes well over distributions of samples.

1

Introduction

In economics, the Myerson price of a distribution is the price that maximizes the revenue when
selling to a buyer whose value is drawn from that distribution. Mathematically, if F is the cdf of the
distribution, then the Myerson price is
p⇤ = argmaxp p · (1

F (p))

In many modern applications such as online marketplaces and advertising, the seller doesn’t just set
one price p but must instead price a variety of differentiated products. In these settings, a seller must
design a policy to price items based on their features in order to optimize revenue. Thus, in this paper
we study the contextual learning version of Myersonian pricing. More formally, we get to observe a
training dataset {(xt , v t )}t=1..m representing the bids of a buyer on differentiated products. We will
assume that the bids v t 2 [0, 1] come from a truthful auction and hence represent the maximum value
a buyer is willing to pay for the product. Each product is represented by a vector of features xt 2 Rn
normalized such that kxt k2  1. The goal of the learner is to design a policy that suggests a price
(xt ) for each product xt with the goal of maximizing the revenue on the underlying distribution D
from which the pairs (xt , v t ) are drawn. In practice, one would train a pricing policy on historical
bids (training) and apply this policy on future products (testing).
Mathematically, we want to solve
max E(x,v)⇠D [R EV( (x); v)]
2P

where P is a class of pricing policies and R EV is the revenue function (see Figure 1)
R EV(p; v) = max(p, 0) · 1{p  v}

having only access to samples of D.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(PP)

