Making Non-Stochastic Control (Almost) as Easy as
Stochastic
Max Simchowitz
EECS Department
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
msimchow@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Recent literature has made much progress in understanding online LQR: a modern
learning-theoretic take on the classical control problem where a learner attempts to
optimally control an unknown linear dynamical system with fully observed state,
perturbed by i.i.d. Gaussian noise. The
√ optimal regret over time horizon T against
the optimal control law scales as e
Θ( T ). In this paper, we show that the same regret rate (against a suitable benchmark) is attainable even in the considerably more
general non-stochastic control model, where the system
is driven by arbitrary ad√
versarial noise [3].
We attain the optimal e
O( T ) regret when the dynamics
are unknown to the learner, and poly(log T ) regret when known, provided that
the cost functions are strongly convex (as in LQR). Our algorithm is based on a
novel variant of online Newton step [19], which adapts to the geometry induced
by adversarial disturbances, and our analysis hinges on generic regret bounds for
certain structured losses in the OCO-with-memory framework [6].

1

Introduction

In control tasks, a learning agent seeks to minimize cumulative loss in a dynamic environment
which responds to its actions. While dynamics make control problems immensely expressive, they
also pose a significant challenge: the learner’s past decisions affect future losses incurred.
This paper focuses on the widely-studied setting of linear control, where the the learner’s environment is described by a continuous state, and evolves according to a linear system of equations,
perturbed by process noise, and guided by inputs chosen by the learner. Many of the first learningtheoretic results for linear control focused on online LQR [1, 13, 12, 25], an online variant of the
classical Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) [21]. In online LQR, the agent aims to control an
unknown linear dynamical system driven by independent, identically distributed Gaussian process
noise. Performance is measured by regret
√ against the optimal LQR control law on a time horizon T ,
e
for which the optimal regret rate is Θ( T ) [12, 25, 26, 9]. Theoretical guarantees for LQR rely
heavily on the strong stochastic modeling assumptions for the noise, and may be far-from-optimal if
these assumptions break. A complementary line of work considers non-stochastic control, replacing
stochastic process noise with adversarial disturbances to the dynamics [3, 28]. Here, performance
is measured by regret: performance relative to the best (dynamic) linear control policy in hindsight,
given full knowledge of the adversarial perturbations.
Though many works have proposed efficient algorithms which attain sublinear regret for nonstochastic control, they either lag behind optimal guarantees for the stochastic LQR problem, or
require partial stochasticity assumptions to ensure their regret. And while there is a host of literature demonstrating that, in many online learning problems without dynamics, the worst-case rates
of regret for the adversarial and stochastic settings are the same [8, 31, 19], whether this is true
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

