What is being transferred in transfer learning?
Behnam Neyshabur⇤
Google
neyshabur@goog e.com

Hanie Sedghi⇤
Google Brain
hsedghi@goog e.com

Chiyuan Zhang⇤
Google Brain
chiyuan@goog e.com

Abstract
One desired capability for machines is the ability to transfer their knowledge of
one domain to another where data is (usually) scarce. Despite ample adaptation of
transfer learning in various deep learning applications, we yet do not understand
what enables a successful transfer and which part of the network is responsible for
that. In this paper, we provide new tools and analyses to address these fundamental
questions. Through a series of analyses on transferring to block-shuffled images,
we separate the effect of feature reuse from learning low-level statistics of data and
show that some benefit of transfer learning comes from the latter. We present that
when training from pre-trained weights, the model stays in the same basin in the
loss landscape and different instances of such model are similar in feature space
and close in parameter space.

1

Introduction

One desired capability of machines is to transfer their knowledge of a domain it is trained on (the
source domain) to another domain (the target domain) where data is (usually) scarce or a fast training
is needed. There has been a plethora of works on using this framework in different applications such
as object detection [Girshick, 2015, Ren et al., 2015], image classification [Sun et al., 2017, Mahajan
et al., 2018, Kolesnikov et al., 2019] and segmentation [Darrell et al., 2014, He et al., 2017], and
various medical imaging tasks [Wang et al., 2017, Rajpurkar et al., 2017, De Fauw et al., 2018], to
name a few. In some cases there is nontrivial difference in visual forms between the source and the
target domain [Wang et al., 2017, Rajpurkar et al., 2017]. However, we yet do not understand what
enables a successful transfer and which parts of the network are responsible for that. In this paper we
address these fundamental questions.
To ensure that we are capturing a general phenomena, we look into target domains that are intrinsically
different and diverse. We use C HE X PERT [Irvin et al., 2019] which is a medical imaging dataset
of chest x-rays considering different diseases. We also consider D OMAIN N ET [Peng et al., 2019]
datasets that are specifically designed to probe transfer learning in diverse domains. The domains
range from real images to sketches, clipart and painting samples. See Figure 1 for sample images of
the transfer learning tasks studied in this paper.
We use a series of analysis to answer the question of what is being transferred. First, we investigate
feature-reuse by shuffling the data. In particular, we partition the image of the downstream tasks into
equal sized blocks and shuffle the blocks randomly. The shuffling of blocks disrupts visual features
in the images, especially with small block sizes (see Figure 1 for examples of shuffled images). We
note the importance of feature re-use and we also see that it is not the only role player in successful
transfer. This experiment shows that low-level statistics of the data that is not disturbed by shuffling
the pixels also play a role in successful transfer (Section 3.1).
⇤
Equal contribution. Authors ordered randomly.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

