On Convergence and Generalization
of Dropout Training

Poorya Mianjy
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
mianjy@jhu.edu

Raman Arora
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We study dropout in two-layer neural networks with rectified linear unit (ReLU) activations. Under mild overparametrization and assuming that the limiting kernel can
separate the data distribution with a positive margin, we show that dropout training
with logistic loss achieves -suboptimality in test error in O(1/) iterations.

1

Introduction

Dropout is an algorithmic regularization approach that endows deep learning models with excellent
generalization ability despite the non-convex nature of the underlying learning problem and the capacity of modern over-parameterized models to over-fit. Introduced by Hinton et al. [2012], Srivastava
et al. [2014], dropout involves randomly pruning the network at every iteration of backpropagation by
turning off a random subset of hidden nodes. Like many popular algorithmic approaches that emerged
as heuristics from practitioners with deep insight into the learning problem, dropout, while extremely
successful in practice, lacks a strong theoretical justification, especially from a computational learning
theoretic perspective.
Dropout has been successful in several application areas including computer vision [Szegedy et al.,
2015], natural language processing [Merity et al., 2017], and speech recognition [Dahl et al., 2013].
Motivated by explaining the empirical success of dropout, and inspired by simple, intuitive nature
of the method, numerous works in recent years have focused on understanding its theoretical underpinnings [Baldi and Sadowski, 2013, Wager et al., 2013, Helmbold and Long, 2015, Gal and
Ghahramani, 2016, Wei et al., 2020]. Most of these works, however, steer clear from the algorithmic
and computational learning aspects of dropout. More precisely, none of the prior work, to the best
of our knowledge, yields insights into the runtime of learning using dropout on non-linear neural
networks. In this paper, we initiate a study into the iteration complexity of dropout training for
achieving -suboptimality on true error – the misclassification error with respect to the underlying
population – in two-layer neural networks with ReLU activations.
We leverage recent advances in the theory of deep learning in over-parameterized settings with
extremely (or infinitely) wide networks [Jacot et al., 2018, Lee et al., 2019]. Analyzing two-layer
ReLU networks in such a regime has led to a series of exciting results recently establishing that
gradient descent (GD) or stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can successfully minimize the empirical
error and the true error [Li and Liang, 2018, Du et al., 2019, Daniely, 2017, Zou et al., 2018, Allen-Zhu
et al., 2019, Song and Yang, 2019, Arora et al., 2019, Cao and Gu, 2019, Oymak and Soltanolkotabi,
2020]. In a related line of research, several works attribute generalization in over-parametrized
settings to the implicit inductive bias of optimization algorithms (through the geometry of local
search methods) [Neyshabur et al., 2017]. However, many real-world state-of-the-art systems employ
various explicit regularizers, and there is growing evidence that implicit bias may be unable to explain
generalization even in a simpler setting of stochastic convex optimization [Dauber et al., 2020]. Here,
we extend convergence guarantees and generalization bounds for GD-based methods with explicit
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

