Probably Approximately Correct Constrained Learning

Luiz F. O. Chamon
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania, USA
luizf@seas.upenn.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania, USA
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
As learning solutions reach critical applications in social, industrial, and medical
domains, the need to curtail their behavior has become paramount. There is now
ample evidence that without explicit tailoring, learning can lead to biased, unsafe,
and prejudiced solutions. To tackle these problems, we develop a generalization
theory of constrained learning based on the probably approximately correct (PAC)
learning framework. In particular, we show that imposing requirements does not
make a learning problem harder in the sense that any PAC learnable class is also
PAC constrained learnable using a constrained counterpart of the empirical risk
minimization (ERM) rule. For typical parametrized models, however, this learner
involves solving a constrained non-convex optimization program for which even
obtaining a feasible solution is challenging. To overcome this issue, we prove that
under mild conditions the empirical dual problem of constrained learning is also a
PAC constrained learner that now leads to a practical constrained learning algorithm
based solely on solving unconstrained problems. We analyze the generalization
properties of this solution and use it to illustrate how constrained learning can
address problems in fair and robust classification.

1

Introduction

Learning has become a core component of the modern information systems we increasingly rely upon
to select job candidates, analyze medical data, and control “smart” applications (home, grid, city). As
these systems become ubiquitous, so does the need to curtail their behavior. Left untethered, they
can fail catastrophically as evidenced by the growing number of reports involving biased, prejudiced
models or systems prone to tampering (e.g., adversarial examples), unsafe behaviors, and deadly
accidents [1–6]. Typically, learning is constrained by using domain expert knowledge to either
construct models that embed the required properties (see, e.g., [7–13]) or tune the training objective
so as to promote them (see, e.g., [14–17]). The latter approach, known as regularization, is ubiquitous
in practice even though it need not yield feasible solutions [18]. In fact, existing results from classical
learning theory guarantee generalization with respect to the regularized objective, which says nothing
about meeting the requirements it may describe [19, 20]. While the former approach guarantees
that the solution satisfies the requirements, the scale and opacity of modern machine learning (ML)
systems render this model design impractical.
Since ML models are often trained using empirical risk minimization (ERM), an alternative solution
is to explicitly add constraints to these optimization problems. Since requirements are often expressed
as constraints in the first place, this approach overcomes the need to tune regularization parameters.
What it more, any solution automatically satisfies the requirements. Nevertheless, this approach
suffers from two fundamental drawbacks. First, its involves solving a constrained optimization
problem that is non-convex for typical parametrizations (e.g., neural networks). Though gradient
descent can often be used to obtain good minimizers for differentiable models, it does not guarantee
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

