AvE: Assistance via Empowerment

Yuqing Du
UC Berkeley
yuqing_du@berkeley.edu

Stas Tiomkin
UC Berkeley
stas@berkeley.edu

Emre Kıcıman
Microsoft Research
emrek@microsoft.com

Daniel Polani
University of Hertfordshire
d.polani@herts.ac.uk

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@berkeley.edu

Anca Dragan
UC Berkeley
anca@berkeley.edu

Abstract
One difficulty in using artificial agents for human-assistive applications lies in
the challenge of accurately assisting with a person’s goal(s). Existing methods
tend to rely on inferring the human’s goal, which is challenging when there are
many potential goals or when the set of candidate goals is difficult to identify.
We propose a new paradigm for assistance by instead increasing the human’s
ability to control their environment, and formalize this approach by augmenting
reinforcement learning with human empowerment. This task-agnostic objective
preserves the person’s autonomy and ability to achieve any eventual state. We test
our approach against assistance based on goal inference, highlighting scenarios
where our method overcomes failure modes stemming from goal ambiguity or
misspecification. As existing methods for estimating empowerment in continuous
domains are computationally hard, precluding its use in real time learned assistance,
we also propose an efficient empowerment-inspired proxy metric. Using this, we
are able to successfully demonstrate our method in a shared autonomy user study
for a challenging simulated teleoperation task with human-in-the-loop training.

1

Introduction

We aim to enable artificial agents, whether physical or virtual, to assist humans in a broad array of
tasks. However, training an agent to provide assistance is challenging when the human’s goal is
unknown because that makes it unclear what the agent should do. Assistance games [18] formally
capture this as the problem of working together with a human to maximize a common reward function
whose parameters are only known to the human and not to the agent. Naturally, approaches to
assistance in both shared workspace [32, 14, 13, 33, 31, 25] and shared autonomy [21, 20, 11, 15, 32]
settings have focused on inferring the human’s goal (or, more broadly, the hidden reward parameters)
from their ongoing actions, building on tools from Bayesian inference [5] and Inverse Reinforcement
Learning [30, 37, 2, 4, 45, 19, 34, 12, 26]. However, goal inference can fail when the human model
is misspecified, e.g. because people are not acting noisy-rationally [27, 36], or because the set of
candidate goals the agent is considering is incorrect [7]. In such cases, the agent can infer an incorrect
goal, causing its assistance (along with the human’s success) to suffer, as it does in Figure 1.
Even in scenarios where the agent correctly infers the human’s goal, we encounter further questions
about the nature of collaborations between humans and assistive agents: what roles do each of them
play in achieving the shared goal? One can imagine a scenario where a human is attempting to
traverse down a hallway blocked by heavy objects. Here, there are a range of assistive behaviours: a
robot could move the objects and create a path so the human is still the main actor, or a robot could
physically carry the person down the hallway, making the human passive. Depending on the context,
either solution may be more or less appropriate. Specifically, the boundary between assisting humans
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

