DisARM: An Antithetic Gradient Estimator for
Binary Latent Variables

Zhe Dong
Google Research, Brain Team
zhedong@google.com

Andriy Mnih
DeepMind
amnih@google.com

George Tucker
Google Research, Brain Team
gjt@google.com

Abstract
Training models with discrete latent variables is challenging due to the difficulty
of estimating the gradients accurately. Much of the recent progress has been
achieved by taking advantage of continuous relaxations of the system, which
are not always available or even possible. The Augment-REINFORCE-Merge
(ARM) estimator provides an alternative that, instead of relaxation, uses continuous
augmentation. Applying antithetic sampling over the augmenting variables yields
a relatively low-variance and unbiased estimator applicable to any model with
binary latent variables. However, while antithetic sampling reduces variance, the
augmentation process increases variance. We show that ARM can be improved by
analytically integrating out the randomness introduced by the augmentation process,
guaranteeing substantial variance reduction. Our estimator, DisARM, is simple to
implement and has the same computational cost as ARM. We evaluate DisARM on
several generative modeling benchmarks and show that it consistently outperforms
ARM and a strong independent sample baseline in terms of both variance and
log-likelihood. Furthermore, we propose a local version of DisARM designed
for optimizing the multi-sample variational bound, and show that it outperforms
VIMCO, the current state-of-the-art method.

1

Introduction

We often require the gradient of an expectation with respect to the parameters of the distribution. In
all but the simplest settings, the expectation is analytically intractable and the gradient is estimated
using Monte Carlo sampling. This problem is encountered, for example, in modern variational
inference, where we would like to maximize a variational lower bound with respect to the parameters
of the variational posterior. The pathwise gradient estimator, also known as the reparameterization
trick, comes close to this ideal and has been instrumental to the success of variational autoencoders
(Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014). Unfortunately, it can only be used with continuous
random variables, and finding a similarly effective estimator for discrete random variables remains an
important open problem.
Score-function estimators (Glynn, 1990; Fu, 2006), also known as REINFORCE (Williams, 1992),
have historically been the estimators of choice for models with discrete random variables due to
their unbiasedness and few requirements. As they usually exhibit high variance, previous work has
augmented them with variance reduction methods to improve their practicality (Williams, 1992;
Ranganath et al., 2014; Mnih and Gregor, 2014). Motivated by the efficiency of the pathwise estimator,
recent progress in gradient estimators for discrete variables has primarily been driven by leveraging
gradient information. The original system may only be defined for discrete inputs and hence gradients
w.r.t. the random variables may not be defined. If we can construct a continuous relaxation of the
Code and additional information: https://sites.google.com/view/disarm-estimator.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

