Focus of Attention Improves
Information Transfer in Visual Features
Matteo Tiezzi1 , Stefano Melacci1∗, Alessandro Betti1 , Marco Maggini1 , Marco Gori1,2
1
DIISM, University of Siena, Siena, Italy
2
Maasai, Universitè Côte d’Azur, Nice, France
{mtiezzi,mela}@diism.unisi.it,alessandro.betti2@unisi.it,
{maggini,marco}@diism.unisi.it

Abstract
Unsupervised learning from continuous visual streams is a challenging problem
that cannot be naturally and efficiently managed in the classic batch-mode setting of
computation. The information stream must be carefully processed accordingly to an
appropriate spatio-temporal distribution of the visual data, while most approaches
of learning commonly assume uniform probability density. In this paper we focus
on unsupervised learning for transferring visual information in a truly online setting
by using a computational model that is inspired to the principle of least action in
physics. The maximization of the mutual information is carried out by a temporal
process which yields online estimation of the entropy terms. The model, which is
based on second-order differential equations, maximizes the information transfer
from the input to a discrete space of symbols related to the visual features of
the input, whose computation is supported by hidden neurons. In order to better
structure the input probability distribution, we use a human-like focus of attention
model that, coherently with the information maximization model, is also based on
second-order differential equations. We provide experimental results to support
the theory by showing that the spatio-temporal filtering induced by the focus of
attention allows the system to globally transfer more information from the input
stream over the focused areas and, in some contexts, over the whole frames with
respect to the unfiltered case that yields uniform probability distributions.

1

Introduction

Nowadays the most popular benchmarks in the machine learning community are composed of batches
of data that are commonly processed in an offline manner using stochastic updates of the model
parameters, periodically shuffling the available samples [23, 17, 8]. A smaller effort has been devoted
by the research community to the direction of focusing on a single, potentially life-long video, in
which the model continuously processes a stream of frames, that is a very natural setting resembling
the flow of information that hits the eyes of each human [5]. An important feature of the human
visual system that is frequently neglected in several algorithms is the attention mechanism that drives
the gaze over different spatial regions of the input stimulus. As a matter of fact, it is implicitly
assumed that all the pixels equally contribute to the learning process, assuming a uniform probability
distribution of their coordinates over the retina. In the last few years, a lot of importance has been
devoted to attention in neural models, for example in learning to play games [36], in learning taskspecific attention [21], or in mixing bottom-up and top-down attention [32]. A different research
direction, closer to Neuroscience, is the one that specifically studies saliency in the context of the
human visual attention systems [6], where dynamic models of visual attention have been recently
proposed, able to predict in an online manner the trajectory of the attention [33, 34].
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

