Weston-Watkins Hinge Loss and Ordered Partitions

Yutong Wang
University of Michigan
yutongw@umich.edu

Clayton D. Scott
University of Michigan
clayscot@umich.edu

Abstract
Multiclass extensions of the support vector machine (SVM) have been formulated
in a variety of ways. A recent empirical comparison of nine such formulations [1]
recommends the variant proposed by Weston and Watkins (WW), despite the fact
that the WW-hinge loss is not calibrated with respect to the 0-1 loss. In this work
we introduce a novel discrete loss function for multiclass classification, the ordered
partition loss, and prove that the WW-hinge loss is calibrated with respect to this
loss. We also argue that the ordered partition loss is minimally emblematic among
discrete losses satisfying this property. Finally, we apply our theory to justify the
empirical observation made by Doǧan et al. [1] that the WW-SVM can work well
even under massive label noise, a challenging setting for multiclass SVMs.

1

Introduction

Classification is the task of assigning labels to instances, and a common approach is to minimize
misclassification error corresponding to the 0-1 loss. However, the 0-1 loss is discrete and typically
cannot be optimized efficiently. To address this, the 0-1 loss is often replaced by a surrogate loss
during training. If the surrogate is calibrated with respect to the 0-1 loss, then a classifier minimizing
the expected surrogate loss will also minimize the expected 0-1 loss in the infinite sample limit.
For multiclass classification, several different multiclass extensions of the support vector machine
(SVM) have been proposed, including the Weston-Watkins (WW) [2], Crammer-Singer (CS) [3], and
Lee-Lin-Wahba (LLW) [4] SVMs. The pertinent difference between these multiclass SVMs is the
multiclass generalization of the hinge loss. Below, we refer to the hinge loss from WW-SVM as the
WW hinge loss and so on. It is well-known that the LLW-hinge is calibrated with respect to the 0-1
loss, while the WW- and CS-hinge losses are not [5, 6].
Despite this result, the LLW-SVM is not more widely accepted than the WW-, CS-, and other SVMs.
The first reason for this is that while the LLW-SVM is calibrated with respect to the 0-1 loss, this did
not lead to superior performance empirically. In particular, Doǧan et al. [1] found that the LLW-SVM
fails in low dimensional feature space even under the noiseless setting. On the other hand, Doǧan
et al. [1] observed that the WW-SVM is the only multiclass SVM that succeeded in both the noiseless
and noisy setting in their simulations. Indeed, Doǧan et al. [1] concluded that, among 9 different
competing multiclass SVMs, the WW-SVM offers the best overall performance when considering
accuracy and computation. The second reason is that the calibration framework is not limited to
the 0-1 loss. There could be other discrete losses with respect to which a surrogate is calibrated,
and which help to explain its performance. Indeed, Ramaswamy et al. [7] recently showed that the
CS-hinge loss is calibrated with respect to a discrete loss for classification with abstention.
In a vein similar to [7], we show that the WW-hinge loss is calibrated with respect to a novel discrete
loss that we call the ordered partition loss. Our results leverage the embedding framework for
analyzing discrete losses and convex piecewise linear surrogates, introduced recently by Finocchiaro
et al. [8]. We also give theoretical justification for the empirical performance of the WW-SVM
observed by Doǧan et al. [1].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

