Synthesizing Tasks for Block-based Programming∗

Umair Z. Ahmed1 Maria Christakis2 Aleksandr Efremov2 Nigel Fernandez2
Ahana Ghosh2 Abhik Roychoudhury1 Adish Singla2
1
National University of Singapore, {umair, abhik}@comp.nus.edu.sg,
2
MPI-SWS, {maria, aefremov, nfernand, gahana, adishs}@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Block-based visual programming environments play a critical role in introducing
computing concepts to K-12 students. One of the key pedagogical challenges in
these environments is in designing new practice tasks for a student that match
a desired level of difficulty and exercise specific programming concepts. In this
paper, we formalize the problem of synthesizing visual programming tasks. In
particular, given a reference visual task Tin and its solution code Cin , we propose a
novel methodology to automatically generate a set {(Tout , Cout )} of new tasks along
with solution codes such that tasks Tin and Tout are conceptually similar but visually
dissimilar. Our methodology is based on the realization that the mapping from the
space of visual tasks to their solution codes is highly discontinuous; hence, directly
mutating reference task Tin to generate new tasks is futile. Our task synthesis
algorithm operates by first mutating code Cin to obtain a set of codes {Cout }. Then,
the algorithm performs symbolic execution over a code Cout to obtain a visual task
Tout ; this step uses the Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) procedure to guide the
search in the symbolic tree. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm
through an extensive empirical evaluation and user study on reference tasks taken
from the Hour of Code: Classic Maze challenge by Code.org and the Intro to
Programming with Karel course by CodeHS.com.

1

Introduction

Block-based visual programming environments are increasingly used nowadays to introduce computing concepts to novice programmers including children and K-12 students. Led by the success of
environments like Scratch [29], initiatives like Hour of Code by Code.org [24] (HOC) and online platforms like CodeHS.com [21], block-based programming has become an integral part of introductory
computer science education. Considering HOC alone, over one billion hours of block-based programming activity has been performed so far by over 50 million unique students worldwide [24, 35].
The societal need for enhancing K-12 computing education has led to a surge of interest in developing
AI-driven systems for pedagogy of block-based programming [33, 26, 27, 34, 16]. Existing works
have studied various aspects of intelligent support, including providing real-time next-step hints when
a student is stuck solving a task [20, 36, 18, 17, 9], giving data-driven feedback about a student’s
misconceptions [31, 19, 28, 30, 35], and demonstrating a worked-out solution for a task when a
student lacks the required programming concepts [37]. An underlying assumption when providing
such intelligent support is that afterwards the student can practice new similar tasks to finally learn the
missing concepts. However, this assumption is far from reality in existing systems—the programming
tasks are typically hand-curated by experts/tutors, and the available set of tasks is limited. Consider
HOC’s Classic Maze challenge [23], which provides a progression of 20 tasks: Millions of students
have attempted these tasks, yet when students fail to solve a task and receive assistance, they cannot
practice similar tasks, hindering their ability to master the desired concepts. We seek to tackle this
pedagogical challenge by developing techniques for synthesizing new programming tasks.
∗

Authors listed alphabetically; Correspondence to: Ahana Ghosh <gahana@mpi-sws.org>.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

