Deep Transformers with Latent Depth
Xian Li1 , Asa Cooper Stickland2 , Yuqing Tang1 , and Xiang Kong1
1
Facebook AI
{xianl, yuqtang, xiangk}@fb.com
2
University of Edinburgh
{a.cooper.stickland}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
The Transformer model has achieved state-of-the-art performance in many sequence modeling tasks. However, how to leverage model capacity with large or
variable depths is still an open challenge. We present a probabilistic framework
to automatically learn which layer(s) to use by learning the posterior distributions
of layer selection. As an extension of this framework, we propose a novel method
to train one shared Transformer network for multilingual machine translation
with different layer selection posteriors for each language pair. The proposed
method alleviates the vanishing gradient issue and enables stable training of deep
Transformers (e.g. 100 layers). We evaluate on WMT English-German machine
translation and masked language modeling tasks, where our method outperforms
existing approaches for training deeper Transformers. Experiments on multilingual machine translation demonstrate that this approach can effectively leverage
increased model capacity and bring universal improvement for both many-to-one
and one-to-many translation with diverse language pairs.

1

Introduction

The Transformer model has achieved the state-of-the-art performance on various natural language
preprocessing (NLP) tasks, originally in neural machine translation [30], and recently in massive
multilingual machine translation [3, 37], crosslingual pretraining [8, 17], and many other tasks. There
has been a growing interest in increasing the model capacity of Transformers, which demonstrates
improved performance on various sequence modeling and generation tasks [35, 24, 1].
Training Transformers with increased or variable depth is still an open problem. Depending on the
position of layer norm sub-layer, backpropagating gradients through multiple layers may suffer from
gradient vanishing [19, 31, 5]. In addition, performance does not always improve by simply stacking
up layers [6, 31]. When used for multilingual or multi-task pretraining, such as multilingual machine
translation, crosslingual language modeling, etc., the simplicity of using one shared Transformer
network for all languages (and tasks) is appealing. However, how to share model capacity among
languages (and tasks) so as to facilitate positive transfer while mitigating negative transfer has not
been well explored.
In this work, we present a novel approach to train deep Transformers, in which the layers to be used
(and shared) and the effective depth are not static, but learnt based on the underlying task. Concretely,
we model the decision to use each layer as a latent variable, whose distribution is jointly learnt with
the rest of the Transformer parameters. At training time we approximate the discrete choice with
a Gumbel-Softmax [14] distribution. The ‘soft weights’ sampled from this distribution also act as
gradient normalization for each layer, and this allows us to train very deep Transformers (up to
100 layers) without using regular layer normalization layers. At inference time, the learnt discrete
choice can be used to directly derive a compact model by pruning layers with low probability, but we
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

