MDP Homomorphic Networks:
Group Symmetries in Reinforcement Learning

Elise van der Pol
UvA-Bosch Deltalab
University of Amsterdam
e.e.vanderpol@uva.nl
Herke van Hoof
UvA-Bosch Deltalab
University of Amsterdam
h.c.vanhoof@uva.nl

Daniel E. Worrall
Philips Lab
University of Amsterdam
d.e.worrall@uva.nl

Frans A. Oliehoek
Department of Intelligent Systems
Delft University of Technology
f.a.oliehoek@tudelft.nl

Max Welling
UvA-Bosch Deltalab
University of Amsterdam
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
This paper introduces MDP homomorphic networks for deep reinforcement learning. MDP homomorphic networks are neural networks that are equivariant under
symmetries in the joint state-action space of an MDP. Current approaches to deep
reinforcement learning do not usually exploit knowledge about such structure. By
building this prior knowledge into policy and value networks using an equivariance
constraint, we can reduce the size of the solution space. We specifically focus
on group-structured symmetries (invertible transformations). Additionally, we
introduce an easy method for constructing equivariant network layers numerically,
so the system designer need not solve the constraints by hand, as is typically done.
We construct MDP homomorphic MLPs and CNNs that are equivariant under either
a group of reflections or rotations. We show that such networks converge faster
than unstructured baselines on CartPole, a grid world and Pong.

1

Introduction

This paper considers learning decision-making systems that exploit symmetries in the structure of the
world. Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is concerned with learning neural function approximators
for decision making strategies. While DRL algorithms have been shown to solve complex, highdimensional problems [35, 34, 26, 25], they are often used in problems with large state-action spaces,
and thus require many samples before convergence. Many tasks exhibit symmetries, easily recognized
by a designer of a reinforcement learning system. Consider the classic control task of balancing a
pole on a cart. Balancing a pole that falls to the right requires an equivalent, but mirrored, strategy to
one that falls to the left. See Figure 1. In this paper, we exploit knowledge of such symmetries in the
state-action space of Markov decision processes (MDPs) to reduce the size of the solution space.
We use the notion of MDP homomorphisms [32, 30] to formalize these symmetries. Intuitively, an
MDP homomorphism is a map between MDPs, preserving the essential structure of the original
MDP, while removing redundancies in the problem description, i.e., equivalent state-action pairs. The
removal of these redundancies results in a smaller state-action space, upon which we may more easily
build a policy. While earlier work has been concerned with discovering an MDP homomorphism for
a given MDP [32, 30, 27, 31, 6, 39], we are instead concerned with how to construct deep policies,
satisfying the MDP homomorphism. We call these models MDP homomorphic networks.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

