Residual Force Control for Agile Human Behavior
Imitation and Extended Motion Synthesis

Ye Yuan Kris M. Kitani
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
{yyuan2, kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning has shown great promise for synthesizing realistic human
behaviors by learning humanoid control policies from motion capture data. However, it is still very challenging to reproduce sophisticated human skills like ballet
dance, or to stably imitate long-term human behaviors with complex transitions.
The main difficulty lies in the dynamics mismatch between the humanoid model
and real humans. That is, motions of real humans may not be physically possible
for the humanoid model. To overcome the dynamics mismatch, we propose a
novel approach, residual force control (RFC), that augments a humanoid control
policy by adding external residual forces into the action space. During training, the
RFC-based policy learns to apply residual forces to the humanoid to compensate
for the dynamics mismatch and better imitate the reference motion. Experiments
on a wide range of dynamic motions demonstrate that our approach outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in terms of convergence speed and the quality of learned
motions. Notably, we showcase a physics-based virtual character empowered by
RFC that can perform highly agile ballet dance moves such as pirouette, arabesque
and jeté. Furthermore, we propose a dual-policy control framework, where a
kinematic policy and an RFC-based policy work in tandem to synthesize multimodal infinite-horizon human motions without any task guidance or user input.
Our approach is the first humanoid control method that successfully learns from a
large-scale human motion dataset (Human3.6M) and generates diverse long-term
motions. Code and videos are available at https://www.ye-yuan.com/rfc.

1

Introduction

Understanding human behaviors and creating virtual humans that act like real people has been a
mesmerizing yet elusive goal in computer vision and graphics. One important step to achieve this
goal is human motion synthesis which has broad applications in animation, gaming and virtual reality.
With advances in deep learning, data-driven approaches [12, 13, 41, 38, 3] have achieved remarkable
progress in producing realistic motions learned from motion capture data. Among them are physicsbased methods [41, 38, 3] empowered by reinforcement learning (RL), where a humanoid agent in
simulation is trained to imitate reference motions. Physics-based methods have many advantages over
their kinematics-based counterparts. For instance, the motions generated with physics are typically
free from jitter, foot skidding or geometry penetration as they respect physical constraints. Moreover,
the humanoid agent inside simulation can interact with the physical environment and adapt to various
terrains and perturbations, generating diverse motion variations.
However, physics-based methods have their own challenges. In many cases, the humanoid agent fails
to imitate highly agile motions like ballet dance or long-term motions that involve swift transitions
between various locomotions. We attribute such difficulty to the dynamics mismatch between the
humanoid model and real humans. Humans are very difficult to model because they are very complex
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

