Learning to solve TV regularised problems
with unrolled algorithms

Hamza Cherkaoui
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Inria
Gif-sur-Yvette, 91190, France
hamza.cherkaoui@cea.fr

Jeremias Sulam
Johns Hopkins University
jsulam1@jhu.edu

Thomas Moreau
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA,
Palaiseau, 91120, France
thomas.moreau@inria.fr

Abstract
Total Variation (TV) is a popular regularization strategy that promotes piece-wise
constant signals by constraining the `1 -norm of the first order derivative of the
estimated signal. The resulting optimization problem is usually solved using
iterative algorithms such as proximal gradient descent, primal-dual algorithms or
ADMM. However, such methods can require a very large number of iterations to
converge to a suitable solution. In this paper, we accelerate such iterative algorithms
by unfolding proximal gradient descent solvers in order to learn their parameters
for 1D TV regularized problems. While this could be done using the synthesis
formulation, we demonstrate that this leads to slower performances. The main
difficulty in applying such methods in the analysis formulation lies in proposing
a way to compute the derivatives through the proximal operator. As our main
contribution, we develop and characterize two approaches to do so, describe their
benefits and limitations, and discuss the regime where they can actually improve
over iterative procedures. We validate those findings with experiments on synthetic
and real data.

1

Introduction

Ill-posed inverse problems appear naturally in signal and image processing and machine learning,
requiring extra regularization techniques. Total Variation (TV) is a popular regularization strategy
with a long history (Rudin et al., 1992), and has found a large number of applications in neuro-imaging
(Fikret et al., 2013), medical imaging reconstruction (Tian et al., 2011), among myriad applications
(Rodríguez, 2013; Darbon and Sigelle, 2006). TV promotes piece-wise constant estimates by
penalizing the `1 -norm of the first order derivative of the estimated signal, and it provides a simple,
yet efficient regularization technique.
TV-regularized problems are typically convex, and so a wide variety of algorithms are in principle
applicable. Since the `1 norm in the TV term is non-smooth, Proximal Gradient Descent (PGD) is
the most popular choice (Rockafellar, 1976). Yet, the computation for the corresponding proximal
operator (denoted prox-TV) represents a major difficulty in this case as it does not have a closed-form
analytic solution. For 1D problems, it is possible to rely on dynamic programming to compute proxTV, such as the taut string algorithm (Davies and Kovac, 2001; Condat, 2013a). Another alternative
consists in computing the proximal operator with iterative first order algorithm (Chambolle, 2004;
Beck and Teboulle, 2009; Boyd et al., 2011; Condat, 2013b). Other algorithms to solve TV-regularized
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

