Adaptive Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network
for Traffic Forecasting

Lei Bai
UNSW, Sydney
baisanshi@gmail.com

Lina Yao
UNSW, Sydney
lina.yao@unsw.edu.au

Xianzhi Wang
University of Technology Sydney
xianzhi.wang@uts.edu.au

Can Li
UNSW, Sydney
can.li4@student.unsw.edu.au

Can Wang
Griffith University
can.wang@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Modeling complex spatial and temporal correlations in the correlated time series
data is indispensable for understanding the traffic dynamics and predicting the
future status of an evolving traffic system. Recent works focus on designing complicated graph neural network architectures to capture shared patterns with the help
of pre-defined graphs. In this paper, we argue that learning node-specific patterns
is essential for traffic forecasting while the pre-defined graph is avoidable. To
this end, we propose two adaptive modules for enhancing Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) with new capabilities: 1) a Node Adaptive Parameter Learning
(NAPL) module to capture node-specific patterns; 2) a Data Adaptive Graph Generation (DAGG) module to infer the inter-dependencies among different traffic
series automatically. We further propose an Adaptive Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network (AGCRN) to capture fine-grained spatial and temporal correlations
in traffic series automatically based on the two modules and recurrent networks.
Our experiments 1 on two real-world traffic datasets show AGCRN outperforms
state-of-the-art by a significant margin without pre-defined graphs about spatial
connections.

1

Introduction

The fast urbanization introduces growing populations in cities and presents significant mobility and
sustainability challenges. Among those challenges, Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) has
become an active research area [1], given its potential to promote system efficiency and decisionmaking. As an essential step towards the ITS, traffic forecasting aims at predicting the future status
(e.g., traffic flow and speed, and passenger demand) of urban traffic systems. It plays a vital role in
traffic scheduling and management and has attracted tremendous attention from the machine learning
research community in recent years [2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
Traffic forecasting is challenging due to the complex intra-dependencies (i.e., temporal correlations
within one traffic series) and inter-dependencies (i.e., spatial correlations among multitudinous correlated traffic series) [3] generated from different sources, e.g., different loop detectors/intersections
for traffic flow & traffic speed prediction, and various stations/regions for passenger demand prediction. Traditional methods simply deploy time series models, e.g., Auto-Regressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA) and Vector Auto-Regression (VAR), for traffic forecasting. They cannot
capture the nonlinear correlations nor intricate spatial-temporal patterns among large scale traffic
1

Code available at: https://github.com/LeiBAI/AGCRN

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

