Learning to Adapt to Evolving Domains

Hong Liu† , Mingsheng Long‡∗, Jianmin Wang‡ , Yu Wang†
‡
School of Software, KLiss, BNRist, Tsinghua University
†
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
h-l17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{mingsheng,jimwang,yu-wang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptation aims at knowledge transfer from a labeled source domain to
an unlabeled target domain. Current domain adaptation methods have made substantial advances in adapting discrete domains. However, this can be unrealistic in
real-world applications, where target data usually come in an online and continually
evolving manner, posing challenges to classic domain adaptation paradigm: (1)
Mainstream domain adaptation methods are tailored to stationary target domains,
and can fail in non-stationary environments. (2) Since the target data arrive online,
the model should also maintain competence on previous target data, i.e. adapt
without forgetting. To tackle these challenges, we propose a meta-adaptation framework which enables the learner to adapt to continually evolving target domains
without forgetting. Our framework consists of two components: a meta-objective of
learning representations to adapt to evolving domains, enabling meta-learning for
unsupervised domain adaptation; and a meta-adapter for learning to adapt without
forgetting, reserving knowledge from previous target data. Experiments validate
the effectiveness our method on evolving domain adaptation benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning applications require consistent performance across datasets of different
underlying data distributions. A plausible solution to this problem is domain adaptation, which
bridges the dataset shift and circumvents manual annotation for new tasks [26, 25]. By learning
features transferring well from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain, domain
adaptation facilitates knowledge transfer and mitigates the harmful effect of shift in data distributions.
In this paper, we consider a more realistic setting of domain adaptation — adapting to evolving target
domains. Imagine a self-driving agent with a scene recognition system trained on scenes from a
stationary condition (the source domain). When deployed in real world, the environment can vary in
a continually evolving way, such as from day to night, and from shine to rain. Therefore, we hope
the agent gradually adapts to the environment shift and performs consistently well on scenes from
all environments (the evolving target domain). Another restriction we are confronted with is the
limited computational resources of the agent when deployed. Thus, we may learn representations in
the factory, and deploy only light-weight model to the cars when adapting to new target data in the
real world. Following the terms of meta-learning [4], we formulate this setting as evolving domain
adaptation (EDA): (1) we have access to adequate labeled examples from the source domain, and
part of the target unlabeled data from a target domain evolving over time in the meta-training phase,
(2) new target data of the meta-testing phase arrive sequentially online from the same evolving target
distribution and cannot be stored, and (3) after adapting to these new target data sequentially, we test
the model on all target data of meta-testing. An example of the EDA problem is provided in Figure 1.
∗

Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn)

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

