Disentangling by Subspace Diffusion
David Pfau, Irina Higgins, Aleksandar Botev, Sébastien Racanière
DeepMind
London, UK
{pfau, irinah, botev, sracaniere}@google.com

Abstract
We present a novel nonparametric algorithm for symmetry-based disentangling
of data manifolds, the Geometric Manifold Component Estimator (G EO M AN CE R).
G EO M AN CE R provides a partial answer to the question posed by Higgins et al.
(2018): is it possible to learn how to factorize a Lie group solely from observations
of the orbit of an object it acts on? We show that fully unsupervised factorization of
a data manifold is possible if the true metric of the manifold is known and each factor
manifold has nontrivial holonomy – for example, rotation in 3D. Our algorithm
works by estimating the subspaces that are invariant under random walk diffusion,
giving an approximation to the de Rham decomposition from differential geometry.
We demonstrate the efficacy of G EO M AN CE R on several complex synthetic
manifolds. Our work reduces the question of whether unsupervised disentangling
is possible to the question of whether unsupervised metric learning is possible,
providing a unifying insight into the geometric nature of representation learning.

1

Introduction

The ability to disentangle the different latent factors of variation in the world has been hypothesized
as a critical ingredient in representation learning [1], and much recent research has sought a fully
unsupervised way to learn disentangled representations from data [2–18]. Because the community
has not settled on a definition of “disentangling", much of this work relies on heuristics and qualitative
criteria to judge performance. For instance, datasets are often constructed by varying interpretable
factors like object position, rotation and color and methods are judged by how well they recover these
predefined factors [19, 20]. One commonly used definition is that a representation is disentangled if the
data distribution can be modeled as a nonlinear transformation of a product of independent probability
distributions [20]. This leads to a pessimistic result, that the different latent factors are not identifiable
without side information or further assumptions.
To escape this pessimistic result, we can turn to a different, symmetry-based definition of disentangling
[21], rooted in the Lie group model of visual perception [22–26]. Instead of a product of distributions,
the symmetry-based approach to disentangling considers a representation disentangled if it matches
the product of groups that define the symmetries in the world. If the actions that define the possible
transformations in the world form a group G = G1 ⇥G2 ⇥...⇥Gm , then a representation is disentangled
under this definition if it decomposes in such a way that the action of a single subgroup leaves all
factors of the representation invariant except for one (See Supp. Mat., Sec. B for a formal definition).
The symmetry-based definition is appealing as it resolves an apparent contradiction in the parallelogram
model of analogical reasoning [27]. For concepts represented as vectors a, b and c in a flat space, the
analogy a : b :: c : d can be completed by d = b+c a, as d completes the fourth corner of a parallelogram. This model has worked well in practice when applied to embeddings learned by deep neural
networks for words [28, 29] and natural images [30, 31], and often matches human judgments [32]. But
for many natural transformations, including 3D rotation, it is not possible to form a representation in a
flat vector space such that vector addition corresponds to composition of transformations. Instead, obser34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

