Uncertainty-Aware Learning for Zero-Shot
Semantic Segmentation

Ping Hu1
Stan Sclaroff1
Kate Saenko1,2
1
2
Boston University MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Zero-shot semantic segmentation (ZSS) aims to classify pixels of novel classes
without training examples available. Recently, most ZSS methods focus on learning
the visual-semantic correspondence to transfer knowledge from seen classes to
unseen classes at the pixel level. Yet, few works study the adverse effects caused by
the noisy and outlying training samples of the seen classes. In this paper, we identify this challenge and address it with a novel framework that learns to discriminate
noisy samples based on Bayesian uncertainty estimation. Specifically, we model
the network outputs with Gaussian and Laplacian distributions, with the variances
accounting for the observation noise and uncertainty of input samples. Learning
objectives are then derived with the estimated variances playing as adaptive attenuation for individual samples in training. Consequently, our model learns more
attentively from representative samples of seen classes while suffering less from
noisy and outlying ones, thus providing better reliability and generalization toward
unseen categories. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework through
comprehensive experiments on multiple challenging benchmarks, and show that
our method achieves significant accuracy improvement over previous approaches
for large-scale open-set segmentation.

1

Introduction

Semantic image segmentation aims to recognize and group pixels of the same object or stuff classes
into segments [4, 16, 42, 64]. As a fundamental problem in computer vision, this task has attracted a
lot of attention from the research community and achieved great success along with the development
of deep learning in recent years [7, 8, 14, 15, 19, 24, 38, 45, 50, 51, 57, 59, 60, 63, 66]. Most of the
existing methods focus on addressing the task over small and close sets of class labels, which relies
on a large amount of training data to achieve effectiveness. Yet, due to the varying frequency of
different object and stuff categories in natural scenes, annotations and samples for some categories
may be difficult to acquire [46], thus posing the challenge in extending those conventional models to
address large and open sets of categories.
To achieve effective zero-shot semantic segmentation (ZSS), existing efforts have been made [2,
28, 31, 44, 55, 62] by treating each pixel as an independent classification problem. And the classic
zero-shot image recognition techniques [1, 3, 6, 18, 29, 35, 47, 52, 54, 61, 65] are directly applied
to learn from seen classes the visual-semantic mappings, which are then transferred to unseen ones.
Though achieving promising results, these methods may still suffer from several limitations. At first,
these methods learn from pixels independently. Yet in images, category-consistent regions are more
semantically meaningful than individual pixels. Thus learning with global information benefits the
effectiveness of learned visual-semantic mappings. Besides, a more critical challenge is that most of
the existing methods ignore the noisy and outlying samples of seen classes, which may cause adverse
learning effects. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), closed-set learning with visual examples available for all
the classes typically results in balanced visual-semantic mappings. However in zero-shot learning,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

