Exponential ergodicity of mirror-Langevin diffusions

Sinho Chewi
MIT
schewi@mit.edu

Thibaut Le Gouic
MIT
tlegouic@mit.edu

Chen Lu
MIT
chenl819@mit.edu

Philippe Rigollet
MIT
rigollet@mit.edu

Tyler Maunu
MIT
maunut@mit.edu

Austin Stromme
MIT
astromme@mit.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the problem of sampling from ill-conditioned log-concave distributions, we give a clean non-asymptotic convergence analysis of mirror-Langevin
diffusions as introduced in [Zha+20]. As a special case of this framework, we
propose a class of diffusions called Newton-Langevin diffusions and prove that they
converge to stationarity exponentially fast with a rate which not only is dimensionfree, but also has no dependence on the target distribution. We give an application
of this result to the problem of sampling from the uniform distribution on a convex
body using a strategy inspired by interior-point methods. Our general approach follows the recent trend of linking sampling and optimization and highlights the role
of the chi-squared divergence. In particular, it yields new results on the convergence
of the vanilla Langevin diffusion in Wasserstein distance.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a target distribution is a central task in statistics and machine learning with applications
ranging from Bayesian inference [RC04; DM+19] to deep generative models [Goo+14]. Owing
to a firm mathematical grounding in the theory of Markov processes [MT09], as well as its great
versatility, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) has emerged as a fundamental sampling paradigm.
While traditional theoretical analyses are anchored in the asymptotic framework of ergodic theory,
this work focuses on finite-time results that better witness the practical performance of MCMC for
high-dimensional problems arising in machine learning.
This perspective parallels an earlier phenomenon in the much better understood field of optimization where convexity has played a preponderant role for both theoretical and methodological advances [Nes04; Bub15]. In fact, sampling and optimization share deep conceptual connections
that have contributed to a renewed understanding of the theoretical properties of sampling algorithms [Dal17a; Wib18] building on the seminal work of Jordan, Kinderlehrer and Otto [JKO98].
We consider the following canonical sampling problem. Let π be a log-concave probability measure
over Rd so that π has density equal to e−V , where the potential V : Rd → R is convex. Throughout
this paper, we also assume that V is twice continuously differentiable for convenience, though many
of our results hold under weaker conditions.
Most MCMC algorithms designed for this problem are based on the Langevin diffusion (LD), that is
the solution (Xt )t≥0 to the stochastic differential equation (SDE)
dXt = −∇V (Xt ) dt +

√

2 dBt ,

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(LD)

