Logarithmic Regret Bound in Partially Observable
Linear Dynamical Systems
Sahin Lale
Caltech
alale@caltech.edu

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli
Purdue University
kamyar@purdue.edu

Babak Hassibi
Caltech
hassibi@caltech.edu

Anima Anandkumar
Caltech
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of system identification and adaptive control in partially observable linear dynamical systems. Adaptive and closed-loop system identification
is a challenging problem due to correlations introduced in data collection. In this
paper, we present the first model estimation method with finite-time guarantees in
both open and closed-loop system identification. Deploying this estimation method,
we propose adaptive control online learning (A DAPTO N), an efficient reinforcement
learning algorithm that adaptively learns the system dynamics and continuously
updates its controller through online learning steps. A DAPTO N estimates the model
dynamics by occasionally solving a linear regression problem through interactions with the environment. Using policy re-parameterization and the estimated
model, A DAPT O N constructs counterfactual loss functions to be used for updating
the controller through online gradient descent. Over time, A DAPT O N improves
its model estimates and obtains more accurate gradient updates to improve the
controller. We show that A DAPT O N achieves a regret upper bound of polylog (T ),
after T time steps of agent-environment interaction. To the best of our knowledge,
A DAPT O N is the first algorithm that achieves polylog (T ) regret in adaptive control
of unknown partially observable linear dynamical systems which includes linear
quadratic Gaussian (LQG) control.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) in unknown partially observable linear dynamical systems with the goal
of minimizing a cumulative cost is one of the central problems in adaptive control [1]. In this setting,
a desirable RL agent needs to efficiently explore the environment to learn the system dynamics, and
exploit the gathered experiences to minimize overall cost [2]. However, since the underlying states
of the systems are not fully observable, learning the system dynamics with finite time guarantees
brings substantial challenges, making it a long-lasting problem in adaptive control. In particular,
when the latent states of a system are not fully observable, future observations are correlated with the
past inputs and observations through the latent states. These correlations are even magnified when
closed-loop controllers, those that naturally use past experiences to come up with control inputs, are
deployed. Therefore, more sophisticated estimation methods that consider these complicated and
unknown correlations are required for learning the dynamics.
In recent years, a series of works have studied this learning problem and presented a range of novel
methods with finite-sample learning guarantees. These studies propose to employ i.i.d. Gaussian
excitation as the control input, collect system outputs and estimate the model parameters using the data
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

