Convergence of Meta-Learning with Task-Specific
Adaptation over Partial Parameters

Kaiyi Ji
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
ji.367@osu.edu

Jason D. Lee
Department of EE
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

H. Vincent Poor
Department of EE
Princeton University
poor@princeton.edu

Abstract
Although model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) is a very successful algorithm
in meta-learning practice, it can have high computational cost because it updates
all model parameters over both the inner loop of task-specific adaptation and the
outer-loop of meta initialization training. A more efficient algorithm ANIL (which
refers to almost no inner loop) was proposed recently by Raghu et al. 2019, which
adapts only a small subset of parameters in the inner loop and thus has substantially
less computational cost than MAML as demonstrated by extensive experiments.
However, the theoretical convergence of ANIL has not been studied yet. In this
paper, we characterize the convergence rate and the computational complexity for
ANIL under two representative inner-loop loss geometries, i.e., strongly-convexity
and nonconvexity. Our results show that such a geometric property can significantly
affect the overall convergence performance of ANIL. For example, ANIL achieves
a faster convergence rate for a strongly-convex inner-loop loss as the number N
of inner-loop gradient descent steps increases, but a slower convergence rate for
a nonconvex inner-loop loss as N increases. Moreover, our complexity analysis
provides a theoretical quantification on the improved efficiency of ANIL over
MAML. The experiments on standard few-shot meta-learning benchmarks validate
our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

As a powerful learning paradigm, meta-learning [2, 29] has recently received significant attention,
especially with the incorporation of training deep neural networks [5, 30]. Differently from the
conventional learning approaches, meta-learning aims to effectively leverage the datasets and prior
knowledge of a task ensemble in order to rapidly learn new tasks often with a small amount of data
such as in few-shot learning. A broad collection of meta-learning algorithms have been developed
so far, which range from metric-based [16, 28], model-based [21, 30], to optimization-based algorithms [5, 22]. The focus of this paper is on the optimization-based approach, which is often easy to
be integrated with optimization formulations of many machine learning problems.
One highly successful optimization-based meta-learning approach is the model-agnostic metalearning (MAML) algorithm [5], which has been applied to many application domains including
classification [25], reinforcement learning [5], imitation learning [9], etc. At a high level, the MAML
algorithm consists of two optimization stages: the inner loop of task-specific adaptation and the outer
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

