Confounding-Robust Policy Evaluation
in Infinite-Horizon Reinforcement Learning
Nathan Kallus
School of Operations Research and
Information Engineering
Cornell University and Cornell Tech
kallus@cornell.edu

Angela Zhou⇤
School of Operations Research and
Information Engineering
Cornell University and Cornell Tech
az434@cornell.edu

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation of sequential decision policies from observational data is
necessary in applications of batch reinforcement learning such as education and
healthcare. In such settings, however, unobserved variables confound observed
actions, rendering exact evaluation of new policies impossible, i.e., unidentifiable.
We develop a robust approach that estimates sharp bounds on the (unidentifiable)
value of a given policy in an infinite-horizon problem given data from another
policy with unobserved confounding, subject to a sensitivity model. We consider
stationary unobserved confounding and compute bounds by optimizing over the
set of all stationary state-occupancy ratios that agree with a new partially identified
estimating equation and the sensitivity model. We prove convergence to the sharp
bounds as we collect more confounded data. Although checking set membership is
a linear program, the support function is given by a difficult nonconvex optimization
problem. We develop approximations based on nonconvex projected gradient
descent and demonstrate the resulting bounds empirically.

1

Introduction

Evaluation of sequential decision-making policies under uncertainty is a fundamental problem for
learning sequential decision policies from observational data, as is necessarily the case in application
areas such as education and healthcare Jiang & Li [11], Precup et al. [28], Thomas & Brunskill [36].
However, with a few exceptions, the literature on off-policy evaluation in reinforcement learning (RL)
assumes (implicitly or otherwise) the absence of unobserved confounders, auxiliary state information
that affects both the policy that generated the original data as well as transitions to the next state.
Precisely in the same important domains where observational off-policy evaluation is necessary due
to the cost of or ethical constraints on experimentation, such as in healthcare [27, 30] or operations, it
is also generally the case that unobserved confounders are present. This contributes to fundamental
challenges for advancing reinforcement learning in observational settings [7].
In this work, we study partial identification in RL off-policy evaluation under unobserved confounding,
focusing specifically on the infinite-horizon setting. Recognizing that policy value cannot actually be
point-identified from confounded observational data, we propose instead to compute the sharpest
bounds on policy value that can be supported by the data and any assumptions on confounding. This
can then support credible conclusions about policy value from the data and can ensure safety in
downstream policy learning.
Recent advancements [6, 8, 13, 17] improve variance reduction of unconfounded off-policy evaluation
by estimating density ratios on the stationary occupancy distribution. But this assumes unconfounded
⇤

Corresponding author. Author ordering is alphabetical.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

