Few-Cost Salient Object Detection with
Adversarial-Paced Learning

1

Dingwen Zhang1 , Haibin Tian1 and Jungong Han2B
School of Mechano-Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710071
2
Computer Science Department, Aberystwyth University, Ceredigion, SY23 3FL
zdw@xidian.edu.cn, haibintian@foxmail.com, jungonghan77@gmail.com

Abstract
Detecting and segmenting salient objects from given image scenes has received
great attention in recent years. A fundamental challenge in training the existing
deep saliency detection models is the requirement of large amounts of annotated
data. While gathering large quantities of training data becomes cheap and easy,
annotating the data is an expensive process in terms of time, labor and human
expertise. To address this problem, this paper proposes to learn the effective
salient object detection model based on the manual annotation on a few training
images only, thus dramatically alleviating human labor in training models. To
this end, we name this task as the few-cost salient object detection and propose
an adversarial-paced learning (APL)-based framework to facilitate the few-cost
learning scenario. Essentially, APL is derived from the self-paced learning (SPL)
regime but it infers the robust learning pace through the data-driven adversarial
learning mechanism rather than the heuristic design of the learning regularizer.
Comprehensive experiments on four widely-used benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed method can effectively approach to the existing supervised deep
salient object detection models with only 1k human-annotated training images.
The project page is available at https://github.com/hb-stone/FC-SOD.

1

Introduction

With the goal of automatically discovering object regions that attract human attention from the given
image scenes, salient object detection has become prevalent in the computer vision community
[1–3]. Due to its wide range of applications, large amounts of efforts have been made to build
powerful deep convolutional network models for addressing this problem. Relying on the large-scale
human-annotated training image data, methods presented in recent years have been undergoing
unprecedentedly rapid development. However, as it is often time-consuming and expensive to provide
the manually annotated pixel-wise ground-truth annotation, the training processes of the most existing
methods are costly in terms of time and money. To this end, this paper studies the challenge to learn
an effective salient object detection model by only using the manual annotation on a few training
images.
Inspired by the few-shot learning problems [4, 5] that use only a few training samples of the targets,
we name the investigated problem as the few-cost salient object detection (FC-SOD) problem as
it costs only a few annotated training samples. More specifically, in FC-SOD, the scenario is that
the training data contain the large scale training images, but only a few of them have the pixel-wise
annotation on the salient objects. Such a problem sounds also similar to a semi-supervised learning
problem. As [6] has defined the semi-supervised SOD (SS-SOD) task as the task to partially label the
regions within each image firstly and then use both the labeled and unlabeled regions to learn the
saliency model, we define the task considered in this work as FC-SOD to avoid confusion.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

