HRN: A Holistic Approach to One Class Learning
Wenpeng Hu1,∗ , Mengyu Wang2,∗, Qi Qin2,3 , Jinwen Ma1 , and Bing Liu2,†
1

Department of Information Science, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
3
Center for Data Science, AAIS, Peking University
{wenpeng.hu,wangmengyu,qinqi,jwma,dcsliub}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing neural network based one-class learning methods mainly use various forms
of auto-encoders or GAN style adversarial training to learn a latent representation
of the given one class of data. This paper proposes an entirely different approach
based on a novel regularization, called holistic regularization (or H-regularization),
which enables the system to consider the data holistically, not to produce a model
that biases towards some features. Combined with a proposed 2-norm instancelevel data normalization, we obtain an effective one-class learning method, called
HRN. To our knowledge, the proposed regularization and the normalization method
have not been reported before. Experimental evaluation using both benchmark
image classification and traditional anomaly detection datasets show that HRN
markedly outperforms the state-of-the-art existing deep/non-deep learning models.
The code of HRN can be found here3 .

1

Introduction

One-class learning or classification has many applications. For example, in information retrieval,
one has a set of documents of interest and wants to identify more such documents [55]. Perhaps,
the biggest application is in anomaly or novelty detection, e.g., intrusion detection, fraud detection,
medical anomaly detection, anomaly detection in social networks and Internet of things, etc [8, 9].
Recently, image and video based applications have also become popular [13, 49, 70]. More details
about these applications and others can be found in the recent survey [7, 61].
One-class learning: Let X be the space of all possible data. Let X ⊆ X be the set of all instances of
a particular class. Given a training dataset T ⊆ X of the class, we want to learn a one-class classifier
f (x) : X → {0, 1}, where f (x) = 1 if x ∈ X (i.e., x is an instance of the class) and f (x) = 0
otherwise (i.e., x is not an instance of the class, e.g., an anomaly). In most applications, deciding
whether a data instance belongs to the given training class or is an anomaly can be subjective and a
threshold is often used based on the application. Like most existing papers [68, 64, 8, 82], this work
is interested in a score function instead, and ignores the above binary decision problem. In this case,
the commonly used evaluation metric is AUC (Area Under the ROC curve).
Early works on one-class classification or learning include one-class SVM (OCSVM) [75], and
Support Vector Data Description (SVDD) [78]. More recently, deep learning models have been
proposed for the same purpose [68, 8], which mainly learn a good latent representation of the given
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author. The work was done when B. Liu was at Peking University on leave of absence from
University of Illinois at Chicago, liub@uic.edu.
3
https://github.com/morning-dews/HRN
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

