An Efficient Adversarial Attack for Tree Ensembles
Chong Zhang
Huan Zhang
Cho-Jui Hsieh
Department of Computer Science, UCLA
chongz@cs.ucla.edu, huan@huan-zhang.com, chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of efficient adversarial attacks on tree based ensembles such
as gradient boosting decision trees (GBDTs) and random forests (RFs). Since these
models are non-continuous step functions and gradient does not exist, most existing
efficient adversarial attacks are not applicable. Although decision-based black-box
attacks can be applied, they cannot utilize the special structure of trees. In our
work, we transform the attack problem into a discrete search problem specially
designed for tree ensembles, where the goal is to find a valid “leaf tuple” that
leads to mis-classification while having the shortest distance to the original input.
With this formulation, we show that a simple yet effective greedy algorithm can
be applied to iteratively optimize the adversarial example by moving the leaf
tuple to its neighborhood within hamming distance 1. Experimental results on
several large GBDT and RF models with up to hundreds of trees demonstrate
that our method can be thousands of times faster than the previous mixed-integer
linear programming (MILP) based approach, while also providing smaller (better)
adversarial examples than decision-based black-box attacks on general `p (p =
1, 2, ∞) norm perturbations. Our code is available at https://github.com/
chong-z/tree-ensemble-attack.

1

Introduction

It has been widely studied that machine learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples
(Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Athalye et al., 2018), where a small imperceptible
perturbation on the input can easily alter the prediction of a model. A series of adversarial attack
methods have been proposed on continuous models such as neural networks, which can be generally
split into two types. The gradient based methods formulate the attack into an optimization problem
on a specially designed loss function for attacks, where the gradient can be acquired through either
back-propagation in the white-box setting (Carlini, Wagner, 2017; Madry et al., 2018), or numerical
estimation in the soft-label black-box setting (Chen et al., 2017; Tu et al., 2018; Ilyas et al., 2018).
The decision based (or hard-label black-box) methods only have access to the output label, which
usually starts with an initial adversarial example and minimizes the perturbation along the decision
boundary (Brendel et al., 2018; Brunner et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2019, 2020; Chen et al., 2019c).
In this paper we study the problem of efficient adversarial attack on tree based ensembles such as
gradient boosting decision trees (GBDT) and random forests (RFs), which have been widely used
in practice (Chen, Guestrin, 2016; Ke et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017; Prokhorenkova et al., 2018).
We minimize the perturbation to find the smallest possible attack, to uncover the true weakness of
a model. Different from neural networks, tree based ensembles are non-continuous step functions
and existing gradient based methods are not applicable. Decision based methods can be applied but
they usually require a large number of queries and may easily fall into local optimum due to rugged
decision boundary. In general, finding the exact minimal adversarial perturbation for tree ensembles
is NP-complete (Kantchelian et al., 2015), and a feasible approximation solution is necessary to
evaluate the robustness of large ensembles.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

