Woodbury Transformations for
Deep Generative Flows

You Lu
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA
you.lu@vt.edu

Bert Huang
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA
bert@cs.tufts.edu

Abstract
Normalizing flows are deep generative models that allow efficient likelihood calculation and sampling. The core requirement for this advantage is that they are
constructed using functions that can be efficiently inverted and for which the determinant of the function’s Jacobian can be efficiently computed. Researchers have
introduced various such flow operations, but few of these allow rich interactions
among variables without incurring significant computational costs. In this paper,
we introduce Woodbury transformations, which achieve efficient invertibility via
the Woodbury matrix identity and efficient determinant calculation via Sylvester’s
determinant identity. In contrast with other operations used in state-of-the-art
normalizing flows, Woodbury transformations enable (1) high-dimensional interactions, (2) efficient sampling, and (3) efficient likelihood evaluation. Other
similar operations, such as 1x1 convolutions, emerging convolutions, or periodic
convolutions allow at most two of these three advantages. In our experiments on
multiple image datasets, we find that Woodbury transformations allow learning of
higher-likelihood models than other flow architectures while still enjoying their
efficiency advantages.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models are powerful tools for modeling complex distributions and have been applied
to many tasks such as synthetic data generation [26, 37], domain adaption [38], and structured
prediction [32]. Examples of these models include autoregressive models [13, 27], variational
autoencoders [20, 30], generative adversarial networks [11], and normalizing flows [6, 7, 21, 29].
Normalizing flows are special because of two advantages: They allow efficient and exact computation
of log-likelihood and sampling.
Flow-based models are composed of a series of invertible functions, which are specifically designed
so that their inverse and determinant of the Jacobian are easy to compute. However, to preserve this
computational efficiency, these functions usually cannot sufficiently encode dependencies among
dimensions of a variable. For example, affine coupling layers [6] split a variable to two parts
and require the second part to only depend on the first. But they ignore the dependencies among
dimensions in the second part.
To address this problem, Dinh et al. [6, 7] introduced a fixed permutation operation that reverses the
ordering of the channels of pixel variables. Kingma and Dhariwal [21] introduced a 1×1 convolution,
which are a generalized permutation layer, that uses a weight matrix to model the interactions among
dimensions along the channel axis. Their experiments demonstrate the importance of capturing
dependencies among dimensions. Relatedly, Hoogeboom et al. [15] proposed emerging convolution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

