Escaping Saddle-Point Faster under
Interpolation-like Conditions
Abhiskek Roy
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
abroy@ucdavis.edu

Krishnakumar Balasubramanian
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
kbala@ucdavis.edu

Saeed Ghadimi
Department of Management Sciences
University of Waterloo
sghadimi@uwaterloo.ca

Prasant Mohapatra
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Davis
pmohapatra@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we show that under over-parametrization several standard stochastic
optimization algorithms escape saddle-points and converge to local-minimizers
much faster. One of the fundamental aspects of over-parametrized models is
that they are capable of interpolating the training data. We show that, under
interpolation-like assumptions satisfied by the stochastic gradients in an overparametrization setting, the first-order oracle complexity of Perturbed Stochastic
Gradient Descent (PSGD) algorithm to reach an ✏-local-minimizer, matches the
corresponding deterministic rate of Õ(1/✏2 ). We next analyze Stochastic CubicRegularized Newton (SCRN) algorithm under interpolation-like conditions, and
show that the oracle complexity to reach an ✏-local-minimizer under interpolationlike conditions, is Õ(1/✏2.5 ). While this obtained complexity is better than the
corresponding complexity of either PSGD, or SCRN without interpolation-like
assumptions, it does not match the rate of Õ(1/✏1.5 ) corresponding to deterministic
Cubic-Regularized Newton method. It seems further Hessian-based interpolationlike assumptions are necessary to bridge this gap. We also discuss the corresponding
improved complexities in the zeroth-order settings.

1

Introduction

Over-parametrized models, for which the training stage involves solving nonconvex optimization
problems, are common in modern machine learning. A canonical example of such a model is deep
neural networks. Such over-parametrized models have several interesting statistical and computational
properties. On the statistical side, such over-parametrized models are highly expressive and are
capable of nearly perfectly interpolating the training data. Furthermore, despite the highly nonconvex
training landscape, most local minimizers have good generalization properties under regularity
conditions; see for example [39, 27, 22, 21] for empirical and theoretical details. We emphasize here
that over-parametrization plays an important role for both phenomenon to occur. Furthermore, it is to
be noted that not all critical points exhibit nice generalization properties. Hence, from a computational
perspective, designing algorithms that do not get trapped in saddle-points, and converge to local
minimizers during the training process, becomes extremely important [12].
Indeed, recently there has been extensive research in the machine learning and optimization communities on designing algorithms that escape saddle-points and converge to local minimizers. The
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

