Deep Energy-Based Modeling of
Discrete-Time Physics

Takashi Matsubara
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan 560–8531
matsubara@sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp

Ai Ishikawa
Kobe University
Kobe, Japan 657–8501
a-ishikawa@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp

Takaharu Yaguchi
Kobe University
Kobe, Japan 657–8501
yaguchi@pearl.kobe-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Physical phenomena in the real world are often described by energy-based modeling theories, such as Hamiltonian mechanics or the Landau theory, which yield
various physical laws. Recent developments in neural networks have enabled the
mimicking of the energy conservation law by learning the underlying continuoustime differential equations. However, this may not be possible in discrete time,
which is often the case in practical learning and computation. Moreover, other
physical laws have been overlooked in the previous neural network models. In this
study, we propose a deep energy-based physical model that admits a specific differential geometric structure. From this structure, the conservation or dissipation law
of energy and the mass conservation law follow naturally. To ensure the energetic
behavior in discrete time, we also propose an automatic discrete differentiation
algorithm that enables neural networks to employ the discrete gradient method.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved significant results for a variety of real-world tasks such as image
processing [23, 46], natural language processing [13], and game playing [40]. Their successes depend
on hard-coded prior knowledge, such as translation invariance in image recognition [28] and the
manifold hypothesis in data modeling [36]. The prior knowledge guarantees a desirable property
of the learned function. The Hamiltonian neural network (HNN) [19] implements the Hamiltonian
structure on a neural network and thereby produces the energy conservation law in physics. After its
great success, neural networks specifically designed for physical phenomena have received much
attention. They have been intensively extended to various forms, such as the Hamiltonian systems
with additional dissipative terms [44].
Meanwhile, most previous studies aimed to model continuous-time differential equations and employed numerical integrators (typically, an explicit Runge–Kutta method) to integrate the neural
network models for learning and computing the dynamics [7, 8, 19, 45]. Surprisingly, our numerical
experiments reveal that a higher-order numerical integrator with adaptive time-stepping is quite
often inferior in performance as compared to a quantitatively lower order but qualitatively superior
numerical integrator. This is because higher-order integrators aim to reproduce continuous-time
dynamics while practical learning and computation are in discrete time. In this case, the qualitative
features that the integrators equipped with could be actually essential.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

