Improved guarantees and a multiple-descent curve
for Column Subset Selection and the Nyström method
Michał Dereziński
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mderezin@berkeley.edu

Rajiv Khanna
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
rajivak@berkeley.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
The Column Subset Selection Problem (CSSP) and the Nyström method are among
the leading tools for constructing small low-rank approximations of large datasets in
machine learning and scientific computing. A fundamental question in this area is:
how well can a data subset of size k compete with the best rank k approximation?
We develop techniques which exploit spectral properties of the data matrix to
obtain improved approximation guarantees which go beyond the standard worstcase analysis. Our approach leads to significantly better bounds for datasets with
known rates of singular value decay, e.g., polynomial or exponential decay. Our
analysis also reveals an intriguing phenomenon: the approximation factor as a
function of k may exhibit multiple peaks and valleys, which we call a multipledescent curve. A lower bound we establish shows that this behavior is not an artifact
of our analysis, but rather it is an inherent property of the CSSP and Nyström tasks.
Finally, using the example of a radial basis function (RBF) kernel, we show that
both our improved bounds and the multiple-descent curve can be observed on real
datasets simply by varying the RBF parameter.

1

Introduction

We consider the task of selecting a small but representative sample of column vectors from a large
matrix. Known as the Column Subset Selection Problem (CSSP), this is a well-studied combinatorial
optimization task with many applications in machine learning (e.g., feature selection, see Guyon &
Elisseeff, 2003; Boutsidis et al., 2008), scientific computing (e.g., Chan & Hansen, 1992; Drineas
et al., 2008) and signal processing (e.g., Balzano et al., 2010). In a commonly studied variant of this
task, we aim to minimize the squared error of projecting all columns of the matrix onto the subspace
spanned by the chosen column subset.
Definition 1 (CSSP). Given an m ˆ n matrix A, pick a set S Ñ t1, ..., nu of k column indices, to
minimize
ErA pSq :“ }A ´ PS A}2F ,

where } ¨ }F is the Frobenius norm, PS is the projection onto spantai : i P Su and ai denotes the
ith column of A.
Another variant of the CSSP emerges in the kernel setting under the name Nyström method (Williams
& Seeger, 2001; Drineas & Mahoney, 2005; Gittens & Mahoney, 2016). We also discuss this variant,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

