Online MAP Inference of Determinantal Point
Processes
Aditya Bhaskara
School of Computing
University of Utah
bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com

Amin Karbasi
School of Engineering & Applied Science
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Silvio Lattanzi
Google Research Zürich
silviol@google.com

Morteza Zadimoghaddam
Google Research Cambridge
zadim@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we provide an efficient approximation algorithm for finding the
most likelihood configuration (MAP) of size k for Determinantal Point Processes
(DPP) in the online setting where the data points arrive in an arbitrary order
and the algorithm cannot discard the selected elements from its local memory.
Given a tolerance additive error ⌘, our O NLINE -DPP algorithm achieves a k O(k)
multiplicative approximation guarantee with an additive error ⌘, using a memory
footprint independent of the size of the data stream. We note that the exponential
dependence on k in the approximation factor is unavoidable even in the offline
setting. Our result readily implies a streaming algorithm with an improved memory
bound compared to existing results.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic modeling of data, along with complex inference techniques, have become an important
ingredient of the modern machine learning toolbox. To introduce structures in such models, such as
diversity, sparsity, or non-iid samples, while ensuring computational tractability we typically need to
provide fast sampling and computationally efficient inference. Determinantal point processes (DPP)
are elegant probabilistic models of repulsion that admit such criteria, namely, efficient sampling,
marginalization, and conditioning [Kulesza and Taskar, 2012a,b]. They have first been introduced
by [Macchi, 1975] in quantum physics to model negative interactions among particles. In recent
years, DPPs have found numerous applications in machine learning that rely on a diverse subset
selection, such as different forms of data summarization [Mirzasoleiman et al., 2013, Kulesza and
Taskar, 2012b, Feldman et al., 2018, Gong et al., 2014], multi-label classification [Xie et al., 2017],
recommender systems [Lee et al., 2017, Qin and Zhu, 2013], to name a few.
To define a DPP more precisely, let us assume that we have a set of n vectors V = {v1 , v2 . . . , vn },
each of dimension d. Define V = [v1 ; v2 ; . . . ; vn ] to be a matrix of size n ⇥ d (row i consists of
vector vi ) and construct a positive semi-definite kernel L = V V T . The entry (i, j) of the kernel L
encodes the similarity between two vectors vi and vj as the inner product between them, namely,
Li,j = hvi , vj i. The essential characteristic of a DPP is that the inclusion of an item makes the
inclusion of similar items less likely. More specifically, a DPP assigns the probability of sampling a
set of vectors indexed by S ✓ V as follows:
Pr(S) / det(VS VST ) = vol2 (S),
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

