Leveraging Predictions in Smoothed Online Convex
Optimization via Gradient-based Algorithms

Yingying Li
SEAS
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA. 02138
yingyingli@g.harvard.edu

Na Li
SEAS
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA. 02138
nali@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider online convex optimization with time-varying stage costs and additional switching costs. Since the switching costs introduce coupling across all
stages, multi-step-ahead (long-term) predictions are incorporated to improve the
online performance. However, longer-term predictions tend to suffer from lower
quality. Thus, a critical question is: how to reduce the impact of long-term prediction errors on the online performance? To address this question, we introduce a
gradient-based online algorithm, Receding Horizon Inexact Gradient (RHIG), and
analyze its performance by dynamic regrets in terms of the temporal variation of
the environment and the prediction errors. RHIG only considers at most W -stepahead predictions to avoid being misled by worse predictions in the longer term.
The optimal choice of W suggested by our regret bounds depends on the tradeoff
between the variation of the environment and the prediction accuracy. Additionally,
we apply RHIG to a well-established stochastic prediction error model and provide
expected regret and concentration bounds under correlated prediction errors. Lastly,
we numerically test the performance of RHIG on quadrotor tracking problems.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider online convex optimization (OCO) with switching costs, also known
as “smoothed” OCO (SOCO) in the literature [1–5]. The stage costs are time-varying but the
decision maker (agent) has access to noisy predictions on the future costs. Specifically, we consider
stage cost function f (xt ; θt ) parameterized by a time-varying parameter θt ∈ Θ. At each stage
t ∈ {1, 2, · · · , T }, the agent receives the predictions of the future parameters θt|t−1 , . . . , θT |t−1 , takes
an action xt ∈ X, and suffers the stage cost f (xt ; θt ) plus a switching cost d(xt , xt−1 ). The switching
cost d(xt , xt−1 ) penalizes the changes in the actions between consecutive stages. This problem
enjoys a wide range of applications. For example, in the data center management problems [6, 7],
the switching cost captures the switch on/off costs of the servers [7], and noisy predictions on future
electricity prices and network traffic are available for the center manager [8, 9]. Other applications
include smart building [10, 11], robotics [12], smart grid [13], connected vehicles [14], optimal
control [15], etc.
Unlike OCO [16], the switching costs considered in SOCO introduce coupling among all stages, so
multi-step-ahead predictions are usually used for promoting the online performance. However, in
most cases, predictions are not accurate, and longer-term predictions tend to suffer lower quality.
Therefore, it is crucial to study how to use the multi-step-ahead predictions effectively, especially,
how to reduce the impact of long-term prediction errors on the online performance.
Recent years have witnessed a growing interest in studying SOCO with predictions. However, most
literature avoids the complicated analysis on noisy multi-step-ahead predictions by considering a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

