Learning to search efficiently for causally
near-optimal treatments
Samuel Håkansson⇤
University of Gothenburg
samuel.hakansson@gu.se

Viktor Lindblom
Chalmers University of Technology
viklindb@student.chalmers.se

Omer Gottesman†
Brown University
omer gottesman@brown.edu

Fredrik D. Johansson
Chalmers University of Technology
fredrik.johansson@chalmers.se

Abstract
Finding an effective medical treatment often requires a search by trial and error.
Making this search more efficient by minimizing the number of unnecessary trials
could lower both costs and patient suffering. We formalize this problem as learning
a policy for finding a near-optimal treatment in a minimum number of trials using
a causal inference framework. We give a model-based dynamic programming
algorithm which learns from observational data while being robust to unmeasured
confounding. To reduce time complexity, we suggest a greedy algorithm which
bounds the near-optimality constraint. The methods are evaluated on synthetic and
real-world healthcare data and compared to model-free reinforcement learning. We
find that our methods compare favorably to the model-free baseline while offering
a more transparent trade-off between search time and treatment efficacy.

1

Introduction

Finding a good treatment for a patient often involves trying out different options before a satisfactory
one is found (Murphy et al., 2007). If the first-line drug is ineffective or has severe side-effects,
guidelines may suggest it is replaced by or combined with another drug (Singh et al., 2016). These
steps are repeated until an effective combination of drugs is found or all options are exhausted, a
process which may span several years (NCCMH, 2010). A long search adds to patient suffering and
postpones potential relief. It is therefore critical that this process is made as time-efficient as possible.
We formalize the search for effective treatments as a policy optimization problem in an unknown
decision process with finite horizon (Garcia and Ndiaye, 1998). This has applications also outside of
medicine: For example, in recommendation systems, we may sequentially propose new products or
services to users with the hope of finding one that the user is interested in. Our goal is to perform as
few trials as possible until the probability that there are untried actions which are significantly better
is small—i.e., a near-optimal action has been found with high probability. Historical observations
allow us to transfer knowledge and perform this search more efficiently for new subjects. As more
actions are tried and their outcomes observed, our certainty about the lack of better alternatives
increases. Importantly, even a failed trial may provide information that can guide the search policy.
In this work, we restrict our attention to actions whose outcomes are stationary in time. This implies
both that repeated trials of the same action have the same outcome and that past actions do not
causally impact the outcome of future actions. The stationarity assumption is justified, for example,
⇤
†

This work was completed while the author was affiliated with Chalmers University of Technology.
This work was completed while the author was affiliated with Harvard University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

