Bayesian Multi-type Mean Field Multi-agent
Imitation Learning
Fan Yang
Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo
fyang24@buffalo.edu

Alina Vereshchaka
Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo
avereshc@buffalo.edu

Changyou Chen
Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo
changyou@buffalo.edu

Wen Dong
Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo
wendong@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Multi-agent Imitation learning (MAIL) refers to the problem that agents learn
to perform a task interactively in a multi-agent system through observing and
mimicking expert demonstrations, without any knowledge of a reward function
from the environment. MAIL has received a lot of attention due to promising
results achieved on synthesized tasks, with the potential to be applied to complex
real-world multi-agent tasks. Key challenges for MAIL include sample efficiency
and scalability. In this paper, we proposed Bayesian multi-type mean field multiagent imitation learning (BM3IL). Our method improves sample efficiency through
establishing a Bayesian formulation for MAIL, and enhances scalability through
introducing a new multi-type mean field approximation. We demonstrate the
performance of our algorithm through benchmarking with three state-of-the-art
multi-agent imitation learning algorithms on several tasks, including solving a
multi-agent traffic optimization problem in a real-world transportation network.
Experimental results indicate that our algorithm significantly outperforms all other
algorithms in all scenarios.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent imitation learning tries to infer a hidden reward function from expert demonstrations and
optimizes a policy with the learned reward function for each agent in a multi-agent system. MAIL
has received a lot of research attention and shown promising results over a variety of tasks, including
the particle environments [15] and cooperative robotic control tasks based on OpenAI baselines [2],
social group communication [17], driving simulation [1], sports [10, 11], and etc. [18] formulates
the multi-agent generative adversarial imitation learning (MA-GAIL) by extending the single-agent
generative adversarial imitation learning [4] to the multi-agent case. [7] incorporates MA-GAIL with
an attention-actor-critic [6] to develop a multi-agent discriminator-actor-attention-critic (MA-DAAC)
algorithm.
MAIL has the potential to solve real-world complex problems, such as optimizing driving routes in a
city-scale transportation network [19], or optimizing the medical resource allocation to mitigate the
spread of disease [9]. However, applying MAIL to real-world problems is not easy. MAIL is often
formulated as solving a Markov game with unknown reward functions [18, 7]. To find the optimal
policy in a Markov game, each agent needs to take into consideration the policies of other agents [21].
The more agents in the environment, the more variance and uncertainty each agent has in the policy
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

