Task-agnostic Exploration in Reinforcement Learning

Xuezhou Zhang
UW-Madison
xzhang784@wisc.edu

Yuzhe Ma
UW-Madison
ma234@wisc.edu

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Efficient exploration is one of the main challenges in reinforcement learning (RL).
Most existing sample-efficient algorithms assume the existence of a single reward
function during exploration. In many practical scenarios, however, there is not a
single underlying reward function to guide the exploration, for instance, when an
agent needs to learn many skills simultaneously, or multiple conflicting objectives
need to be balanced. To address these challenges, we propose the task-agnostic
RL framework: In the exploration phase, the agent first collects trajectories by
exploring the MDP without the guidance of a reward function. After exploration, it
aims at finding near-optimal policies for N tasks, given the collected trajectories
augmented with sampled rewards for each task. We present an efficient taskagnostic RL algorithm, UCBZ ERO, that finds ε-optimal policies for N arbitrary
tasks after at most Õ(log(N )H 5 SA/ε2 ) exploration episodes, where H is the
episode length, S is the state space size, and A is the action space size. We also
provide an Ω(log(N )H 2 SA/ε2 ) lower bound, showing that the log dependency on
N is unavoidable. Furthermore, we provide an N -independent sample complexity
bound of UCBZ ERO in the recently proposed reward-free setting, a statistically
easier setting where the ground truth reward functions are known.

1

Introduction

Efficient exploration is widely regarded as one of the main challenges in reinforcement learning (RL). Recent works in theoretical RL have provided near-optimal algorithms in both
model-based [Jaksch et al., 2010, Azar et al., 2017, Zanette and Brunskill, 2019] and model-free
[Strehl et al., 2006, Jin et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2020] paradigms, that are able to learn a nearoptimal policy with a sample complexity that matches the information-theoretical lower bound.
However, these algorithms are designed to solve a single pre-defined task and rely on the assumption that a well-defined reward function is available during exploration. In such settings, policy
optimization can be performed simultaneously with exploration and results in an effective explorationexploitation trade-off.
In many real-world applications, however, a pre-specified reward function is not available during
exploration. For instance, in recommendation systems, reward often consists of multiple conflicting objectives, and the balance between them is tuned via continuous trial and error to encourage the desired behavior [Zheng et al., 2018]; In hierarchical and multi-task RL [Dietterich, 2000,
Tessler et al., 2017, Oh et al., 2017], the agent aims at simultaneously learning a set of skills; In
the robotic navigation problem [Rimon and Koditschek, 1992, Kretzschmar et al., 2016], the agent
needs to navigate to not only one goal location, but a set of locations in the environment. Motivated
by these real-world challenges, we ask: Is it possible to efficiently explore the environment and
simultaneously learn a set of potentially conflicting tasks?
To answer this question, we present the task-agnostic RL paradigm: During the exploration phase,
the agent collects trajectories from an MDP without the guidance of pre-specified reward function.
Next, in the policy-optimization phase, it aims at finding near-optimal policies for N tasks, given the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

