Optimizing Mode Connectivity via Neuron Alignment

N. Joseph Tatro
Dept. of Mathematical Sciences
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY
tatron@rpi.edu
Igor Melnyk
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
igor.melnyk@ibm.com

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Prasanna Sattigeri
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
psattig@us.ibm.com

Payel Das
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY
daspa@us.ibm.com

Rongjie Lai
Dept. of Mathematical Sciences
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY
lair@rpi.edu

Abstract
The loss landscapes of deep neural networks are not well understood due to their
high nonconvexity. Empirically, the local minima of these loss functions can be
connected by a learned curve in model space, along which the loss remains nearly
constant; a feature known as mode connectivity. Yet, current curve finding algorithms do not consider the influence of symmetry in the loss surface created by
model weight permutations. We propose a more general framework to investigate
the effect of symmetry on landscape connectivity by accounting for the weight
permutations of the networks being connected. To approximate the optimal permutation, we introduce an inexpensive heuristic referred to as neuron alignment.
Neuron alignment promotes similarity between the distribution of intermediate
activations of models along the curve. We provide theoretical analysis establishing
the benefit of alignment to mode connectivity based on this simple heuristic. We
empirically verify that the permutation given by alignment is locally optimal via a
proximal alternating minimization scheme. Empirically, optimizing the weight permutation is critical for efficiently learning a simple, planar, low-loss curve between
networks that successfully generalizes. Our alignment method can significantly
alleviate the recently identified robust loss barrier on the path connecting two
adversarial robust models and find more robust and accurate models on the path.
Code is available at https://github.com/IBM/NeuronAlignment.

1

Introduction

Loss surfaces of neural networks have been of recent interest in the deep learning community both
from a numerical (Dauphin et al., 2014; Sagun et al., 2014) and a theoretical (Choromanska et al.,
2014; Safran & Shamir, 2015) perspective. Their optimization yields interesting examples of a highdimensional non-convex problem, where counter-intuitively gradient descent methods successfully
converge to non-spurious minima. Practically, recent advancements in several applications have used
insights on loss surfaces to justify their approaches. For instance, Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. (2019)
investigates regularizing the curvature of the loss surface to increase the robustness of trained models.
One interesting question about these non-convex loss surfaces is to what extent trained models, which
correspond to local minima, are connected. Here, connection denotes the existence of a path between
the models, parameterized by their weights, along which loss is nearly constant. There has been
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

