Improving Sparse Vector Technique with Renyi
Differential Privacy

Yuqing Zhu
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
CA 93106
yuqingzhu@ucsb.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
CA 93106
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
The Sparse Vector Technique (SVT) is one of the most fundamental algorithmic
tools in differential privacy (DP). It also plays a central role in the state-of-the-art
algorithms for adaptive data analysis and model-agnostic private learning. In this
paper, we revisit SVT from the lens of Renyi differential privacy, which results in
new privacy bounds, new theoretical insight and new variants of SVT algorithms.
A notable example is a Gaussian mechanism version of SVT, which provides better
utility over the standard (Laplace-mechanism-based) version thanks to its more
concentrated noise. Extensive empirical evaluation demonstrates the merits of
Gaussian SVT over the Laplace SVT and other alternatives, which encouragingly
suggests that using Gaussian SVT as a drop-in replacement could make SVT-based
algorithms more practical in downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

The Sparse Vector Technique (SVT) [Dwork et al., 2009] is a fundamental tool in differential privacy
(DP) that allows the algorithm to screen potentially an unbounded number of adaptively chosen
queries while paying a cost of privacy only for a small number of queries that passes a predefined
threshold.
SVT is the workhorse behind the private multiplicative weights mechanism [Hardt and Rothblum,
2010] and median oracle mechanism [Roth and Roughgarden, 2010], which famously shows that one
can answer exponentially more linear queries differential privately for low-dimensional problems. It
is also the key technique underlying the (conjectured optimal) improvements to the ReusableHoldout
algorithms for preserving statistical validity in adaptive data analysis [Dwork et al., 2015b] and
the Ladder algorithm for reliable machine learning leaderboards [Blum and Hardt, 2015]. We refer
readers to the excellent course [Smith and Roth, 2017, Lecture 12] and the references therein.
More recently, SVT is combined with the Distance to Stability argument to build a machinery for
model agnostic private learning in the knowledge transfer framework [Bassily et al., 2018]. The
proposed algorithm releases many private labels from an ensemble of “teacher” classifiers trained on
the private dataset [Bassily et al., 2018] while essentially only paying a privacy cost for those that
are unstable. This in principle would allow the use any deep neural networks as a blackbox while
leveraging the high-margin of the learned representation.
Despite the substantial benefit of SVT in theory, it is not known as a practical method. For example,
in the case of model-agnostic private learning, SVT is often outperformed by simple Gaussian
Mechanism [Papernot et al., 2018] that release all labels, since the latter uses a more concentrated
noise (Gaussian over Laplace) and also has a tighter composition via Concentrated / Renyi differential
privacy (CDP/RDP) [Dwork and Rothblum, 2016, Bun and Steinke, 2016, Mironov, 2017].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

