Fair Hierarchical Clustering
Sara Ahmadian
Google
sahmadian@google.com
Ravi Kumar
Google
ravi.k53@gmail.com
Philip Pham
Google
phillypham@google.com

Alessandro Epasto
Google
aepasto@google.com
Mohammad Mahdian
Google
mahdian@google.com
Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google
sergeiv@google.com

Marina Knittel
University of Maryland
mknittel@cs.umd.edu
Benjamin Moseley
Carnegie Mellon University
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu
Yuyan Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
yuyanw@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
As machine learning has become more prevalent, researchers have begun to recognize the necessity of ensuring machine learning systems are fair. Recently, there has
been an interest in defining a notion of fairness that mitigates over-representation
in traditional clustering.
In this paper we extend this notion to hierarchical clustering, where the goal is to
recursively partition the data to optimize a specific objective. For various natural
objectives, we obtain simple, efficient algorithms to find a provably good fair
hierarchical clustering. Empirically, we show that our algorithms can find a fair
hierarchical clustering, with only a negligible loss in the objective.

1

Introduction

Algorithms and machine learned models are increasingly used to assist in decision making on a wide
range of issues, from mortgage approval to court sentencing recommendations [28]. It is clearly
undesirable, and in many cases illegal, for models to be biased to groups, for instance to discriminate
on the basis of race or religion. Ensuring that there is no bias is not as easy as removing these
protected categories from the data. Even without them being explicitly listed, the correlation between
sensitive features and the rest of the training data may still cause the algorithm to be biased. This has
led to an emergent literature on computing provably fair outcomes (see the book [7]).
The prominence of clustering in data analysis, combined with its use for data segmentation, feature
engineering, and visualization makes it critical that efficient fair clustering methods are developed.
There has been a flurry of recent results in the ML research community, proposing algorithms for fair
flat clustering, i.e., partitioning a dataset into a set of disjoint clusters, as captured by K - CENTER, K MEDIAN , K - MEANS, correlation clustering objectives [3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 14, 18, 24, 25, 30, 31]. However,
the same issues affect hierarchical clustering, which is the problem we study.
The input to the hierarchical clustering problem is a set of data points, with pairwise similarity or
dissimilarity scores. A hierarchical clustering is a tree, whose leaves correspond to the individual
datapoints. Each internal node represents a cluster containing all the points in the leaves of its
subtree. Naturally, the cluster at an internal node is the union of the clusters given by its children.
Hierarchical clustering is widely used in data analysis [21], social networks [32, 34], and image/text
organization [26].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

