Natural Policy Gradient Primal-Dual Method for
Constrained Markov Decision Processes
Dongsheng Ding
ECE
University of Southern California
dongshed@usc.edu

Kaiqing Zhang
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
kzhang66@illinois.edu

Tamer Başar
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
basar1@illinois.edu

Mihailo R. Jovanović
ECE
University of Southern California
mihailo@usc.edu

Abstract
We study sequential decision-making problems in which each agent aims to maximize the expected total reward while satisfying a constraint on the expected
total utility. We employ the natural policy gradient method to solve the discounted infinite-horizon Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs) problem. Specifically, we propose a new Natural Policy Gradient Primal-Dual (NPGPD) method for CMDPs which updates the primal variable via natural policy
gradient ascent and the dual variable via projected sub-gradient descent. Even
though the underlying maximization involves a nonconcave objective function and
a nonconvex constraint set under the softmax policy parametrization, we prove that
our method achieves global convergence with sublinear rates regarding both the
optimality gap and the constraint violation. Such a convergence is independent of
the size of the state-action space, i.e., it is dimension-free. Furthermore, for the
general smooth policy class, we establish sublinear rates of convergence regarding
both the optimality gap and the constraint violation, up to a function approximation
error caused by restricted policy parametrization. Finally, we show that two samplebased NPG-PD algorithms inherit such non-asymptotic convergence properties
and provide finite-sample complexity guarantees. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first to establish non-asymptotic convergence guarantees of policybased primal-dual methods for solving infinite-horizon discounted CMDPs. We
also provide computational results to demonstrate merits of our approach.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) studies sequential decision-making problems where the agent aims to
maximize its expected total reward by interacting with an unknown environment over time [44]. The
model of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) is usually used to represent the environment dynamics. However, in many safety-critical applications, e.g., in autonomous driving [19], robotics [35],
cyber-security [58], and financial management [1], the agent is also subject to constraints on its
utilities/costs. This naturally leads to a generalization of the environment dynamics to constrained
MDPs (CMDPs) [4]. Besides maximizing the expected total reward, the agent also has to take into
account the constraint on the expected total utility/cost as an additional learning objective.
Policy gradient (PG) methods [45], including the natural policy gradient (NPG) [21], have enjoyed
substantial empirical success in solving MDPs [39, 24, 31, 40, 44]. PG methods, or more generally
direct policy search methods, have also been used to solve CMDPs [47, 12, 11, 15, 46, 23, 36, 2, 43].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

