Comparator-Adaptive Convex Bandits

Dirk van der Hoeven
Mathematical Institute
Leiden University
dirk@dirkvanderhoeven.com

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
ashok@cutkosky.com

Haipeng Luo
Computer Science Department
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
We study bandit convex optimization methods that adapt to the norm of the comparator, a topic that has only been studied before for its full-information counterpart.
Specifically, we develop convex bandit algorithms with regret bounds that are small
whenever the norm of the comparator is small. We first use techniques from the
full-information setting to develop comparator-adaptive algorithms for linear bandits. Then, we extend the ideas to convex bandits with Lipschitz or smooth loss
functions, using a new variant of the standard single-point gradient estimator and
carefully designed surrogate losses.

1

Introduction

In many situations, information is readily available. For example, if a gambler were to bet on the
outcome of a football game, he can observe the outcome of the game regardless of what bet he made.
In other situations, information is scarce. For example, the gambler could be deciding what to eat for
dinner: should I eat a salad, a pizza, a sandwich, or not at all? These actions will result in different
and unknown outcomes, but the gambler will only see the outcome of the action he actually takes,
with one notable exception: not eating results in a predetermined outcome of being very hungry.
These two situations are instantiations of two different settings in online convex optimization: the full
information setting and the bandit setting. More formally, both settings are sequential decision making
problems where in each round t = 1, . . . , T , a learner has to make a prediction wt ∈ W ⊆ Rd and
an adversary provides a convex loss function `t : W → R. Afterwards, in the full information setting
[27] the learner has access to the loss function `t , while in the bandit setting [19, 13] the learner only
receives the loss evaluated at the prediction, that is, `t (wt ). In both settings the goal is to minimize
the regret with respect to some benchmark point u in hindsight, referred to as the comparator. More
specifically, the regret against u is the difference between the total loss incurred by the predictions of
the learner and that of the comparator:
RT (u) =

T
X

`t (wt ) − `t (u).

t=1

When the learner’s strategy is randomized, we measure the performance by the expected regret
E [RT (u)].
Standard algorithms in both the full information setting and the bandit setting assume that the learner’s
decision space W is a convex compact set and achieve sublinear regret against the optimal comparator
PT
in this set: u = arg minu∗ ∈W t=1 `t (u∗ ). To tune these standard algorithms optimally, however,
one requires knowledge of the norm of the comparator kuk, which is unknown. A common workaround is to simply tune the algorithms in terms of the worst-case norm: maxu∈W kuk, assumed
to be 1 without loss of generality. This results in worst-case bounds that do not take advantage of
the case when kuk is small. For example, when the loss functions are L-Lipschitz, classic Online
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

