An Equivalence between Loss Functions and
Non-Uniform Sampling in Experience Replay

Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, Doina Precup
Mila, McGill University
scott.fujimoto@mail.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Prioritized Experience Replay (PER) is a deep reinforcement learning technique in
which agents learn from transitions sampled with non-uniform probability proportionate to their temporal-difference error. We show that any loss function evaluated
with non-uniformly sampled data can be transformed into another uniformly sampled loss function with the same expected gradient. Surprisingly, we find in some
environments PER can be replaced entirely by this new loss function without
impact to empirical performance. Furthermore, this relationship suggests a new
branch of improvements to PER by correcting its uniformly sampled loss function
equivalent. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed modifications to PER
and the equivalent loss function in several MuJoCo and Atari environments.

1

Introduction

The use of non-uniform sampling in deep reinforcement learning originates from a technique known
as prioritized experience replay (PER) [1], in which high error transitions are sampled with increased
probability, enabling faster propagation of rewards and accelerating learning by focusing on the
most critical data. An ablation study over the many improvements to deep Q-learning [2] found
PER to be the most critical extension for overall performance. However, while the motivation for
PER is intuitive, this commonly used technique lacks a critical theoretical foundation. In this paper,
we develop analysis enabling us to understand the benefits of non-uniform sampling and suggest
modifications to PER that both simplify and improve the empirical performance of the algorithm.
In deep reinforcement learning, value functions are approximated with deep neural networks, trained
with a loss over the temporal-difference error of previously seen transitions. The expectation of
this loss, over the sampling distribution of transitions, determines the effective gradient which is
used to find minima in the network. By biasing the sampling distribution, PER effectively changes
the expected gradient. Our main theoretical contribution shows the expected gradient of a loss
function minimized on data sampled with non-uniform probability, is equal to the expected gradient
of another, distinct, loss function minimized on data sampled uniformly. This relationship can be
used to transform any loss function into a prioritized sampling scheme with a new loss function or
vice-versa. We can use this transformation to develop a concrete understanding about the benefits
of non-uniform sampling methods such as PER, as well as facilitate the design of novel prioritized
methods. Our discoveries can be summarized as follows:
Loss function and prioritization should be tied. The key implication of this result is that the design
of prioritized sampling methods should not be considered in isolation from the loss function. We
can use this connection to analyze the correctness of methods which use non-uniform sampling by
transforming the loss into the uniform-sampling equivalent and considering whether the new loss
is in line with the target objective. In particular, we find the PER objective can be unbiased, even
without importance sampling, if the loss function is chosen correctly.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

