A General Large Neighborhood Search Framework
for Solving Integer Linear Programs

Jialin Song†

Ravi Lanka‡ ∗
Yisong Yue†
†
California Institute of Technology
‡
Rakuten, India
§
University of Southern California

Bistra Dilkina§

Abstract
This paper studies a strategy for data-driven algorithm design for large-scale combinatorial optimization problems that can leverage existing state-of-the-art solvers
in general purpose ways. The goal is to arrive at new approaches that can reliably
outperform existing solvers in wall-clock time. We focus on solving integer linear programs, and ground our approach in the large neighborhood search (LNS)
paradigm, which iteratively chooses a subset of variables to optimize while leaving the remainder fixed. The appeal of LNS is that it can easily use any existing
solver as a subroutine, and thus can inherit the benefits of carefully engineered
heuristic or complete approaches and their software implementations. We show
that one can learn a good neighborhood selector using imitation and reinforcement
learning techniques. Through an extensive empirical validation in bounded-time
optimization, we demonstrate that our LNS framework can significantly outperform compared to state-of-the-art commercial solvers such as Gurobi.

1

Introduction

The design of algorithms for solving hard combinatorial optimization problems remains a valuable
and challenging task. Practically relevant problems are typically NP-complete or NP-hard. Examples include any kind of search problem through a combinatorial space, such as network designs
[19], mechanism design [15], planning [39], inference in graphical models [50], program synthesis
[36], verification [7], and engineering design [12, 37], amongst many others.
The widespread importance of solving hard combinatorial optimization problems has spurred intense research in designing approximation algorithms and heuristics for large problem classes, such
as integer programming [8, 21, 34] and satisfiability [51, 13, 16]. Historically, the design of such
algorithms was done largely manually, requiring careful understandings of the underlying structure
within specific classes of optimization problems. Such approaches are often unappealing due to the
need to obtain substantial domain knowledge, and one often desires a more automated approach.
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest to automatically learn good (parameters of)
algorithms for combinatorial problems from training data. The most popular paradigm, also referred
to as “learning to search”, aims to augment existing algorithmic templates by replacing hard-coded
heuristic components with parameterized learnable versions. For example, this has been done in the
context of greedy search for NP-hard graph problems [31]. However, greedy as well as most general
purpose heuristic or local search algorithms are limited to combinatorial optimization problems,
where the constraints are easy to satisfy, and hence are difficult to apply to domains with intricate
side constraints. On the other hand, Integer Linear Programs (ILPs) are a widely applicable problem
class that can encode a broad set of domains as well as large number and variety of constrains.
∗

Work done while at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

