The route to chaos in routing games:
When is price of anarchy too optimistic?
Thiparat Chotibut
Chula Intelligent and Complex Systems
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science
Chulalongkorn University
Thiparat.C@chula.ac.th
Michał Misiurewicz
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Indiana Univ.-Purdue Univ. Indianapolis
mmisiure@math.iupui.edu

Fryderyk Falniowski
Department of Mathematics
Cracow University of Economics
falniowf@uek.krakow.pl

Georgios Piliouras
Engineering Systems and Design
Singapore Univ. of Technology and Design
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Routing games are amongst the most studied classes of games in game theory.
Their most well-known property is that learning dynamics typically converge to
equilibria implying approximately optimal performance (low Price of Anarchy).
We perform a stress test for these classic results by studying the ubiquitous learning
dynamics, Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU), in different classes of congestion games, uncovering intricate non-equilibrium phenomena. We study MWU
using the actual game costs without applying cost normalization to [0, 1]. Although
this non-standard assumption leads to large regret, it captures realistic agents’ behaviors. Namely, as the total demand increases, agents respond more aggressively
to unbearably large costs.
We start with the illustrative case of non-atomic routing games with two paths
of linear cost, and show that every system has a carrying capacity, above which
it becomes unstable. If the equilibrium flow is a symmetric 50 50% split, the
system exhibits one period-doubling bifurcation. Although the Price of Anarchy is
equal to one, in the large population limit the time-average social cost for all but
a zero measure set of initial conditions converges to its worst possible value. For
asymmetric equilibrium flows, increasing the demand eventually forces the system
into Li-Yorke chaos with positive topological entropy and periodic orbits of all
possible periods. Remarkably, in all non-equilibrating regimes, the time-average
flows on the paths converge exactly to the equilibrium flows, a property akin to noregret learning in zero-sum games. We extend our results to games with arbitrarily
many strategies, polynomial cost functions, non-atomic as well as atomic routing
games, and heterogenous users.

1

Introduction

Congestion and routing games [44] are amongst the most well studied class of games in game theory.
Being isomorphic to potential games [41], congestion games are one of the few classes of games in
which a variety of learning dynamics are known to converge to Nash equilibria [5, 19, 22, 23, 32].
Congestion games also play a pivotal role in the study of Price of Anarchy [33, 46]. Price of Anarchy
(PoA) is defined as the ratio of the social cost of the worst Nash equilibrium to the optimal social
cost. A small Price of Anarchy implies that all Nash equilibria are near optimal, and hence any
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

