Untangling tradeoffs between recurrence and
self-attention in neural networks
Giancarlo Kerg1,2, ∗ Bhargav Kanuparthi 1,2,∗
Yoshua Bengio1,2,4

Anirudh Goyal 1,2

Kyle Goyette 1,2,3

Guillaume Lajoie1,2,5

Abstract
Attention and self-attention mechanisms, are now central to state-of-the-art deep
learning on sequential tasks. However, most recent progress hinges on heuristic
approaches with limited understanding of attention’s role in model optimization
and computation, and rely on considerable memory and computational resources
that scale poorly. In this work, we present a formal analysis of how self-attention
affects gradient propagation in recurrent networks, and prove that it mitigates the
problem of vanishing gradients when trying to capture long-term dependencies
by establishing concrete bounds for gradient norms. Building on these results,
we propose a relevancy screening mechanism, inspired by the cognitive process
of memory consolidation, that allows for a scalable use of sparse self-attention
with recurrence. While providing guarantees to avoid vanishing gradients, we use
simple numerical experiments to demonstrate the tradeoffs in performance and
computational resources by efficiently balancing attention and recurrence. Based
on our results, we propose a concrete direction of research to improve scalability
of attentive networks.

1

Introduction

We live in a world where most of the information takes a sequential form, largely because it is
delivered over time. Performing computations on streams of sequential inputs requires extracting
relevant temporal dependencies and learning to recognize patterns across several timescales. Humans
can effortlessly make associations relating events stored in memory which are far from each other in
time and thus, capture long-term dependencies.
Historically, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been the deep network architecture of choice for
this type of task since, just like neural circuits in the brain, they enable dynamics that can be shaped to
interact with input streams. However, RNNs (including gated RNNs [35, 10]) still struggle with large
timescales as their iterative nature leads to unstable information propagation [5, 30, 35, 18].This is
because most standard RNNs rely on their current state ht , a vector of fixed dimension, to represent
a summary of relevant past information. Indeed, Bengio et al. [5] showed that without making
additional assumptions, storing information in a fixed-size state vector in a stable way necessarily
leads to vanishing gradients when back-propagating through time (see also [18]).
∗
Indicates first authors. Ordering determined by coin flip.
1: Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Canada
2: Université de Montréal, Département d’Informatique et Recherche Opérationelle, Montreal, Canada
3: Université de Montréal, CIRRELT, Montreal, Canada
4: CIFAR senior fellow
5: Université de Montréal, Département de Mathématiques et Statistiques, Montreal, Canada

Correspondence to: <giancarlo.kerg@gmail.com>
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

