Improving Inference for Neural Image Compression

Yibo Yang, Robert Bamler, Stephan Mandt
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
{yibo.yang, rbamler, mandt}@uci.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of lossy image compression with deep latent variable
models. State-of-the-art methods [Ballé et al., 2018, Minnen et al., 2018, Lee et al.,
2019] build on hierarchical variational autoencoders (VAEs) and learn inference
networks to predict a compressible latent representation of each data point. Drawing
on the variational inference perspective on compression [Alemi et al., 2018], we
identify three approximation gaps which limit performance in the conventional
approach: an amortization gap, a discretization gap, and a marginalization gap.
We propose remedies for each of these three limitations based on ideas related to
iterative inference, stochastic annealing for discrete optimization, and bits-back
coding, resulting in the first application of bits-back coding to lossy compression.
In our experiments, which include extensive baseline comparisons and ablation
studies, we achieve new state-of-the-art performance on lossy image compression
using an established VAE architecture, by changing only the inference method.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods are reshaping the field of data compression, and recently started to outperform
state-of-the-art classical codecs on image compression [Minnen et al., 2018]. Besides useful on its
own, image compression is a stepping stone towards better video codecs [Lombardo et al., 2019,
Habibian et al., 2019, Yang et al., 2020a], which can reduce a sizable amount of global internet traffic.
State-of-the-art neural methods for lossy image compression [Ballé et al., 2018, Minnen et al.,
2018, Lee et al., 2019] learn a mapping between images and latent variables with a variational
autoencoder (VAE). An inference network maps a given image to a compressible latent representation,
which a generative network can then map back to a reconstructed image. In fact, compression can
be more broadly seen as a form of inference: to compress—or “encode”—data, one has to perform
inference over a well-specified decompression—or “decoding”—algorithm.
In classical compression codecs, the decoder has to follow a well-specified procedure to ensure
interoperability between different implementations of the same codec. By contrast, the encoding
process is typically not uniquely defined: different encoder implementations of the same codec often
compress the same input data to different bitstrings. For example, pngcrush [Randers-Pehrson, 1997]
typically produces smaller PNG files than ImageMagick. Yet, both programs are standard-compliant
PNG encoder implementations as both produce a compressed file that decodes to the same image. In
other words, both encoder implementations perform correct inference over the standardized decoder
specification, but use different inference algorithms with different performance characteristics.
The insight that better inference leads to better compression performance even within the same codec
motivates us to reconsider how inference is typically done in neural data compression with VAEs. In
this paper, we show that the conventional amortized inference [Kingma and Welling, 2013, Rezende
et al., 2014] in VAEs leaves substantial room for improvement when used for data compression.
We propose an improved inference method for data compression tasks with three main innovations:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

