Sequential Bayesian Experimental Design with
Variable Cost Structure
Sue Zheng
CSAIL MIT
szheng@csail.mit.edu

David S. Hayden
CSAIL MIT
dshayden@csail.mit.edu

Jason Pacheco
University of Arizona
pachecoj@cs.arizona.edu

John W. Fisher III
CSAIL MIT
fisher@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Mutual information (MI) is a commonly adopted utility function in Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED). While theoretically appealing, MI evaluation
poses a significant computational burden for most real world applications. As a
result, many algorithms utilize MI bounds as proxies that lack regret-style guarantees. Here, we utilize two-sided bounds to provide such guarantees. Bounds
are successively refined/tightened through additional computation until a desired
guarantee is achieved. We consider the problem of adaptively allocating computational resources in BOED. Our approach achieves the same guarantee as existing
methods, but with fewer evaluations of the costly MI reward. We adapt knapsack
optimization of best arm identification problems, with important differences that
impact overall algorithm design and performance. First, observations of MI rewards are biased. Second, evaluating experiments incurs shared costs amongst
all experiments (posterior sampling) in addition to per-experiment costs that may
vary with increasing evaluation. We propose and demonstrate an algorithm that
accounts for these variable costs in the refinement decision.

1

Introduction

In many analysis problems the data collection process is subject to resource limitations. These
limitations arise in a variety of ways, including limits on explicit costs, selection size, energy
expenditures, time expenditures, and limits on computation. The framework of Bayesian optimal
experimental design (BOED) judiciously allocates limited resources by identifying a sequence of
designs that are maximally informative about a quantity of interest. This optimization of resources is
not unique to the design of experiments. Indeed, the decision making task which underlies BOED
is analogous to that of other domains, owing to its significance: sensor planning [14, 27], active
learning [8, 25], multi-armed bandit best arm identification [19], among others.
Various measures exist to assess the information content of a design. Following classical foundations
in BOED [3, 20, 2], this work considers mutual information (MI) as a design utility. MI quantifies
the expected reduction in posterior uncertainty provided by an experiment, and offers a number of
advantages to alternative information measures. Most importantly, it is invariant to deterministic
mappings under additive noise [18]. By contrast, classical measures based on Fisher information
(e.g. A-, D-, E-, etc. optimal design) have function-specific biases. Indeed, MI equates to D-optimal
design for normal linear models in the classic formulation of BOED [6, 4]. All information measures,
however, pose unique computational challenges for even moderately complex latent variable models.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

