Consequences of Misaligned AI

Dylan Hadfield-Menell
Center for Human-Compatible AI
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94709
dhm@berkeley.edu

Simon Zhuang
Center for Human-Compatible AI
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94709
simonzhuang@berkeley.edu

Abstract
AI systems often rely on two key components: a specified goal or reward function
and an optimization algorithm to compute the optimal behavior for that goal. This
approach is intended to provide value for a principal: the user on whose behalf the
agent acts. The objectives given to these agents often refer to a partial specification
of the principal’s goals. We consider the cost of this incompleteness by analyzing
a model of a principal and an agent in a resource constrained world where the L
attributes of the state correspond to different sources of utility for the principal.
We assume that the reward function given to the agent only has support on J < L
attributes. The contributions of our paper are as follows: 1) we propose a novel
model of an incomplete principal—agent problem from artificial intelligence; 2)
we provide necessary and sufficient conditions under which indefinitely optimizing
for any incomplete proxy objective leads to arbitrarily low overall utility; and 3)
we show how modifying the setup to allow reward functions that reference the full
state or allowing the principal to update the proxy objective over time can lead to
higher utility solutions. The results in this paper argue that we should view the
design of reward functions as an interactive and dynamic process and identifies a
theoretical scenario where some degree of interactivity is desirable.

1

Introduction

In the story of King Midas, an ancient Greek king makes a wish that everything he touch turn to gold.
He subsequently starves to death as his newfound powers transform his food into (inedible) gold. His
wish was an incomplete representation of his actual desires and he suffered as a result. This story,
which teaches us to be careful about what we ask for, lays out a fundamental challenge for designers
of modern autonomous systems.
Almost any autonomous agent relies on two key components: a specified goal or reward function
for the system and an optimization algorithm to compute the optimal behavior for that goal. This
procedure is intended to produce value for a principal: the user, system designer, or company on
whose behalf the agent acts. Research in AI typically seeks to identify more effective optimization
techniques under the, often unstated, assumption that better optimization will produce more value for
the principal. If the specified objective is a complete representation of the principal’s goals, then this
assumption is surely justified.
Instead, the designers of AI systems often find themselves in the same position as Midas. The misalignment between what we can specify and what we want has already caused significant harms (32).
Perhaps the clearest demonstration is in content recommendation systems that rank videos, articles,
or posts for users. These rankings often optimize engagement metrics computed from user behavior.
The misalignment between these proxies and complex values like time-well-spent, truthfulness,
and cohesion contributes to the prevalence of clickbait, misinformation, addiction, and polarization
online (31). Researchers in AI safety have argued that improvements in our ability to optimize
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

