Practical No-box Adversarial Attacks against DNNs

Qizhang Li ∗
ByteDance AI Lab

Yiwen Guo †
ByteDance AI Lab

Hao Chen
University of California, Davis

liqizhang@bytedance.com

guoyiwen.ai@bytedance.com

chen@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
The study of adversarial vulnerabilities of deep neural networks (DNNs) has progressed rapidly. Existing attacks require either internal access (to the architecture,
parameters, or training set of the victim model) or external access (to query the
model). However, both the access may be infeasible or expensive in many scenarios.
We investigate no-box adversarial examples, where the attacker can neither access
the model information or the training set nor query the model. Instead, the attacker
can only gather a small number of examples from the same problem domain as that
of the victim model. Such a stronger threat model greatly expands the applicability
of adversarial attacks. We propose three mechanisms for training with a very small
dataset (on the order of tens of examples) and find that prototypical reconstruction
is the most effective. Our experiments show that adversarial examples crafted on
prototypical auto-encoding models transfer well to a variety of image classification
and face verification models. On a commercial celebrity recognition system held
by clarifai.com, our approach significantly diminishes the average prediction
accuracy of the system to only 15.40%, which is on par with the attack that transfers adversarial examples from a pre-trained Arcface model. Our code is publicly
available at: https://github.com/qizhangli/nobox-attacks.

1

Introduction

The adversarial vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs) have been extensively studied over the
past few years [46, 12, 35, 30, 3, 29, 1]. It has been demonstrated that an attacker is able to generate
small, human-imperceptible perturbations to fool advanced DNN models to make incorrect decisions.
These attacks pose great threats to security-critical systems where DNNs are deployed and lead to
increasing concerns about the robustness of DNNs.
Based on how much information the attacker knows, we can divide existing attacks into white-box and
black-box settings. In black-box attacks, the attacker cannot access the architecture, the parameters,
or the training data of the victim model. Early attempts for black-box adversarial attacks [33, 34]
relied on the transferability of adversarial examples. They trained substitute architectures by querying
the victim models. Recent progress considered gradient estimation [5, 20, 50, 21, 13, 6, 4] and
boundary tracing [2].
Black-box attacks rely on querying the victim models, a.k.a., “oracles”. However, in many scenarios,
such queries are either infeasible (e.g., the model API is inaccessible to the attacker) or are expensive
in time or money. To overcome this limitation, we consider a stronger threat model where the attacker
makes no query to the victim model (and also has no access to the model parameters or its training
data). This was coined as the “no-box” threat model [5] but no practical attack has been studied to the
best of our knowledge. We investigate such no-box attacks against DNNs on computer vision models.
Similar to some strong black-box attacks [34], we assume that the attacker can access neither a large
∗
†

Work done during an internship at ByteDance
Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

