Causal Estimation with Functional Confounders
Aahlad Puli1
aahlad@nyu.edu

Adler J. Perotte2
adler.perotte@columbia.edu

Rajesh Ranganath1,3
rajeshr@cims.nyu.edu

1

Computer Science, New York University, New York, NY 10011
Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032
3
Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, NY 10011
2

Abstract
Causal inference relies on two fundamental assumptions: ignorability and positivity.
We study causal inference when the true confounder value can be expressed as
a function of the observed data; we call this setting estimation with functional
confounders (EFC). In this setting ignorability is satisfied, however positivity is
violated, and causal inference is impossible in general. We consider two scenarios
where causal effects are estimable. First, we discuss interventions on a part of
the treatment called functional interventions and a sufficient condition for effect
estimation of these interventions called functional positivity. Second, we develop
conditions for nonparametric effect estimation based on the gradient fields of the
functional confounder and the true outcome function. To estimate effects under
these conditions, we develop Level-set Orthogonal Descent Estimation (LODE).
Further, we prove error bounds on LODE’s effect estimates, evaluate our methods
on simulated and real data, and empirically demonstrate the value of EFC.

1

Introduction

Determining the effect of interventions on outcomes using observational data lies at the core of many
fields like medicine, economic policy, and genomics. For example, policy makers estimate effects
to elect whether to invest in education or job training programs. In medicine, doctors use effects to
design optimal treatment strategies for patients. Geneticists perform genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) to relate genotypes and phenotypes. In observational data, there could exist unobserved
variables that affect both the intervention and the outcome, called confounders. A necessary condition
for the causal effect to be identified is that all confounders are observed; called ignorability. If
ignorability holds, a sufficient condition for causal effect estimation is adequate variation in the
intervention after conditioning on the confounders; this condition is called positivity.
The data apriori does not differentiate between confounders and interventions. It is the practitioners
that select interventions of interest from all pre-outcome variables (variables that occur before the
outcome). Then, assuming knowledge of the data generating mechanism, practitioners can label
certain variables amongst the remaining pre-outcome variables as confounders. This corresponds to
indexing into the set of pre-outcome variables.
In certain problems the confounders are specified as a function of the pre-outcome variables that does
not simply index into the set of pre-outcome variables. For a concrete example, consider GWAS. The
goal in GWAS is to estimate the influence of genetic variations on phenotypes like disease risk. In
GWAS, population and family structures both result in certain genetic variations and affect phenotypes
and therefore, are confounders [4]. Practitioners specify these confounders by using the genetic
similarity between individuals [15, 19, 31], which is a function of the genetic variations. When the
confounders are a function of the same pre-outcome variables that define the interventions, positivity
is violated. Then, the class of interventions whose effects are estimable is not well-defined.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

