On the Modularity of Hypernetworks

Tomer Galanti
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
tomerga2@tauex.tau.ac.il

Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research (FAIR) &
Tel Aviv University
wolf@fb.com

Abstract
In the context of learning to map an input I to a function hI : X → R, two
alternative methods are compared: (i) an embedding-based method, which learns a
fixed function in which I is encoded as a conditioning signal e(I) and the learned
function takes the form hI (x) = q(x, e(I)), and (ii) hypernetworks, in which the
weights θI of the function hI (x) = g(x; θI ) are given by a hypernetwork f as
θI = f (I). In this paper, we define the property of modularity as the ability to
effectively learn a different function for each input instance I. For this purpose,
we adopt an expressivity perspective of this property and extend the theory of [6]
and provide a lower bound on the complexity (number of trainable parameters) of
neural networks as function approximators, by eliminating the requirements for
the approximation method to be robust. Our results are then used to compare the
complexities of q and g, showing that under certain conditions and when letting
the functions e and f be as large as we wish, g can be smaller than q by orders of
magnitude. This sheds light on the modularity of hypernetworks in comparison
with the embedding-based method. Besides, we show that for a structured target
function, the overall number of trainable parameters in a hypernetwork is smaller
by orders of magnitude than the number of trainable parameters of a standard
neural network and an embedding method.

1

Introduction

Conditioning refers to the existence of multiple input signals. For example, in an autoregressive
model, where the primary input is the current hidden state or the output of the previous time step, a
conditioning signal can drive the process in the desired direction. When performing text to speech
with WaveNets [35], the autoregressive signal is concatenated to the conditioning signal arising
from the language features. Other forms of conditioning are less intuitive. For example, in Style
GANs [16], conditioning takes place by changing the weights of the normalization layers according
to the desired style.
In various settings, it is natural to treat the two inputs x and I of the target function y(x, I) as
nested, i.e., multiple inputs x correspond to the ‘context’ of the same conditioning input I. A natural
modeling [4, 30, 27] is to encode the latter by some embedding network e and to concatenate it
to x when performing inference q(x, e(I)) with a primary network q. A less intuitive solution,
commonly referred to as a hypernetwork, uses a primary network g whose weights are not directly
learned. Instead, g has a fixed architecture, and a second network f generates its weights based on
the conditioning input as θI = f (I). The network g, with the weights θI can then be applied to any
input x.
Hypernetworks hold state of the art results on numerous popular benchmarks [1, 36, 2, 37, 22],
especially due to their ability to adapt g for different inputs I. This allows the hypernetwork to model
tasks effectively, even when using a low-capacity g. This lack of capacity is offset by using very
large networks f . For instance, in [21], a deep residual hypernetwork that is trained from scratch
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

