Applications of Common Entropy for
Causal Inference
Murat Kocaoglu
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
murat@ibm.com
Alexandros G. Dimakis
The University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Sanjay Shakkottai
The University of Texas at Austin
shakkott@austin.utexas.edu
Constantine Caramanis
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Sriram Vishwanath
The University of Texas at Austin
sriram@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of discovering the simplest latent variable that can make
two observed discrete variables conditionally independent. The minimum entropy
required for such a latent is known as common entropy in information theory. We
extend this notion to Rényi common entropy by minimizing the Rényi entropy of
the latent variable. To efficiently compute common entropy, we propose an iterative
algorithm that can be used to discover the trade-off between the entropy of the
latent variable and the conditional mutual information of the observed variables.
We show two applications of common entropy in causal inference: First, under the
assumption that there are no low-entropy mediators, it can be used to distinguish
causation from spurious correlation among almost all joint distributions on simple
causal graphs with two observed variables. Second, common entropy can be
used to improve constraint-based methods such as PC or FCI algorithms in the
small-sample regime, where these methods are known to struggle. We propose a
modification to these constraint-based methods to assess if a separating set found
by these algorithms are valid using common entropy. We finally evaluate our
algorithms on synthetic and real data to establish their performance.

1

Introduction

Understanding the causal workings of a system from data is essential in many fields of science and
engineering. Recently, there has been increasing interest in causal inference in the machine learning
(ML) community. While most of ML has traditionally been relying solely on correlations in the data,
it is now widely accepted that distinguishing causation from correlation is useful even for simple
predictive tasks. This is because causal relations are more robust to the changes in the dataset and
can help with generalization, while an ML system relying solely on correlations might suffer when
these correlations change in the environment the system is deployed in [12].
A causal graph is a directed acyclic graph that depicts the causal workings of the system under study
[38]. Since it indicates the causes of each variable, it can be seen as a qualitative summary of the
underlying mechanisms. Learning the causal graph is the first step for most of the causal inference
tasks, since inference algorithms rely on the causal structure. Causal graphs can be learned from
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

