Sinkhorn Natural Gradient for Generative Models
Zebang Shen˚ Zhenfu Wang: Alejandro Ribeiro˚ Hamed Hassani˚
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering : Department of Mathematics
University of Pennsylvania
{zebang@seas,zwang423@math,aribeiro@seas,hassani@seas}.upenn.edu

˚

Abstract
We consider the problem of minimizing a functional over a parametric family
of probability measures, where the parameterization is characterized via a pushforward structure. An important application of this problem is in training generative
adversarial networks. In this regard, we propose a novel Sinkhorn Natural Gradient
(SiNG) algorithm which acts as a steepest descent method on the probability space
endowed with the Sinkhorn divergence. We show that the Sinkhorn information
matrix (SIM), a key component of SiNG, has an explicit expression and can be
evaluated accurately in complexity that scales logarithmically with respect to the
desired accuracy. This is in sharp contrast to existing natural gradient methods
that can only be carried out approximately. Moreover, in practical applications
when only Monte-Carlo type integration is available, we design an empirical
estimator for SIM and provide the stability analysis. In our experiments, we
quantitatively compare SiNG with state-of-the-art SGD-type solvers on generative
tasks to demonstrate its efficiency and efficacy of our method.

1

Introduction

Consider the minimization of a functional F over a parameterized family probability measures tαθ u:
min tF pθq:“Fpαθ qu ,
θPΘ

(1)

where Θ Ď Rd is the feasible domain of the parameter θ. We assume that the measures αθ are defined
over a common ground set X Ď Rq with the following structure: αθ “ Tθ 7 µ, where µ is a fixed and
known measure and Tθ is a push-forward mapping. More specifically, µ is a simple measure on a
latent space Z Ď Rq̄ , such as the standard Gaussian measure µ “ N p0q̄ , Iq̄ q, and the parameterized
map Tθ : Z Ñ X transforms the measure µ to αθ . This type of push-forward parameterization
is commonly used in deep generative models, where Tθ represents a neural network parametrized
by weights θ [Goodfellow et al., 2014, Salimans et al., 2018, Genevay et al., 2018]. Consequently,
methods to efficiently and accurately solve problem (1) are of great importance in machine learning.
The de facto solvers for problem (1) are generic nonconvex optimizers such as Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) and its variants, Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014], Amsgrad [Reddi et al., 2019],
RMSProp [Hinton et al.], etc. These optimization algorithms directly work on the parameter space
and are agnostic to the fact that αθ ’s are probability measures. Consequently, SGD type solvers suffer
from the complex optimization landscape induced from the neural-network mappings Tθ .
An alternative to SGD type methods is the natural gradient method, which is originally motivated
from Information Geometry [Amari, 1998, Amari et al., 1987]. Instead of simply using the Euclidean
structure of the parameter space Θ in the usual SGD, the natural gradient method endows the
parameter space with a “natural" metric structure by pulling back a known metric on the probability
space and then searches the steepest descent direction of F pθq in the “curved" neighborhood of θ. In
particular, the natural gradient update is invariant to reparametrization. This allows natural gradient to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

