Over-parameterized Adversarial Training: An
Analysis Overcoming the Curse of Dimensionality

Orestis Plevrakis∗
Princeton University
orestisp@cs.princeton.edu

Yi Zhang*
Princeton University
y.zhang@cs.princeton.edu
Simon S. Du
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Xingguo Li
Princeton University
xingguol@cs.princeton.edu

Zhao Song
Institute of Advanced Study
zhao@ias.edu

Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University and IAS
arora@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Adversarial training is a popular method to give neural nets robustness against
adversarial perturbations. In practice adversarial training leads to low robust
training loss. However, a rigorous explanation for why this happens under natural
conditions is still missing. Recently a convergence theory for standard (nonadversarial) training was developed by various groups for very over-parametrized
nets. It is unclear how to extend these results to adversarial training because of
the min-max objective. Recently, a first step towards this direction was made
by [14] using tools from online learning, but they require the width of the net and
the running time to be exponential in input dimension d, and they consider an
activation function that is not used in practice. Our work proves convergence to low
robust training loss for polynomial width and running time, instead of exponential,
under natural assumptions and with ReLU activation. Key element of our proof is
showing that ReLU networks near initialization can approximate the step function,
which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks trained by gradient based methods tend to change their answer (incorrectly)
after small adversarial perturbations in inputs [25]. Much effort has been spent to make deep nets
resistant to such perturbations but adversarial training with a natural min-max objective [20] stands
out as one of the most effective approaches according to [9, 7].
One interpretation of the min-max formulation is a certain two-player game between a neural network
learner and an adversary who is allowed to perturb the input within certain constraints. In each round,
the adversary generates new adversarial examples against the current network, on which the learner
takes a gradient step to decrease its prediction loss in response (see Algorithm 1).
It is empirically observed that, when the neural network is initialized randomly, this training algorithm
is efficient and computes a reasonably sized neural net that is robust on (at least) the training examples [20]. We’re interested in theoretical understanding of this phenomenon: Why does adversarial
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

