Once-for-All Adversarial Training: In-Situ Tradeoff
between Robustness and Accuracy for Free
Haotao Wang†,∗, Tianlong Chen†,∗, Shupeng Gui , Ting-Kuei Hu¶ ,
Ji Liu‡ and Zhangyang Wang†
†

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin

Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
¶
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
‡
Ytech Seattle AI lab, FeDA lab, AI platform, Kwai Inc
†
{htwang, tianlong.chen, atlaswang}@utexas.edu

sgui.aca@gmail.com ¶ tkhu@tamu.edu ‡ ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Abstract
Adversarial training and its many variants substantially improve deep network
robustness, yet at the cost of compromising standard accuracy. Moreover, the
training process is heavy and hence it becomes impractical to thoroughly explore
the trade-off between accuracy and robustness. This paper asks this new question: how to quickly calibrate a trained model in-situ, to examine the achievable
trade-offs between its standard and robust accuracies, without (re-)training it many
times? Our proposed framework, Once-for-all Adversarial Training (OAT), is
built on an innovative model-conditional training framework, with a controlling
hyper-parameter as the input. The trained model could be adjusted among different
standard and robust accuracies “for free” at testing time. As an important knob, we
exploit dual batch normalization to separate standard and adversarial feature statistics, so that they can be learned in one model without degrading performance. We
further extend OAT to a Once-for-all Adversarial Training and Slimming (OATS)
framework, that allows for the joint trade-off among accuracy, robustness and
runtime efficiency. Experiments show that, without any re-training nor ensembling,
OAT/OATS achieve similar or even superior performance compared to dedicatedly
trained models at various configurations. Our codes and pretrained models are
available at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/Once-for-All-Adversarial-Training.

1

Motivation and background

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are nowadays well-known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [1,
2]. With the growing usage of DNNs on security sensitive applications, such as self-driving [3] and
bio-metrics [4], a critical concern has been raised to carefully examine the worst-case accuracy of
deployed DNNs on crafted attacks (denoted as robust accuracy, or robustness for short, following [5]),
in addition to their average accuracy on standard inputs (denoted as standard accuracy, or accuracy
for short). Among a variety of adversarial defense methods proposed to enhance DNN robustness,
adversarial training (AT) based methods [5, 6, 7] are consistently top-performers.
While adversarial defense methods are gaining increasing attention and popularity in safety/securitycritical applications, their downsides are also noteworthy. Firstly, most adversarial defense methods,
including adversarial training, come at the price of compromising the standard accuracy [8]. That
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

