Stochastic Latent Actor-Critic: Deep Reinforcement
Learning with a Latent Variable Model

Alex X. Lee1,2

Anusha Nagabandi1
Pieter Abbeel1
Sergey Levine1
1
University of California, Berkeley
2
DeepMind
{alexlee_gk,nagaban2,pabbeel,svlevine}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can use high-capacity deep networks
to learn directly from image observations. However, these high-dimensional observation spaces present a number of challenges in practice, since the policy must now
solve two problems: representation learning and task learning. In this work, we
tackle these two problems separately, by explicitly learning latent representations
that can accelerate reinforcement learning from images. We propose the stochastic
latent actor-critic (SLAC) algorithm: a sample-efficient and high-performing RL
algorithm for learning policies for complex continuous control tasks directly from
high-dimensional image inputs. SLAC provides a novel and principled approach
for unifying stochastic sequential models and RL into a single method, by learning
a compact latent representation and then performing RL in the model’s learned latent space. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that our method outperforms
both model-free and model-based alternatives in terms of final performance and
sample efficiency, on a range of difficult image-based control tasks. Our code and
videos of our results are available at our website.1

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can learn to solve tasks directly from raw, low-level
observations such as images. However, such high-dimensional observation spaces present a number of
challenges in practice: On one hand, it is difficult to directly learn from these high-dimensional inputs,
but on the other hand, it is also difficult to tease out a compact representation of the underlying taskrelevant information from which to learn instead. Standard model-free deep RL aims to unify these
challenges of representation learning and task learning into a single end-to-end training procedure.
However, solving both problems together is difficult, since an effective policy requires an effective
representation, and an effective representation requires meaningful gradient information to come
from the policy or value function, while using only the model-free supervision signal (i.e., the reward
function). As a result, learning directly from images with standard end-to-end RL algorithms can in
practice be slow, sensitive to hyperparameters, and inefficient.
Instead, we propose to separate representation learning and task learning, by relying on predictive
model learning to explicitly acquire a latent representation, and training the RL agent in that learned
latent space. This alleviates the representation learning challenge because predictive learning benefits
from a rich and informative supervision signal even before the agent has made any progress on the
task, and thus results in improved sample efficiency of the overall learning process. In this work, our
predictive model serves to accelerate task learning by separately addressing representation learning,
in contrast to existing model-based RL approaches, which use predictive models either for generating
cheap synthetic experience [51, 22, 32] or for planning into the future [11, 13, 46, 9, 55, 26].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
1

https://alexlee-gk.github.io/slac/

