Listening to Sounds of Silence for Speech Denoising
Ruilin Xu1 , Rundi Wu1 , Yuko Ishiwaka2 , Carl Vondrick1 , and Changxi Zheng1
1

Columbia University, New York, USA
SoftBank Group Corp., Tokyo, Japan

2

Abstract
We introduce a deep learning model for speech denoising, a long-standing challenge
in audio analysis arising in numerous applications. Our approach is based on a
key observation about human speech: there is often a short pause between each
sentence or word. In a recorded speech signal, those pauses introduce a series of
time periods during which only noise is present. We leverage these incidental silent
intervals to learn a model for automatic speech denoising given only mono-channel
audio. Detected silent intervals over time expose not just pure noise but its timevarying features, allowing the model to learn noise dynamics and suppress it from
the speech signal. Experiments on multiple datasets confirm the pivotal role of
silent interval detection for speech denoising, and our method outperforms several
state-of-the-art denoising methods, including those that accept only audio input
(like ours) and those that denoise based on audiovisual input (and hence require
more information). We also show that our method enjoys excellent generalization
properties, such as denoising spoken languages not seen during training.

1

Introduction

Noise is everywhere. When we listen to someone speak, the audio signals we receive are never
pure and clean, always contaminated by all kinds of noises—cars passing by, spinning fans in an
air conditioner, barking dogs, music from a loudspeaker, and so forth. To a large extent, people
in a conversation can effortlessly filter out these noises [42]. In the same vein, numerous applications, ranging from cellular communications to human-robot interaction, rely on speech denoising
algorithms as a fundamental building block.
Despite its vital importance, algorithmic speech denoising remains a grand challenge. Provided
an input audio signal, speech denoising aims to separate the foreground (speech) signal from its
additive background noise. This separation problem is inherently ill-posed. Classic approaches
such as spectral subtraction [7, 98, 6, 72, 79] and Wiener filtering [80, 40] conduct audio denoising
in the spectral domain, and they are typically restricted to stationary or quasi-stationary noise. In
recent years, the advance of deep neural networks has also inspired their use in audio denoising.
While outperforming the classic denoising approaches, existing neural-network-based approaches
use network structures developed for general audio processing tasks [56, 90, 100] or borrowed from
other areas such as computer vision [31, 26, 3, 36, 32] and generative adversarial networks [70, 71].
Nevertheless, beyond reusing well-developed network models as a black box, a fundamental question
remains: What natural structures of speech can we leverage to mold network architectures for better
performance on speech denoising?
1.1 Key insight: time distribution of silent intervals
Motivated by this question, we revisit one of the most widely used audio denoising methods in
practice, namely the spectral subtraction method [7, 98, 6, 72, 79]. Implemented in many commercial
software such as Adobe Audition [39], this classical method requires the user to specify a time
interval during which the foreground signal is absent. We call such an interval a silent interval. A
silent interval is a time window that exposes pure noise. The algorithm then learns from the silent
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

