Distribution Matching for Crowd Counting

Boyu Wang∗ Huidong Liu∗ Dimitris Samaras Minh Hoai
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790
{boywang, huidliu, samaras, minhhoai}@cs.stonybrook.edu
∗
indicates equal contribution

Abstract
In crowd counting, each training image contains multiple people, where each person
is annotated by a dot. Existing crowd counting methods need to use a Gaussian to
smooth each annotated dot or to estimate the likelihood of every pixel given the
annotated point. In this paper, we show that imposing Gaussians to annotations
hurts generalization performance. Instead, we propose to use Distribution Matching
for crowd COUNTing (DM-Count). In DM-Count, we use Optimal Transport (OT)
to measure the similarity between the normalized predicted density map and the
normalized ground truth density map. To stabilize OT computation, we include
a Total Variation loss in our model. We show that the generalization error bound
of DM-Count is tighter than that of the Gaussian smoothed methods. In terms of
Mean Absolute Error, DM-Count outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods
by a large margin on two large-scale counting datasets, UCF-QNRF and NWPU,
and achieves the state-of-the-art results on the ShanghaiTech and UCF-CC50
datasets. DM-Count reduced the error of the state-of-the-art published result by
approximately 16%.
Code is available at https://github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/DM-Count.

1

Introduction

Image-based crowd counting is an important research problem with various applications in many
domains including journalism and surveillance. Current state-of-the-art methods [54, 8, 25, 55, 61,
59, 17, 48, 21, 23, 36] treat crowd counting as a density map estimation problem, where a deep neural
network first produces a 2D crowd density map for a given input image and subsequently estimates
the total size of the crowd by summing the density values across all spatial locations of the density
map. For images of large crowds, this density map estimation approach has been shown to be more
robust than the detection-then-counting approach [22, 19, 62, 12] because the former is less sensitive
to occlusion and it does not need to commit to binarized decisions at an early stage.
A crucial step in the development of a density map estimation method is the training of a deep neural
network that maps from an input image to the corresponding annotated density map. In all existing
crowd counting datasets [15, 60, 14, 51], the annotated density map for each training image is a sparse
binary mask, where each individual person is marked with a single dot on their head or forehead. The
spatial extent of each person is not provided, due to the laborious effort needed for delineating the
spatial extent, especially when there is too much occlusion ambiguity. Given training images with dot
annotation, training the density map estimation network is equivalent to optimizing the parameters of
the network to minimize a differentiable loss function that measures the discrepancy between the
predicted density map and the dot-annotation map. Notably, the former is a dense real-value matrix,
while the later is a sparse binary matrix. Given the sparsity of the dots, a function that is defined
based on the pixel-wise difference between the annotated and predicted density maps is hard to train
because the reconstruction loss is heavily unbalanced between the 0s and 1s in the sparse binary
matrix. One approach to alleviate this problem is to turn each annotated dot into a Gaussian blob such
that the ground truth is more balanced and thus the network is easier to train. Almost all prior crowd
density map estimation methods [56, 57, 60, 38, 20, 33, 35, 4, 28, 50, 27, 40, 29, 26] have followed
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

