Hard Shape-Constrained Kernel Machines

Pierre-Cyril Aubin-Frankowski
École des Ponts ParisTech and CAS
MINES ParisTech, PSL
Paris, 75006, France
pierre-cyril.aubin@mines-paristech.fr
Zoltán Szabó
Center of Applied Mathematics, CNRS
École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Route de Saclay, Palaiseau, 91128, France
zoltan.szabo@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
Shape constraints (such as non-negativity, monotonicity, convexity) play a central
role in a large number of applications, as they usually improve performance for
small sample size and help interpretability. However enforcing these shape requirements in a hard fashion is an extremely challenging problem. Classically, this task
is tackled (i) in a soft way (without out-of-sample guarantees), (ii) by specialized
transformation of the variables on a case-by-case basis, or (iii) by using highly
restricted function classes, such as polynomials or polynomial splines. In this paper,
we prove that hard affine shape constraints on function derivatives can be encoded
in kernel machines which represent one of the most flexible and powerful tools in
machine learning and statistics. Particularly, we present a tightened second-order
cone constrained reformulation, that can be readily implemented in convex solvers.
We prove performance guarantees on the solution, and demonstrate the efficiency
of the approach in joint quantile regression with applications to economics and to
the analysis of aircraft trajectories, among others.

1

Introduction

Shape constraints (such as non-negativity, monotonicity, convexity) are omnipresent in data science
with numerous successful applications in statistics, economics, biology, finance, game theory, reinforcement learning and control problems. For example, in biology, monotone regression techniques
have been applied to identify genome interactions (Luss et al., 2012), and in dose-response studies
(Hu et al., 2005). Economic theory dictates that utility functions are increasing and concave (Matzkin,
1991), demand functions of normal goods are downward sloping (Lewbel, 2010; Blundell et al.,
2012), production functions are concave (Varian, 1984) or S-shaped (Yagi et al., 2020). Moreover
cyclic monotonicity has recently turned out to be beneficial in panel multinomial choice problems
(Shi et al., 2018), and most link functions used in a single index model are monotone (Li and Racine,
2007; Chen and Samworth, 2016; Balabdaoui et al., 2019). Meanwhile, supermodularity is a common
assumption in supply chain models, stochastic multi-period inventory problems, pricing models and
game theory (Topkis, 1998; Simchi-Levi et al., 2014). In finance, European and American call option
prices are convex and monotone in the underlying stock price and increasing in volatility (Aït-Sahalia
and Duarte, 2003). In statistics, the conditional quantile function is increasing w.r.t. the quantile level.
In reinforcement learning and in stochastic optimization the value functions are regularly supposed
to be convex (Keshavarz et al., 2011; Shapiro et al., 2014). More examples can be found in recent
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

