An Unbiased Risk Estimator for Learning with
Augmented Classes

Yu-Jie Zhang, Peng Zhao, Lanjihong Ma, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{zhangyj, zhaop, maljh, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of learning with augmented classes (LAC), where
augmented classes unobserved in the training data might emerge in the testing
phase. Previous studies generally attempt to discover augmented classes by exploiting geometric properties, achieving inspiring empirical performance yet lacking
theoretical understandings particularly on the generalization ability. In this paper
we show that, by using unlabeled training data to approximate the potential distribution of augmented classes, an unbiased risk estimator of the testing distribution can
be established for the LAC problem under mild assumptions, which paves a way
to develop a sound approach with theoretical guarantees. Moreover, the proposed
approach can adapt to complex changing environments where augmented classes
may appear and the prior of known classes may change simultaneously. Extensive
experiments confirm the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning encourage its application in high-stake scenarios, where the
robustness is the central requirement [1, 2]. A robust learning system should be able to handle
the distribution change in the non-stationary environments [3, 4, 5]. In this paper, we focus on the
problem of learning with augmented classes (LAC) [6], where the class distribution changes during
the learning process—some augmented classes unobserved in training data might emerge in testing.
To make reliable predictions, desired learning systems are required to identify augmented classes and
retain good generalization performance over the testing distribution.
The main challenge of the LAC problem lies in how to depict relationships between known and
augmented classes. A typical solution is to learn a compact geometric description of the known
classes and take those beyond the description as augmented classes, where the anomaly detection
or novelty detection approaches can be employed (such as one-class SVM [7, 8], kernel density
estimation [9, 10] and iForest [11]). Da et al. [6] give the name of LAC and employ the low-density
separation assumption to adjust the decision boundaries in a multi-class situation. In addition to the
effort of machine learning community, the computer vision and pattern recognition communities
also contribute to the study of the problem (or its cousin). Scheirer et al. [12] propose the notion of
open space risk to penalize predictions outside the support of training data, based on which several
approaches are developed [12, 13]. Later, approaches based on the nearest neighbor [14] and extreme
value theory [15] are also developed. More discussions on related topics are deferred to Section 5.
Although various approaches are proposed with nice performance and some of them conduct theoretical analysis, generalization properties of the LAC problem is less explored. Scheirer et al.
[12, 13], Rudd et al. [15] formally use the open space risk or extreme value theory to identify augmented classes, but the generalization error of learned models is not further analyzed. There are also
works [16, 17, 18] focusing on the Neyman-Pearson (NP) classification, which controls the novelty
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

