Limits to Depth-Efficiencies of Self-Attention

Yoav Levine, Noam Wies, Or Sharir, Hofit Bata, and Amnon Shashua
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Abstract
Self-attention architectures, which are rapidly pushing the frontier in natural language processing, demonstrate a surprising depth-inefficient behavior: previous
works indicate that increasing the internal representation (network width) is just
as useful as increasing the number of self-attention layers (network depth). We
theoretically predict a width-dependent transition between depth-efficiency and
depth-inefficiency in self-attention. We conduct systematic empirical ablations on
networks of depths 6 to 48 that clearly reveal the theoretically predicted behaviors,
and provide explicit quantitative suggestions regarding the optimal depth-to-width
allocation for a given self-attention network size. The race towards beyond 1Trillion parameter language models renders informed guidelines for increasing
self-attention depth and width in tandem an essential ingredient. Our guidelines elucidate the depth-to-width trade-off in self-attention networks of sizes up to the scale
of GPT3 (which is too deep for its size), and beyond, marking an unprecedented
width of 30K as optimal for a 1-Trillion parameter self-attention network.

1

Introduction

The golden age of deep learning has popularized the depth-efficiency notion: From an expressiveness
standpoint, increasing a neural network’s size by adding more layers (deepening) is advantageous
relatively to other parameter increase alternatives, such as increasing the dimension of the internal
representation (widening). Beyond overwhelming empirical signals for this notion [Simonyan and
Zisserman, 2014, He et al., 2016], depth-efficiency was theoretically supported from a variety of
angles [Cohen et al., 2016, Eldan and Shamir, 2016, Raghu et al., 2017, Daniely, 2017].
Diminishing returns in the case of very deep networks were mainly attributed to optimization issues,
and indeed the alleviation of these issues has allowed network depths to mount from 10s to 100s
and beyond [He et al., 2016], enabling deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) to advance the
state-of-the-art in computer vision applications. However, as the field matured, a more nuanced
perspective emerged. Empirical [Zagoruyko and Komodakis, 2016, Wu et al., 2019] and theoretical
[Lu et al., 2017] studies suggest that the interplay between depth and width may be more subtle.
Recently, a method for increasing width and depth in tandem (“EfficientNet" by Tan and Le [2019])
has lead to the state-of-the-art on ImageNet while using a ConvNet with a fraction of the parameters
used by previous leaders. Our work provides principled guidelines for increasing width and depth in
tandem in self-attention networks.
Since the introduction of the Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017], along with its encoder-only variant,
BERT [Devlin et al., 2019], self-attention based deep learning architectures have taken over the
field of natural language processing [Liu et al., 2019, Radford et al., 2019, Yang et al., 2019, Raffel
et al., 2019a, Clark et al., 2020]. However, in contrast to the depth “arms race" that took place in the
ConvNet case, the leading self-attention networks are not much deeper than the original BERT model.
In fact, even the strongest self-attention models trained to date, which increased the 0.3B parameter
count of BERT-large by factors of 100s to 11B [Raffel et al., 2019a] and 175B [Brown et al., 2020],
have only increased its depth by factors of 2 and 4, respectively. The remaining size increase stems
from an increase in layer widths, clearly countering the depth-efficiency notion.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

