Near-Optimal Comparison Based Clustering

Michaël Perrot∗
Univ Lyon, UJM-Saint-Etienne, CNRS, IOGS,
LabHC UMR 5516, F-42023, SAINT-ETIENNE, France
michael.perrot@univ-st-etienne.fr
Pascal Mattia Esser∗,
Debarghya Ghoshdastidar∗
Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
{esser,ghoshdas}@in.tum.de

Abstract
The goal of clustering is to group similar objects into meaningful partitions. This
process is well understood when an explicit similarity measure between the objects
is given. However, far less is known when this information is not readily available
and, instead, one only observes ordinal comparisons such as “object i is more similar to j than to k.” In this paper, we tackle this problem using a two-step procedure:
we estimate a pairwise similarity matrix from the comparisons before using a clustering method based on semi-definite programming (SDP). We theoretically show
that our approach can exactly recover a planted clustering using a near-optimal
number of passive comparisons. We empirically validate our theoretical findings
and demonstrate the good behaviour of our method on real data.

1

Introduction

In clustering, the objective is to group together objects that share the same semantic meaning, that
are similar to each other, into k disjoint partitions. This problem has been extensively studied in the
literature when a measure of similarity between the objects is readily available, for example when
the examples have a Euclidean representation or a graph structure (Shi and Malik, 2000; Arthur and
Vassilvitskii, 2007; von Luxburg, 2007). However, it has attracted less attention when the objects
are difficult to represent in a standard way, for example cars or food. A recent trend to tackle this
problem is to use comparison based learning (Ukkonen, 2017; Emamjomeh-Zadeh and Kempe, 2018)
where, instead of similarities, one only observes comparisons between the examples:
Triplet comparison: Object xi is more similar to object xj than to object xk ;
Quadruplet comparison: Objects xi and xj are more similar to each other than objects xk and xl .
There are two ways to obtain these comparisons. On the one hand, one can adaptively query them
from an oracle, for example a crowd. This is the active setting. On the other hand, they can be
directly given, with no way to make new queries. This is the passive setting. In this paper, we study
comparison based learning for clustering using passively obtained triplets and quadruplets.
Comparison based learning mainly stems from the psychometric and crowdsourcing literature (Shepard, 1962; Young, 1987; Stewart et al., 2005) where the importance and robustness of collecting
ordinal information from human subjects has been widely discussed. In recent years, this framework
has attracted an increasing amount of attention in the machine learning community and three main
learning paradigms have emerged. The first one consists in obtaining an Euclidean embedding of
the data that respects the comparisons as much as possible and then applying standard learning
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

