Variational Amodal Object Completion

Huan Ling1,2,3

David Acuna1,2,3

Seung Wook Kim1,2,3
NVIDIA1

University of Toronto2

Karsten Kreis 1
Sanja Fidler1,2,3
Vector Institute3

{huling ,dacunamarrer, kkreis, seungwookk, sfidler}@nvidia.com

Abstract
In images of complex scenes, objects are often occluding each other which makes
perception tasks such as object detection and tracking, or robotic control tasks
such as planning, challenging. To facilitate downstream tasks, it is thus important
to reason about the full extent of objects, i.e., seeing behind occlusion, typically
referred to as amodal instance completion. In this paper, we propose a variational
generative framework for amodal completion, referred to as Amodal-VAE, which
does not require any amodal labels at training time, as it is able to utilize widely
available object instance masks. We showcase our approach on the downstream task
of scene editing where the user is presented with interactive tools to complete and
erase objects in photographs. Experiments on complex street scenes demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance in amodal mask completion, and showcase high quality
scene editing results. Interestingly, a user study shows that humans prefer object
completions inferred by our model to the human-labeled ones.

1 Introduction
One of the most remarkable properties of the human visual system is the ability to rapidly recognize
objects and understand their spatial extent in complex visual scenes, even when objects are barely
visible due to occlusion [9, 42]. This is important, as it allows humans to more accurately anticipate
what can happen a few moments into the future, and plan accordingly. We expect such a capability to
also benefit robotic systems. Reasoning about objects and their extent is also key in other contexts,
for example, in semantic image editing tasks. Imagine a user that wants to erase an object from a
photograph, and possibly even manipulate objects that are partially hidden behind it. To do this, an
A.I. system needs to be able to “complete” the occluded objects in the scene, both in their spatial
extent, i.e., their masks, as well as in appearance. This problem is typically referred to as amodal
instance completion, and is an important component of many applications.
However, most research in the domain of semantic segmentation, has focused on the “modal” perception of the scene [6, 11, 34], i.e., segmenting visible pixels of the objects, for which large-scale
annotated datasets are available [7, 23, 41]. The lack of labeled data for amodal segmentation is
likely due to the difficulty and ambiguity of the annotation task. Amodal annotation of occluded
objects requires a human labeler to draw an imagined contour rather than tracing a visible contour in
an image, which requires drawing skills that not all annotators possess. In cases where objects are
highly occluded there may also be multiple valid hypotheses for a plausible completion.
In this work, we propose a variational generative framework for amodal instance completion, called
Amodal-VAE. It does not require amodal labels at training time, and exploits instance masks of
visible parts of the objects that are widely available in current datasets. Our approach learns to
reconstruct full objects from partial masks by training a variational autoencoder in carefully designed
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

