Understanding and Exploring the Network with
Stochastic Architectures
Zhijie Deng, Yinpeng Dong, Shifeng Zhang, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
{dzj17,dyp17,zhangsf15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
There is an emerging trend to train a network with stochastic architectures to enable
various architectures to be plugged and played during inference. However, the
existing investigation is highly entangled with neural architecture search (NAS),
limiting its widespread use across scenarios. In this work, we decouple the training
of a network with stochastic architectures (NSA) from NAS and provide a first
systematical investigation on it as a stand-alone problem. We first uncover the characteristics of NSA in various aspects ranging from training stability, convergence,
predictive behaviour, to generalization capacity to unseen architectures. We identify various issues of the vanilla NSA, such as training/test disparity and function
mode collapse, and further propose the solutions to these issues with theoretical
and empirical insights. We believe that these results could also serve as good
heuristics for NAS. Given these understandings, we further apply the NSA with our
improvements into diverse scenarios to fully exploit its promise of inference-time
architecture stochasticity, including model ensemble, uncertainty estimation and
semi-supervised learning. Remarkable performance (e.g., 2.75% error rate and
0.0032 expected calibration error on CIFAR-10) validate the effectiveness of such
a model, providing new perspectives of exploring the potential of the network with
stochastic architectures, beyond NAS.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are the de facto methods to model complex data in a wide spectrum
of practical scenarios [12, 36, 38, 40]. The design of neural architectures has always been an active
research topic in DNNs, aiming to discover effective connectivity patterns for building networks, in
manually designed [33, 14, 43, 13, 51, 32] or automatic [52, 31, 53, 22] manners. Recent research
even permits us to train a network without a fixed architecture [3, 45, 42, 1, 11], i.e., at every training
iteration, an architecture sample is randomly drawn from an architecture distribution and used to
guide the training of network weights (see Fig. 1 for more insights), which is also known as the
weight sharing technique in neural architecture search (NAS)1 .
Though the weight-sharing network with stochastic architectures is promising, its usage is closely
encoupled with NAS to relieve the burden of training thousands of networks. Indeed, the stochasticity
over the architectures inside the model itself is also of interest, in consideration of multiple aspects:
(i) In the spirit of stochastic regularization, the introduced architecture variability helps to regularize
deep models from co-adaptation and over-fitting, in a more structured and global style than standard
stochastic regularizations applied on local feature maps or weights [35, 39, 19, 8]. (ii) The trained
∗

Corresponding author.
In NAS, the distribution where the stochastic architectures are sampled may also be updated w.r.t. validation
data simultaneously, with the purpose of discovering outperforming architectures.
1

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

