Closing the Dequantization Gap:
PixelCNN as a Single-Layer Flow

Didrik Nielsen
Technical University of Denmark
didni@dtu.dk

Ole Winther
Technical University of Denmark
olwi@dtu.dk

Abstract
Flow models have recently made great progress at modeling ordinal discrete
data such as images and audio. Due to the continuous nature of flow models,
dequantization is typically applied when using them for such discrete data, resulting
in lower bound estimates of the likelihood. In this paper, we introduce subset
flows, a class of flows that can tractably transform finite volumes and thus allow
exact computation of likelihoods for discrete data. Based on subset flows, we
identify ordinal discrete autoregressive models, including WaveNets, PixelCNNs
and Transformers, as single-layer flows. We use the flow formulation to compare
models trained and evaluated with either the exact likelihood or its dequantization
lower bound. Finally, we study multilayer flows composed of PixelCNNs and
non-autoregressive coupling layers and demonstrate state-of-the-art results on
CIFAR-10 for flow models trained with dequantization.

1

Introduction

Learning generative models of high-dimensional
Y
Z
data poses a significant challenge. The model will
Flow
f
Y1
have to capture not only the marginal distributions of
Y2
Z1
each of the variables, but also the potentially combiZ2
natorial number of interactions between them. Deep
Y4
Y3
Z3
generative models provide tools for learning richlyZ4
structured, high-dimensional distributions, utilizing
the vast amounts of unlabeled data available. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow Figure 1: Subset flows f : Y → Z allow not
et al., 2014) are one class of deep generative mod- only to transform points z = f (y), but also
els that have demonstrated an impressive ability to subsets Zi = f (Yi ), in one pass. As a result,
generate plausible-looking images. However, GANs these flows can be trained on ordinal discrete
typically lack support over the full data distribution data without the need for dequantization.
and provide no quantitative measure of performance.
Likelihood-based deep generative models, on the other hand, do provide this and can be classified as:
1. Latent variable models such as Deep Belief Networks (Hinton et al., 2006; Hinton, 2007),
Deep Boltzmann Machines (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009), Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014).
2. Autoregressive models such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), MADE (Germain
et al., 2015), WaveNet (van den Oord et al., 2016a), PixelCNN (van den Oord et al., 2016c),
PixelCNN++ (Salimans et al., 2017), Sparse Transformers (Child et al., 2019).
3. Flow models such as RealNVP (Dinh et al., 2017), Glow (Kingma and Dhariwal, 2018),
MAF (Papamakarios et al., 2017), FFJORD (Grathwohl et al., 2019).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

