Algorithmic recourse under imperfect causal
knowledge: a probabilistic approach
Amir-Hossein Karimi⇤1,2

Julius von Kügelgen⇤1,3

Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Isabel Valera 1,4

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems, Zürich, Switzerland
3
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
4
Department of Computer Science, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
{amir, jvk, bs, ivalera}@tue.mpg.de
1

2

Abstract
Recent work has discussed the limitations of counterfactual explanations to recommend actions for algorithmic recourse, and argued for the need of taking causal
relationships between features into consideration. Unfortunately, in practice, the
true underlying structural causal model is generally unknown. In this work, we first
show that it is impossible to guarantee recourse without access to the true structural
equations. To address this limitation, we propose two probabilistic approaches to
select optimal actions that achieve recourse with high probability given limited
causal knowledge (e.g., only the causal graph). The first captures uncertainty
over structural equations under additive Gaussian noise, and uses Bayesian model
averaging to estimate the counterfactual distribution. The second removes any
assumptions on the structural equations by instead computing the average effect of
recourse actions on individuals similar to the person who seeks recourse, leading
to a novel subpopulation-based interventional notion of recourse. We then derive a
gradient-based procedure for selecting optimal recourse actions, and empirically
show that the proposed approaches lead to more reliable recommendations under
imperfect causal knowledge than non-probabilistic baselines.

1

Introduction

As machine learning algorithms are increasingly used to assist consequential decision making in a
wide range of real-world settings [36, 41], providing explanations for the decision of these black-box
models becomes crucial [7, 58]. A popular approach is that of (nearest) counterfactual explanations,
which refer to the closest feature instantiations that would have resulted in a changed prediction [59].
While providing some insight (explanation) into the underlying black-box classifier, such counterfactual explanations do not directly translate into actionable recommendations to individuals
for obtaining a more favourable prediction[22, 5]—a related task referred to as algorithmic recourse [54, 55, 19, 21]. Importantly, prior work on both counterfactual explanations and algorithmic
recourse treats features as independently manipulable inputs, thus ignoring the causal relationships
between features.
In this context, recent work [22] has argued for the need of taking into account the causal structure
between features to find a minimal set of actions (in the form of interventions) that guarantees
recourse. However, while this approach is theoretically sound, it involves computing counterfactuals
in the true underlying structural causal model (SCM) [35], and thus relies on strong impractical
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

