Collapsing Bandits and Their Application to Public
Health Interventions
Aditya Mate∗
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, 02138
aditya_mate@g.harvard.edu

Jackson A. Killian∗
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, 02138
jkillian@g.harvard.edu

Andrew Perrault
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, 02138
aperrault@g.harvard.edu

Haifeng Xu
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA, 22903
hx4ad@virginia.edu

Milind Tambe
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, 02138
milind_tambe@harvard.edu

Abstract
We propose and study Collapsing Bandits, a new restless multi-armed bandit
(RMAB) setting in which each arm follows a binary-state Markovian process
with a special structure: when an arm is played, the state is fully observed, thus
“collapsing” any uncertainty, but when an arm is passive, no observation is made,
thus allowing uncertainty to evolve. The goal is to keep as many arms in the “good”
state as possible by planning a limited budget of actions per round. Such Collapsing
Bandits are natural models for many healthcare domains in which health workers
must simultaneously monitor patients and deliver interventions in a way that
maximizes the health of their patient cohort. Our main contributions are as follows:
(i) Building on the Whittle index technique for RMABs, we derive conditions under
which the Collapsing Bandits problem is indexable. Our derivation hinges on novel
conditions that characterize when the optimal policies may take the form of either
“forward” or “reverse” threshold policies. (ii) We exploit the optimality of threshold
policies to build fast algorithms for computing the Whittle index, including a closed
form. (iii) We evaluate our algorithm on several data distributions including data
from a real-world healthcare task in which a worker must monitor and deliver
interventions to maximize their patients’ adherence to tuberculosis medication. Our
algorithm achieves a 3-order-of-magnitude speedup compared to state-of-the-art
RMAB techniques, while achieving similar performance. The code is available at:
https://github.com/AdityaMate/collapsing_bandits

1

Introduction

Motivation. This paper considers scheduling problems in which a planner must act on k out of N
binary-state processes each round. The planner fully observes the state of the processes on which
she acts, then all processes undergo an action-dependent Markovian state transition; the state of the
process is unobserved until it is acted upon again, resulting in uncertainty. The planner’s goal is to
maximize the number of processes that are in some “good” state over the course of T rounds. This
class of problems is natural in the context of monitoring tasks which arise in many domains such as
sensor/machine maintenance [12, 10, 1, 31], anti-poaching patrols [26], and especially healthcare. For
example, nurses or community health workers are employed to monitor and improve the adherence
of patient cohorts to medications for diseases like diabetes [23], hypertension [4], tuberculosis [27, 5]
∗

equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

