Contextual Reserve Price Optimization in Auctions
via Mixed-Integer Programming
Joey Huchette
Rice University
joehuchette@rice.edu

Haihao Lu
University of Chicago
haihao.lu@chicagobooth.edu

Hossein Esfandiari
Google Research
esfandiari@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a linear model to set the reserve price in an
auction, given contextual information, in order to maximize expected revenue
from the seller side. First, we show that it is not possible to solve this problem in
polynomial time unless the Exponential Time Hypothesis fails. Second, we present
a strong mixed-integer programming (MIP) formulation for this problem, which
is capable of exactly modeling the nonconvex and discontinuous expected reward
function. Moreover, we show that this MIP formulation is ideal (i.e. the strongest
possible formulation) for the revenue function of a single impression. Since it can
be computationally expensive to exactly solve the MIP formulation in practice, we
also study the performance of its linear programming (LP) relaxation. Though
it may work well in practice, we show that, unfortunately, in the worst case the
optimal objective of the LP relaxation can be O(number of samples) times larger
than the optimal objective of the true problem. Finally, we present computational
results, showcasing that the MIP formulation, along with its LP relaxation, are able
to achieve superior in- and out-of-sample performance, as compared to state-ofthe-art algorithms on both real and synthetic datasets. More broadly, we believe
this work offers an indication of the strength of optimization methodologies like
MIP to exactly model intrinsic discontinuities in machine learning problems.

1

Introduction

Digital advertising is a tremendously fast growing industry: the worldwide digital advertising
expenditure was $283 billion in 2018, and it is estimated to further grow to $517 billion in 2023.1
Real time bidding (RTB) stands out as one of the most significant developments of the past decade in
the space of advertisement allocation mechanisms, as it is widely utilized by major online advertising
platforms including–but not limited to–Google, Facebook, and Amazon. In RTB for display ads, a
user visiting a webpage instantaneously triggers an auction held by an Ad Exchange, wherein the
winner of the auction earns the ad slot and pays the publisher a certain price.
A form of auction commonly used in practice by Ad Exchanges is a second-price auction with reserve
price [22]. In such auctions, the publisher or Ad Exchange sets a reserve price before the auction
is held, and the highest bidder wins the ad slot and pays the maximum of the second price and the
1
“Digital advertising spending worldwide 2018-2023”, retrieved May 25 2020 from https://www.
statista.com/statistics/237974/online-advertising-spending-worldwide/

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

