Rel3D: A Minimally Contrastive Benchmark for
Grounding Spatial Relations in 3D

Ankit Goyal† , Kaiyu Yang† , Dawei Yang†‡ , Jia Deng†
‡
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
†
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
{agoyal, kaiyuy, daweiy, jiadeng}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Understanding spatial relations (e.g., “laptop on table”) in visual input is important
for both humans and robots. Existing datasets are insufficient as they lack largescale, high-quality 3D ground truth information, which is critical for learning spatial
relations. In this paper, we fill this gap by constructing Rel3D: the first large-scale,
human-annotated dataset for grounding spatial relations in 3D. Rel3D enables
quantifying the effectiveness of 3D information in predicting spatial relations
on large-scale human data. Moreover, we propose minimally contrastive data
collection—a novel crowdsourcing method for reducing dataset bias. The 3D
scenes in our dataset come in minimally contrastive pairs: two scenes in a pair
are almost identical, but a spatial relation holds in one and fails in the other. We
empirically validate that minimally contrastive examples can diagnose issues with
current relation detection models as well as lead to sample-efficient training. Code
and data are available at https://github.com/princeton-vl/Rel3D.

1

Introduction

Spatial relations such as “laptop on table” are ubiquitous in our environment, and understanding
them is vital for both humans and intelligent agents like robots. As humans, we use spatial relations
for perceiving and building knowledge of the surrounding environment and supporting our daily
activities such as moving around and finding objects [1, 2]. Spatial relations play an important role in
communication for describing to others where objects are located [3–6].
Likewise, for robots, understanding spatial relations is necessary for navigation [7], object manipulation [8, 9], and human-robot interaction [10, 11]. For a robot to complete a task such as “put the
bottle in the box”, it is necessary to first understand the relation “bottle in the box”.
A spatial relation is defined as a subject-predicate-object triplet, where predicate describes the spatial
configuration between subject and object, such as painting-over-bed. Understanding spatial relations
may seem an easy task at first glance, and a plausible model could be a set of hand-crafted rules for
each predicate based on the spatial properties of subject and object, like their relative position [12–15].
However, just like many other rule-based systems, this approach works for a small set of carefully
curated examples, but fails for wider real-world examples consistent with human judgment [16].
The failure results from the rich and complex semantics of spatial predicates, which depend on
various factors beyond relative positions. For example, they depend on frames of reference (Is “left
to the car” relative to the observer or relative to the car?), object properties (For “in front of the
house”, what is the frontal side of a house? Is there still a frontal side if the object were a tree?),
and also commonsense (“painting over bed” is not touching while “blanket over bed” is). With all
these subtleties, any set of hand-crafted rules is likely to be inadequate, so researchers have applied
data-driven approaches to learn spatial relations from visual data [17, 18, 11, 7, 8, 19, 20].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

