Stochastic Normalization
Zhi Kou∗, Kaichao You∗, Mingsheng Long (B), Jianmin Wang
School of Software, BNRist, Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
{kz19,ykc20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained deep networks on a small dataset is an important component in the deep learning pipeline. A critical problem in fine-tuning is how to avoid
over-fitting when data are limited. Existing efforts work from two aspects: (1)
impose regularization on parameters or features; (2) transfer prior knowledge to
fine-tuning by reusing pre-trained parameters. In this paper, we take an alternative
approach by refactoring the widely used Batch Normalization (BN) module to mitigate over-fitting. We propose a two-branch design with one branch normalized by
mini-batch statistics and the other branch normalized by moving statistics. During
training, two branches are stochastically selected to avoid over-depending on some
sample statistics, resulting in a strong regularization effect, which we interpret as
“architecture regularization.” The resulting method is dubbed stochastic normalization (StochNorm). With the two-branch architecture, it naturally incorporates
pre-trained moving statistics in BN layers during fine-tuning, exploiting more
prior knowledge of pre-trained networks. Extensive empirical experiments show
that StochNorm is a powerful tool to avoid over-fitting in fine-tuning with small
datasets. Besides, StochNorm is readily pluggable in modern CNN backbones. It
is complementary to other fine-tuning methods and can work together to achieve
stronger regularization effect.

1

Introduction

Training deep networks (Szegedy et al., 2015; He et al., 2016b; Huang et al., 2017) from scratch
requires large amounts of data. Nevertheless, data collecting is not easy. It took years to build
the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009) with millions of images. For each new task at hand, it is
unrealistic to collect a new dataset at the scale of ImageNet. Thanks to the release of pre-trained
deep networks in PyTorch (Benoit et al., 2019) and TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016), practitioners
can benefit from deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015) even with a small amount of data. The practice
of transferring pre-trained parameters, a.k.a. fine-tuning, is prevalent in both computer vision (Jung
et al., 2015) and natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019).
Because the dataset used in fine-tuning is typically very small, the universal approximation ability (Zhang et al., 2017) of neural networks makes them prone to over-fitting, which is a critical
problem in fine-tuning. In general, there are two ways to avoid over-fitting during fine-tuning: impose
appropriate regularization to explicitly reduce over-fitting, and transfer prior knowledge by reusing
pre-trained networks as an initialization point for implicit regularization.
To avoid over-fitting better, we choose to refactor the widely used Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe
& Szegedy, 2015) module and come up with a two-branch design: one branch is normalized by
mini-batch statistics and the other branch is normalized by moving statistics. During training, the
activations of each channel are normalized by either mini-batch statistics or moving statistics, which
is determined stochastically in a dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) style to avoid over-depending on
∗

Equal contribution, in alphabetic order

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

