Adversarial Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning

Minseon Kim1 , Jihoon Tack1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , AITRICS2
{minseonkim, jihoontack, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing adversarial learning approaches mostly use class labels to generate adversarial samples that lead to incorrect predictions, which are then used to augment the
training of the model for improved robustness. While some recent works propose
semi-supervised adversarial learning methods that utilize unlabeled data, they still
require class labels. However, do we really need class labels at all, for adversarially
robust training of deep neural networks? In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial attack for unlabeled data, which makes the model confuse the instance-level
identities of the perturbed data samples. Further, we present a self-supervised contrastive learning framework to adversarially train a robust neural network without
labeled data, which aims to maximize the similarity between a random augmentation of a data sample and its instance-wise adversarial perturbation. We validate
our method, Robust Contrastive Learning (RoCL), on multiple benchmark datasets,
on which it obtains comparable robust accuracy over state-of-the-art supervised
adversarial learning methods, and significantly improved robustness against the
black box and unseen types of attacks. Moreover, with further joint fine-tuning
with supervised adversarial loss, RoCL obtains even higher robust accuracy over
using self-supervised learning alone. Notably, RoCL also demonstrate impressive
results in robust transfer learning.

1

Introduction

The vulnerability of neural networks to imperceptibly small perturbations [1] has been a crucial
challenge in deploying them to safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving. Various
studies have been proposed to ensure the robustness of the trained networks against adversarial
attacks [2–4], random noise [5], and corruptions [6, 7]. Perhaps the most popular approach to achieve
adversarial robustness is adversarial learning, which trains the model with samples perturbed to
maximize the loss on the target model. Starting from Fast Gradient Sign Method [8] which apply a
perturbation in the gradient direction, to Projected Gradient Descent [9] that maximizes the loss over
iterations, and TRADES [2] that trades-off clean accuracy and adversarial robustness, adversarial
learning has evolved substantially over the past few years. However, conventional methods with
adversarial learning all require class labels to generate adversarial attacks.
Recently, self-supervised learning [10–14], which trains the model on unlabeled data in a supervised
manner by utilizing self-generated labels from the data itself, has become popular as means of
learning representations for deep neural networks. For example, prediction of the rotation angles [10],
and solving randomly generated Jigsaw puzzles [11] are examples of such self-supervised learning
methods. Recently, instance-level identity preservation [12, 13] with contrastive learning has shown
to be very effective in learning the rich representations for classification. Contrastive self-supervised
learning frameworks such as [12–15] basically aim to maximize the similarity of a sample to its
augmentation, while minimizing its similarity to other instances.
In this work, we propose a contrastive self-supervised learning framework to train an adversarially
robust neural network without any class labels. Our intuition is that we can fool the model by generat34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

