RetroXpert: Decompose Retrosynthesis Prediction
Like A Chemist
Chaochao Yan∗†
University of Texas at Arlington
chaochao.yan@mavs.uta.edu

Qianggang Ding ∗†
Tsinghua University
dqg18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Peilin Zhao
Tencent AI Lab
masonzhao@tencent.com

Shuangjia Zheng †
Sun Yat-sen University
zhengshj9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Jinyu Yang †
University of Texas at Arlington
jinyu.yang@mavs.uta.edu

Yang Yu
Tencent AI Lab
kevinyyu@tencent.com

Junzhou Huang
University of Texas at Arlington
jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Retrosynthesis is the process of recursively decomposing target molecules into
available building blocks. It plays an important role in solving problems in organic
synthesis planning. To automate or assist in the retrosynthesis analysis, various
retrosynthesis prediction algorithms have been proposed. However, most of them
are cumbersome and lack interpretability about their predictions. In this paper,
we devise a novel template-free algorithm for automatic retrosynthetic expansion
inspired by how chemists approach retrosynthesis prediction. Our method disassembles retrosynthesis into two steps: i) identify the potential reaction center of
the target molecule through a novel graph neural network and generate intermediate synthons, and ii) generate the reactants associated with synthons via a robust
reactant generation model. While outperforming the state-of-the-art baselines by a
significant margin, our model also provides chemically reasonable interpretation.

1

Introduction

Retrosynthesis of the desired compound is commonly constructed by recursively decomposing it
into a set of available reaction building blocks. This analysis mode was formalized in the pioneering
work [1, 2] and now have become one of the fundamental paradigms in the modern chemical society.
Retrosynthesis is challenging, in part due to the huge size of the search space. The reported syntheticorganic knowledge consists of in the order of 107 reactions and compounds [3]. On the other hand,
the incomplete understanding of the reaction mechanism also increases the difficulty of retrosynthesis,
which is typically undertaken by human experts. Therefore, it is a subjective process and requires
considerable expertise and experience. However, molecules may have multiple possible retrosynthetic
routes and it is challenging even for experts to select the most appropriate route since the feasibility of
a route is often determined by multiple factors, such as the availability of potential reactants, reaction
conditions, reaction yield, and potential toxic byproducts.
∗

Both authors contribute equally to the work.
This work is done when Chaochao Yan, Qianggang Ding, Shuangjia Zheng, and Jinyu Yang work as interns
at Tencent AI Lab.
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

