Hyperparameter Ensembles for
Robustness and Uncertainty Quantification

Florian Wenzel, Jasper Snoek, Dustin Tran, Rodolphe Jenatton
Google Research
{florianwenzel, jsnoek, trandustin, rjenatton}@google.com

Abstract
Ensembles over neural network weights trained from different random initialization,
known as deep ensembles, achieve state-of-the-art accuracy and calibration. The
recently introduced batch ensembles provide a drop-in replacement that is more
parameter efficient. In this paper, we design ensembles not only over weights,
but over hyperparameters to improve the state of the art in both settings. For
best performance independent of budget, we propose hyper-deep ensembles, a
simple procedure that involves a random search over different hyperparameters,
themselves stratified across multiple random initializations. Its strong performance
highlights the benefit of combining models with both weight and hyperparameter
diversity. We further propose a parameter efficient version, hyper-batch ensembles,
which builds on the layer structure of batch ensembles and self-tuning networks.
The computational and memory costs of our method are notably lower than typical
ensembles. On image classification tasks, with MLP, LeNet, ResNet 20 and Wide
ResNet 28-10 architectures, we improve upon both deep and batch ensembles.

Neural networks are well-suited to form ensembles of
models [30]. Indeed, neural networks trained from
different random initialization can lead to equally wellperforming models that are nonetheless diverse in that
they make complementary errors on held-out data [30].
This property is explained by the multi-modal nature of
their loss landscape [24] and the randomness induced
by both their initialization and the stochastic methods
commonly used to train them [8, 38, 9].
Many mechanisms have been proposed to further foster
diversity in ensembles of neural networks, e.g., based
on cyclical learning rates [36] or Bayesian analysis [17].
In this paper, we focus on exploiting the diversity induced by combining neural networks defined by different hyperparameters. This concept is already wellestablished [13] and the auto-ML community actively
applies it [21, 65, 53, 46]. We build upon this research
with the following two complementary goals.

Accuracy

Introduction

Cross entropy

1

0.84
0.82
0.80
2

4

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16
hyper-deep ensemble
deep ensemble

6

8 10 12 14 16

0.8
0.6

Ensemble size

Figure 1: Comparison of our hyper-deep
ensemble with deep ensemble for different
ensemble sizes using a Wide ResNet 28-10
over CIFAR-100. Combining models with
different hyperparameters is beneficial.

First, for performance independent of computational and memory budget, we seek to improve upon
deep ensembles [43], the current state-of-the-art ensembling method in terms of robustness and
uncertainty quantification [64, 28]. To this end, we develop a simple stratification scheme which
combines random search and the greedy selection of hyperparameters from [13] with the benefit
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

