Learning Retrospective Knowledge with
Reverse Reinforcement Learning

Shangtong Zhang ∗
University of Oxford

Vivek Veeriah
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford

Abstract
We present a Reverse Reinforcement Learning (Reverse RL) approach for representing retrospective knowledge. General Value Functions (GVFs) have enjoyed
great success in representing predictive knowledge, i.e., answering questions about
possible future outcomes such as “how much fuel will be consumed in expectation
if we drive from A to B?”. GVFs, however, cannot answer questions like “how
much fuel do we expect a car to have given it is at B at time t?”. To answer this
question, we need to know when that car had a full tank and how that car came
to B. Since such questions emphasize the influence of possible past events on the
present, we refer to their answers as retrospective knowledge. In this paper, we
show how to represent retrospective knowledge with Reverse GVFs, which are
trained via Reverse RL. We demonstrate empirically the utility of Reverse GVFs in
both representation learning and anomaly detection.

1

Introduction

Much knowledge can be formulated as answers to predictive questions (Sutton, 2009), for example, “to
know that Joe is in the coffee room is to predict that you will see him if you went there” (Sutton, 2009).
Such knowledge is referred to as predictive knowledge (Sutton, 2009; Sutton et al., 2011). General
Value Functions (GVFs, Sutton et al. 2011) are commonly used to represent predictive knowledge.
GVFs are essentially the same as canonical value functions (Puterman, 2014; Sutton and Barto, 2018).
However, the policy, the reward function, and the discount function
associated with GVFs are usually carefully designed such that the
numerical value of a GVF at certain states matches the numerical anL1
L2
swer to certain predictive questions. In this way, GVFs can represent
predictive knowledge.
Consider the concrete example in Figure 1, where a microdrone is
doing a random walk. The microdrone is initialized somewhere with
100% battery. L4 is a power station where its battery is recharged to
100%. Each clockwise movement consumes 2% of the battery, and
each counterclockwise movement consumes 1% (for simplicity, we
assume negative battery levels, e.g., -10%, are legal). Furthermore,
each movement fails with probability 1%, in which case the microdrone remains in the same location and no energy is consumed. An
example of a predictive question in this system is:
Question 1. Starting from L1, how much energy will be consumed
in expectation before the next charge?

L4

L3

Figure 1: A microdrone doing random walk among four
different locations. L4 is a
charging station where the
microdrone’s battery is fully
recharged.

To answer this question, we can model the system as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP). The policy is uniformly random and the reward for each movement is the
∗

Correspondence to shangtong.zhang@cs.ox.ac.uk

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

