Learning under Model Misspecification:
Applications to Variational and Ensemble methods

Andrés R. Masegosa∗
University of Almería
andresma@ual.es

Abstract
Virtually any model we use in machine learning to make predictions does not
perfectly represent reality. So, most of the learning happens under model misspecification. In this work, we present a novel analysis of the generalization performance
of Bayesian model averaging under model misspecification and i.i.d. data using a
new family of second-order PAC-Bayes bounds. This analysis shows, in simple and
intuitive terms, that Bayesian model averaging provides suboptimal generalization
performance when the model is misspecified. In consequence, we provide strong
theoretical arguments showing that Bayesian methods are not optimal for learning
predictive models, unless the model class is perfectly specified. Using novel secondorder PAC-Bayes bounds, we derive a new family of Bayesian-like algorithms,
which can be implemented as variational and ensemble methods. The output of
these algorithms is a new posterior distribution, different from the Bayesian posterior, which induces a posterior predictive distribution with better generalization
performance. Experiments with Bayesian neural networks illustrate these findings.

1

Introduction

All our models are idealizations which only provide an approximation to the real-world distributions
generating the data (i.e. "all models are wrong" [9]). But whether our models are or not well-specified
is a key consideration in Bayesian statistics. Suboptimal behaviors of Bayesian methods when the
model family is misspecified have been widely reported in the literature [20, 21, 22, 26, 51], even
questioning the principles of Bayesian statistics.

Figure 1: The exact Bayesian posterior and our new proposed (PAC2T -Variational) posterior, and
their respective posterior predictive distributions, for a linear regression model with a misspecified
constant noise term (the data noise is higher than the linear model’s noise). The Bayesian posterior
concentrates around the best single linear model, while our method estimates a posterior which
introduces high variance in the intercept parameter θ0 to induce a posterior predictive distribution
with higher noise that better fits the data distribution (see Appendix C.2 for details).
∗

Part of the work was done while AM was visiting the University of Copenhagen.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

