3D Self-Supervised Methods for Medical Imaging
Aiham Taleb 1,* , Winfried Loetzsch 1,† , Noel Danz 1,† , Julius Severin 1,* , Thomas Gaertner 1,† ,
Benjamin Bergner 1,* , and Christoph Lippert 1,*
1

Digital Health & Machine Learning, Hasso-Plattner-Institute, Potsdam University, Germany
*
{firstname.lastname}@hpi.de
†
{firstname.lastname}@student.hpi.uni-potsdam.de

Abstract
Self-supervised learning methods have witnessed a recent surge of interest after
proving successful in multiple application fields. In this work, we leverage these
techniques, and we propose 3D versions for five different self-supervised methods,
in the form of proxy tasks. Our methods facilitate neural network feature learning
from unlabeled 3D images, aiming to reduce the required cost for expert annotation.
The developed algorithms are 3D Contrastive Predictive Coding, 3D Rotation
prediction, 3D Jigsaw puzzles, Relative 3D patch location, and 3D Exemplar
networks. Our experiments show that pretraining models with our 3D tasks yields
more powerful semantic representations, and enables solving downstream tasks
more accurately and efficiently, compared to training the models from scratch
and to pretraining them on 2D slices. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
methods on three downstream tasks from the medical imaging domain: i) Brain
Tumor Segmentation from 3D MRI, ii) Pancreas Tumor Segmentation from 3D
CT, and iii) Diabetic Retinopathy Detection from 2D Fundus images. In each task,
we assess the gains in data-efficiency, performance, and speed of convergence.
Interestingly, we also find gains when transferring the learned representations, by
our methods, from a large unlabeled 3D corpus to a small downstream-specific
dataset. We achieve results competitive to state-of-the-art solutions at a fraction of
the computational expense. We publish our implementations1 for the developed
algorithms (both 3D and 2D versions) as an open-source library, in an effort to
allow other researchers to apply and extend our methods on their datasets.

1

Introduction

Due to technological advancements in 3D sensing, the need for machine learning-based algorithms
that perform analysis tasks on 3D imaging data has grown rapidly in the past few years [1–3]. 3D
imaging has numerous applications, such as in Robotic navigation, in CAD imaging, in Geology,
and in Medical Imaging. While we focus on medical imaging as a test-bed for our proposed 3D
algorithms in this work, we ensure their applicability to other 3D domains. Medical imaging plays
a vital role in patient healthcare, as it aids in disease prevention, early detection, diagnosis, and
treatment. Yet efforts to utilize advancements in machine learning algorithms are often hampered
by the sheer expense of the expert annotation required [4]. Generating expert annotations of 3D
medical images at scale is non-trivial, expensive, and time-consuming. Another related challenge in
medical imaging is the relatively small sample sizes. This becomes more obvious when studying
a particular disease, for instance. Also, gaining access to large-scale datasets is often difficult due
to privacy concerns. Hence, scarcity of data and annotations are some of the main constraints for
machine learning applications in medical imaging.
1

https://github.com/HealthML/self-supervised-3d-tasks

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

