Finite-Sample Analysis of Contractive Stochastic
Approximation Using Smooth Convex Envelopes

Zaiwei Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology
zchen458@gatech.edu

Siva Theja Maguluri
Georgia Institute of Technology
siva.theja@gatech.edu

Sanjay Shakkottai
The University of Texas at Austin
sanjay.shakkottai@utexas.edu

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
IBM Research NY
Karthikeyan.Shanmugam2@ibm.com

Abstract
Stochastic Approximation (SA) is a popular approach for solving fixed-point
equations where the information is corrupted by noise. In this paper, we consider
an SA involving a contraction mapping with respect to an arbitrary norm, and
show its finite-sample error bounds while using different stepsizes. The idea is
to construct a smooth Lyapunov function using the generalized Moreau envelope,
and show that the iterates of SA have negative drift with respect to that Lyapunov
function. Our result is applicable in Reinforcement Learning (RL). In particular,
we use it to establish the first-known convergence rate of the V-trace algorithm
for off-policy TD-learning [18]. Importantly, our construction results in only a
logarithmic dependence of the convergence bound on the size of the state-space.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) captures an important facet of machine learning going beyond prediction and regression: sequential decision making, and has had great impact in various problems of
practical interest [37, 29, 35]. At the heart of RL is the problem of iteratively solving the Bellman’s
equation using noisy samples, i.e. solving a fixed-point equation of the form H(x) = x. Here, H is a
contractive operator with respect to a suitable norm, where we only have access to samples from noisy
versions of the operator. Such fixed-point equations, more broadly, are solved through the framework
of Stochastic Approximation (SA) algorithms [33], with several RL algorithms such as Q-learning
and TD-learning being examples there-of. This paper focuses on understanding the evolution of such
a noisy fixed-point iteration through the lens of SA, and providing finite-sample convergence results.
More formally, the SA algorithm for solving the fixed-point equation H(x) = x is of the form
xk+1 = xk + k (H(xk ) − xk + wk ), where {k } is the stepsize sequence, and {wk } is the noise
sequence. To derive finite-sample bounds, three conditions are pertinent: (a) The norm in which the
operator H contracts, (b) The mean zero noise when conditioned on the past, and (c) The nature of
the bound on the conditional second moment of the noise.
In prior literature, if the conditional second moment of the noise {wk } is uniformly bounded by a
constant, then the norm with respect to which H being a contraction becomes irrelevant, and it is
possible to derive finite-sample convergence guarantees [3, 4, 19, 17]. When the second moment
of the noise is not uniformly bounded, then finite-sample bounds can be derived in the case where
the norm for contraction of H is the Euclidean norm [5, 11]. However, in many RL problems, the
contraction of H occurs with respect to a different norm (e.g. the `∞ -norm [47] or a weighted variant
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

