Secretary and Online Matching Problems
with Machine Learned Advice
Antonios Antoniadis
Universität zu Köln
Köln, Germany
antoniadis@cs.uni-koeln.de

Themis Gouleakis
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
tgouleak@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Pieter Kleer
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
pkleer@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Pavel Kolev
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus
Saarbrücken, Germany
pkolev@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
The classical analysis of online algorithms, due to its worst-case nature, can be
quite pessimistic when the input instance at hand is far from worst-case. Often this
is not an issue with machine learning approaches, which shine in exploiting patterns
in past inputs in order to predict the future. However, such predictions, although
usually accurate, can be arbitrarily poor. Inspired by a recent line of work, we
augment three well-known online settings with machine learned predictions about
the future, and develop algorithms that take them into account. In particular, we
study the following online selection problems: (i) the classical secretary problem,
(ii) online bipartite matching and (iii) the graphic matroid secretary problem. Our
algorithms still come with a worst-case performance guarantee in the case that
predictions are subpar while obtaining an improved competitive ratio (over the
best-known classical online algorithm for each problem) when the predictions are
sufficiently accurate. For each algorithm, we establish a trade-off between the
competitive ratios obtained in the two respective cases.

1

Introduction

There has been enormous progress in the field of machine learning in the last decade, which has
affected a variety of other areas as well. One of these areas is the design of online algorithms.
Traditionally, the analysis of such algorithms involves worst-case guarantees, which can often be
quite pessimistic. It is conceivable though, that having prior knowledge regarding the online input
(obtained using machine learning) could potentially improve those guarantees significantly.
In this work, we consider various online selection algorithms augmented with so-called machine
learned advice. In particular, we consider secretary and online bipartite matching problems. The
high-level idea is to incorporate some form of predictions in an existing online algorithm in order to
get the best of two worlds: (i) provably improve the algorithm’s performance guarantee in the case that
predictions are sufficiently good, while (ii) losing only a constant factor of the algorithm’s existing
worst-case performance guarantee, when the predictions are subpar. Improving the performance of
classical online algorithms with the help of machine learned predictions is a relatively new area that
has gained a lot of attention in the last couple of years [24, 21, 36, 27, 30, 34, 17, 33, 32].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

