Multifaceted Uncertainty Estimation for
Label-Efficient Deep Learning

Weishi Shi1
Xujiang Zhao2
Feng Chen2
Qi Yu1∗
1
Rochester Institute of Technology
University of Texas at Dallas2
{ws7586, qi.yu}@rit.edu1
{xujiang.zhao, feng.chen}@utdallas.edu2

Abstract
We present a novel multi-source uncertainty prediction approach that enables deep
learning (DL) models to be actively trained with much less labeled data. By
leveraging the second-order uncertainty representation provided by subjective logic
(SL), we conduct evidence-based theoretical analysis and formally decompose the
predicted entropy over multiple classes into two distinct sources of uncertainty:
vacuity and dissonance, caused by lack of evidence and conflict of strong evidence,
respectively. The evidence based entropy decomposition provides deeper insights
on the nature of uncertainty, which can help effectively explore a large and highdimensional unlabeled data space. We develop a novel loss function that augments
DL based evidence prediction with uncertainty anchor sample identification. The
accurately estimated multiple sources of uncertainty are systematically integrated
and dynamically balanced using a data sampling function for label-efficient active
deep learning (ADL). Experiments conducted over both synthetic and real data
and comparison with competitive AL methods demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed ADL model.

1

Introduction

Deep learning (DL) models establish dominating status among other types of supervised learning
models by achieving the state-of-the-art performance in various application domains. However,
such an advantage only emerges when a huge amount of labeled training data is available. This
limitation slows down the pace of DL, especially when being applied to knowledge-rich domains,
such as medicine and biology, where large-scale labeled samples are too expensive to obtain from
well-trained experts. Meanwhile, active learning (AL) has demonstrated great success by showing
that for many supervised models, training samples are not equally important in terms of improving
the model performance [1]. As a result, a carefully selected smaller training set can achieve a model
equally well or even better than a randomly selected large training set.
An interesting question arises, which is whether DL models can be actively trained using much less
labeled data. Recent efforts show promising results in this direction through Bayesian modeling [2]
and batch model sampling [3]. However, as DL models are commonly applied to high dimensional
data such as images and videos, a fundamental challenge still remains, which is how to most
effectively explore the exponentially growing feature space to select the most useful data samples for
active model training. Existing AL models usually leverage the model provided information, such as
estimated decision boundaries or predicted entropy for data sampling. However, the deep structure
and the large number of parameters of DL models make model overfitting almost inevitable especially
in the early stage of AL when only very limited training data is available. As a result, the model may
provide misleading information that makes data sampling from a high-dimensional search space even
more difficult. Besides a high dimensionality, complex data may contain a large number of classes
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

