Automatic Curriculum Learning through
Value Disagreement

Yunzhi Zhang
UC Berkeley

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley

Lerrel Pinto
UC Berkeley, NYU

Abstract
Continually solving new, unsolved tasks is the key to learning diverse behaviors.
Through reinforcement learning (RL), we have made massive strides towards
solving tasks that have a single goal. However, in the multi-task domain, where
an agent needs to reach multiple goals, the choice of training goals can largely
affect sample efficiency. When biological agents learn, there is often an organized
and meaningful order to which learning happens. Inspired by this, we propose
setting up an automatic curriculum for goals that the agent needs to solve. Our
key insight is that if we can sample goals at the frontier of the set of goals that
an agent is able to reach, it will provide a significantly stronger learning signal
compared to randomly sampled goals. To operationalize this idea, we introduce a
goal proposal module that prioritizes goals that maximize the epistemic uncertainty
of the Q-function of the policy. This simple technique samples goals that are neither
too hard nor too easy for the agent to solve, hence enabling continual improvement.
We evaluate our method across 13 multi-goal robotic tasks and 5 navigation tasks,
and demonstrate performance gains over current state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in games like Go [49],
and control tasks such as flying [26] and dexterous manipulation [4]. However, a key limitation to
these methods is their sample complexity. They often require millions of samples to learn a single
locomotion skill, and sometimes even billions of samples to learn a more complex skill [7]. Creating
general purpose RL agents will necessitate acquiring multiple such skills, which further exacerbates
the sample inefficiency of these algorithms. Humans, on the other hand, are not only able to learn a
multitude of different skills, but are able to do so from orders of magnitude fewer samples [25]. So,
how do we endow RL agents with this ability to learn efficiently?
When human (or biological agents) learn, they do not simply learn from random data or on uniformly
sampled tasks. There is an organized and meaningful order in which the learning is performed. For
instance, when human infants learn to grasp, they follow a strict curriculum of distinct grasping
strategies: palmar-grasp, power-grasp, and fine-grasp [33]. Following this order of tasks from simple
ones to gradually more difficult ones is crucial in acquiring complex skills [38]. This ordered structure
is also crucial to motor learning in animals [50, 28]. In the context of machine learning, a learning
framework that orders data or tasks in a meaningful way is termed ‘curriculum learning’ [12].
Most research into curriculum learning has focused on the order of data that is presented to a
supervised learning algorithm [15]. The key idea is that while training a supervised model, ‘easy’ data
should be presented first, followed by more difficult data. This gradual presentation of data is shown
to improve convergence and predictive performance [12]. However, in the context of reinforcement
learning, how should one present a curriculum of data? The answer depends on what aspect of
complexity needs to addressed. In this work, we focus on the complexity involved in solving new
tasks/goals. Concretely, we operate in the sparse-reward goal-conditioned RL setting [45]. Here, the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

