Optimal Algorithms for Stochastic Multi-Armed
Bandits with Heavy Tailed Rewards

Kyungjae Lee
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
kyungjae.lee@rllab.snu.ac.kr
Sungbin Lim
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School
UNIST
sungbin@unist.ac.kr

Hongjun Yang
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School
UNIST
hj42@unist.ac.kr

Songhwai Oh
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we consider stochastic multi-armed bandits (MABs) with heavy-tailed
rewards, whose p-th moment is bounded by a constant νp for 1 < p ≤ 2. First, we
propose a novel robust estimator which does not require νp as prior information,
while other existing robust estimators demand prior knowledge about νp . We show
that an error probability of the proposed estimator decays exponentially fast. Using
this estimator, we propose a perturbation-based exploration strategy and develop a
generalized regret analysis scheme that provides upper and lower regret bounds by
revealing the relationship between the regret and the cumulative density function
of the perturbation. From the proposed analysis scheme, we obtain gap-dependent
and gap-independent upper and lower regret bounds of various perturbations. We
also find the optimal hyperparameters for each perturbation, which can achieve
the minimax optimal regret bound with respect to total rounds. In simulation,
the proposed estimator shows favorable performance compared to existing robust
estimators for various p values and, for MAB problems, the proposed perturbation
strategy outperforms existing exploration methods.

1

Introduction

A multi-armed bandit (MAB) is a fundamental yet powerful framework to model a sequential decision
making problem. In this problem, an intelligent agent continuously chooses an action and receives
a noisy feedback in the form of a stochastic reward, but no information is provided for unselected
actions. Then, the goal of the agent is to maximize cumulative rewards over time by identifying
an optimal action which has the maximum reward. However, since MABs often assume that prior
knowledge about rewards is not given, the agent faces an innate dilemma between gathering new
information by exploring sub-optimal actions (exploration) and choosing the best action based on
the collected information (exploitation). Designing an efficient exploration algorithm for MABs
is a long-standing challenging problem. The efficiency of the exploration method is measured by
a cumulative regret which is the sum of differences between the maximum reward and the reward
obtained at each round.
Early researches for stochastic MABs have been investigated under the sub-Gaussian assumption
on a reward distribution, which has the exponential-decaying behavior. However, there remains a
large class of distributions which are not covered by the sub-Gaussianity and are called heavy-tailed
distributions. While there exist several methods for handling such heavy-tailed rewards [3, 17], these
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

