Off-Policy Evaluation and Learning
for External Validity under a Covariate Shift

Masatoshi Uehara1∗, Masahiro Kato2∗, Shota Yasui2
1
Cornell University
mu223@cornell.edu
2
CyberAgent Inc.
masahiro_kato@cyberagent.co.jp
yasui_shota@cyberagent.co.jp

Abstract
We consider evaluating and training a new policy for the evaluation data by using
the historical data obtained from a different policy. The goal of off-policy evaluation (OPE) is to estimate the expected reward of a new policy over the evaluation
data, and that of off-policy learning (OPL) is to find a new policy that maximizes
the expected reward over the evaluation data. Although the standard OPE and
OPL methods assume the same distribution of covariate between the historical
and evaluation data, a covariate shift often exists in real-world applications, i.e.,
the distribution of the covariate of the historical data is different from that of the
evaluation data. In this paper, we derive the efficiency bound of an OPE estimator
under a covariate shift. Then, we propose doubly robust and efficient estimators
for OPE and OPL under a covariate shift by using a nonparametric estimator of
the density ratio between the historical and evaluation data distributions. We also
discuss other possible estimators and compare their theoretical properties. Finally,
we conduct experiments to confirm the effectiveness of the proposed estimators.

1

Introduction

In various applications, such as the design of advertisement, personalized medicine, search engines,
and recommendation systems, there is a significant interest in evaluating and learning a new policy
from historical data (Beygelzimer & Langford, 2009; Li et al., 2010; Athey & Wager, 2017). To
accomplish this, we use off-policy evaluation (OPE) and off-policy learning (OPL) methods. The
goal of OPE is to evaluate a new policy by estimating the expected reward of the new policy (Dudík
et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2017; Narita et al., 2019; Bibaut et al., 2019; Kallus & Uehara, 2019; Oberst
& Sontag, 2019). In contrast, OPL aims to find a new policy that maximizes the expected reward
(Zhao et al., 2012; Kitagawa & Tetenov, 2018; Zhou et al., 2018; Chernozhukov et al., 2019).
Although the OPE method provides an estimator of the expected reward of a new policy, most existing studies presume that the distributions of covariates are the same between the historical and
evaluation data. However, in many real-world applications, the expected reward of a new policy
over the distribution of evaluation data is of significant interest, which can be different from that
of historical data. For example, in the medical field, it is known that the results of a randomized
controlled trial (RCT) cannot be directly transported because the covariate distribution in a target
population is different (Cole & Stuart, 2010). This problem is known as a lack of external validity
(Pearl & Bareinboim, 2014). These situations, in which historical and evaluation data follow different distributions, are also known as covariate shifts (Shimodaira, 2000; Sugiyama et al., 2008). This
situation is illustrated in Figure 1.
∗

Equal contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

