Neural Dynamic Policies
for End-to-End Sensorimotor Learning

Shikhar Bahl∗
CMU

Mustafa Mukadam
FAIR

Abhinav Gupta
CMU

Deepak Pathak
CMU

Abstract
The current dominant paradigm in sensorimotor control, whether imitation or
reinforcement learning, is to train policies directly in raw action spaces such
as torque, joint angle, or end-effector position. This forces the agent to make
decision at each point in training, and hence, limit the scalability to continuous,
high-dimensional, and long-horizon tasks. In contrast, research in classical robotics
has, for a long time, exploited dynamical systems as a policy representation to
learn robot behaviors via demonstrations. These techniques, however, lack the
flexibility and generalizability provided by deep learning or deep reinforcement
learning and have remained under-explored in such settings. In this work, we begin
to close this gap and embed dynamics structure into deep neural network-based
policies by reparameterizing action spaces with differential equations. We propose
Neural Dynamic Policies (NDPs) that make predictions in trajectory distribution
space as opposed to prior policy learning methods where action represents the
raw control space. The embedded structure allow us to perform end-to-end policy
learning under both reinforcement and imitation learning setups. We show that
NDPs achieve better or comparable performance to state-of-the-art approaches on
many robotic control tasks using both reward-based training and demonstrations.
Project video and code are available at: https://shikharbahl.github.io/
neural-dynamic-policies/.

1

Introduction

Consider an embodied agent tasked with throwing
a ball into a bin. Not only does the agent need to
decide where and when to release the ball, but also
reason about the whole trajectory that it should take
such that the ball is imparted with the correct momentum to reach the bin. This form of reasoning
is necessary to perform many such everyday tasks.
Common methods in deep learning for robotics
tackle this problem either via imitation or reinforcement. However, in most cases, the agent’s policy is
trained in raw action spaces like torque, joint angle,
or end-effector position, which forces the agent to
make decisions at each time step of the trajectory
instead of making decisions in the trajectory space
itself (see Figure 1). But then how do we reason
about trajectories as actions?
∗

y

if n

Tf
ar
in

T

f

t

t

t

frItit
t

T
Tf

Vanilla Policy

NDP (Ours)

Figure 1: Vector field induced by NDPs. The goal
is to draw the planar digit 4 from the start position.
The dynamical structure in NDP induces a smooth
vector field in trajectory space. In contrast, a vanilla
policy has to reason individually in different parts.

Correspondence to: sbahl2@cs.cmu.edu

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

