A Boolean Task Algebra For Reinforcement Learning

Geraud Nangue Tasse, Steven James, Benjamin Rosman
School of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
University of the Witwatersrand
Johannesburg, South Africa
geraudnt@gmail.com, {steven.james, benjamin.rosman1}@wits.ac.za

Abstract
The ability to compose learned skills to solve new tasks is an important property
of lifelong-learning agents. In this work, we formalise the logical composition of
tasks as a Boolean algebra. This allows us to formulate new tasks in terms of the
negation, disjunction and conjunction of a set of base tasks. We then show that by
learning goal-oriented value functions and restricting the transition dynamics of the
tasks, an agent can solve these new tasks with no further learning. We prove that
by composing these value functions in specific ways, we immediately recover the
optimal policies for all tasks expressible under the Boolean algebra. We verify our
approach in two domains—including a high-dimensional video game environment
requiring function approximation—where an agent first learns a set of base skills,
and then composes them to solve a super-exponential number of new tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved recent success in a number of difficult, high-dimensional
environments (Mnih et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2017).
However, these methods generally require millions of samples from the environment to learn optimal
behaviours, limiting their real-world applicability. A major challenge is thus in designing sampleefficient agents that can transfer their existing knowledge to solve new tasks quickly. This is
particularly important for agents in a multitask or lifelong setting, since learning to solve complex
tasks from scratch is typically impractical.
One approach to transfer is composition (Todorov, 2009), which allows an agent to leverage existing
skills to build complex, novel behaviours. These newly-formed skills can then be used to solve or
speed up learning in a new task. In this work, we focus on concurrent composition, where existing
base skills are combined to produce new skills (Todorov, 2009; Saxe et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al.,
2018; Van Niekerk et al., 2019; Hunt et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2019). This differs from other forms of
composition, such as options (Sutton et al., 1999) and hierarchical RL (Barto & Mahadevan, 2003),
where actions and skills are chained in a temporal sequence.
While previous work on logical composition considers only the union and intersection of tasks
(Haarnoja et al., 2018; Van Niekerk et al., 2019; Hunt et al., 2019), they do not formally define them.
However, union and intersection are operations on sets, rather than tasks. We therefore formalise
the notion of union and intersection of tasks using the Boolean algebra structure, since this is the
algebraic structure that abstracts the notions of union, intersection, and complement of sets. We then
define a Boolean algebra over the space of optimal value functions, and then prove that there exists a
homomorphism between the task and value function algebras. Given a set of base tasks that have
been previously solved by the agent, any new task written as a Boolean expression can immediately
be solved without further learning, resulting in a zero-shot super-exponential explosion in the agent’s
abilities. We summarise our main contributions as follows:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

