A Non-Asymptotic Analysis for
Stein Variational Gradient Descent
Anna Korba
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
a.korba@ucl.ac.uk
Michael Arbel
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
michael.n.arbel@gmail.com

Adil Salim
Visual Computing Center
KAUST
adil.salim@kaust.edu.sa
Giulia Luise
Computer Science Department
University College London
g.luise16@ucl.ac.uk

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) algorithm, which optimises a set of particles to approximate a target probability distribution π ∝ e−V
on Rd . In the population limit, SVGD performs gradient descent in the space
of probability distributions on the KL divergence with respect to π, where the
gradient is smoothed through a kernel integral operator. In this paper, we provide a
novel finite time analysis for the SVGD algorithm. We provide a descent lemma
establishing that the algorithm decreases the objective at each iteration, and rates
of convergence for the averaged Stein Fisher divergence (also referred to as Kernel
Stein Discrepancy). We also provide a convergence result of the finite particle
system corresponding to the practical implementation of SVGD to its population
version.

1

Introduction

The task of sampling from a target distribution is common in Bayesian inference, where the distribution of interest is the posterior distribution of the parameters. Unfortunately, the posterior distribution
is generally difficult to compute due to the presence of an intractable integral. This sampling problem
can be formulated from an optimization point of view (Wibisono, 2018). We assume that the target
distribution π admits a density proportional to exp(−V ) with respect to Lebesgue measure over
X = Rd , where V : X → R is referred to as the potential function. In this setting, the target
distribution π is the R
solution to the optimization problem defined on the set P2 (X ) of probability
measures µ such that kxk2 dµ(x) < ∞ by:
min KL(µ|π),
µ∈P2 (X )

(1)

where KL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence, and assuming π ∈ P2 (X ). Many existing
methods for the sampling task can be related to this optimization problem. Variants of the Langevin
Monte Carlo algorithm (Durmus and Moulines, 2016; Dalalyan and Karagulyan, 2019) can be seen
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

