Differentiable Causal Discovery
from Interventional Data
Philippe Brouillard∗
Mila, Université de Montréal

Sébastien Lachapelle∗
Mila, Université de Montréal

Simon Lacoste-Julien
Mila, Université de Montréal
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Alexandre Lacoste
Element AI

Alexandre Drouin
Element AI

Abstract
Learning a causal directed acyclic graph from data is a challenging task that
involves solving a combinatorial problem for which the solution is not always identifiable. A new line of work reformulates this problem as a continuous constrained
optimization one, which is solved via the augmented Lagrangian method. However,
most methods based on this idea do not make use of interventional data, which can
significantly alleviate identifiability issues. This work constitutes a new step in this
direction by proposing a theoretically-grounded method based on neural networks
that can leverage interventional data. We illustrate the flexibility of the continuousconstrained framework by taking advantage of expressive neural architectures such
as normalizing flows. We show that our approach compares favorably to the state
of the art in a variety of settings, including perfect and imperfect interventions for
which the targeted nodes may even be unknown.

1

Introduction

The inference of causal relationships is a problem of fundamental interest in science. In all fields
of research, experiments are systematically performed with the goal of elucidating the underlying
causal dynamics of systems. This quest for causality is motivated by the desire to take actions that
induce a controlled change in a system. Achieving this requires to answer questions, such as “what
would be the impact on the system if this variable were changed from value x to y?”, which cannot
be answered without causal knowledge [33].
In this work, we address the problem of data-driven causal discovery [16]. Our goal is to design an
algorithm that can automatically discover causal relationships from data. More formally, we aim to
learn a causal graphical model (CGM) [36], which consists of a joint distribution coupled with a
directed acyclic graph (DAG), where edges indicate direct causal relationships. Achieving this based
on observational data alone is challenging since, under the faithfulness assumption, the true DAG is
only identifiable up to a Markov equivalence class [46]. Fortunately, identifiability can be improved
by considering interventional data, i.e., the outcome of some experiments. In this case, the DAG
is identifiable up to an interventional Markov equivalence class, which is a subset of the Markov
equivalence class [48, 15], and, when observing enough interventions [9, 11], the DAG is exactly
identifiable. In practice, it may be possible for domain experts to collect such interventional data,
resulting in clear gains in identifiability. For instance, in genomics, recent advances in gene editing
technologies have given rise to high-throughput methods for interventional gene expression data [6].
∗

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: {philippe.brouillard, sebastien.lachapelle}@umontreal.ca

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

