Differentiable Neural Architecture Search in
Equivalent Space with Exploration Enhancement

Miao Zhang1,2,3 , Huiqi Li1∗, Shirui Pan3∗ , Xiaojun Chang3 , Zongyuan Ge3,4 , Steven Su2
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 University of Technology Sydney
3
Monash University 4 Airdoc Research Australia
{Miao.Zhang, Shirui.Pan, Xiaojun.Chang, Zongyuan.Ge}@monash.edu,
huiqili@bit.edu.cn, steven.su@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Recent works on One-Shot Neural Architecture Search (NAS) mostly adopt a
bilevel optimization scheme to alternatively optimize the supernet weights and
architecture parameters after relaxing the discrete search space into a differentiable
space. However, the non-negligible incongruence in their relaxation methods is hard
to guarantee the differentiable optimization in the continuous space is equivalent to
the optimization in the discrete space. Differently, this paper utilizes a variational
graph autoencoder to injectively transform the discrete architecture space into an
equivalently continuous latent space, to resolve the incongruence. A probabilistic
exploration enhancement method is accordingly devised to encourage intelligent
exploration during the architecture search in the latent space, to avoid local optimal
in architecture search. As the catastrophic forgetting in differentiable One-Shot
NAS deteriorates supernet predictive ability and makes the bilevel optimization
inefficient, this paper further proposes an architecture complementation method
to relieve this deficiency. We analyze the proposed method’s effectiveness, and a
series of experiments have been conducted to compare the proposed method with
state-of-the-art One-Shot NAS methods.

1

Introduction

While Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [9, 18, 29] has achieved impressive results in many automating neural network designing tasks, it has also imposed huge demand of computation power for most
machine learning practitioners. To mitigate this problem, many recent studies have been devoted to
reducing the search cost through the weight-sharing paradigm (which is also called One-Shot NAS)
[4]. These methods define a supernet to subsume all possible architectures in the search space, and
evaluate architectures through inheriting weights from the supernet. Early One-Shot NAS approaches
first adopt a controller to sample architectures for the supernet training, and then use heuristic search
methods to find the promising architecture over a discrete search space based on the trained supernet
[14, 19, 26]. Later researches [6, 11, 15, 22, 23, 32] further employ the continuous relaxation to make
the architecture differentiable, so that gradient descent can be used to optimize the architecture with
respect to validation accuracy, and this paradigm is also referred to as differentiable NAS [22].
One shortcoming for the discrete-continuous conversion in differentiable NAS is that there is no
theoretical foundation showing that the optimization in the continuous latent space is equivalent to
discrete space. The lack of injective constraints in the simple continuous relaxation hardly guarantees
that performing optimization in the continuous latent space is equivalent to doing so in the discrete
space. Several concurrent works [7, 36] further reveal that this incongruence, which is correlated
∗

Corresponding Author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

