Online Influence Maximization under Linear
Threshold Model
Shuai Li1⇤

1

Fang Kong1
Kejie Tang1
Qizhi Li1
Wei Chen2
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Microsoft Research

{shuaili8,fangkong,tangkj00,qizhili}@sjtu.edu.cn

weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
Online influence maximization (OIM) is a popular problem in social networks to
learn influence propagation model parameters and maximize the influence spread at
the same time. Most previous studies focus on the independent cascade (IC) model
under the edge-level feedback. In this paper, we address OIM in the linear threshold
(LT) model. Because node activations in the LT model are due to the aggregated
effect of all active neighbors, it is more natural to model OIM with the node-level
feedback. And this brings new challenge in online learning since we only observe
aggregated effect from groups of nodes and the groups are also random. Based on
the linear structure in node activations, we incorporate ideas from linear bandits
and design an algorithm LT-LinUCB that is consistent with the observed feedback.
By proving group observation modulated (GOM) bounded smoothness property, a
novel result of the influence difference
p in terms of the random observations, we
provide a regret of order Õ(poly(m) T ), where m is the number of edges and
T is the number of rounds. This is the first theoretical result in such order for
OIM under the LT model. In the end, we also provide an algorithm OIM-ETC with
regret bound O(poly(m) T 2/3 ), which is model-independent, simple and has less
requirement on online feedback and offline computation.

1

Introduction

Social networks play an important role in spreading information in people’s life. In viral marketing,
companies wish to broadcast their products by making use of the network structure and characteristics
of influence propagation. Specifically, they want to provide free products to the selected users (seed
nodes), let them advertise through the network and maximize the purchase. There is a budget of the
free products and the goal of the companies is to select the optimal seed set to maximize the influence
spread. This problem is called influence maximization (IM) [19] and has a wide range of applications
including recommendation systems, link prediction and information diffusion.
In the IM problem, the social network is usually modeled as a directed graph with nodes representing
users and directed edges representing influence relationship between users. IM studies how to select
a seed set under a given influence propagation model to maximize the influence spread when the
weights are known. Independent cascade (IC) model and linear threshold (LT) model [19] are two
most widely used models to characterize the influence propagation in a social network, and both
models use weights on edges as model parameters.
In many real applications, however, the weights are usually unknown in advance. For example, in
viral marketing, it is unrealistic to assume that the companies know the influence abilities beforehand.
A possible solution is to learn those parameters from the diffusion data collected in the past [6, 36].
But this method lacks the ability of adaptive learning based on the need of influence maximization.
⇤

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

