Generative 3D Part Assembly via
Dynamic Graph Learning
Jialei Huang∗
Peking University
1600012454@pku.edu.cn
Kaichun Mo
Stanford University
kaichun@cs.stanford.edu

Guanqi Zhan∗
Peking University
guanqi_zhan@pku.edu.cn
Lin Shao
Stanford University
lins2@stanford.edu

Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University
guibas@cs.stanford.edu

Qingnan Fan
Stanford University
fqnchina@gmail.com

Baoquan Chen
CFCS, CS Dept., Peking University
AIIT, Peking University
baoquan.chen@gmail.com

Hao Dong†
CFCS, CS Dept., Peking University
AIIT, Peking University
Peng Cheng Laboratory
hao.dong@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Autonomous part assembly is a challenging yet crucial task in 3D computer vision
and robotics. Analogous to buying an IKEA furniture, given a set of 3D parts that
can assemble a single shape, an intelligent agent needs to perceive the 3D part
geometry, reason to propose pose estimations for the input parts, and ﬁnally call
robotic planning and control routines for actuation. In this paper, we focus on
the pose estimation subproblem from the vision side involving geometric and relational reasoning over the input part geometry. Essentially, the task of generative
3D part assembly is to predict a 6-DoF part pose, including a rigid rotation and
translation, for each input part that assembles a single 3D shape as the ﬁnal output.
To tackle this problem, we propose an assembly-oriented dynamic graph learning framework that leverages an iterative graph neural network as a backbone. It
explicitly conducts sequential part assembly reﬁnements in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner, exploits a pair of part relation reasoning module and part aggregation module
for dynamically adjusting both part features and their relations in the part graph.
We conduct extensive experiments and quantitative comparisons to three strong
baseline methods, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

It is a complicated and laborious task, even for humans, to assemble an IKEA furniture from its
parts. Without referring to any procedural or external guidance, e.g. reading the instruction manual,
or watching a step-by-step video demonstration, the task of 3D part assembly involves exploring an
extremely large solution spaces and reasoning over the input part geometry for candidate assembly
proposals. To assemble a physically stable furniture, a rich set of part relations and constraints need
to be satisﬁed for a successful assembly.
∗
†

Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin ﬂip.
Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

