Worst-Case Analysis for Randomly Collected Data

Justin Y. Chen
MIT
justc@mit.edu

Gregory Valiant
Stanford University
gvaliant@cs.stanford.edu

Paul Valiant
IAS and Purdue University
pvaliant@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce a framework for statistical estimation that leverages knowledge
of how samples are collected but makes no distributional assumptions on the
data values. Specifically, we consider a population of elements {1, . . . , n} with
corresponding values x1 , . . . , xn . We observe the values for a sample set A ⊂
{1, . . . , n} and wish to estimate some statistic of the values for a target set B ⊂
{1, . . . , n} where B could be the entire set. Crucially, we assume that the sets A and
B are drawn according to some known joint distribution (A, B) ∼ P over pairs of
subsets of {1, . . . , n}. A given estimation algorithm is evaluated based on its worstcase, expected error where the expectation is with respect to the distribution P from
which the sample A and target set B are drawn, and the worst-case is with respect
to the data values x1 , . . . , xn . Within this general framework we give an efficient
algorithm to find an estimator for the target mean, as a weighted combination of
the input sample—where the weights are a function of the distribution P and the
identities of the elements in the sample and target sets A, B. We show that the
worst-case expected error achieved by this estimator is at most a multiplicative π/2
factor worse than the optimum for such estimators. A component of this algorithm
can also be used to approximate the worst-case expected error of a given estimator.
The algorithm and proof leverage a surprising connection to the Grothendieck
problem. We extend these results to the setting of linear regression, where each
datapoint is not a scalar but a labeled vector (xi , yi ) ∈ Rd+1 . Our framework,
which makes no distributional assumptions on the data values but rather relies on
knowledge of the data collection process via the distribution P , is a significant
departure from the typical statistical estimation framework and introduces a uniform
algorithmic analysis for the many natural settings where membership in a sample
may be correlated with data values, such as when probabilities of sampling vary as
in “importance sampling”, when individuals are recruited into a sample via a social
network as in “snowball sampling” or “respondent-driven sampling” [12, 14] or
when samples have chronological structure as in “selective prediction” [10, 21].
We experimentally demonstrate the benefit of this framework and our algorithm in
comparison to standard estimators, for several such settings.

1

Modeling Data Collection

For many real-world estimation or prediction problems, it is not unreasonable to assume that data
values are drawn independently from some underlying distribution. Correspondingly, there is an
enormous body of work developing algorithms suited for such settings as well as for related settings
with slightly weaker assumptions such as exchangeability or assumptions found in various models in
robust statistics or robust learning. By contrast, there are also many settings in which we know very
little about the underlying data values, and any sort of distributional assumption would be problematic.
For such settings, however, we might have some knowledge or control over the process by which
data is collected. How can we design algorithms for estimating basic statistics that are optimal for a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

