Learning discrete distributions: user vs item-level
privacy

Yuhan Liu
Cornell University
yl2976@cornell.edu
Felix Yu
Google Research
felixyu@google.com

Ananda Theertha Suresh
Google Research
theertha@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
sanjivk@google.com

Michael Riley
Google Research
riley@google.com

Abstract
Much of the literature on differential privacy focuses on item-level privacy, where
loosely speaking, the goal is to provide privacy per item or training example.
However, recently many practical applications such as federated learning require
preserving privacy for all items of a single user, which is much harder to achieve.
Therefore understanding the theoretical limit of user-level privacy becomes crucial.
We study the fundamental problem of learning discrete distributions over k symbols with user-level differential privacy. If each user has m samples, we show that
straightforward applications of Laplace or Gaussian mechanisms require the number of users to be O(k/(mα2 ) + k/εα) to achieve an `1 distance of α between the
true and estimated distributions, with the privacy-induced penalty k/εα independent of the number of samples per user m. Moreover, we show that any mechanism
that only operates on the final aggregate counts should require a user complexity
of the same order. We then propose a mechanism such that the number of users
√
√
scales as Õ(k/(mα2 ) + k/ mεα) and hence the privacy penalty is Θ̃( m) times
smaller compared to the standard mechanisms in certain settings of interest. We
further show that the proposed mechanism is nearly-optimal under certain regimes.
We also propose general techniques for obtaining lower bounds on restricted
differentially private estimators and a lower bound on the total variation between
binomial distributions, both of which might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

1.1

Differential privacy

Differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006, Dwork and Roth, 2014, Wasserman and Zhou, 2010]
has emerged as the standard framework for providing privacy for various statistical problems. Ever
since its inception, it has been applied to various statistical and learning scenarios including learning
histograms [Dwork et al., 2006, Hay et al., 2010, Suresh, 2019], statistical estimation [Diakonikolas
et al., 2015, Kamath et al., 2019, Acharya et al., 2020, Kamath et al., 2020, Acharya et al., 2019a,b],
learning machine learning models [Chaudhuri et al., 2011, Bassily et al., 2014, McMahan et al.,
2018b, Dwork et al., 2014], hypothesis testing [Aliakbarpour et al., 2018, Acharya et al., 2018], and
various other tasks.
Differential privacy is studied in two scenarios, local differential privacy [Kasiviswanathan et al.,
2011, Duchi et al., 2013] and global differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006]. In this paper, we study
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

