Non-crossing quantile regression for deep
reinforcement learning

Fan Zhou, Jianing Wang, Xingdong Feng∗
School of Statistics and Management
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
zhoufan@mail.shufe.edu.cn;jianing.wang@163.sufe.edu.cn;
feng.xingdong@mail.shufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Distributional reinforcement learning (DRL) estimates the distribution over future returns instead of the mean to more efficiently capture the intrinsic uncertainty of MDPs. However, batch-based DRL algorithms cannot guarantee the
non-decreasing property of learned quantile curves especially at the early training
stage, leading to abnormal distribution estimates and reduced model interpretability. To address these issues, we introduce a general DRL framework by using
non-crossing quantile regression to ensure the monotonicity constraint within each
sampled batch, which can be incorporated with some well-known DRL algorithm.
We demonstrate the validity of our method from both the theory and model implementation perspectives. Experiments on Atari 2600 Games show that some
state-of-art DRL algorithms with the non-crossing modification can significantly
outperform their baselines in terms of faster convergence speeds and better testing
performance. In particular, our method can effectively recover the distribution
information and thus dramatically increase the exploration efficiency when the
reward space is extremely sparse.

1

Introduction

Different from value-based reinforcement learning algorithms [16, 21, 22] which entirely focus on the
expected future return, distributional reinforcement learning (DRL) [12, 20, 24, 17, 1] also accounts
for the intrinsic randomness within a Markov Decision Process [5, 4, 19] by modelling the total return
as a random variable. Existing DRL algorithms fall into two broad categories, one of which learns
quantile values at a set of pre-defined locations such as C51 [1], Rainbow[10], and QR-DQN [5].
Relaxing the constraint on the value range makes QR-DQN achieve a significant improvement over
C51 and Rainbow. One recent study, IQN, proposed by [4], shifts the attention from estimating a
discrete set of quantiles to the quantile function. IQN has a more flexible architecture than QR-DQN
by allowing quantile fractions to be sampled from a uniform distribution. With sufficient network
capacity and infinite number of quantiles, IQN can theoretically approximate the full distribution.
A big challenge to distributional RL methods is how to evaluate the validity of the learned quantile
distribution. One common problem of fitting quantile regressions at multiple percentiles is the nonmonotonicity of the obtained quantile estimates. Much of this issue can be attributed to the fact that
the quantile functions are estimated at different quantile levels separately without applying any global
constraints to ensure monotonicity. The crossing phenomenon is significantly enhanced by the limited
training samples especially at the early stage of the training process, which also increases the difficulty
of model interpretation. Without the non-crossing guarantee, the direction of policy searching may be
distorted and the selection of optimal actions greatly varies across training epochs. On the other hand,
∗

Corresponding Author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

