Constrained episodic reinforcement learning in
concave-convex and knapsack settings

Kianté Brantley
University of Maryland
kdbrant@cs.umd.edu

Miroslav Dudík
Microsoft Research
mdudik@microsoft.com

Thodoris Lykouris
Microsoft Research
thlykour@microsoft.com

Sobhan Miryoosefi
Princeton University
miryoosefi@cs.princeton.edu

Max Simchowitz
UC Berkeley
msimchow@berkeley.edu

Aleksandrs Slivkins
Microsoft Research
slivkins@microsoft.com

Wen Sun
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Abstract
We propose an algorithm for tabular episodic reinforcement learning (RL) with
constraints. We provide a modular analysis with strong theoretical guarantees for
two general settings. First is the convex-concave setting: maximization of a concave
reward function subject to constraints that expected values of some vector quantities
(such as the use of unsafe actions) lie in a convex set. Second is the knapsack setting:
maximization of reward subject to the constraint that the total consumption of any
of the specified resources does not exceed specified levels during the whole learning
process. Previous work in constrained RL is limited to linear expectation constraints
(a special case of convex-concave setting), or focuses on feasibility question, or on
single-episode settings. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed algorithm
significantly outperforms these approaches in constrained episodic benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Standard reinforcement learning (RL) approaches seek to maximize a scalar reward (Sutton and
Barto, 1998, 2018; Schulman et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2015), but in many settings this is insufficient,
because the desired properties of the agent behavior are better described using constraints. For
example, an autonomous vehicle should not only get to the destination, but should also respect safety,
fuel efficiency, and human comfort constraints along the way (Le et al., 2019); a robot should not
only fulfill its task, but should also control its wear and tear, for example, by limiting the torque
exerted on its motors (Tessler et al., 2019). Moreover, in many settings, we wish to satisfy such
constraints already during training and not only during the deployment. For example, a power grid,
an autonomous vehicle, or a real robotic hardware should avoid costly failures, where the hardware
is damaged or humans are harmed, already during training (Leike et al., 2017; Ray et al., 2020).
Constraints are also key in additional sequential decision making applications, such as dynamic
pricing with limited supply (e.g., Besbes and Zeevi, 2009; Babaioff et al., 2015), scheduling of
resources on a computer cluster (Mao et al., 2016), and imitation learning, where the goal is to stay
close to an expert behavior (Syed and Schapire, 2007; Ziebart et al., 2008; Sun et al., 2019).
In this paper we study constrained episodic reinforcement learning, which encompasses all of these
applications. An important characteristic of our approach, distinguishing it from previous work (e.g.,
Altman, 1999; Achiam et al., 2017; Tessler et al., 2019; Miryoosefi et al., 2019; Ray et al., 2020), is
our focus on efficient exploration, leading to reduced sample complexity. Notably, the modularity of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

