∆-STN: Efficient Bilevel Optimization for Neural
Networks using Structured Response Jacobians

Juhan Bae
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
jbae@cs.toronto.edu

Roger Grosse
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
rgrosse@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Hyperparameter optimization of neural networks can be elegantly formulated as
a bilevel optimization problem. While research on bilevel optimization of neural
networks has been dominated by implicit differentiation and unrolling, hypernetworks such as Self-Tuning Networks (STNs) have recently gained traction due to
their ability to amortize the optimization of the inner objective. In this paper, we
diagnose several subtle pathologies in the training of STNs. Based on these observations, we propose the ∆-STN, an improved hypernetwork architecture which
stabilizes training and optimizes hyperparameters much more efficiently than STNs.
The key idea is to focus on accurately approximating the best-response Jacobian
rather than the full best-response function; we achieve this by reparameterizing
the hypernetwork and linearizing the network around the current parameters. We
demonstrate empirically that our ∆-STN can tune regularization hyperparameters
(e.g. weight decay, dropout, number of cutout holes) with higher accuracy, faster
convergence, and improved stability compared to existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Tuning regularization hyperparameters such as weight decay, dropout [55], and data augmentation
is indispensable for state-of-the-art performance in a challenging dataset such as ImageNet [8, 52,
7]. An automatic approach to adapting these hyperparameters would improve performance and
simplify the engineering process. Although black box methods for tuning hyperparameters such as
grid search, random search [2], and Bayesian optimization [53, 54] work well in low-dimensional
hyperparameter spaces, they are computationally expensive, require many runs of training, and
require that hyperparameter values be fixed throughout training.
Hyperparameter optimization can be elegantly formulated as a bilevel optimization problem [5, 15].
Let w ∈ Rm denote parameters (e.g. weights and biases) and λ ∈ Rh denote hyperparameters
(e.g. weight decay). Let LV and LT denote validation and training objectives, respectively. We aim
to find the optimal hyperparameters λ∗ that minimize the validation objective at the end of training.
Mathematically, the bilevel objective can be formulated as follows1 :
λ∗ = arg min LV (λ, w∗ ) subject to w∗ = arg min LT (λ, w)
λ∈Rh

(1.1)

w∈Rm

In machine learning, most work on bilevel optimization has focused on implicit differentiation [28,
48] and unrolling [39, 14]. A more recent approach, which we build on in this work, explicitly
approximates the best-response (rational reaction) function r(λ) = arg minw LT (λ, w) with a
hypernetwork [49, 19] and jointly optimizes the hyperparameters and the hypernetwork [35]. The
1

The uniqueness of arg min is assumed throughout this paper.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

