A Single Recipe for Online Submodular Maximization
with Adversarial or Stochastic Constraints
Omid Sadeghi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
omids@uw.edu

Prasanna Raut
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
raut@uw.edu

Maryam Fazel
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
mfazel@uw.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we consider an online optimization problem in which the reward
functions are DR-submodular, and in addition to maximizing the total reward, the
sequence of decisions must satisfy some convex constraints on average. Specifically,
at each round t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, upon committing to an action xt , a DR-submodular
utility function ft (·) and a convex constraint function gt (·) are revealed, and the
goal is to maximize the overall utility while ensuring the average of the constraint
PT
functions T1 t=1 gt (xt ) is non-positive. Such cumulative constraints arise naturally in applications where the average resource consumption is required to remain
below a prespecified threshold. We study this problem under an adversarial model
and a stochastic model for the convex constraints, where the functions gt can vary
arbitrarily or according to an i.i.d. process over time slots t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, respectively. We propose a single algorithm which achieves sub-linear (with respect to T )
regret as well as sub-linear constraint violation bounds in both settings, without
prior knowledge of the regime. Prior works have studied this problem in the special
case of linear constraint functions. Our results not only improve upon the existing
bounds under linear cumulative constraints, but also give the first sub-linear bounds
for general convex long-term constraints.

1

Introduction

Online optimization covers a large number of problems in which information is revealed incrementally
(i.e., online) and irrevocable decisions should be made at each step in face of uncertainty about the
future arriving information [1–5]. Such problems could be formulated as a repeated game between
the decision maker (i.e., the learner) and the adversary (i.e., the nature or environment). At each
iteration of this game, the learner chooses an action from a fixed domain set and then, it receives
feedback in the form of utility or reward for her selected action. In the non-stochastic feedback model,
no assumptions are made on the sequence of arriving rewards except their boundedness. As time goes
by, the learner aims to observe the past and make better decisions to maximize the overall reward.
The performance of online algorithms are usually measured through the regret or the competitive
ratio of the algorithm. In the regret analysis framework, at each round, the learner has to commit to
an action before observing the corresponding reward function and the goal is to design algorithms
whose total accumulated reward differs sub-linearly (in the time horizon T ) from the reward of the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

