Robust Federated Learning:
The Case of Affine Distribution Shifts
Amirhossein Reisizadeh∗
ECE Department
UC Santa Barbara
reisizadeh@ucsb.edu

Farzan Farnia∗
LIDS
MIT
farnia@mit.edu

Ramtin Pedarsani
ECE Department
UC Santa Barbara
ramtin@ece.ucsb.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
LIDS
MIT
jadbabai@mit.edu

Abstract
Federated learning is a distributed paradigm for training models using samples
distributed across multiple users in a network, while keeping the samples on users’
devices with the aim of efficiency and protecting users privacy. In such settings, the
training data is often statistically heterogeneous and manifests various distribution
shifts across users, which degrades the performance of the learnt model. The
primary goal of this paper is to develop a robust federated learning algorithm that
achieves satisfactory performance against distribution shifts in users’ samples. To
achieve this goal, we first consider a structured affine distribution shift in users’
data that captures the device-dependent data heterogeneity in federated settings.
This perturbation model is applicable to various federated learning problems such
as image classification where the images undergo device-dependent imperfections,
e.g. different intensity, contrast, and brightness. To address affine distribution
shifts across users, we propose a Federated Learning framework Robust to Affine
distribution shifts (FLRA) that is robust against affine distribution shifts to the
distribution of observed samples. To solve the FLRA’s distributed minimax optimization problem, we propose a fast and efficient optimization method and provide
convergence and performance guarantees via a gradient Descent Ascent (GDA)
method. We further prove generalization error bounds for the learnt classifier
to show proper generalization from empirical distribution of samples to the true
underlying distribution. We perform several numerical experiments to empirically
support FLRA. We show that an affine distribution shift indeed suffices to significantly decrease the performance of the learnt classifier in a new test user, and our
proposed algorithm achieves a significant gain in comparison to standard federated
learning and adversarial training methods.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a new framework for training a centralized model using data samples distributed
over a network of devices, while keeping data localized. Federated learning comes with the promise
of training accurate models using local data points such that the privacy of participating devices is preserved; however, it faces several challenges ranging from developing statistically and computationally
efficient algorithms to guaranteeing privacy.
A typical federated learning setting consists of a network of hundreds to millions of devices (nodes)
which interact with each other through a central node (a parameter server). Communicating messages
over such a large-scale network can lead to major slow-downs due to communication bandwidth
bottlenecks [1, 2]. In fact, the communication bottleneck is one of the main grounds that distinguishes
federated and standard distributed learning paradigms. To reduce communication load in federated
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

