On the Loss Landscape of Adversarial Training:
Identifying Challenges and How to Overcome Them

1

Chen Liu1 Mathieu Salzmann1 Tao Lin1 Ryota Tomioka2 Sabine Süsstrunk1
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, {chen.liu, mathieu.salzmann, tao.lin, sabine.susstrunk}@epfl.ch
2
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK, ryoto@microsoft.com

Abstract
We analyze the influence of adversarial training on the loss landscape of machine
learning models. To this end, we first provide analytical studies of the properties of
adversarial loss functions under different adversarial budgets. We then demonstrate
that the adversarial loss landscape is less favorable to optimization, due to increased
curvature and more scattered gradients. Our conclusions are validated by numerical
analyses, which show that training under large adversarial budgets impede the
escape from suboptimal random initialization, cause non-vanishing gradients and
make the model find sharper minima. Based on these observations, we show that
a periodic adversarial scheduling (PAS) strategy can effectively overcome these
challenges, yielding better results than vanilla adversarial training while being
much less sensitive to the choice of learning rate.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art deep learning models have been found to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks [18, 34,
45]. Imperceptible perturbations of the input can make the model produce wrong predictions with
high confidence. This raises concerns about deep learning’s deployment in safety-critical applications.
Although many training algorithms have been proposed to counter such adversarial attacks, most
of them were observed to fail when facing stronger attacks [4, 10]. Adversarial training [33] is one
of the few exceptions, so far remaining effective and thus popular. It uses adversarial examples
generated with the attacker’s scheme to update the model parameters. However, adversarial training
and its variants [2, 6, 24, 42, 53] have been found to have a much larger generalization gap [37] and
to require larger model capacity for convergence [49]. Although recent works [6, 40] show that the
adversarial training error reduces to almost 0% with a large enough model and that the generalization
gap can be narrowed by using more training data, convergence in adversarial training remains
much slower than in vanilla training on clean data. This indicates discrepancies in the underlying
optimization landscapes. While much work has studied the loss landscape of deep networks in vanilla
training [12, 13, 14, 15, 31], such an analysis in adversarial training remains unaddressed.
Here we study optimization in adversarial training. Vanilla training can be considered as a special
case where no perturbation is allowed, i.e., zero adversarial budget. Therefore, we focus on the
impact of the adversarial budget size on the loss landscape. In this context, we investigate from a
theoretical and empirical perspective how different adversarial budget sizes affect the loss landscape
to make optimization more challenging. Our analyses start with linear models and then generalize to
nonlinear deep learning ones. We study the whole training process and identify different behaviors
in the early and final stages of training. Based on our observations, we then introduce a scheduling
strategy for the adversarial budget during training. We empirically show this scheme to yield better
performance and to be less sensitive to the learning rate than vanilla adversarial training.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

