Community detection in sparse time-evolving graphs
with a dynamical Bethe-Hessian

Lorenzo Dall’Amico
GIPSA-lab, UGA, CNRS, Grenoble INP
lorenzo.dall-amico@gipsa-lab.fr
Romain Couillet
GIPSA-lab, UGA, CNRS, Grenoble INP
L2S, CentraleSupélec, University of Paris Saclay

Nicolas Tremblay
GIPSA-lab, UGA, CNRS, Grenoble INP

Abstract
This article considers the problem of community detection in sparse dynamical
graphs in which the community structure evolves over time. A fast spectral algorithm based on an extension of the Bethe-Hessian matrix is proposed, which
benefits from the positive correlation in the class labels and in their temporal evolution and is designed to be applicable to any dynamical graph with a community
structure. Under the dynamical degree-corrected stochastic block model, in the
case of two classes of equal size, we demonstrate and support with extensive
simulations that our proposed algorithm is capable of making non-trivial community reconstruction as soon as theoretically possible, thereby reaching the optimal
detectability threshold and provably outperforming competing spectral methods.

1

Introduction

Complex networks are a powerful tool to describe pairwise interactions among the members of a
multi-agent system [1]. One of the most elementary tasks to be performed on networks is community
detection [2, 3], i.e., the identification of a non overlapping partition of the members (or nodes) of
the network, representing its “mesoscale” structure. Although most of the attention is still focused
on static community detection [3], many real networks are intimately dynamic: this is the case of
networks representing physical proximity of mobile agents, collaboration interactions in the long run,
biological and chemical evolution of group members, etc. (see [4] for a review).
There are many ways to define the concept of communities, particularly in dynamical networks (see
e.g., [3, 5]). In this article, we focus on the dynamical degree corrected stochastic block model (DDCSBM), formally defined in Section 2, which is a variation of the static DCSBM [6, 7]. Specifically,
letting Gt be the k-community graph at time instant t, Gt is generated independently of Gt0 for all
t0 6= t, but only a fraction 1 − η (for η ∈ [0, 1]) of the nodes changes class association between
time t and time t + 1. The degree correction lets the nodes have an arbitrary degree distribution,
thereby possibly accounting for the broad distributions typical of real networks [8]. Of fundamental
importance, in the static regime, two-class DCSBM graphs exhibit a detectability threshold below
which no algorithm can asymptotically find a node partition non trivially aligned to the genuine classes
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Under a D-DCSBM model, one can similarly define a dynamical detectability
threshold which considers the inference problem on the graph sequence {Gt }t=1,...,T [14]. For k > 2
classes, the identification of a detectability threshold remains an open problem.
Spectral clustering is arguably one of the most successful ways to perform community detection
[15]. Instances of spectral methods are indeed known to attain the detectability threshold in various
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

