SVGD as a kernelized Wasserstein gradient flow of
the chi-squared divergence

Sinho Chewi
MIT
schewi@mit.edu

Thibaut Le Gouic
MIT
tlegouic@mit.edu

Chen Lu
MIT
chenl819@mit.edu

Tyler Maunu
MIT
maunut@mit.edu

Philippe Rigollet
MIT
rigollet@mit.edu

Abstract
Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD), a popular sampling algorithm, is often
described as the kernelized gradient flow for the Kullback-Leibler divergence in
the geometry of optimal transport. We introduce a new perspective on SVGD that
instead views SVGD as the (kernelized) gradient flow of the chi-squared divergence which, we show, exhibits a strong form of uniform exponential ergodicity
under conditions as weak as a Poincaré inequality. This perspective leads us to
propose an alternative to SVGD, called Laplacian Adjusted Wasserstein Gradient
Descent (LAWGD), that can be implemented from the spectral decomposition of
the Laplacian operator associated with the target density. We show that LAWGD
exhibits strong convergence guarantees and good practical performance.

1

Introduction

The seminal paper of Jordan, Kinderlehrer, and Otto [JKO98] has profoundly reshaped our understanding of sampling algorithms. What is now commonly known as the JKO scheme interprets the
evolution of marginal distributions of a Langevin diffusion as a gradient flow of a Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence over the Wasserstein space of probability measures. This optimization perspective on
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) has not only renewed our understanding of algorithms based on
Langevin diffusions [Dal17a; Ber18; CB18; Wib18; DMM19; VW19], but has also fueled the discovery of new MCMC algorithms inspired by the diverse and powerful optimization toolbox [Mar+12;
Sim+16; Che+18; Ber18; Hsi+18; Wib18; Ma+19; Wib19; Che+20; DR20; Zha+20b].
In order to arrive at a practical sampling algorithm, one must discretize the Wasserstein gradient flow.
The most common discretization is to discretize the Langevin diffusion, resulting in the Unadjusted
Langevin Algorithm (ULA) [Dal17b; DM17]. However, it is unclear whether this diffusion based
discretization is the most effective one. In fact, ULA is asymptotically biased, which results in slow
convergence and often requires ad-hoc adjustments [Dwi+19]. To overcome this limitation, various
methods that track the Wasserstein gradient flow more closely have been recently developed [Ber18;
Wib18; SKL20].
An alternative sampling approach that avoids diffusions is to construct a sequence of deterministic
mappings that approximately pushes forward an initial distribution to the target distribution. Let F
denote a functional over the Wasserstein space of distributions. The Wasserstein gradient flow of F
may be described as the deterministic and time-inhomogeneous Markov process (Xt )t≥0 started at a
random variable X0 ∼ µ0 and evolving according to Ẋt = −[∇W2 F (µt )](Xt ), where µt denotes
the distribution of Xt . Here [∇W2 F (µ)](·) : Rd → Rd is the Wasserstein gradient of F at µ. If
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

