Fast geometric learning with symbolic matrices
Jean Feydy*
Imperial College London
jfeydy@ic.ac.uk

Joan Alexis Glaunès*
Université de Paris
alexis.glaunes@parisdescartes.fr

Benjamin Charlier*
Université de Montpellier
benjamin.charlier@umontpellier.fr

Michael M. Bronstein
Imperial College London / Twitter
m.bronstein@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Geometric methods rely on tensors that can be encoded using a symbolic formula
and data arrays, such as kernel and distance matrices. We present an extension for
standard machine learning frameworks that provides comprehensive support for
this abstraction on CPUs and GPUs: our toolbox combines a versatile, transparent
user interface with fast runtimes and low memory usage. Unlike general purpose
acceleration frameworks such as XLA, our library turns generic Python code
into binaries whose performances are competitive with state-of-the-art geometric
libraries – such as FAISS for nearest neighbor search – with the added benefit
of flexibility. We perform an extensive evaluation on a broad class of problems:
Gaussian modelling, K-nearest neighbors search, geometric deep learning, nonEuclidean embeddings and optimal transport theory. In practice, for geometric
problems that involve 103 to 106 samples in dimension 1 to 100, our library speeds
up baseline GPU implementations by up to two orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Fast numerical methods are the fuel of machine learning research. Over the last decade, the sustained
development of the CUDA ecosystem has driven the progress in the field: though Python is the lingua
franca of data science and machine learning, most frameworks rely on efficient C++ backends to
leverage the computing power of GPUs [1, 86, 101]. Recent advances in computer vision or natural
language processing attest to the fitness of modern libraries: they stem from the mix of power and
flexibility that is provided by PyTorch, TensorFlow and general purpose accelerators such as XLA.
Nevertheless, important work remains to be done. Geometric computations present a clear gap
in performances between Python and C++: notable examples are implementations of point cloud
convolutions or of the nearest neighbor search [65, 76]. To scale up geometric computations to
real-world data, a common practice is therefore to replace the compute-intensive parts of a Python
code by handcrafted CUDA kernels [35, 60, 92]. These are expensive to develop and maintain, which
leads to an unfortunate need to compromise between ease of development and scalability.
To address this issue, we present KeOps: an extension for PyTorch, NumPy, Matlab and R that
combines the speed of a handcrafted CUDA kernel with the simplicity of a high level language.
Our toolbox optimizes map-reduce operations on generalized point clouds and provides transparent
support for distance-like matrices, as illustrated in Figure 1. The resulting computations are fully
differentiable and have a negligible memory footprint. Their runtimes are competitive with stateof-the-art CUDA libraries when they exist, and peerless in the many use cases that are not covered
by existing implementations. Our library fits seamlessly within existing codebases and provides
a sizeable performance boost to a wide range of methods. Among other applications, we present
optimal transport solvers and geometric operators in hyperbolic spaces which are orders of magnitude
faster than the state-of-the-art. We believe that our library is an important addition to the existing
arsenal of tools and will have a stimulating impact on machine learning research.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

