Multi-Robot Collision Avoidance under Uncertainty
with Probabilistic Safety Barrier Certificates

Wenhao Luo∗
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
wenhaol@cs.cmu.edu

Wen Sun
Computer Science Department
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Ashish Kapoor
Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, Washington 98033
akapoor@microsoft.com

Abstract
Safety in terms of collision avoidance for multi-robot systems is a difficult challenge
under uncertainty, non-determinism and lack of complete information. This paper
aims to propose a collision avoidance method that accounts for both measurement
uncertainty and motion uncertainty. In particular, we propose Probabilistic Safety
Barrier Certificates (PrSBC) using Control Barrier Functions to define the space
of admissible control actions that are probabilistically safe with formally provable
theoretical guarantee. By formulating the chance constrained safety set into deterministic control constraints with PrSBC, the method entails minimally modifying
an existing controller to determine an alternative safe controller via quadratic programming constrained to PrSBC constraints. The key advantage of the approach
is that no assumptions about the form of uncertainty are required other than finite
support, also enabling worst-case guarantees. We demonstrate effectiveness of the
approach through experiments on realistic simulation environments.

1

Introduction

Safe control is one of the most important task that needs to be addressed in the realm of large-scale
multi-robot systems. For example, consider the problem of building an automatic collision avoidance
system (ACAS) for aerial robots that would scale up as the autonomous aerial traffic increases. Such
a system needs to be computationally efficient for execution in real-time and robust to various realworld factors that include uncertainty, non-determinism and approximations made in the formulation
of the system. Measurement uncertainty in the system arises from various estimation or prediction
procedures in real-world that rely on sensory information ( e.g. LIDARS, on-board GPS) being
collected in real-time to get robots state information. On the other hand, non-determinism often arises
from our in-ability to model various exogenous variables that are part of our operating environment,
e.g. phenomena such as wind gusts. Ability to pro-actively deal with such measurement and motion
uncertainty is fundamental in the safety considerations.
In this work, we consider the problem of real-time safe control in terms of reactive collision avoidance
for crowded multi-robot team operating in a realistic environment with their existing task-related
controllers or control policies. Akin to real-world we consider scenarios with both measurement
∗

Work done while interning at Microsoft Corporation, Redmond.
Code is available online at https://github.com/wenhaol/PrSBC.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

