Exploiting Higher Order Smoothness in
Derivative-free Optimization and Continuous Bandits

Arya Akhavan
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
and
ENSAE Paris Tech
aria.akhavanfoomani@iit.it

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
and
University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Alexandre B. Tsybakov
ENSAE Paris Tech
alexandre.tsybakov@ensae.fr

Abstract
We study the problem of zero-order optimization of a strongly convex function.
The goal is to find the minimizer of the function by a sequential exploration of its
values, under measurement noise. We study the impact of higher order smoothness
properties of the function on the optimization error and on the cumulative regret.
To solve this problem we consider a randomized approximation of the projected
gradient descent algorithm. The gradient is estimated by a randomized procedure
involving two function evaluations and a smoothing kernel. We derive upper
bounds for this algorithm both in the constrained and unconstrained settings and
prove minimax lower bounds for any sequential search method. Our results imply
that the zero-order algorithm is nearly optimal in terms of sample complexity and
the problem parameters. Based on this algorithm, we also propose an estimator
of the minimum value of the function achieving almost sharp oracle behavior.
We compare our results with the state-of-the-art, highlighting a number of key
improvements.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of zero-order stochastic optimization, in which we aim to minimize an unknown
strongly convex function via a sequential exploration of its function values, under measurement
error, and a closely related problem of continuous (or continuum-armed) stochastic bandits. These
problems have received significant attention in the literature, see [1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 14, 17, 18, 34,
16, 20, 21, 30, 25, 31, 13, 27, 28, 19, 29], and are fundamental for many applications in which the
derivatives of the function are either too expensive or impossible to compute. A principal goal of this
paper is to exploit higher order smoothness properties of the underlying function in order to improve
the performance of search algorithms. We derive upper bounds on the estimation error for a class of
projected gradient-like algorithms, as well as close matching lower bounds, that characterize the role
played by the number of iterations, the strong convexity parameter, the smoothness parameter, the
number of variables, and the noise level.
Let f : Rd → R be the function that we wish to minimize over a closed convex subset Θ of Rd . Our
approach, outlined in Algorithm 1, builds upon previous work in which a sequential algorithm queries
at each iteration a pair of function values, under a general noise model. Specifically, at iteration t the
current guess xt for the minimizer of f is used to build two perturbations xt + δt and xt − δt , where
the function values are queried subject to additive measurement errors ξt and ξt0 , respectively. The
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

