Model Selection in Contextual Stochastic Bandit
Problems
Aldo Pacchiano⇤
UC Berkeley
Julian Zimmert
Google Research

My Phan⇤
University of Massachusetts
Tor Lattimore
DeepMind

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori
DeepMind

Anup Rao
Adobe

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind and University of Alberta

Abstract
We study bandit model selection in stochastic environments. Our approach relies
on a master algorithm that selects between candidate base algorithms. We develop
a master-base algorithm abstraction that can work with general classes of base
algorithms and different type of adversarial master algorithms. Our methods rely
on a novel and generic smoothing
transformation for bandit algorithms that permits
p
us to obtain optimal O( T ) model selection guarantees for stochastic contextual
bandit problems as long as the optimal base algorithm satisfies a high probability
regret guarantee. We show through a lower bound that even when one of the p
base
algorithms has O(log T ) regret, in general it is impossible to get better than ⌦( T )
regret in model selection, even asymptotically. Using our techniques, we address
model selection in a variety of problems such as misspecified linear contextual
bandits [13], linear bandit with unknown dimension [8] and reinforcement learning
with unknown feature maps. Our algorithm requires the knowledge of the optimal
base regret to adjust the master learning rate. We show that without such prior
knowledge any master can suffer a regret larger than the optimal base regret.

1

Introduction

In a bandit model selection problem, given a set of base algorithms, the learner aims to adapt in an
online fashion to the best base that is the most suitable for the current environment. Maillard and
Munos [15] are perhaps the first to address the bandit model-selection problem, with a variant of
EXP4 master algorithm that works with UCB or EXP3 base algorithms. These results are improved
by Agarwal et al. [2]. Agarwal et al. [2] combine the base algorithms using an online mirror descent
master (CORRAL) that sends importance weighted rewards to the base algorithms, thus requiring
each base algorithm to be individually modified to be compatible with the master. For example, to
use UCB as a base, we would need to manually re-derive UCB’s confidence interval and modify its
regret analysis to be compatible with importance weighted feedback. Instead, we introduce a generic
smoothing wrapper method that can be applied to base algorithms without substantial modification.
There are works on model selection in settings such as in linear bandits with unknown dimension or
structure [8, 6]. Apart from strong assumptions, those works are limited to a specific model-selection
problem. A general and efficient method to combine multiple base algorithms is missing.
Contributions. We focus on bandit model-selection in stochastic environments. Our contributions
are as follows:
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

