Supermasks in Superposition

Mitchell Wortsman∗
University of Washington

Vivek Ramanujan∗
Allen Institute for AI

Mohammad Rastegari
University of Washington

Rosanne Liu
ML Collective

Jason Yosinski
ML Collective

Aniruddha Kembhavi†
Allen Institute for AI

Ali Farhadi
University of Washington

Abstract
We present the Supermasks in Superposition (SupSup) model, capable of sequentially learning thousands of tasks without catastrophic forgetting. Our approach
uses a randomly initialized, fixed base network and for each task finds a subnetwork (supermask) that achieves good performance. If task identity is given at test
time, the correct subnetwork can be retrieved with minimal memory usage. If not
provided, SupSup can infer the task using gradient-based optimization to find a
linear superposition of learned supermasks which minimizes the output entropy.
In practice we find that a single gradient step is often sufficient to identify the
correct mask, even among 2500 tasks. We also showcase two promising extensions.
First, SupSup models can be trained entirely without task identity information, as
they may detect when they are uncertain about new data and allocate an additional
supermask for the new training distribution. Finally the entire, growing set of
supermasks can be stored in a constant-sized reservoir by implicitly storing them
as attractors in a fixed-sized Hopfield network.

1

Introduction

Learning many different tasks sequentially without forgetting remains a notable challenge for neural
networks [47, 56, 23]. If the weights of a neural network are trained on a new task, performance on
previous tasks often degrades substantially [33, 10, 12], a problem known as catastrophic forgetting.
In this paper, we begin with the observation that catastrophic forgetting cannot occur if the weights
of the network remain fixed and random. We leverage this to develop a flexible model capable
of learning thousands of tasks: Supermasks in Superposition (SupSup). SupSup, diagrammed in
Figure 1, is driven by two core ideas: a) the expressive power of untrained, randomly weighted
subnetworks [57, 39], and b) inference of task-identity as a gradient-based optimization problem.
a) The expressive power of subnetworks Neural networks may be overlaid with a binary mask
that selectively keeps or removes each connection, producing a subnetwork. The number of possible
subnetworks is combinatorial in the number of parameters. Researchers have observed that the
number of combinations is large enough that even within randomly weighted neural networks, there
exist supermasks that create corresponding subnetworks which achieve good performance on complex
tasks. Zhou et al. [57] and Ramanujan et al. [39] present two algorithms for finding these supermasks
while keeping the weights of the underlying network fixed and random. SupSup scales to many tasks
by finding for each task a supermask atop a shared, untrained network.
b) Inference of task-identity as an optimization problem When task identity is unknown,
SupSup can infer task identity to select the correct supermask. Given data from task j, we aim
∗

Equal contribution. † Also affiliated with the University of Washington. Code available at https://github.
com/RAIVNLab/supsup and correspondence to {mitchnw,ramanv}@cs.washington.edu.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

