A Maximum-Entropy Approach to Off-Policy
Evaluation in Average-Reward MDPs
Nevena Lazić⇤

Dong Yin⇤

Mehrdad Farajtabar⇤

Chris Harris†

Nir Levine⇤

Dilan Görür⇤

Dale Schuurmans†

Abstract
This work focuses on off-policy evaluation (OPE) with function approximation in
infinite-horizon undiscounted Markov decision processes (MDPs). For MDPs that
are ergodic and linear (i.e. where rewards and dynamics are linear in some known
features), we provide the first finite-sample OPE error bound for a model-based
approach, extending existing results beyond the episodic and discounted cases.
In a more general setting, when the feature dynamics are approximately linear
and for arbitrary rewards, we propose a new heuristic approach for estimating
stationary distributions with function approximation. Namely, we formulate this
problem as finding the maximum-entropy distribution subject to matching feature
expectations under empirical dynamics. We show that this results in an exponentialfamily distribution whose sufficient statistics are the features, paralleling maximumentropy approaches in supervised learning. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed OPE approaches in multiple environments.

1

Introduction

Recently, there have been considerable advances in reinforcement learning (RL), with algorithms
achieving impressive performance on game playing and simple robotic tasks. Successful approaches
typically learn through direct (online) interaction with the environment. However, in many real
applications, access to the environment is limited to a fixed dataset, due to considerations of cost,
safety, or time. One key challenge in this setting is off-policy evaluation (OPE): the task of evaluating
the performance of a target policy given samples collected by a behavior policy.
The focus of our work is OPE in infinite-horizon undiscounted MDPs, which capture long-horizon
tasks such as game playing, routing, and the control of physical systems. Most recent state-of-the-art
OPE methods for this setting estimate the ratios of stationary distributions of the target and behavior
policy [Liu et al., 2018, Nachum et al., 2019a, Wen et al., 2020, Nachum and Dai, 2020]. These
approaches typically produce estimators that are consistent, but have no finite-sample guarantees,
and even the existing guarantees may not hold with function approximation. One exception is the
recent work of Duan and Wang [2020], which relies on linear function approximation. They assume
that the MDP is linear (i.e. that rewards and dynamics are linear in some known feature space) and
analyze OPE in episodic and discounted MDPs when given a fixed dataset of i.i.d. trajectories. They
establish a finite-sample instance-dependent error upper bound for regression-based fitted Q-iteration
(FQI), and a nearly-matching minimax lower bound.
Our work extends the results of Duan and Wang [2020] to the setting of undiscounted ergodic linear
MDPs and non-i.i.d. data (coming from a single trajectory). We provide the first finite-sample OPE
⇤
†

DeepMind
Google

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

