On the Tightness of Semidefinite Relaxations for
Certifying Robustness to Adversarial Examples

Richard Y. Zhang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, 61801 IL, USA.
ryz@illinois.edu

Abstract
The robustness of a neural network to adversarial examples can be provably certified
by solving a convex relaxation. If the relaxation is loose, however, then the
resulting certificate can be too conservative to be practically useful. Recently,
a less conservative robustness certificate was proposed, based on a semidefinite
programming (SDP) relaxation of the ReLU activation function. In this paper,
we describe a geometric technique that determines whether this SDP certificate is
exact, meaning whether it provides both a lower-bound on the size of the smallest
adversarial perturbation, as well as a globally optimal perturbation that attains
the lower-bound. Concretely, we show, for a least-squares restriction of the usual
adversarial attack problem, that the SDP relaxation amounts to the nonconvex
projection of a point onto a hyperbola. The resulting SDP certificate is exact if
and only if the projection of the point lies on the major axis of the hyperbola.
Using this geometric technique, we prove that the certificate is exact over a single
hidden layer under mild assumptions, and explain why it is usually conservative
for several hidden layers. We experimentally confirm our theoretical insights
using a general-purpose interior-point method and a custom rank-2 Burer-Monteiro
algorithm.

1

Introduction

It is now well-known that neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples: imperceptibly
small changes to the input that result in large, possibly targeted change to the output [1–3]. Adversarial
examples are particularly concerning for safety-critical applications like self-driving cars and smart
grids, because they present a mechanism for erratic behavior and a vector for malicious attacks.
Methods for analyzing robustness to adversarial examples work by formulating the problem of finding
the smallest perturbation needed to result in an adversarial outcome. For example, this could be
the smallest change to an image of the digit “3” for a given model to misclassify it as an “8”. The
size of this smallest change serves as a robustness margin: the model is robust if even the smallest
adversarial change is still easily detectable.
Computing the robustness margin is a nonconvex optimization problem. In fact, methods that attack
a model work by locally solving this optimization, usually using a variant of gradient descent [3–6].
A successful attack demonstrates vulnerability by explicitly stating a small—but not necessarily the
smallest—adversarial perturbation. Of course, failed attacks do not prove robustness, as there is
always the risk of being defeated by stronger attacks in the future. Instead, robustness can be certified
by proving lower-bounds on the robustness margin [7–18]. Training against a robustness certificate (as
an adversary) in turn produces models that are certifiably robust to adversarial examples [10, 19, 20].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

