Digraph Inception Convolutional Networks

Zekun Tong1 Yuxuan Liang2 Changsheng Sun2 Xinke Li1
David S. Rosenblum2,3 Andrew Lim1,∗
1

Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
Department of Computer Science, George Mason University, VA, USA

{zekuntong,liangyuxuan,cssun,xinke.li}@u.nus.edu
dsr@gmu.edu, isealim@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have shown promising results in modeling
graph-structured data. However, they have difficulty with processing digraphs
because of two reasons: 1) transforming directed to undirected graph to guarantee
the symmetry of graph Laplacian is not reasonable since it not only misleads
message passing scheme to aggregate incorrect weights but also deprives the unique
characteristics of digraph structure; 2) due to the fixed receptive field in each layer,
GCNs fail to obtain multi-scale features that can boost their performance. In this
paper, we theoretically extend spectral-based graph convolution to digraphs and
derive a simplified form using personalized PageRank. Specifically, we present
the Digraph Inception Convolutional Networks (DiGCN) which utilizes digraph
convolution and k th -order proximity to achieve larger receptive fields and learn
multi-scale features in digraphs. We empirically show that DiGCN can encode
more structural information from digraphs than GCNs and help achieve better
performance when generalized to other models. Moreover, experiments on various
benchmarks demonstrate its superiority against the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Learning from digraph (directed graph) data to solve practical problems, such as traffic prediction
[25, 36], knowledge discovery [12] and time-series problems [4, 9], has attracted increasing attention.
There are two general categories of GCNs: spatial-based [16, 40] and spectral-based [19, 23, 11].
The spatial-based approaches achieve digraph convolution by using self-defined neighbour traversal
methods to aggregate features, which usually adds significant computational overhead [44, 45, 48].
Correspondingly, spectral-based GCNs [19, 44] use adjacency matrices based on spectrum analysis
theory to explore neighborhood instead of traversal search, which greatly reduces the training time.
However, they are limited to use undirected graphs as input by definition, the graph Laplacian needs
to be symmetric [45]. How to extend spectral-based GCNs to the digraphs needs to be explored.
A majority of spectral-based GCNs transform digraphs to undirected by relaxing its direction structure
[19, 44], i.e., trivially adding edges to symmetrize the adjacency matrices. It will not only mislead
message passing scheme to aggregate the features with incorrect weights but also discard distinctive
direction structure [43], such as irreversible time-series relationships. Besides, there are several works
that learn specific structure by defining motifs [28], inheritance relationship [18] and second-order
proximity[39]. However, these methods have to stipulate learning templates or rules in advance, and
is not capable to deal with complex structures beyond their definitions.
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

