Optimization and Generalization of Shallow Neural
Networks with Quadratic Activation Functions
Stefano Sarao Mannelli†‡∗ , Eric Vanden-Eijnden‡ , and Lenka Zdeborová§

Abstract
We study the dynamics of optimization and the generalization properties of
one-hidden layer neural networks with quadratic activation function in the overparametrized regime where the layer width m is larger than the input dimension d.
We consider a teacher-student scenario where the teacher has the same structure
as the student with a hidden layer of smaller width m∗ ≤ m. We describe how
the empirical loss landscape is affected by the number n of data samples and the
width m∗ of the teacher network. In particular we determine how the probability
that there be no spurious minima on the empirical loss depends on n, d, and m∗ ,
thereby establishing conditions under which the neural network can in principle
recover the teacher. We also show that under the same conditions gradient descent
dynamics on the empirical loss converges and leads to small generalization error,
i.e. it enables recovery in practice. Finally we characterize the time-convergence
rate of gradient descent in the limit of a large number of samples. These results are
confirmed by numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are a key component of the machine learning toolbox. Still the reasons behind their
success remain mysterious from a theoretical prospective. While sufficiently large neural networks
can in principle represent a large class of functions, we do not yet understand under what conditions
their parameters can be adjusted in an algorithmically tractable way for that purpose. For example,
under worst case assumptions, some functions cannot be tractably learned with neural networks [1, 2].
We also know that there exist settings with adversarial initializations where neural networks fail in
generalization to new samples, while the same setting from random initial conditions succeeds [3].
And yet, in many practical settings, neural networks are trained successfully even with simple local
algorithm such as gradient descent (GD) or stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
The problem of learning the parameters of a neural network is two-fold. First, we want that their
training on a set of data via minimization of a suitable loss function succeed in finding a set of
parameters for which the value of the loss is close to its global minimum. Second, and more
importantly, we want that such a set of parameters also generalizes well to unseen data. Theoretical
guarantees have been obtained in many settings by a geometrical analysis of the loss showing that
only global minima are present, see e.g. [4, 5]. In particular it has been shown that network overparametrization can be beneficial and lead to landscapes without spurious minima in which GD or
SGD converge [6–10]. However, over-parametrized neural networks successfully optimized on a
training set do not necessarily generalize well – for example neural networks can achieve zero errors
† Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CEA, Institut de physique théorique, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette,France.
‡ Courant Institute, New York University, 251 Mercer Street, New York, New York 10012, USA.
§ SPOC laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland.
∗ Work done while visiting at Courant Institute.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

