Margins are Insufficient for Explaining Gradient
Boosting

Allan Grønlund ∗†

Lior Kamma †

Kasper Green Larsen †

Abstract
Boosting is one of the most successful ideas in machine learning, achieving great
practical performance with little fine-tuning. The success of boosted classifiers
is most often attributed to improvements in margins. The focus on margin explanations was pioneered in the seminal work by Schapire et al. (1998) and has
culminated in the k’th margin generalization bound by Gao and Zhou (2013), which
was recently proved to be near-tight for some data distributions (Grønlund et al.
2019). In this work, we first demonstrate that the k’th margin bound is inadequate
in explaining the performance of state-of-the-art gradient boosters. We then explain
the short comings of the k’th margin bound and prove a stronger and more refined
margin-based generalization bound for boosted classifiers that indeed succeeds in
explaining the performance of modern gradient boosters. Finally, we improve upon
the recent generalization lower bound by Grønlund et al. (2019).

1

Introduction

Boosting is a powerful technique for producing highly accurate voting classifiers by combining less
accurate base learners. Boosting algorithms are typically easy to fine tune and obtain state-of-the-art
performance on many learning tasks. Boosting dates back to the seminal work introducing the
AdaBoost algorithm [4] and much work has gone into understanding and developing better boosting
algorithms. The best performing boosting algorithms are typically variants of gradient boosters [5],
such as LightGBM [10] and XGBoost [2], using Regression Trees as base learners.
Classic experiments [14] showed that boosting algorithms tend to improve their test accuracy even
when training past the point of perfectly classifying the training data. This may seem counter-intuitive,
as adding more base learners, results in a more complex model, that hence might be more prone to
overfitting. This phenomenon is often explained by observed improvements in margins. For binary
classification with a sample space X , labels in {−1, 1} and a classP
of base learners H ⊆ X → [−1, 1],
a voting classifier f : X → {−1, 1} has the form f (x) = sign( h∈H αh h(x)) with all αh ≥ 0. A
voting classifier thus takes a weighted
P “vote” among the base learners to obtain its prediction. When
speaking of margins, we assume h αh = 1, which can always be achieved by rescaling the α’s by
their sum withoutP
changing f . The margin of a training point (x, y) with x ∈ X and y ∈ {−1, 1} is
then defined as y h αh h(x). The margin is thus a value in [−1, 1] which is positive when f (x) = y
and negative otherwise. Intuitively, large (positive) margins mean that f is not only correct but very
certain in its predictions. Margin theory, starting with the work of Schapire et al. [4], formalized this
by proving generalization bounds demonstrating that large margins imply better generalization. It
was also shown that the theoretical generalization bounds fit very well with the observed behavior
of AdaBoost that tends to keep improving margins even when training past the point of perfectly
classifying the training data [14].
∗
†

All authors contributed equally, and are presented in alphabetical order.
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, {jallan,lior.kamma,larsen}@cs.au.dk

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

