Diversity-Guided Multi-Objective Bayesian
Optimization With Batch Evaluations
Mina Konaković Luković⇤
MIT CSAIL
minakl@mit.edu

Yunsheng Tian⇤
MIT CSAIL
yunsheng@csail.mit.edu

Wojciech Matusik
MIT CSAIL
wojciech@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Many science, engineering, and design optimization problems require balancing
the trade-offs between several conflicting objectives. The objectives are often blackbox functions whose evaluations are time-consuming and costly. Multi-objective
Bayesian optimization can be used to automate the process of discovering the
set of optimal solutions, called Pareto-optimal, while minimizing the number of
performed evaluations. To further reduce the evaluation time in the optimization
process, testing of several samples in parallel can be deployed. We propose a
novel multi-objective Bayesian optimization algorithm that iteratively selects the
best batch of samples to be evaluated in parallel. Our algorithm approximates
and analyzes a piecewise-continuous Pareto set representation. This representation allows us to introduce a batch selection strategy that optimizes for both
hypervolume improvement and diversity of selected samples in order to efficiently
advance promising regions of the Pareto front. Experiments on both synthetic test
functions and real-world benchmark problems show that our algorithm predominantly outperforms relevant state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/yunshengtian/DGEMO.

1

Introduction

Various experimental design problems in science and engineering seek optimal solutions that require
simultaneous optimization of a number of conflicting objectives. Typically the objectives are blackbox functions that are expensive to evaluate. Hence the number of evaluated experiments is severely
limited and designing experiments by hand does not provide optimal performance. Recently, there has
been an increasing interest in effective data-driven algorithms to efficiently guide the experimental
design process and lead to the best performing designs. Some use cases include material design [53],
battery optimization [1], clinical drug trials [50, 47], and chemical design [16]. An approach that
has proven to be powerful in optimizing the expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions is Bayesian
optimization (BO) [20, 41]. A fundamental concept behind the BO is two-fold: first, a inexpensive
surrogate model is used to model the black-box objective function based on the evaluated experiments;
second, an acquisition function is employed to adaptively sample the design space and efficiently
improve the set of optimal solutions. Both single- and multi-objective Bayesian optimization (MOBO)
have been studied.
In a variety of physical experimental setups, evaluating several experiments in parallel, e.g., in
batches, reduces the time and cost of the optimization process. Experiments can take days, weeks,
even months to complete; hence taking advantage of batching is important. Furthermore, in design
problems with multiple conflicting objectives, in most cases, there is no single optimal solution, but
rather a set of optimal designs with different trade-offs. These designs often tend to group in different
regions based on their properties and performance. In this paper, we develop a novel MOBO approach
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

