Graph Random Neural Networks for
Semi-Supervised Learning on Graphs

Wenzheng Feng1∗ , Jie Zhang2∗‡ , Yuxiao Dong3 , Yu Han1 , Huanbo Luan1 , Qian Xu2 ,
Qiang Yang2 , Evgeny Kharlamov4 , Jie Tang1§
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
WeBank Co., Ltd 3 Microsoft Research 4 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
fwz17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zhangjie.exe, ericdongyx, yhanthu, luanhuanbo}@gmail.com
{qianxu, qiangyang}@webank.com, evgeny.kharlamov@de.bosch.com, jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the problem of semi-supervised learning on graphs, for which graph
neural networks (GNNs) have been extensively explored. However, most existing
GNNs inherently suffer from the limitations of over-smoothing [6, 23, 24, 30],
non-robustness [48, 45], and weak-generalization when labeled nodes are scarce.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective framework—G RAPH R ANDOM
N EURAL N ETWORKS (G RAND)—to address these issues. In G RAND, we first
design a random propagation strategy to perform graph data augmentation. Then
we leverage consistency regularization to optimize the prediction consistency of
unlabeled nodes across different data augmentations. Extensive experiments on
graph benchmark datasets suggest that G RAND significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art GNN baselines on semi-supervised node classification. Finally, we show
that G RAND mitigates the issues of over-smoothing and non-robustness, exhibiting
better generalization behavior than existing GNNs. The source code of G RAND is
publicly available at https://github.com/Grand20/grand.

1

Introduction

Graphs serve as a common language for modeling structured and relational data [22], such as social
networks, knowledge graphs, and the World Wide Web. Mining and learning graphs can benefit
various real-world problems and applications. The focus of this work is on the problem of semisupervised learning on graphs [46, 20, 10], which aims to predict the categories of unlabeled nodes
of a given graph with only a small proportion of labeled nodes. Among its solutions, graph neural
networks (GNNs) [20, 17, 35, 1] have recently emerged as powerful approaches. The main idea of
GNNs lies in a deterministic feature propagation process to learn expressive node representations.
However, recent studies show that such propagation procedure brings some inherent issues: First,
most GNNs suffer from over-smoothing [23, 6, 24, 30]. Li et al. show that the graph convolution
operation is a special form of Laplacian smoothing [23], and consequently, stacking many GNN layers
tends to make nodes’ features indistinguishable. In addition, a very recent work [30] suggests that
the coupled non-linear transformation in the propagation procedure can further aggravate this issue.
Second, GNNs are often not robust to graph attacks [48, 45], due to the deterministic propagation
adopted in most of them. Naturally, the deterministic propagation makes each node highly dependent
with its (multi-hop) neighborhoods, leaving the nodes to be easily misguided by potential data noise
and susceptible to adversarial perturbations.
∗

Equal contribution.
Work performed while at Tsinghua University.
§
Corresponding author.

‡

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

