An Efficient Framework for
Clustered Federated Learning
Avishek Ghosh⇤
Dept of EECS, UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
avishek_ghosh@berkeley.edu
Dong Yin*
DeepMind
Mountain View, CA 94043
dongyin@google.com

Jichan Chung*
Dept of EECS, UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
jichan3751@berkeley.edu
Kannan Ramchandran
Dept of EECS, UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
kannanr@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of Federated Learning (FL) where users are distributed
and partitioned into clusters. This setup captures settings where different groups
of users have their own objectives (learning tasks) but by aggregating their data
with others in the same cluster (same learning task), they can leverage the strength
in numbers in order to perform more efficient Federated Learning. We propose
a new framework dubbed the Iterative Federated Clustering Algorithm (IFCA),
which alternately estimates the cluster identities of the users and optimizes model
parameters for the user clusters via gradient descent. We analyze the convergence
rate of this algorithm first in a linear model with squared loss and then for generic
strongly convex and smooth loss functions. We show that in both settings, with good
initialization, IFCA converges at an exponential rate, and discuss the optimality of
the statistical error rate. When the clustering structure is ambiguous, we propose
to train the models by combining IFCA with the weight sharing technique in
multi-task learning. In the experiments, we show that our algorithm can succeed
even if we relax the requirements on initialization with random initialization and
multiple restarts. We also present experimental results showing that our algorithm
is efficient in non-convex problems such as neural networks. We demonstrate the
benefits of IFCA over the baselines on several clustered FL benchmarks.2

1

Introduction

In many modern data-intensive applications such as recommendation systems, image recognition,
and conversational AI, distributed computing has become a crucial component. In many applications,
data are stored in end users’ own devices such as mobile phones and personal computers, and in
these applications, fully utilizing the on-device machine intelligence is an important direction for
next-generation distributed learning. Federated Learning (FL) [28, 17, 27] is a recently proposed
distributed computing paradigm that is designed towards this goal, and has received significant
attention. Many statistical and computational challenges arise in Federated Learning, due to the
highly decentralized system architecture. In this paper, we propose an efficient algorithm that aims to
address one of the major challenges in FL—dealing with heterogeneity in the data distribution.
In Federated Learning, since the data source and computing nodes are end users’ personal devices,
the issue of data heterogeneity, also known as non-i.i.d. data, naturally arises. Exploiting data
⇤

2

Equal contribution
Implementation of our experiments is open sourced at https://github.com/jichan3751/ifca.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

