Provably Robust Metric Learning
Lu Wang1,2

Xuanqing Liu3 Jinfeng Yi2 Yuan Jiang1 Cho-Jui Hsieh3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
JD.com, Beijing 100101, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
wangl@lamda.nju.edu.cn / wangl@jd.com xqliu@cs.ucla.edu
yijinfeng@jd.com jiangy@lamda.nju.edu.cn chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu
1

Abstract
Metric learning is an important family of algorithms for classification and similarity
search, but the robustness of learned metrics against small adversarial perturbations
is less studied. In this paper, we show that existing metric learning algorithms,
which focus on boosting the clean accuracy, can result in metrics that are less
robust than the Euclidean distance. To overcome this problem, we propose a novel
metric learning algorithm to find a Mahalanobis distance that is robust against
adversarial perturbations, and the robustness of the resulting model is certifiable.
Experimental results show that the proposed metric learning algorithm improves
both certified robust errors and empirical robust errors (errors under adversarial
attacks). Furthermore, unlike neural network defenses which usually encounter
a trade-off between clean and robust errors, our method does not sacrifice clean
errors compared with previous metric learning methods.

1

Introduction

Metric learning has been an important family of machine learning algorithms and has achieved
successes on several problems, including computer vision [27, 19, 20], text analysis [30], meta
learning [44, 40] and others [39, 52, 54]. Given a set of training samples, metric learning aims to
learn a good distance measurement such that items in the same class are closer to each other in the
learned metric space, which is crucial for classification and similarity search. Since this objective
is directly related to the assumption of nearest neighbor classifiers, most of the metric learning
algorithms can be naturally and successfully combined with K-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN) classifiers.
Adversarial robustness of machine learning algorithms has been studied extensively in recent years
due to the need of robustness guarantees in real world systems. It has been demonstrated that neural
networks can be easily attacked by adversarial perturbations in the input space [43, 18, 2], and such
perturbations can be computed efficiently in both white-box [4, 33] and black-box settings [7, 21, 10,
46]. To tackle this issue, many defense algorithms have been proposed to improve the robustness of
neural networks [29, 33]. Although these algorithms can successfully defend from standard attacks,
it has been shown that many of them are vulnerable under stronger attacks when the attacker knows
the defense mechanisms [4]. Therefore, recent research in adversarial defense of neural networks has
shifted to the concept of “certified defense”, where the defender needs to provide a certification that
no adversarial examples exist within a certain input region [50, 12, 55].
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning a metric that is robust against adversarial input
perturbations. It has been shown that nearest neighbor classifiers are not as robust as expected [36,
45, 38], where a small and human imperceptible perturbation in the input space can fool a KNN classifier, thus it is natural to investigate how to obtain a metric that improves the adversarial
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

