Low Distortion Block-Resampling with
Spatially Stochastic Networks

Sarah Jane Hong∗
Latent Space
sarah@latentspace.co

Martin Arjovsky∗ †
École Normale Supérieure
martinarjovsky@gmail.com

Darryl Barnhart∗
Latent Space
darryl@latentspace.co

Ian Thompson∗
Latent Space
ian@latentspace.co

Abstract
We formalize and attack the problem of generating new images from old ones that
are as diverse as possible, only allowing them to change without restrictions in
certain parts of the image while remaining globally consistent. This encompasses
the typical situation found in generative modelling, where we are happy with parts
of the generated data, but would like to resample others (“I like this generated
castle overall, but this tower looks unrealistic, I would like a new one”). In order to
attack this problem we build from the best conditional and unconditional generative
models to introduce a new network architecture, training procedure, and a new
algorithm for resampling parts of the image as desired.

1

Introduction

Many computer vision problems can be phrased as conditional or unconditional image generation.
This includes super-resolution, colorization, and semantic image synthesis among others. However,
current techniques for these problems lack a mechanism for fine-grained control of the generation.
More precisely, even if we like certain parts of a generated image but not others, we are forced to
decide on either keeping the generated image as-is, or generating an entirely new one from scratch. In
this work we aim to obtain a generative model and an algorithm that allow for us to resample images
while keeping selected parts as close as possible to the original one, but freely changing others in a
diverse manner while keeping global consistency.
To make things more precise, let us consider the problem of conditional image generation, where the
data follows an unknown distribution P(x, y) and we want to learn a fast mechanism for sampling
y ∈ Y given x ∈ X . The unconditional generation case can be instantiated by simply setting x = 0.
The current state of the art algorithms for image generation usually employ generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [15, 28, 18] when presented with a dataset of pairs (x, y). Conditional GANs learn
a function gθ : Z × X → Y, and afterwards images ŷ are generated from x by sampling z ∼ P (z)
and outputting ŷ := gθ (z, x). The distribution P (z) is usually a fixed Gaussian distribution, and the
GAN procedure makes it so that gθ (z, x) when z ∼ P (z) approximates P(y|x) in a very particular
sense (see [15, 3] for more details). As such, GANs create a diverse set of outputs for any given x by
transforming the z’s to different complex images.
One limitation of the above setup is that given a generated sample ŷ = g(z, x), we are restricted to
accept it and use it as-is for whatever our downstream task is, or generate an entirely new sample by
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work performed while at Latent Space.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

