Personalized Federated Learning with Moreau
Envelopes
Canh T. Dinh1 , Nguyen H. Tran1 , Tuan Dung Nguyen1,2
1
The University of Sydney, Australia
tdin6081@uni.sydney.edu.au, nguyen.tran@sydney.edu.au
2
The University of Melbourne, Australia
tuandungn@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a decentralized and privacy-preserving machine learning
technique in which a group of clients collaborate with a server to learn a global
model without sharing clients’ data. One challenge associated with FL is statistical
diversity among clients, which restricts the global model from delivering good
performance on each client’s task. To address this, we propose an algorithm for
personalized FL (pFedMe) using Moreau envelopes as clients’ regularized loss
functions, which help decouple personalized model optimization from the global
model learning in a bi-level problem stylized for personalized FL. Theoretically,
we show that pFedMe’s convergence rate is state-of-the-art: achieving quadratic
speedup for strongly convex and sublinear speedup of order 2/3 for smooth nonconvex objectives. Experimentally, we verify that pFedMe excels at empirical
performance compared with the vanilla FedAvg and Per-FedAvg, a meta-learning
based personalized FL algorithm.

1

Introduction

The abundance of data generated in a massive number of hand-held devices these days has stimulated
the development of Federated learning (FL) [1]. The setting of FL is a network of clients connected
to a server, and its goal is to build a global model from clients’ data in a privacy-preserving and
communication-efficient way. The current techniques that attempt to fulfill this goal mostly follow
three steps: (i) at each communication iteration, the server sends the current global model to clients;
(ii) the clients update their local models using their local data; (iii) the server collects the latest
local models from a subset of sampled clients in order to update a new global model, repeated until
convergence [1–4].
Despite its advantages of data privacy and communication reduction, FL faces a main challenge that
affects its performance and convergence rate: statistical diversity, which means that data distributions
among clients are distinct (i.e., non-i.i.d.). Thus, the global model, which is trained using these
non-i.i.d. data, is hardly well-generalized on each client’s data. This particular behaviour has been
reported in [5, 6], which showed that when the statistical diversity increases, generalization errors
of the global model on clients’ local data also increase significantly. On the other hand, individual
learning without FL (i.e., no client collaboration) will also have large generalization error due to
insufficient data. These raise the question: How can we leverage the global model in FL to find a
“personalized model” that is stylized for each client’s data?
Motivated by critical roles of personalized models in several business applications of healthcare,
finance, and AI services [5], we address this question by proposing a new FL scheme for personalization, which minimizes the Moreau envelopes [7] of clients’ loss functions. With this scheme,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

