VIME: Extending the Success of Self- and
Semi-supervised Learning to Tabular Domain

Jinsung Yoon
Google Cloud AI, UCLA
jinsungyoon@google.com

Yao Zhang
University of Cambridge
yz555@cam.ac.uk

James Jordon
University of Oxford
james.jordon@wolfson.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
UCLA, Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Self- and semi-supervised learning frameworks have made significant progress in
training machine learning models with limited labeled data in image and language
domains. These methods heavily rely on the unique structure in the domain datasets
(such as spatial relationships in images or semantic relationships in language). They
are not adaptable to general tabular data which does not have the same explicit
structure as image and language data. In this paper, we fill this gap by proposing
novel self- and semi-supervised learning frameworks for tabular data, which we
refer to collectively as VIME (Value Imputation and Mask Estimation). We create
a novel pretext task of estimating mask vectors from corrupted tabular data in
addition to the reconstruction pretext task for self-supervised learning. We also
introduce a novel tabular data augmentation method for self- and semi-supervised
learning frameworks. In experiments, we evaluate the proposed framework in
multiple tabular datasets from various application domains, such as genomics and
clinical data. VIME exceeds state-of-the-art performance in comparison to the
existing baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Tremendous successes have been achieved in a variety of applications (such as image classification [1],
object detection [2], and language translation [3]) with deep learning models via supervised learning
on large labeled datasets such as ImageNet [4]. Unfortunately, collecting sufficiently large labeled
datasets is expensive and even impossible in several domains (such as medical datasets concerned
with a particularly rare disease). In these settings, however, there is often a wealth of unlabeled data
available - datasets are often collected from a large population, but target labels are only available
for a small group of people. The 100,000 Genomes project [5], for instance, sequenced 100,000
genomes from around 85,000 NHS patients affected by a rare disease, such as cancer. By definition
rare diseases occur in (less than) 1 in 2000 people. Datasets like these present huge opportunities
for self- and semi-supervised learning algorithms, which can leverage the unlabeled data to further
improve the performance of a predictive model.
Unfortunately, existing self- and semi-supervised learning algorithms are not effective for tabular
data1 because they heavily rely on the spatial or semantic structure of image or language data. A
1
Tabular data is a database that is structured in a tabular form. It arranges data elements in vertical columns
(features) and horizontal rows (samples).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

