Attention-Gated Brain Propagation: How the brain
can implement reward-based error backpropagation

Isabella Pozzi
Machine Learning Group
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
isabella.pozzi@cwi.nl
Sander M. Bohté
Machine Learning Group
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
s.m.bohte@cwi.nl

Pieter R. Roelfsema
Vision & Cognition Group
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
p.roelfsema@nin.knaw.nl

Abstract
Much recent work has focused on biologically plausible variants of supervised
learning algorithms. However, there is no teacher in the motor cortex that instructs
the motor neurons and learning in the brain depends on reward and punishment.
We demonstrate a biologically plausible reinforcement learning scheme for deep
networks with an arbitrary number of layers. The network chooses an action
by selecting a unit in the output layer and uses feedback connections to assign
credit to the units in successively lower layers that are responsible for this action. After the choice, the network receives reinforcement and there is no teacher
correcting the errors. We show how the new learning scheme – Attention-Gated
Brain Propagation (BrainProp) – is mathematically equivalent to error backpropagation, for one output unit at a time. We demonstrate successful learning of
deep fully connected, convolutional and locally connected networks on classical
and hard image-classification benchmarks; MNIST, CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and
Tiny ImageNet. BrainProp achieves an accuracy that is equivalent to that of standard error-backpropagation, and better than state-of-the-art biologically inspired
learning schemes. Additionally, the trial-and-error nature of learning is associated
with limited additional training time so that BrainProp is a factor of 1-3.5 times
slower. Our results thereby provide new insights into how deep learning may be
implemented in the brain.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks with many layers of neural units now attain human-level performance in
speech and image recognition [1, 2, 3] and in complex computer games like Chess, Go and Starcraft
[4, 5, 6]. Central to this success is the application of the error-backpropagation algorithm (EBP) [7] to
efficiently assign credit to individual weights between the layers in deep networks. EBP computes the
error gradient for connections between all the layers. Can the brain, with its hierarchically arranged
cortical areas, solve the credit assignment problem in a similar manner?
Recent studies proposed versions of EBP for the brain that required a teacher, studying the feasibility
of asymmetric feedback networks [8, 9, 10, 11] and developing variants of equilibrium propagation
[12, 13, 14, 15, 16], reviewed in [17, 18]. In equilibrium propagation [12, 18], activity is first
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

