DeepSVG: A Hierarchical Generative Network for
Vector Graphics Animation

Alexandre Carlier1,2
1

Martin Danelljan2

Alexandre Alahi1

Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

2

Radu Timofte2

ETH Zurich

Abstract
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) are ubiquitous in modern 2D interfaces due to
their ability to scale to different resolutions. However, despite the success of deep
learning-based models applied to rasterized images, the problem of vector graphics
representation learning and generation remains largely unexplored. In this work,
we propose a novel hierarchical generative network, called DeepSVG, for complex
SVG icons generation and interpolation. Our architecture effectively disentangles
high-level shapes from the low-level commands that encode the shape itself. The
network directly predicts a set of shapes in a non-autoregressive fashion. We
introduce the task of complex SVG icons generation by releasing a new large-scale
dataset along with an open-source library for SVG manipulation. We demonstrate
that our network learns to accurately reconstruct diverse vector graphics, and can
serve as a powerful animation tool by performing interpolations and other latent
space operations. Our code is available at https://github.com/alexandre01/
deepsvg.

Figure 1: DeepSVG generates vector graphics by predicting draw commands, such as lines and
Bézier curves. Our latent space allows meaningful animations between complex vector graphics
icons.

1

Introduction

Despite recent success of rasterized image generation and content creation, little effort has been
directed towards generation of vector graphics. Yet, vector images, often in the form of Scalable
Vector Graphics [20] (SVG), have become a standard in digital graphics, publication-ready image
assets, and web-animations. The main advantage over their rasterized counterpart is their scaling
ability, making the same image file suitable for both tiny web-icons or billboard-scale graphics.
Generative models for vector graphics could serve as powerful tools, allowing artists to generate,
manipulate, and animate vector graphics, potentially enhancing their creativity and productivity.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

