Sample-Efficient Reinforcement Learning
of Undercomplete POMDPs

Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Sham M. Kakade
University of Washington
Microsoft Research, NYC
sham@cs.washington.edu

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research, NYC
akshaykr@microsoft.com

Qinghua Liu
Princeton University
qinghual@princeton.edu

Abstract
Partial observability is a common challenge in many reinforcement learning applications, which requires an agent to maintain memory, infer latent states, and
integrate this past information into exploration. This challenge leads to a number of
computational and statistical hardness results for learning general Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs). This work shows that these hardness
barriers do not preclude efficient reinforcement learning for rich and interesting
subclasses of POMDPs. In particular, we present a sample-efficient algorithm,
OOM-UCB, for episodic finite undercomplete POMDPs, where the number of
observations is larger than the number of latent states and where exploration is
essential for learning, thus distinguishing our results from prior works. OOM-UCB
achieves an optimal sample complexity of Õ(1/ε2 ) for finding an ε-optimal policy,
along with being polynomial in all other relevant quantities. As an interesting
special case, we also provide a computationally and statistically efficient algorithm
for POMDPs with deterministic state transitions.

1

Introduction

In many sequential decision making settings, the agent lacks complete information about the underlying state of the system, a phenomenon known as partial observability. Partial observability significantly complicates the tasks of reinforcement learning and planning, because the non-Markovian
nature of the observations forces the agent to maintain memory and reason about beliefs of the system
state, all while exploring to collect information about the environment. For example, a robot may
not be able to perceive all objects in the environment due to occlusions, and it must reason about
how these objects may move to avoid collisions [10]. Similar reasoning problems arise in imperfect
information games [8], medical diagnosis [13], and elsewhere [25]. Furthermore, from a theoretical
perspective, well-known complexity-theoretic results show that learning and planning in partially
observable environments is statistically and computationally intractable in general [23, 22, 30, 21].
The standard formulation for reinforcement learning with partial observability is the Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP), in which an agent operating on noisy observations
makes decisions that influence the evolution of a latent state. The complexity barriers apply for this
model, but they are of a worst case nature, and they do not preclude efficient algorithms for interesting
sub-classes of POMDPs. Thus we ask:
Can we develop efficient algorithms for reinforcement learning in large classes of POMDPs?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

