Polynomial-Time Computation of Optimal
Correlated Equilibria in Two-Player Extensive-Form
Games with Public Chance Moves and Beyond

Gabriele Farina
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, CMU
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Unlike normal-form games, where correlated equilibria have been studied for more
than 45 years, extensive-form correlation is still generally not well understood.
Part of the reason for this gap is that the sequential nature of extensive-form
games allows for a richness of behaviors and incentives that are not possible in
normal-form settings. This richness translates to a significantly different complexity
landscape surrounding extensive-form correlated equilibria. As of today, it is known
that finding an optimal extensive-form correlated equilibrium (EFCE), extensiveform coarse correlated equilibrium (EFCCE), or normal-form coarse correlated
equilibrium (NFCCE) in a two-player extensive-form game is computationally
tractable when the game does not include chance moves, and intractable when the
game involves chance moves. In this paper we significantly refine this complexity
threshold by showing that, in two-player games, an optimal correlated equilibrium
can be computed in polynomial time, provided that a certain condition is satisfied.
We show that the condition holds, for example, when all chance moves are public,
that is, both players observe all chance moves. This implies that an optimal EFCE,
EFCCE and NFCCE can be computed in polynomial time in the game size in
two-player games with public chance moves.

1

Introduction

A vast body of literature in computational game theory has focused on computing Nash equilibria
(NEs) in two-player zero-sum imperfect-information extensive-form games. Success stories from
that endeavor include the creation of strong—in some cases superhuman—AIs for several complex
games, including two-player limit Texas hold’em [4], two-player no-limit Texas hold’em [5, 6, 22],
and multiplayer no-limit Texas hold’em [7]. NE captures strategic interactions in which each
player maximizes her own utility. The interaction in NE is assumed to be fully decentralized: no
communication between players is possible and the behavior of the players is not coordinated by
any external orchestrator in any way. While that assumption is natural in games such as poker, NE
is too restrictive in other types of strategic interactions in which partial forms of communication or
centralized control are possible [1]. Therefore, there has been growing interest around less restrictive
solution concepts than NE.
Correlated and coarse correlated equilibria are classic families of solution concepts that relax the
assumptions of NE to allow forms of coordination of utility-maximizing agents [3, 23]. In correlated
and coarse correlated equilibria, a mediator that can recommend behavior—but not enforce it—
complements the game. Before the interaction starts, the mediator samples a profile of recommended
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

