Learning Utilities and Equilibria in Non-Truthful
Auctions
Hu Fu
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
hufu@cs.ubc.ca

Tao Lin∗
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies
Department of Computer Science
Peking University
Beijing, China
lin_tao@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In non-truthful auctions, agents’ utility for a strategy depends on the strategies of
the opponents and also the prior distribution over their private types; the set of
Bayes Nash equilibria generally has an intricate dependence on the prior. Using
the First Price Auction as our main demonstrating example, we show that Õ(n/2 )
samples from the prior with n agents suffice for an algorithm to learn the interim
utilities for all monotone bidding strategies. As a consequence, this number of
samples suffice for learning all approximate equilibria. We give almost matching
(up to polylog factors) lower bound on the sample complexity for learning utilities.
We also consider a setting where agents must pay a search cost to discover their
own types. Drawing on a connection between this setting and the first price
auction, discovered recently by Kleinberg et al. (2016), we show that Õ(n/2 )
samples suffice for utilities and equilibria to be estimated in a near welfare-optimal
descending auction in this setting. En route, we improve the sample complexity
bound, recently obtained by Guo et al. (2019), for the Pandora’s Box problem,
which is a classical model for sequential consumer search.

1

Introduction

Mechanism design devises systems in which multiple agents take strategic actions based on their
private preferences (designated as types). For example, an auctioneer devises rules that determine
an auction’s winner and payments, based on bidders’ actions (the bids); the bidders then, knowing
the rule and their types — in this case their own values for the item at sale — strategize over their
bids. The following task is central to many aspects of mechanism design: given agents’ strategies,
evaluate each agent’s performance, or utility. To start with, agents are most often interested in
predicting the performance of their strategies given what the other agents do; nowadays, auctioneers
and third-party service providers often give guidance to bidding, and are interested in such evaluations
as well. An auctioneer often would like to find out if a profile of strategies best respond to each
other and are hence at equilibrium; revenue, welfare and surplus analysis at equilibrium is all based
on utility estimation. Recent development in online ad auctions (such as the oCPX auctions) sees
growing popularity of delegated bidding, where bidders entrust the auctioneer/platform with the
task of bidding. Auctioneers in this scenario must estimate the bidders’ utilities given their bidding
strategies. As another application of utility estimation, one may be interested in knowing how far a
mechanism is from being incentive compatible, i.e., supposing all other agents bid their true values,
how much incentive an agent would have to lie about her value (see, e.g., Balcan et al., 2019).
∗
Tao Lin is now at Harvard University. This work was done when he was at Peking University and during a
visit to the University of British Columbia.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

