Adam with Bandit Sampling for Deep Learning

Rui Liu, Tianyi Wu, Barzan Mozafari
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{ruixliu, tianyiwu, mozafari}@umich.edu

Abstract
Adam is a widely used optimization method for training deep learning models. It
computes individual adaptive learning rates for different parameters. In this paper,
we propose a generalization of Adam, called A DAMBS, that allows us to also adapt
to different training examples based on their importance in the model’s convergence.
To achieve this, we maintain a distribution over all examples, selecting a mini-batch
in each iteration by sampling according to this distribution, which we update using
a multi-armed bandit algorithm. This ensures that examples that are more beneficial
to the model training are sampled with higher probabilities. Weq
theoretically show
that A DAMBS improves the convergence rate of Adam—O( logT n ) instead of
p
O( Tn ) in some cases. Experiments on various models and datasets demonstrate
A DAMBS’s fast convergence in practice.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a popular optimization method, which iteratively updates the
model parameters by moving them in the direction of the negative gradient of the loss evaluated on
a mini-batch. However, standard SGD does not have the ability to use past gradients or adapt to
individual parameters (a.k.a. features). Some variants of SGD, such as AdaGrad [16], RMSprop [34],
AdaDelta [36], or Nadam [15] can exploit past gradients or adapt to individual features. Adam [19]
combines the advantages of these SGD variants: it uses momentum on past gradients, but also
computes adaptive learning rates for each individual parameter by estimating the first and second
moments of the gradients. This adaptive behavior is quite beneficial as different parameters might
be of different importance in terms of the convergence of the model training. In fact, by adapting to
different parameters, Adam has shown to outperform its competitors in various applications [19], and
as such, has gained significant popularity.
However, another form of adaptivity that has proven beneficial in the context of basic SGD variants
is adaptivity with respect to different examples in the training set [18, 6, 8, 38, 13]. For the first time,
to the best of our knowledge, in this paper we show that accounting for the varying importance of
training examples can even improve Adam’s performance and convergence rate. In other words,
Adam has only considered the varying importance among parameters but not among the training
examples. Although some prior work exploits importance sampling to improve SGD’s convergence
rate [18, 6, 8, 38, 13], they often rely on some special properties of different models to estimate a
sampling distribution over examples in advance. As a more general approach, we focus on learning
the distribution during the training procedure, which is more adaptive. This is key to achieving faster
convergence rate, because the sampling distribution typically changes from one iteration to the next,
depending on the relationship between training examples and model parameters at each iteration.
In this paper, we propose a new general optimization method based on bandit sampling, called
A DAMBS (Adam with Bandit Sampling), that endows Adam with the ability to adapt to different
examples. To achieve this goal, we maintain a distribution over all examples, representing their
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

