Learning Rich Rankings

Arjun Seshadri
Stanford University
aseshadr@stanford.edu

Stephen Ragain
Stanford University
sragain17@gmail.com

Johan Ugander
Stanford University
jugander@stanford.edu

Abstract
Although the foundations of ranking are well established, the ranking literature has
primarily been focused on simple, unimodal models, e.g. the Mallows and PlackettLuce models, that define distributions centered around a single total ordering.
Explicit mixture models have provided some tools for modelling multimodal
ranking data, though learning such models from data is often difficult. In this
work, we contribute a contextual repeated selection (CRS) model that leverages
recent advances in choice modeling to bring a natural multimodality and richness
to the rankings space. We provide rigorous theoretical guarantees for maximum
likelihood estimation under the model through structure-dependent tail risk and
expected risk bounds. As a by-product, we also furnish the first tight bounds on the
expected risk of maximum likelihood estimators for the multinomial logit (MNL)
choice model and the Plackett-Luce (PL) ranking model, as well as the first tail
risk bound on the PL ranking model. The CRS model significantly outperforms
existing methods for modeling real world ranking data in a variety of settings, from
racing to rank choice voting.

1

Introduction

Ranking data is one of the fundamental primitives of statistics, central to the study of recommender
systems, search engines, social choice, as well as general data collection across machine learning. The
combinatorial nature of ranking data comes with inherent computational and statistical challenges [15],
and distributions over the space of rankings (the symmetric group Sn ) are very high-dimensional
objects that are quickly intractable to represent with complete generality. As a result, popular models
of ranking data focus on parametric families of distributions in Sn , anchoring the computational and
statistical burden of the model to the parameters.
Most popular models of rankings are distance-based or utility-based, where the Mallows [33] and
Plackett-Luce [43] models are the two most popular models in each respective category. Both of
these models simplistically assume transitivity and center a distribution around a single total ordering,
assumptions that are limiting in practice. Intransitivities are frequent in sports competitions and other
matchups [12]. The presence of political factions render unimodality an invalid assumption in ranked
surveys and ranked voting, and recommender systems audiences often contain subpopulations with
significant differences in preferences [26] that also induce multimodal ranking distributions.
A major open challenge in the ranking literature, then, has been to develop rich ranking models that
go beyond these assumptions while still being efficiently learnable from data. Work on escaping
unimodality is not new—the ranking literature has long considered models that violate unimodality
(e.g., Babington Smith [50]), including explicit mixtures of unimodal models [39, 22]. However, such
proposals are almost always restricted to theoretical discussions removed from practical applications.
In Figure 1 we provide a stylized visualization of multimodal data and models on the canonical
Cayley graph of S5 (Sn with n = 5), contrasting a bimodal empirical distribution with the unimodal
predicted probabilities from the Mallows and Plackett-Luce maximum likelihood estimates, as well
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

