Learning to Prove Theorems by Learning to Generate
Theorems
Mingzhe Wang
Princeton University
mingzhew@cs.princeton.edu

Jia Deng
Princeton University
jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We consider the task of automated theorem proving, a key AI task. Deep learning
has shown promise for training theorem provers, but there are limited humanwritten theorems and proofs available for supervised learning. To address this
limitation, we propose to learn a neural generator that automatically synthesizes
theorems and proofs for the purpose of training a theorem prover. Experiments on
real-world tasks demonstrate that synthetic data from our approach improves the
theorem prover and advances the state of the art of automated theorem proving in
Metamath. Code is available at https://github.com/princeton-vl/MetaGen.

1

Introduction

Automated theorem proving aims to automatically generate a proof given a conjecture (the target
theorem) and a knowledge base of known facts, all expressed in a formal language. Automated
theorem proving is useful in a wide range of applications, including the verification and synthesis of
software and hardware systems (Gu et al., 2016; Darvas et al., 2005; Kern & Greenstreet, 1999).
Automated theorem proving boils down to a search problem: finding the sequence of symbol
manipulations that generate a valid proof. The fundamental challenge lies in the explosion of search
space, in particular with long proofs and large knowledge bases. The success of theorem proving thus
relies on effective heuristics that guide the prover by deciding the next step the prover should take.
Deep learning has emerged as a promising approach to learning search heuristics in an automated
theorem prover (Irving et al., 2016; Whalen, 2016; Loos et al., 2017; Bansal et al., 2019a; Lee et al.,
2019). The search process fundamentally reduces to a sequence of actions on manipulating a set of
symbols. Thus a deep network can be trained to select the best action at each step.
A key challenge is how to train such networks. Prior work has used human-written theorems and
proofs to perform imitation learning and has shown promising results (Loos et al., 2017; Yang &
Deng, 2019; Whalen, 2016; Paliwal et al., 2019). The training data consists of theorems and proofs
manually written by human experts in a formal language, and the prover is trained to imitate the
proof steps demonstrated by humans.
However, relying on human-written data has a major drawback: such data has limited availability and
scalability. Writing theorems and proofs in a formal language requires highly specialized knowledge
and skills, including mathematics, computer programming, and proficiency in the particular formal
language. For a CS graduate student, it can take months to master a new formal language such as
Mizar, Metamath or HOLight (Wiedijk, 2003), after which it can take days to formalize a single page
of a math textbook. This makes it impractical to crowdsource human-written proofs at large scale.
In this paper, we propose to train a theorem prover using synthetic data. The basic idea is to construct
a generator that automatically synthesizes new theorems and their proofs, which serve to augment
human-written data for training the prover.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

