PAC-Bayes Analysis Beyond the Usual Bounds
Omar Rivasplata
University College London & DeepMind
o.rivasplata@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Ilja Kuzborskij
DeepMind
iljak@google.com

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind
szepi@google.com

John Shawe-Taylor
University College London
jst@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We focus on a stochastic learning model where the learner observes a finite set
of training examples and the output of the learning process is a data-dependent
distribution over a space of hypotheses. The learned data-dependent distribution
is then used to make randomized predictions, and the high-level theme addressed
here is guaranteeing the quality of predictions on examples that were not seen
during training, i.e. generalization. In this setting the unknown quantity of interest
is the expected risk of the data-dependent randomized predictor, for which upper
bounds can be derived via a PAC-Bayes analysis, leading to PAC-Bayes bounds.
Specifically, we present a basic PAC-Bayes inequality for stochastic kernels, from
which one may derive extensions of various known PAC-Bayes bounds as well as
novel bounds. We clarify the role of the requirements of fixed ‘data-free’ priors,
bounded losses, and i.i.d. data. We highlight that those requirements were used
to upper-bound an exponential moment term, while the basic PAC-Bayes theorem
remains valid without those restrictions. We present three bounds that illustrate
the use of data-dependent priors, including one for the unbounded square loss.

1

Introduction

The context of this paper is the statistical learning model where the learner observes training data
S = (Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zn ) randomly drawn from a space of size-n samples S = Z n (e.g. Z = Rd ⇥ Y
for a supervised learning problem where the input space is Rd and the label set is Y) according to
some unknown probability distribution1 Pn 2 M1 (S). Typically Z1 , . . . , Zn are independent and
share a common distribution P1 2 M1 (Z). Upon observing the training data S, the learner outputs
a data-dependent probability distribution QS over a hypothesis space H. Notice that this learning
scenario involves randomness in the data and the hypothesis. In this stochastic learning model, the
randomized predictions are carried out by randomly drawing a fresh hypothesis for each prediction.
Therefore, we consider the performance
R of a probability distribution Q over the hypothesis space:
the expected empirical loss is Q[L̂s ] = H L̂s (h)Q(dh), i.e. the Q-average of the standard empirical
Pn
loss L̂s (h) = L̂(h, s) defined as L̂(h, s) = n1 i=1 `(h, zi ) for a fixed h 2 H and s = (z1 , . . . , zn ),
where ` R: H ⇥ Z ! [0, 1) is a given loss function. Similarly, the expected population
loss is
R
Q[L] = H L(h)Q(dh), i.e. the Q-average of the standard population loss L(h) = Z `(h, z)P1 (dz)
for a fixed h 2 H, where P1 2 M1 (Z) is the distribution that generates one random example.
An important component of our development is formalizing “data-dependent distributions over H”
in a way that makes explicit their difference to fixed “data-free” distributions over H.
1

We write M1 (X ) to denote the family of probability measures over a set X , see Appendix A.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

