Sparse and Continuous Attention Mechanisms

André F. T. Martinsä,Æ,ã
Vlad Niculaeå,ä

António Farinhasä

Pedro M. Q. AguiarÅ,Æ

Marcos Trevisoä
Mário A. T. Figueiredoä,Æ

{andre.t.martins, marcos.treviso, antonio.farinhas, mario.figueiredo}
@tecnico.ulisboa.pt, aguiar@isr.ist.utl.pt, vlad@vene.ro
ä
Å

Instituto de Telecomunicações, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal
Instituto de Sistemas e Robótica, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal
Æ
LUMLIS (Lisbon ELLIS Unit), Lisbon, Portugal
å
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
ã
Unbabel, Lisbon, Portugal

Abstract
Exponential families are widely used in machine learning; they include many
distributions in continuous and discrete domains (e.g., Gaussian, Dirichlet, Poisson,
and categorical distributions via the softmax transformation). Distributions in
each of these families have fixed support. In contrast, for finite domains, there
has been recent work on sparse alternatives to softmax (e.g. sparsemax and αentmax), which have varying support, being able to assign zero probability to
irrelevant categories. This paper expands that work in two directions: first, we
extend α-entmax to continuous domains, revealing a link with Tsallis statistics and
deformed exponential families. Second, we introduce continuous-domain attention
mechanisms, deriving efficient gradient backpropagation algorithms for α ∈ {1, 2}.
Experiments on attention-based text classification, machine translation, and visual
question answering illustrate the use of continuous attention in 1D and 2D, showing
that it allows attending to time intervals and compact regions.

1

Introduction

Exponential families are ubiquitous in statistics and machine learning [1, 2]. They enjoy many useful
properties, such as the existence of conjugate priors (crucial in Bayesian inference) and the classical
Pitman-Koopman-Darmois theorem [3–5], which states that, among families with fixed support
(independent of the parameters), exponential families are the only having sufficient statistics of fixed
dimension for any number of i.i.d. samples.
Departing from exponential families, there has been recent work on discrete, finite-domain distributions with varying and sparse support, via the sparsemax and the entmax transformations [6–8].
Those approaches drop the link to exponential families of categorical distributions provided by the
softmax transformation, which always yields dense probability mass functions. In contrast, sparsemax
and entmax can lead to sparse distributions, whose support is not constant throughout the family. This
property has been used to design sparse attention mechanisms with improved interpretability [8, 9].
However, sparsemax and entmax are so far limited to discrete domains. Can a similar approach be
extended to continuous domains? This paper provides that extension and pinpoints a connection with
“deformed exponential families” [10–12] and Tsallis statistics [13], leading to α-sparse families (§2).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

