In Search of Robust Measures of Generalization
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite1⇤, Alexandre Drouin1⇤ , Brady Neal1,2,3 , Nitarshan Rajkumar2,3 ,
Ethan Caballero2,3 , Linbo Wang4 , Ioannis Mitliagkas2,3 , Daniel M. Roy4,5
1

Element AI, 2 Mila, 3 Université de Montréal, 4 University of Toronto, 5 Vector Institute

Abstract
One of the principal scientific challenges in deep learning is explaining generalization, i.e., why the particular way the community now trains networks to achieve
small training error also leads to small error on held-out data from the same population. It is widely appreciated that some worst-case theories—such as those
based on the VC dimension of the class of predictors induced by modern neural network architectures—are unable to explain empirical performance. A large
volume of work aims to close this gap, primarily by developing bounds on generalization error, optimization error, and excess risk. When evaluated empirically,
however, most of these bounds are numerically vacuous. Focusing on generalization bounds, this work addresses the question of how to evaluate such bounds
empirically. Jiang et al. [9] recently described a large-scale empirical study aimed
at uncovering potential causal relationships between bounds/measures and generalization. Building on their study, we highlight where their proposed methods can
obscure failures and successes of generalization measures in explaining generalization. We argue that generalization measures should instead be evaluated within
the framework of distributional robustness.

1

Introduction

Despite tremendous attention, a satisfying theory of generalization in deep learning remains elusive. In light of so many claims about explaining generalization in deep learning, this statement is
somewhat controversial. It also raises an important question:
What does it mean to explain generalization in deep learning?
In this work, we propose empirical methodology to aid in the search of a precise mathematical
theory, allowing us to leverage large-scale empirical studies of generalization, like those in recent
work [8, 9]. Unlike earlier work, however, our proposal rests on the foundation of robust prediction,
in order to catch out, rather than average out, failures.
The dominant approach to studying generalization is the frequentist framework of statistical learning
theory. We focus our attention on the simplest setting within supervised classification, where the
training data, S, are modeled as a sequence of n random variables, drawn i.i.d. from a distribution D
on labeled examples (x, y). In supervised classification, learning algorithms choose a classifier hS ,
based on the training data S. Ignoring important considerations such as fairness, robustness, etc.,
the key property of a classifier h is its probability of error, or (classification) risk,
RD (h) = P(x,y)⇠D [h(x) 6= y].

(1)

One of the key questions is why deep learning often produces classifiers with human-level risk in
domains that stymied researchers for decades. In this work, we take an empirical perspective and
⇤

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: {karolina.dziugaite, alexandre.drouin}@elementai.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

