PIE-NET: Parametric Inference of Point Cloud Edges

Xiaogang Wang1,2 Yuelang Xu2,5 Kai Xu3 Andrea Tagliasacchi4
Bin Zhou1 Ali Mahdavi-Amiri2 Hao Zhang2
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
Simon Fraser University 3 National University of Defense Technology
4
Google Research 5 Tsinghua University
{wangxiaogang, zhoubin}@buaa.edu.cn; xull16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
{kevin.kai.xu, a.mahdavi.amiri}@gmail.com;
atagliasacchi@google.com; haoz@sfu.ca

Abstract
We introduce an end-to-end learnable technique to robustly identify feature edges
in 3D point cloud data. We represent these edges as a collection of parametric
curves (i.e., lines, circles, and B-splines). Accordingly, our deep neural network,
coined PIE-N ET, is trained for parametric inference of edges. The network relies
on a region proposal architecture, where a first module proposes an over-complete
collection of edge and corner points, and a second module ranks each proposal to
decide whether it should be considered. We train and evaluate our method on the
ABC dataset, the largest publicly available dataset of CAD models, via ablation
studies and compare our results to those produced by traditional (non-learning)
processing pipelines, as well as a recent deep learning-based edge detector (ECNet). Our results significantly improve over the state-of-the-art, both quantitatively
and qualitatively, and generalize well to novel shape categories.

1

Introduction

Edge estimation is a fundamental problem in image and shape processing. Often regarded as a
low-level vision problem, edge detection has been intensely studied and by and large “solved” at
the conceptual level – there are precise mathematical definitions of what an edge is over an image,
or over the surface of a 3D shape. In practice however, even state-of-the-art edge estimators are
sensitive to parameter settings and they often underperform near soft edges, noise, and sparse data.
This is especially true for acquired point clouds, where these data artifacts are prevalent. We argue
this is caused by the fact that edge detection is traditionally achieved by performing decisions based
on manually designed local surface features; note that this resembles the use of hand-designed
descriptors in pre-deep learning computer vision.
In this paper, we advocate for a data-driven approach to feature edge estimation from point clouds –
one where priors to make this operation robust are learned from training data. More precisely, we
develop PIE-N ET, a deep neural network that is trained for Parameter Inference of feature Edges over
a 3D point cloud, where the output consists of one or more parametric curves. Our method treats edge
inference as a proposal and ranking problem – a solution that has shown to be extremely effective in
computer vision for object detection. More specifically, in a first phase, PIE-N ET proposes a large
collection of potentially invalid and/or redundant parametric curves, while in a second phase invalid
proposals are suppressed, and the final output is generated. The suppression is guided by learnt
confidence scores estimated by the network, as well as by how well the predicted curves fit the data.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

