X-CAL: Explicit Calibration for Survival Analysis

Mark Goldstein∗
New York University
goldstein@nyu.edu

Xintian Han∗
New York University
xintian.han@nyu.edu

Adler J. Perotte
Columbia University
adler.perotte@columbia.edu

Aahlad Puli∗
New York University
aahlad@nyu.edu

Rajesh Ranganath
New York University
rajeshr@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Survival analysis models the distribution of time until an event of interest, such as
discharge from the hospital or admission to the ICU. When a model’s predicted
number of events within any time interval is similar to the observed number, it
is called well-calibrated. A survival model’s calibration can be measured using,
for instance, distributional calibration (D - CALIBRATION) [Haider et al., 2020]
which computes the squared difference between the observed and predicted number
of events within different time intervals. Classically, calibration is addressed in
post-training analysis. We develop explicit calibration (X - CAL), which turns D CALIBRATION into a differentiable objective that can be used in survival modeling
alongside maximum likelihood estimation and other objectives. X- CAL allows
practitioners to directly optimize calibration and strike a desired balance between
predictive power and calibration. In our experiments, we fit a variety of shallow
and deep models on simulated data, a survival dataset based on MNIST, on lengthof-stay prediction using MIMIC - III data, and on brain cancer data from The Cancer
Genome Atlas. We show that the models we study can be miscalibrated. We give
experimental evidence on these datasets that X - CAL improves D - CALIBRATION
without a large decrease in concordance or likelihood.

1

Introduction

A core challenge in healthcare is to assess the risk of events such as onset of disease or death. Given
a patient’s vitals and lab values, physicians should know whether the patient is at risk for transfer
to a higher level of care. Accurate estimates of the time-until-event help physicians assess risk and
accordingly prescribe treatment strategies: doctors match aggressiveness of treatment against severity
of illness. These predictions are important to the health of the individual patient and to the allocation
of resources in the healthcare system, affecting all patients.
Survival Analysis formalizes this risk assessment by estimating the conditional distribution of the
time-until-event for an outcome of interest, called the failure time. Unlike supervised learning,
survival analysis must handle datapoints that are censored: their failure time is not observed, but
bounds on the failure time are. For example, in a 10 year cardiac health study [Wilson et al., 1998,
Vasan et al., 2008], some individuals will remain healthy over the study duration. Censored points are
informative, as we can learn that someone’s physiology indicates they are healthy-enough to avoid
onset of cardiac issues within the next 10 years.
A well-calibrated survival model is one where the predicted number of events within any time
interval is similar to the observed number [Pepe and Janes, 2013]. When this is the case, event
∗

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

