LoopReg: Self-supervised Learning of Implicit
Surface Correspondences, Pose and Shape for 3D
Human Mesh Registration

Bharat Lal Bhatnagar
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland University
bbhatnag@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Christian Theobalt
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland University
theobalt@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Cristian Sminchisescu
Google Research
sminchisescu@google.com

Gerard Pons-Moll
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarland University
gpons@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
We address the problem of fitting 3D human models to 3D scans of dressed humans.
Classical methods optimize both the data-to-model correspondences and the human
model parameters (pose and shape), but are reliable only when initialized close to
the solution. Some methods initialize the optimization based on fully supervised
correspondence predictors, which is not differentiable end-to-end, and can only
process a single scan at a time. Our main contribution is LoopReg, an end-to-end
learning framework to register a corpus of scans to a common 3D human model.
The key idea is to create a self-supervised loop. A backward map, parameterized by
a Neural Network, predicts the correspondence from every scan point to the surface
of the human model. A forward map, parameterized by a human model, transforms
the corresponding points back to the scan based on the model parameters (pose and
shape), thus closing the loop. Formulating this closed loop is not straightforward
because it is not trivial to force the output of the NN to be on the surface of the
human model – outside this surface the human model is not even defined. To
this end, we propose two key innovations. First, we define the canonical surface
implicitly as the zero level set of a distance field in R3 , which in contrast to more
common UV parameterizations Ω ⊂ R2 , does not require cutting the surface, does
not have discontinuities, and does not induce distortion. Second, we diffuse the
human model to the 3D domain R3 . This allows to map the NN predictions forward,
even when they slightly deviate from the zero level set. Results demonstrate that we
can train LoopReg mainly self-supervised – following a supervised warm-start, the
model becomes increasingly more accurate as additional unlabelled raw scans are
processed. Our code and pre-trained models can be downloaded for research [5].

1

Introduction

We propose a novel approach for model-based registration, i.e. fitting parametric model to 3D scans
of articulated humans. Registration of scans is necessary to complete, edit and control geometry, and
is often a precondition for building statistical 3D models from data [82, 48, 58, 11].
Classical model-based approaches optimize an objective function over scan-to-model correspondences
and the parameters of a statistical human model, typically pose, shape and non-rigid displacement.
When properly initialized, such approaches are effective and generalize well. However, when the
variation in pose, shape and clothing is high, they are vulnerable to local minima.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

