MomentumRNN: Integrating Momentum
into Recurrent Neural Networks
Tan M. Nguyen
Department of ECE
Rice University, Houston, USA

Richard G. Baraniuk
Department of ECE
Rice University, Houston, USA

Andrea L. Bertozzi
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles

Stanley J. Osher
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles

Bao Wang ∗
Department of Mathematics
Scientific Computing and Imaging (SCI) Institute
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

Abstract
Designing deep neural networks is an art that often involves an expensive search
over candidate architectures. To overcome this for recurrent neural nets (RNNs), we
establish a connection between the hidden state dynamics in an RNN and gradient
descent (GD). We then integrate momentum into this framework and propose a new
family of RNNs, called MomentumRNNs. We theoretically prove and numerically
demonstrate that MomentumRNNs alleviate the vanishing gradient issue in training
RNNs. We study the momentum long-short term memory (MomentumLSTM) and
verify its advantages in convergence speed and accuracy over its LSTM counterpart
across a variety of benchmarks. We also demonstrate that MomentumRNN is
applicable to many types of recurrent cells, including those in the state-of-theart orthogonal RNNs. Finally, we show that other advanced momentum-based
optimization methods, such as Adam and Nesterov accelerated gradients with
a restart, can be easily incorporated into the MomentumRNN framework for
designing new recurrent cells with even better performance.

1

Introduction

Mathematically principled recurrent neural nets (RNNs) facilitate the network design process and
reduce the cost of searching over many candidate architectures. A particular advancement in RNNs
is the long short-term memory (LSTM) model [24] which has achieved state-of-the-art results in
many applications, including speech recognition [15], acoustic modeling [53, 51], and language
modeling [46]. There have been many efforts in improving LSTM: [19] introduces a forget gate
into the original LSTM cell, which can forget information selectively; [18] further adds peephole
connections to the LSTM cell to inspect its current internal states[17]; to reduce the computational
cost, a gated recurrent unit (GRU) [11] uses a single update gate to replace the forget and input gates
in LSTM. Phased LSTM [42] adds a new time gate to the LSTM cell and achieves faster convergence
than the regular LSTM on learning long sequences. In addition, [52] and [50] introduce a biological
cell state and working memory into LSTM, respectively. Nevertheless, most of RNNs, including
LSTMs, are biologically informed or even ad-hoc instead of being guided by mathematical principles.
∗

Please correspond to: wangbaonj@gmail.com or mn15@rice.edu
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

