Counterexample-Guided Learning of
Monotonic Neural Networks
Aishwarya Sivaraman
University of California, Los Angeles
dcssiva@cs.ucla.edu
Todd Millstein
University of California, Los Angeles
todd@cs.ucla.edu

Golnoosh Farnadi
Mila/Université de Montréal
farnadig@mila.quebec
Guy Van den Broeck
University of California, Los Angeles
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The widespread adoption of deep learning is often attributed to its automatic feature
construction with minimal inductive bias. However, in many real-world tasks, the
learned function is intended to satisfy domain-specific constraints. We focus
on monotonicity constraints, which are common and require that the function’s
output increases with increasing values of specific input features. We develop a
counterexample-guided technique to provably enforce monotonicity constraints at
prediction time. Additionally, we propose a technique to use monotonicity as an
inductive bias for deep learning. It works by iteratively incorporating monotonicity
counterexamples in the learning process. Contrary to prior work in monotonic
learning, we target general ReLU neural networks and do not further restrict the
hypothesis space. We have implemented these techniques in a tool called C OMET.1
Experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate that our approach achieves stateof-the-art results compared to existing monotonic learners, and can improve the
model quality compared to those that were trained without taking monotonicity
constraints into account.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are increasingly used to make sensitive decisions, including financial decisions
such as whether to give a loan to an applicant [25] and as controllers for safety critical systems
such as autonomous vehicles [7, 54]. In these settings, for safety, ethical, and legal reasons, it is of
utmost importance that some of the decisions made are monotonic. For example, one would expect
an individual with a higher salary to have a higher loan amount approved, all else being equal, and
the speed of a drone to decrease with its proximity to the ground. Learning problems in medicine,
revenue-maximizing auctions [17], bankruptcy prediction, credit rating, house pricing, etc., all have
monotonicity as a natural property to which a model should adhere. Guaranteeing monotonicity helps
users to better trust and understand the learned model [24]. Furthermore, prior knowledge about
monotonic relationships can also be an effective regularizer to avoid overfitting [14].
Unfortunately, there is no easy way to specify that a trained neural network should be monotonic in
one or more of its features. Existing approaches to this problem, such as min-max networks [40],
monotonic lattices [16], and deep lattice networks [53], guarantee monotonicity by construction but
do so at the cost of significantly restricting the hypothesis class. Other solutions, such as learning
a linear function with positive coefficients, are even more restrictive. Furthermore, techniques that
1

https://github.com/AishwaryaSivaraman/COMET

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

