Self-Supervised Generative Adversarial Compression

Chong Yu
NVIDIA
chongy@nvidia.com

Jeff Pool
NVIDIA
jpool@nvidia.com

Abstract
Deep learning’s success has led to larger and larger models to handle more and more
complex tasks; trained models often contain millions of parameters. These large
models are compute- and memory-intensive, which makes it a challenge to deploy
them with latency, throughput, and storage constraints. Some model compression
methods have been successfully applied to image classification and detection
or language models, but there has been very little work compressing generative
adversarial networks (GANs) performing complex tasks. In this paper, we show
that a standard model compression technique, weight pruning and knowledge
distillation, cannot be applied to GANs using existing methods. We then develop
a self-supervised compression technique which uses the trained discriminator to
supervise the training of a compressed generator. We show that this framework
has compelling performance to high degrees of sparsity, can be easily applied to
new tasks and models, and enables meaningful comparisons between different
compression granularities.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been successful in various tasks like computer vision, natural
language processing, recommendation systems, and autonomous driving. Modern networks are
comprised of millions of parameters, requiring significant storage and computational effort. Though
accelerators such as GPUs make realtime performance more accessible, compressing networks for
faster inference and simpler deployment is an active area of research. Compression techniques have
been applied to many networks to reduce memory requirements and improve performance. Though
these approaches do not always harm accuracy, aggressive compression can adversely affect the
behavior of the network. Distillation [1, 2] can improve the accuracy of a compressed network by
using information from the original, uncompressed network.
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [3, 4] are a class of DNN that consist of two sub-networks:
a generative model and a discriminative model. Their training process aims to achieve a Nash Equilibrium between these two sub-models. GANs have been used in semi-supervised and unsupervised
learning areas, such as fake dataset synthesis [5, 6], style transfer [7, 8], and image-to-image translation [9, 10]. Like networks used in other tasks, GANs have millions of parameters and nontrivial
computational requirements.
In this work, we explore compressing the generative model of GANs for efficient deployment. We
show that applying standard pruning techniques causes the generator’s behavior to no longer achieve
the network’s goal and that past work targeted at compressing GANs for simple image synthesis fall
short when they are applied to pruning large tasks. In some cases, this result is masked by loss curves
that look identical to the original training. By modifying the loss function with a novel combination
of the pre-trained discriminator and the original and compressed generators, we overcome this
behavioral degradation and achieve compelling compression rates with little change in the quality of
the compressed generator’s ouput. We apply our technique to several networks and tasks to show
generality. Finally, we study the behavior of compressed generators when pruned with different
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

