Rethinking the Value of Labels for Improving
Class-Imbalanced Learning

Yuzhe Yang
EECS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
yuzhe@mit.edu

Zhi Xu
EECS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
zhixu@mit.edu

Abstract
Real-world data often exhibits long-tailed distributions with heavy class imbalance,
posing great challenges for deep recognition models. We identify a persisting
dilemma on the value of labels in the context of imbalanced learning: on the one
hand, supervision from labels typically leads to better results than its unsupervised
counterparts; on the other hand, heavily imbalanced data naturally incurs “label
bias” in the classifier, where the decision boundary can be drastically altered by
the majority classes. In this work, we systematically investigate these two facets of
labels. We demonstrate, theoretically and empirically, that class-imbalanced learning can significantly benefit in both semi-supervised and self-supervised manners.
Specifically, we confirm that (1) positively, imbalanced labels are valuable: given
more unlabeled data, the original labels can be leveraged with the extra data to
reduce label bias in a semi-supervised manner, which greatly improves the final
classifier; (2) negatively however, we argue that imbalanced labels are not useful
always: classifiers that are first pre-trained in a self-supervised manner consistently
outperform their corresponding baselines. Extensive experiments on large-scale
imbalanced datasets verify our theoretically grounded strategies, showing superior
performance over previous state-of-the-arts. Our intriguing findings highlight the
need to rethink the usage of imbalanced labels in realistic long-tailed tasks. Code
is available at https://github.com/YyzHarry/imbalanced-semi-self.

1

Introduction

Imbalanced data is ubiquitous in the real world, where large-scale datasets often exhibit long-tailed
label distributions [1,5,24,33]. In particular, for critical applications related to safety or health, such as
autonomous driving and medical diagnosis, the data are by their nature heavily imbalanced. This posts
a major challenge for modern deep learning frameworks [2, 5, 10, 20, 53], where even with specialized
techniques such as data re-sampling approaches [2,5,41] or class-balanced losses [7,13,26], significant
performance drops still remain under extreme class imbalance. In order to further tackle the challenge,
it is hence vital to understand the different characteristics incurred by class-imbalanced learning.
Yet, distinct from balanced data, the labels in the context of imbalanced learning play a surprisingly
controversial role, which leads to a persisting dilemma on the value of labels: (1) On the one hand,
learning algorithms with supervision from labels typically result in more accurate classifiers than their
unsupervised counterparts, demonstrating the positive value of labels; (2) On the other hand, however,
imbalanced labels naturally impose “label bias” during learning, where the decision boundary can be
significantly driven by the majority classes, demonstrating the negative impact of labels. Hence, the
imbalanced label is seemingly a double-edged sword. Naturally, a fundamental question arises:
How to maximally exploit the value of labels to improve class-imbalanced learning?
In this work, we take initiatives to systematically decompose and analyze the two facets of imbalanced
labels. As our key contributions, we demonstrate that the positive and the negative viewpoint of the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

