Adversarial Sparse Transformer for Time Series
Forecasting

Sifan Wu∗
Tsinghua University
wusf18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Qianggang Ding∗
Tsinghua University
dqg18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Xi Xiao
Tsinghua University/Peng Cheng Laboratory
xiaox@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Peilin Zhao†
Tencent AI Lab
masonzhao@tencent.com

Ying Wei
Tencent AI Lab
judywei@tencent.com

Junzhou Huang
University of Texas at Arlington/Tencent AI Lab
jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Many approaches have been proposed for time series forecasting, in light of its
significance in wide applications including business demand prediction. However,
the existing methods suffer from two key limitations. Firstly, most point prediction
models only predict an exact value of each time step without flexibility, which
can hardly capture the stochasticity of data. Even probabilistic prediction using
the likelihood estimation suffers these problems in the same way. Besides, most
of them use the auto-regressive generative mode, where ground-truth is provided
during training and replaced by the network’s own one-step ahead output during
inference, causing the error accumulation in inference. Thus they may fail to
forecast time series for long time horizon due to the error accumulation. To solve
these issues, in this paper, we propose a new time series forecasting model –
Adversarial Sparse Transformer (AST), based on Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs). Specifically, AST adopts a Sparse Transformer as the generator to learn
a sparse attention map for time series forecasting, and uses a discriminator to
improve the prediction performance at a sequence level. Extensive experiments on
several real-world datasets show the effectiveness and efficiency of our method.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has demonstrated its wide applications in business and industrial decisionmaking. For example, demand forecasting of energy consumption helps optimize the resource
allocation and dispatch the power generation. There are many classical approaches to solve time
series forecasting problems, such as Auto Regressive Integrated Moving Average(ARIMA) [3] models
or exponential smoothing [7]. They incorporate prior knowledge about time series structures such as
trend, seasonality and so on, and can achieve good performance for single linear time series prediction.
But they are ineffective in predicting complex time series data, partly because of their inability to
utilize the time-related features.
∗
†

This work is done when Sifan Wu and Qianggang Ding work as interns at Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

