Causal Discovery from Soft Interventions with
Unknown Targets: Characterization and Learning
Amin Jaber
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University, USA
jaber0@purdue.edu

Murat Kocaoglu
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research MA, USA
murat@ibm.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research NY, USA
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University, USA
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
One fundamental problem in the empirical sciences is of reconstructing the causal
structure that underlies a phenomenon of interest through observation and experimentation. While there exists a plethora of methods capable of learning the
equivalence class of causal structures that are compatible with observations, it is
less well-understood how to systematically combine observations and experiments
to reconstruct the underlying structure. In this paper, we investigate the task of
structural learning in non-Markovian systems (i.e., when latent variables a↵ect
more than one observable) from a combination of observational and soft experimental data when the interventional targets are unknown. Using causal invariances
found across the collection of observational and interventional distributions (not
only conditional independences), we define a property called -Markov that connects these distributions to a pair consisting of (1) a causal graph D and (2) a set
of interventional targets I. Building on this property, our main contributions are
two-fold: First, we provide a graphical characterization that allows one to test
whether two causal graphs with possibly di↵erent sets of interventional targets
belong to the same -Markov equivalence class. Second, we develop an algorithm
capable of harnessing the collection of data to learn the corresponding equivalence
class. We then prove that this algorithm is sound and complete, in the sense that
it is the most informative in the sample limit, i.e., it discovers as many tails and
arrowheads as can be oriented within a -Markov equivalence class.

1

Introduction

Learning cause-and-e↵ect relationships is one of the fundamental problems for various fields, including biology [28, 6], epidemiology [26], and economics [12]. A prominent approach for causal
discovery models the underlying system as a causal graph represented by a directed acyclic graph
(DAG), where nodes denote random variables (measured or latent) and directed edges denote causal
e↵ects from tails to arrowheads [22, 29, 24]. Accordingly, the task of structural learning entails
piecing together the constraints found in the data (and implied by the underlying, unobserved causal
system) to infer the corresponding causal graph. In practice, however, these constraints are almost
never sufficient to determine the true causal graph, and a collection of compatible graphs ends up
being the target of the analysis, which forms what is known as an equivalence class (EC).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

