Dissecting Neural ODEs

Stefano Massaroli∗
The University of Tokyo, DiffEqML

Michael Poli∗
KAIST, DiffEqML

massaroli@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

poli_m@kaist.ac.kr

Jinkyoo Park
KAIST

Atsushi Yamashita
The University of Tokyo

Hajime Asama
The University of Tokyo

jinkyoo.park@kaist.ac.kr

yamashita@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

asama@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Continuous deep learning architectures have recently re–emerged as Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural ODEs). This infinite–depth approach theoretically bridges the gap between deep learning and dynamical systems, offering
a novel perspective. However, deciphering the inner working of these models
is still an open challenge, as most applications apply them as generic black–box
modules. In this work we “open the box”, further developing the continuous–depth
formulation with the aim of clarifying the influence of several design choices on
the underlying dynamics.

1

Introduction

Neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018) represent the latest instance of continuous deep learning models, first
developed in the context of continuous recurrent networks (Cohen and Grossberg, 1983). Since their
introduction, research on Neural ODEs variants (Tzen and Raginsky, 2019; Jia and Benson, 2019;
Zhang et al., 2019b; Yıldız et al., 2019; Poli et al., 2019) has progressed at a rapid pace. However,
the search for concise explanations and experimental evaluations of novel architectures has left many
fundamental questions unanswered.
In this work, we establish a general system–theoretic Neural ODE formulation (1) and dissect it into
its core components; we analyze each of them separately, shining light on peculiar phenomena unique
to the continuous deep learning paradigm. In particular, augmentation strategies are generalized
beyond ANODEs (Dupont et al., 2019), and the novel concepts of data–control and adaptive–depth
enriching (1) are showcased as effective approaches to learn maps such as reflections or concentric
annuli without augmentation.
While explicit dependence on the depth–variable has been considered in the original formulation
(Chen et al., 2018), a parameter depth–variance in continuous models has been overlooked. We
provide a treatment in infinite–dimensional space required by the true deep limit of ResNets, the
solution of which leads to a Neural ODE variant based on a spectral discretization.
Neural Ordinary Differential Equation




ż = fθ(s) (s, x, z(s))

z(0) = hx (x)

ŷ(s) = h (z(s))
y

∗

s ∈ S (1)

Input
Output
(Hidden) State
Parameters
Neural Vector Field
Input Network
Output Network

x
ŷ
z
θ(s)
fθ(s)
hx
hy

Rnx
Rny
R nz
Rnθ
R nz
R nx → R nz
R nz → R ny

Equal contribution. Author order was decided by flipping a coin.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

