Data Diversification: A Simple Strategy For Neural
Machine Translation
Xuan-Phi Nguyen1,3 , Shafiq Joty1,2 , Wu Kui3 , Ai Ti Aw3
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
Salesforce Research
3
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR
Singapore
{nguyenxu002@e.ntu,srjoty@ntu}.edu.sg
{wuk,aaiti}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
We introduce Data Diversification: a simple but effective strategy to boost neural
machine translation (NMT) performance. It diversifies the training data by using
the predictions of multiple forward and backward models and then merging them
with the original dataset on which the final NMT model is trained. Our method
is applicable to all NMT models. It does not require extra monolingual data
like back-translation, nor does it add more computations and parameters like
ensembles of models. Our method achieves state-of-the-art BLEU scores of 30.7
and 43.7 in the WMT’14 English-German and English-French translation tasks,
respectively. It also substantially improves on 8 other translation tasks: 4 IWSLT
tasks (English-German and English-French) and 4 low-resource translation tasks
(English-Nepali and English-Sinhala). We demonstrate that our method is more
effective than knowledge distillation and dual learning, it exhibits strong correlation
with ensembles of models, and it trades perplexity off for better BLEU score.

1

Introduction

The invention of novel architectures for neural machine translation (NMT) has been fundamental to
the progress of the field. From the traditional recurrent approaches [22, 14], NMT has advanced to
self-attention method [24], which is more efficient and powerful and has set the standard for many
other NLP tasks [3]. Another parallel line of research is to devise effective methods to improve
NMT without intensive modification to model architecture, which we shall refer to as non-intrusive
extensions. Examples of these include the use of sub-word units to solve the out-of-vocabulary
(OOV) problem [18] or exploiting extra monolingual data to perform semi-supervised learning using
back-translation [17, 4]. One major advantage of these methods is the applicability to most existing
NMT models as well as potentially future architectural advancements with little change. Thus, nonintrusive extensions are used in practice to avoid the overhead cost of developing new architectures
and enhance the capability of existing state-of-the-art models.
In this paper, we propose Data Diversification1 , a simple but effective way to improve machine
translation consistently and significantly. In this method, we first train multiple models on both
backward (target→source) and forward (source→target) translation tasks. Then, we use these models
to generate a diverse set of synthetic training data from both lingual sides to augment the original data.
Our approach is inspired from and a combination of multiple well-known strategies: back-translation,
ensemble of models, data augmentation and knowledge distillation for NMT.
1

Code: https://github.com/nxphi47/data_diversification

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

