Residual Distillation: Towards Portable Deep Neural
Networks without Shortcuts
Guilin Li1∗†, Junlei Zhang1∗, Yunhe Wang 1 , Chuanjian Liu1 ,
Matthias Tan2 , Yunfeng Lin1 , Wei Zhang1 , Jiashi Feng3 , Tong Zhang4
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 2 CityU, 3 NUS, 4 HKUST
hiliguilin@gmail.com, zjlnbnb@163.com
yunhe.wang@huawei.com, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
By transferring both features and gradients between different layers, shortcut
connections explored by ResNets allow us to effectively train very deep neural
networks up to hundreds of layers. However, the additional computation costs
induced by those shortcuts are often overlooked. For example, during online
inference, the shortcuts in ResNet-50 account for about 40 percent of the entire
memory usage on feature maps, because the features in the preceding layers cannot
be released until the subsequent calculation is completed. In this work, for the
first time, we consider training the CNN models with shortcuts and deploying
them without. In particular, we propose a novel joint-training framework to train
plain CNN by leveraging the gradients of the ResNet counterpart. During forward
step, the feature maps of the early stages of plain CNN are passed through later
stages of both itself and the ResNet counterpart to calculate the loss. During
backpropagation, gradients calculated from a mixture of these two parts are used to
update the plainCNN network to solve the gradient vanishing problem. Extensive
experiments on ImageNet/CIFAR10/CIFAR100 demonstrate that the plainCNN
network without shortcuts generated by our approach can achieve the same level
of accuracy as that of the ResNet baseline while achieving about 1.4× speed-up
and 1.25× memory reduction. We also verified the feature transferability of our
ImageNet pretrained plain-CNN network by fine-tuning it on MIT 67 and Caltech
101. Our results show that the performance of the plain-CNN is slightly higher than
that of its baseline ResNet-50 on these two datasets. The code will be available at
https://github.com/leoozy/JointRD_Neurips2020 and the MindSpore code will be
available at https://www.mindspore.cn/resources/hub.

1

Introduction

Very deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied in a large variety
of computer vision tasks in recent years [1, 2]. Wherein, the residual modules, i.e., the shortcuts
have played a vital role in training very deep neural networks. Shortcuts can be effectively utilized
to alleviate the gradient vanishing problem, which is widely used in modern CNN architectures
including ResNet [3], MobileNet [4], ResNeXt [5], EfficientNet [6], etc. However, besides the
improvement in performance [7], there is an important disadvantage for shortcuts which is often
overlooked in existing works. Different from conventional neural architectures (e.g., VGGNet [8]),
the feature maps of intermediate layers in those networks using shortcuts cannot be released during
online inference. Since the shortcut operation merges features in layers with different depths, we need
∗
†

Co-first authors with equal contributions listed in alphabetical order.
Guilin Li is now affiliated with Intact financial (HK) limited.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

