Continuous Regularized Wasserstein Barycenters
Lingxiao Li
MIT CSAIL
lingxiao@mit.edu

Aude Genevay
MIT CSAIL
aude.genevay@gmail.com

Mikhail Yurochkin
IBM Research, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Justin Solomon
MIT CSAIL, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
jsolomon@mit.edu

Abstract
Wasserstein barycenters provide a geometrically meaningful way to aggregate
probability distributions, built on the theory of optimal transport. They are difficult
to compute in practice, however, leading previous work to restrict their supports
to finite sets of points. Leveraging a new dual formulation for the regularized
Wasserstein barycenter problem, we introduce a stochastic algorithm that constructs
a continuous approximation of the barycenter. We establish strong duality and use
the corresponding primal-dual relationship to parametrize the barycenter implicitly
using the dual potentials of regularized transport problems. The resulting problem
can be solved with stochastic gradient descent, which yields an efficient online
algorithm to approximate the barycenter of continuous distributions given sample
access. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach and compare against
previous work on synthetic examples and real-world applications.

1

Introduction

In statistics and machine learning, it is often desirable to aggregate distinct but similar collections
of information, represented as probability distributions. For example, when temperature data is
missing from one weather station, one can combine the temperature histograms from nearby stations
to provide a good estimate for the missing station [Sol+14]. Or, in a Bayesian inference setting, when
inference on the full data set is not allowed due to privacy or efficiency reasons, one can distributively
gather posterior samples from slices of the data to form a single posterior incorporating information
from all the data [Min+14; SLD18; Sri+15; Sta+17].
One successful aggregation strategy consists in computing a barycenter of the input distributions.
Given a notion of distance between distributions, the barycenter is the distribution that minimizes
the sum of distances to the individual input distributions. A popular choice of distance is the
Wasserstein distance based on the theory of optimal transport. The corresponding barycenter, called
the Wasserstein barycenter was first studied in [AC11]. Intuitively, the Wasserstein distance is defined
as the least amount of work required to transport the mass from one distribution into the other, where
the notion of work is measured with respect to the metric of the underlying space on which the
distributions are supported. The Wasserstein distance enjoys strong theoretical properties [Vil08;
FG15; San15], and efficient algorithms for its computation have been proposed in recent years [Cut13;
Gen+16; Seg+17; PC19]. It has found success in many machine learning applications, including
Bayesian inference [EM12] and domain adaptation [CFT14].
Finding the Wasserstein barycenter is not an easy task. To make it computationally tractable, the
barycenter is typically constrained to be a discrete measure on a fixed number of support points [CD14;
Sta+17; Dvu+18; CCS18]. This discrete approximation, however, can be undesirable in downstream
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

