Posterior Re-calibration for Imbalanced Datasets
Junjiao Tian
Georgia Institute of Technology
jtian73@gatech.edu

Yen-Cheng Liu
Georgia Institute of Technology
ycliu@gatech.edu

Nathaniel Glaser
Georgia Institute of Technology
nglaser@gatech.edu

Yen-Chang Hsu
Georgia Institute of Technology
yenchang.hsu@gatech.edu

Zsolt Kira
Georgia Institute of Technology
zkira@gatech.edu

Abstract
Neural Networks can perform poorly when the training label distribution is heavily imbalanced, as well as when the testing data differs from the training distribution. In order to deal with shift in the testing label distribution, which imbalance causes, we motivate the problem from the perspective of an optimal
Bayes classifier and derive a post-training prior rebalancing technique that can
be solved through a KL-divergence based optimization. This method allows a
flexible post-training hyper-parameter to be efficiently tuned on a validation set
and effectively modify the classifier margin to deal with this imbalance. We further combine this method with existing likelihood shift methods, re-interpreting
them from the same Bayesian perspective, and demonstrating that our method
can deal with both problems in a unified way. The resulting algorithm can be
conveniently used on probabilistic classification problems agnostic to underlying
architectures. Our results on six different datasets and five different architectures
show state of art accuracy, including on large-scale imbalanced datasets such as
iNaturalist for classification and Synthia for semantic segmentation. Please see
https://github.com/GT-RIPL/UNO-IC.git for implementation.

1

Introduction

Applications of deep learning algorithms in the real world have fueled new interest in research beyond
well-constructed datasets where the classes are balanced and the training distribution faithfully reflects
the true (testing) distribution.
However, it is unlikely that one can anticipate all possible scenarios and construct well-curated
datasets consistently. Therefore it is important to study robust algorithms that can perform well with
such imbalanced datasets and unseen situations during testing. The aforementioned problems can be
categorized as distributional shift between the training and testing conditions, specifically:label prior
shift and non-semantic likelihood shift.
In this paper, we focus on label prior shift, which can arise when i) the training class distribution
does not match the true (test) class distribution due to the inherent difficulty in obtaining samples
from certain classes, or ii) the distribution of classes does not reflect their relative importance. For
example, the natural world is inherently imbalanced such that a collected dataset may exhibit a
long-tailed distribution. Similarly, in semantic segmentation, the pixel percentage of pedestrains does
not reflect their importance in prediction (e.g. for safety).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

