Nonasymptotic Guarantees for Spiked Matrix
Recovery with Generative Priors

Jorio Cocola
Department of Mathematics
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
cocola.j@northeastern.edu

Paul Hand
Department of Mathematics
and Khoury College of Computer Sciences,
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
p.hand@northeastern.edu

Vladislav Voroninski
Helm.ai,
Menlo Park, CA 94025
vlad@helm.ai

Abstract
Many problems in statistics and machine learning require the reconstruction of a
rank-one signal matrix from noisy data. Enforcing additional prior information on
the rank-one component is often key to guaranteeing good recovery performance.
One such prior on the low-rank component is sparsity, giving rise to the sparse
principal component analysis problem. Unfortunately, there is strong evidence
that this problem suffers from a computational-to-statistical gap, which may be
fundamental. In this work, we study an alternative prior where the low-rank
component is in the range of a trained generative network. We provide a nonasymptotic analysis with optimal sample complexity, up to logarithmic factors, for
rank-one matrix recovery under an expansive-Gaussian network prior. Specifically,
we establish a favorable global optimization landscape for a nonlinear least squares
objective, provided the number of samples is on the order of the dimensionality of
the input to the generative model. This result suggests that generative priors have
no computational-to-statistical gap for structured rank-one matrix recovery in the
finite data, nonasymptotic regime. We present this analysis in the case of both the
Wishart and Wigner spiked matrix models.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study the problem of estimating a spike vector y? ∈ Rn from data Y consisting of a
rank-1 matrix perturbed with random noise. In particular, the following random models for Y will be
considered.
• The Spiked Wishart Model in which Y ∈ RN ×n is given by:
Y = u y? | + σZ,

(1)

where σ > 0, u ∼ N (0, In ) and Z are independent and Zij are i.i.d. from N (0, 1).
• The Spiked Wigner Model in which Y ∈ Rn×n is given by:
Y = y? y? | + νH
n×n

(2)

where ν > 0, H ∈ R
is drawn from a Gaussian Orthogonal Ensemble GOE(n), i.e.
Hii ∼ N (0, 2/n) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n and Hij = Hji ∼ N (0, 1/n) for 1 ≤ j < i ≤ n.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

