Learning Disentangled Representations of
Video with Missing Data

Armand Comas Massagué1
comasmassague.a@northeastern.edu
Zlatan Feric2
feric.z@northeastern.edu

Chi Zhang2
zhang.chi13@northeastern.edu

Octavia Camps1
camps@coe.neu.edu

Rose Yu2,3
roseyu@ucsd.edu ∗

Abstract
Missing data poses significant challenges while learning representations of video
sequences. We present Disentangled Imputed Video autoEncoder (DIVE), a deep
generative model that imputes and predicts future video frames in the presence of
missing data. Specifically, DIVE introduces a missingness latent variable, disentangles the hidden video representations into static and dynamic appearance, pose, and
missingness factors for each object. DIVE imputes each object’s trajectory where
the data is missing. On a moving MNIST dataset with various missing scenarios,
DIVE outperforms the state of the art baselines by a substantial margin. We also
present comparisons on a real-world MOTSChallenge pedestrian dataset, which
demonstrates the practical value of our method in a more realistic setting. Our code
and data can be found at https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/DIVE.

1

Introduction

Videos contain rich structured information about our physical world. Learning representations from
video enables intelligent machines to reason about the surroundings and it is essential to a range of
tasks in machine learning and computer vision, including activity recognition [1], video prediction
[2] and spatiotemporal reasoning [3]. One of the fundamental challenges in video representation
learning is the high-dimensional, dynamic, multi-modal distribution of pixels. Recent research in
deep generative models [4, 5, 6, 7] tackles the challenge by exploiting inductive biases of videos and
projecting the high-dimensional data into substantially lower dimensional space. These methods
search for disentangled representations by decomposing the latent representation of video frames
into semantically meaningful factors [8].
Unfortunately, existing methods cannot reason about the objects when they are missing in videos.
In contrast, a five month-old child can understand that objects continue to exist even when they are
unseen, a phenomena known as “object permanence” [9]. Towards making intelligent machines, we
study learning disentangled representations of videos with missing data. We consider a variety of
missing scenarios that might occur in natural videos: objects can be partially occluded; objects can
disappear in a scene and reappear; objects can also become missing while changing their size, shape,
color and brightness. The ability to disentangle these factors and learn appropriate representations is
an important step toward spatiotemporal decision making in complex environments.
In this work, we build on the deep generative model of DDPAE [5] which integrates structured
graphical models into deep neural networks. Our model, which we call Disentangled-Imputed-VideoautoEncoder (DIVE), (i) learns representations that factorize into appearance, pose and missingness
∗1

College of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern
University, MA, USA, 3 Computer Science & Engineering, University of California San Diego, CA, USA.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

