GradAug: A New Regularization Method for Deep
Neural Networks
Taojiannan Yang, Sijie Zhu, Chen Chen
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
{tyang30,szhu3,chen.chen}@uncc.edu

Abstract
We propose a new regularization method to alleviate over-fitting in deep neural
networks. The key idea is utilizing randomly transformed training samples to
regularize a set of sub-networks, which are originated by sampling the width of the
original network, in the training process. As such, the proposed method introduces
self-guided disturbances to the raw gradients of the network and therefore is termed
as Gradient Augmentation (GradAug). We demonstrate that GradAug can help
the network learn well-generalized and more diverse representations. Moreover,
it is easy to implement and can be applied to various structures and applications.
GradAug improves ResNet-50 to 78.79% on ImageNet classification, which is a
new state-of-the-art accuracy. By combining with CutMix, it further boosts the
performance to 79.67%, which outperforms an ensemble of advanced training
tricks. The generalization ability is evaluated on COCO object detection and
instance segmentation where GradAug significantly surpasses other state-of-the-art
methods. GradAug is also robust to image distortions and FGSM adversarial
attacks and is highly effective in low data regimes. Code is available at https:
//github.com/taoyang1122/GradAug

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved great success in computer vision tasks such as image classification [1, 2], image reconstruction [3, 4], object detection [5, 6] and semantic segmentation [7, 8]. But
deep neural networks are often over-parameterized and easily suffering from over-fitting. Regularization [9, 10] and data augmentation [1, 11] are widely used techniques to alleviate the over-fitting
problem. Many data-level regularization methods [10, 12, 13] have achieved promising performance
in image classification. These methods are similar to data augmentation where they put constraints
on the input images. Although effective in image classification, these methods are hard to apply to
downstream tasks such as object detection and segmentation due to their special operations. For
example, the state-of-the-art CutMix [13] can not be directly applied to object detection because
first, mixing samples will destroy the semantics in images; second, it is hard to interpolate the labels
in these tasks. Another category of regularization methods imposes constraints on the network
structures. [14] proposes that adding noises to the network gradients can improve generalization.
Other methods [9,15,16] randomly drop some connections in the network, which implicitly introduce
random noises in the training process. These methods are usually more generic but not as effective as
data-level regularization.
In this paper, we introduce Gradient Augmentation (GradAug), which generates meaningful disturbances to the gradients by the network itself rather than just adding random noises. The idea is that
when a random transformation (e.g., random rotation, random scale, random crop, etc.) is applied to
an image, a well-generalized network should still recognize the transformed image as the same object.
Different from the regular data augmentation technique which only regularizes the full-network,
we regularize the representations learned by a set of sub-networks, which are randomly sampled
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

