Shared Space Transfer Learning
for analyzing multi-site fMRI data

Muhammad Yousefnezhad1,2,3,∗, Alessandro Selvitella1,4 , Daoqiang Zhang2 ,
Andrew J. Greenshaw1 , Russell Greiner1,3
1
University of Alberta, Canada
2
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China
3
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), Canada
4
Purdue University Fort Wayne, United States
myousefnezhad@ualberta.ca, aselvite@pfw.edu, dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn,
{andy.greenshaw, rgreiner}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) learns predictive models from task-based
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data, for distinguishing when
subjects are performing different cognitive tasks — e.g., watching movies or making
decisions. MVPA works best with a well-designed feature set and an adequate
sample size. However, most fMRI datasets are noisy, high-dimensional, expensive
to collect, and with small sample sizes. Further, training a robust, generalized
predictive model that can analyze homogeneous cognitive tasks provided by multisite fMRI datasets has additional challenges. This paper proposes the Shared
Space Transfer Learning (SSTL) as a novel transfer learning (TL) approach that
can functionally align homogeneous multi-site fMRI datasets, and so improve
the prediction performance in every site. SSTL first extracts a set of common
features for all subjects in each site. It then uses TL to map these site-specific
features to a site-independent shared space in order to improve the performance
of the MVPA. SSTL uses a scalable optimization procedure that works effectively
for high-dimensional fMRI datasets. The optimization procedure extracts the
common features for each site by using a single-iteration algorithm and maps
these site-specific common features to the site-independent shared space. We
evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method for transferring between various
cognitive tasks. Our comprehensive experiments validate that SSTL achieves
superior performance to other state-of-the-art analysis techniques.

1

Introduction

The task-based functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is one of the prevalent tools in
neuroscience to analyze how human brains work [1–5]. It can be used to visualize the neural activities
when subjects are performing cognitive tasks — such as watching photos or making decisions [1].
Since brain images are high-dimensional and noisy, most of the recent neuroimage studies utilize
machine learning approaches such as classification techniques for analyzing fMRI datasets [1, 2].
Multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) learns a classification model based on a set of fMRI responses
(with labels), which can be used to predict the cognitive tasks performed by a novel subject, who was
not part of the training phase [1]. An accurate MVPA model needs a well-designed feature space
and sufficient number of training instances [1–3]. However, most fMRI datasets include a limited set
of samples because collecting neuroimage data is an expensive procedure and needs a wide range
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

