A Matrix Chernoff Bound for Markov Chains and Its
Application to Co-occurrence Matrices

Jiezhong Qiu
Tsinghua University
qiujz16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Ben Liao
Tencent Quantum Lab
bliao@tencent.com

Richard Peng
Georgia Tech
rpeng@cc.gatech.edu

Chi Wang
Microsoft Research, Redmond
wang.chi@microsoft.com
Jie Tang
Tsinghua University
jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We prove a Chernoff-type bound for sums of matrix-valued random variables
sampled via a regular (aperiodic and irreducible) finite Markov chain. Specially,
consider a random walk on a regular Markov chain and a Hermitian matrix-valued
function on its state space. Our result gives exponentially decreasing bounds on
the tail distributions of the extreme eigenvalues of the sample mean matrix. Our
proof is based on the matrix expander (regular undirected graph) Chernoff bound
[Garg et al. STOC ’18] and scalar Chernoff-Hoeffding bounds for Markov chains
[Chung et al. STACS ’12].
Our matrix Chernoff bound for Markov chains can be applied to analyze the
behavior of co-occurrence statistics for sequential data, which have been common
and important data signals in machine learning. We show that given a regular
Markov chain with n states and mixing time τ , we need a trajectory of length
O(τ (log n + log τ )/2 ) to achieve an estimator of the co-occurrence matrix with
error bound . We conduct several experiments and the experimental results are
consistent with the exponentially fast convergence rate from theoretical analysis.
Our result gives the first bound on the convergence rate of the co-occurrence matrix
and the first sample complexity analysis in graph representation learning.

1

Introduction

Chernoff bound [5], which gives exponentially decreasing bounds on tail distributions of sums of
independent scalar-valued random variables, is one of the most basic and versatile tools in theoretical
computer science, with countless applications to practical problems [21, 35]. There are two notable
limitations when applying Chernoff bound in analyzing sample complexity in real-world machine
learning problems. First, in many cases the random variables have dependence, e.g., Markov
dependence [20] in MCMC [18] and online learning [48]. Second, applications are often concerned
with the concentration behavior of quantities beyond scalar-valued random variables, e.g., random
features in kernel machines [40] and co-occurrence statistics which are random matrices [38, 39].
Existing research has attempted to extend the original Chernoff bound in one of these two limitations [19, 11, 27, 24, 53, 14, 6, 41, 52, 42, 1, 50]. Wigderson and Xiao [53] conjectured that Chernoff
bounds can be generalized to both matrix-valued random variables and Markov dependence, while
restricting the Markov dependence to be a regular undirected graph. It was recently proved by Garg
et al. [10], based on a new multi-matrix extension of the Golden-Thompson inequality [45]. However,
the regular undirected graph is a special case of Markov chains which are reversible and have a
uniform stationary distribution, and does not apply to practical problems such as random walk on
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

