Agnostic Q-learning with Function Approximation in
Deterministic Systems: Near-Optimal Bounds on
Approximation Error and Sample Complexity

Simon S. Du∗

Jason D. Lee†

Gaurav Mahajan‡

Ruosong Wang§

Abstract
The current paper studies the problem of agnostic Q-learning with function approximation in deterministic systems where the optimal Q-function is approximable
by a function in the class F with approximation error δ
We propose a novel
√ ≥ 0. 
recursion-based algorithm and show that if δ = O ρ/ dimE , then one can find
the optimal policy using O(dimE ) trajectories, where ρ is the gap between the
optimal Q-value of the best actions and that of the second-best actions and dimE
is the Eluder dimension of F. Our result has two implications:
1. In conjunction with the lower bound in [Du et al., 2020], our upper bound
√
e ρ/ dimE is necessary and sufficient for
suggests that the condition δ = Θ
algorithms with polynomial sample complexity.
2. In conjunction with the obvious lower bound in the tabular case, our upper
e (dimE ) is tight in the agnostic
bound suggests that the sample complexity Θ
setting.
Therefore, we help address the open problem on agnostic Q-learning proposed
in [Wen and Van Roy, 2013]. We further extend our algorithm to the stochastic
reward setting and obtain similar results.

1

Introduction

Q-learning is a fundamental approach in reinforcement learning [Watkins and Dayan, 1992]. Empirically, combining Q-learning with function approximation schemes has lead to tremendous success
on various sequential decision-making problems. However, theoretically, we only have a good
understanding of Q-learning in the tabular setting. Strehl et al. [2006], Jin et al. [2018] show that
with certain exploration techniques, Q-learning provably finds a near-optimal policy with sample
complexity polynomial in the number of states, number of actions and the planning horizon. However,
modern reinforcement learning applications often require dealing with large state space where the
polynomial dependency on the number of states is not acceptable.
Recently, there has been great interest in designing and analyzing Q-learning algorithms with
linear function approximation [Wen and Van Roy, 2013, Du et al., 2019]. Under various additional
assumptions, these works show that one can obtain a near-optimal policy using Q-learning with
sample complexity polynomial in the feature dimension d and the planning horizon, if the optimal
Q-function is an exact linear function of the d-dimensional features of the state-action pairs.
∗

University of Washington. Email: ssdu@cs.washington.edu
Princeton University. Email: jasonlee@princeton.edu
‡
University of California, San Diego. Email: gmahajan@eng.ucsd.edu
§
Carnegie Mellon University. Email:ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

