Dirichlet Graph Variational Autoencoder

Jia Li1 , Jianwei Yu1 , Jiajin Li1 , Honglei Zhang3 , Kangfei Zhao1 ,
Yu Rong2 , Hong Cheng1 , Junzhou Huang2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
Georgia Institute of Technology
{lijia,jwyu,jjli,kfzhao,hcheng}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, zhanghonglei@gatech.edu
yu.rong@hotmail.com, jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) have been
widely used in modeling and generating graphs with latent factors. However, there
is no clear explanation of what these latent factors are and why they perform well.
In this work, we present Dirichlet Graph Variational Autoencoder (DGVAE) with
graph cluster memberships as latent factors. Our study connects VAEs based graph
generation and balanced graph cut, and provides a new way to understand and
improve the internal mechanism of VAEs based graph generation. Speciﬁcally,
we ﬁrst interpret the reconstruction term of DGVAE as balanced graph cut in a
principled way. Furthermore, motivated by the low pass characteristics in balanced graph cut, we propose a new variant of GNN named Heatts to encode the
input graph into cluster memberships. Heatts utilizes the Taylor series for fast
computation of heat kernels and has better low pass characteristics than Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN). Through experiments on graph generation and
graph clustering, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Since the introduction of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [18, 4, 6] and Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) [16], many studies [19, 21, 8] have used GNNs and VAEs (GVAEs) to generate realistic
graphs with latent factors. The latent factors are usually formulated as Gaussian variables and comply
with some predeﬁned prior distributions, e.g., isotropic Gaussian with diagonal covariance. Although
some encouraging progress has been achieved, there is still little insight into the internal operation
and behaviour of these complex models, or what intrinsic information the latent factors have captured
with respect to the input graph. Inspired by the recent development of variational autoencoder topic
model [27, 3] in text generation, in this work, we propose to formulate the latent factors in GVAEs as
graph cluster memberships, analogous to topics in text generation.
Indeed, it is not a new idea to generate graphs via exploiting certain structures (i.e., clusters or
subgraphs). JT-VAE [14] proposes to generate molecular graphs in two phases, in which it ﬁrst
decomposes the whole molecule into subgraphs or clusters of atoms, e.g., rings or bonds. It then
utilizes these clusters to assemble a coherent molecular graph. However, JT-VAE relies on tree
decomposition algorithms tailored for molecules, which is hard to generalize to non-molecular graph
generation. In this paper, we propose a novel Dirichlet Graph Variational Audoencoder (DGVAE) to
automatically encode the cluster decomposition in latent factors by replacing node-wise Gaussian
variables with Dirichlet distributions, where the latent factors can be taken as cluster memberships.
Under this framework, we provide a transparent interpretation of the de facto reconstruction term
of Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) in VAEs, which is in effect equivalent to adopting the spectral
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

