Self-Supervised Few-Shot Learning on Point Clouds

Charu Sharma and Manohar Kaul
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India
charusharma1991@gmail.com, mkaul@iith.ac.in

Abstract
The increased availability of massive point clouds coupled with their utility in a
wide variety of applications such as robotics, shape synthesis, and self-driving cars
has attracted increased attention from both industry and academia. Recently, deep
neural networks operating on labeled point clouds have shown promising results on
supervised learning tasks like classification and segmentation. However, supervised
learning leads to the cumbersome task of annotating the point clouds. To combat
this problem, we propose two novel self-supervised pre-training tasks that encode
a hierarchical partitioning of the point clouds using a cover-tree, where point cloud
subsets lie within balls of varying radii at each level of the cover-tree. Furthermore,
our self-supervised learning network is restricted to pre-train on the support set
(comprising of scarce training examples) used to train the downstream network
in a few-shot learning (FSL) setting. Finally, the fully-trained self-supervised
network’s point embeddings are input to the downstream task’s network. We
present a comprehensive empirical evaluation of our method on both downstream
classification and segmentation tasks and show that supervised methods pre-trained
with our self-supervised learning method significantly improve the accuracy of
state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, our method also outperforms previous
unsupervised methods in downstream classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Point clouds find utility in a wide range of applications from a diverse set of domains such as indoor
navigation [1], self-driving vehicles [2], robotics [3], shape synthesis and modeling [4], to name
a few. These applications require reliable 3D geometric features extracted from point clouds to
detect objects or parts of objects. Rather than follow the traditional route of generating features
from edge and corner detection methods [5, 6] or creating hand-crafted features based on domain
knowledge and/or certain statistical properties [7, 8], recent methods focus on learning generalized
representations which provide semantic features using labeled and unlabeled point cloud datasets.
As point clouds are irregular and unordered, there exist two broad categories of methods that learn
representations from point clouds. First, methods that convert raw point clouds (irregular domain)
to volumetric voxel-grid representations (regular domain), in order to use traditional convolutional
architectures that learn from data belonging to regular domains (e.g., images and voxels). Second,
methods that try to learn representations directly from raw unordered point clouds [9–12]. However,
both these class of methods suffer from drawbacks. Namely, converting raw point clouds to voxels
incurs a lot of additional memory and introduces unwanted quantization artifacts [16], while
supervised learning techniques on both voxelized and raw point clouds suffer from the burden of
manually annotating massive point cloud data.
To address these problems, research in developing unsupervised and self-supervised learning methods,
relevant to a range of diverse domains, has recently gained a lot of traction. The state-of-the-art
unsupervised or self-supervised methods on point clouds are mainly based on generative adver34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

