Learning to Incentivize Other Learning Agents

Jiachen Yang1∗, Ang Li2 , Mehrdad Farajtabar2 , Peter Sunehag2 , Edward Hughes2 , Hongyuan Zha1,3†
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 DeepMind
3
AIRS and Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
jiachen.yang@gatech.edu
[anglili,farajtabar,sunehag,edwardhughes]@google.com
zha@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
The challenge of developing powerful and general Reinforcement Learning (RL)
agents has received increasing attention in recent years. Much of this effort has
focused on the single-agent setting, in which an agent maximizes a predefined
extrinsic reward function. However, a long-term question inevitably arises: how
will such independent agents cooperate when they are continually learning and
acting in a shared multi-agent environment? Observing that humans often provide
incentives to influence others’ behavior, we propose to equip each RL agent in a
multi-agent environment with the ability to give rewards directly to other agents,
using a learned incentive function. Each agent learns its own incentive function by
explicitly accounting for its impact on the learning of recipients and, through them,
the impact on its own extrinsic objective. We demonstrate in experiments that
such agents significantly outperform standard RL and opponent-shaping agents in
challenging general-sum Markov games, often by finding a near-optimal division
of labor. Our work points toward more opportunities and challenges along the path
to ensure the common good in a multi-agent future.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [37] agents are achieving increasing success on an expanding set
of tasks [28, 20, 32, 41, 6]. While much effort is devoted to single-agent environments and fullycooperative games, there is a possible future in which large numbers of RL agents with imperfectlyaligned objectives must interact and continually learn in a shared multi-agent environment. The option
of centralized training with a global reward [13, 35, 31] is excluded as it does not scale easily to
large populations and may not be adopted by self-interested parties. On the other hand, the paradigm
of decentralized training—in which no agent is designed with an objective to maximize collective
performance and each agent optimizes its own set of policy parameters—poses difficulties for agents
to attain high individual and collective return [29]. In particular, agents in many real world situations
with mixed motives, such as settings with nonexcludable and subtractive common-pool resources,
may face a social dilemma wherein mutual selfish behavior leads to low individual and total utility,
due to fear of being exploited or greed to exploit others [30, 23, 24]. Whether, and how, independent
learning and acting agents can cooperate while optimizing their own objectives is an open question.
The conundrum of attaining multi-agent cooperation with decentralized training of agents, who
may have misaligned individual objectives, requires us to go beyond the restrictive mindset that
the collection of predefined individual rewards cannot be changed by the agents themselves. We
draw inspiration from the observation that this fundamental multi-agent problem arises at multiple
∗
†

Work done during internship at DeepMind
On leave from College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

