Deep Graph Pose: a semi-supervised deep graphical
model for improved animal pose tracking
Anqi Wu1⇤

E. Kelly Buchanan1⇤

Matthew R Whiteway1

Guido Meijer3

Jean-Paul Noel4

Erica Rodriguez1

Amy Norovich1

Evan Schaffer1

Neeli Mishra1

Dora Angelaki4

Andrés Bendesky1

Michael Schartner2
Claire Everett1
C. Daniel Salzman1

The International Brain Laboratory5

John Cunningham1

Liam Paninski1

Columbia University, New York, USA
{aw3236, ekb2154, mw3323, er2934, cpe2108, aln2128, ess2129, nm2786
cds2005, ab4463, jpc2181, lmp2107}@columbia.edu
2
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Michael.Schartner@unige.ch
3
The Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal
guido.meijer@research.fchampalimaud.org
4
New York University, New York, USA
{jpn5, da93}@nyu.edu
5
info@internationalbrainlab.org
1

Abstract
Noninvasive behavioral tracking of animals is crucial for many scientific investigations. Recent transfer learning approaches for behavioral tracking have considerably advanced the state of the art. Typically these methods treat each video
frame and each object to be tracked independently. In this work, we improve on
these methods (particularly in the regime of few training labels) by leveraging the
rich spatiotemporal structures pervasive in behavioral video — specifically, the
spatial statistics imposed by physical constraints (e.g., paw to elbow distance),
and the temporal statistics imposed by smoothness from frame to frame. We propose a probabilistic graphical model built on top of deep neural networks, Deep
Graph Pose (DGP), to leverage these useful spatial and temporal constraints, and
develop an efficient structured variational approach to perform inference in this
model. The resulting semi-supervised model exploits both labeled and unlabeled
frames to achieve significantly more accurate and robust tracking while requiring
users to label fewer training frames. In turn, these tracking improvements enhance
performance on downstream applications, including robust unsupervised segmentation of behavioral “syllables,” and estimation of interpretable “disentangled”
low-dimensional representations of the full behavioral video. Open source code is
available at https://github.com/paninski-lab/deepgraphpose.
⇤

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

