Causal Discovery in Physical Systems from Videos

Yunzhu Li
MIT CSAIL
liyunzhu@mit.edu

Antonio Torralba
MIT CSAIL
torralba@csail.mit.edu

Dieter Fox
University of Washington, Nvidia
fox@cs.washington.edu

Animashree Anandkumar
Caltech, Nvidia
anima@caltech.edu

Animesh Garg
University of Toronto, Vector Institute, Nvidia
garg@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Causal discovery is at the core of human cognition. It enables us to reason about the
environment and make counterfactual predictions about unseen scenarios that can
vastly differ from our previous experiences. We consider the task of causal discovery from videos in an end-to-end fashion without supervision on the ground-truth
graph structure. In particular, our goal is to discover the structural dependencies
among environmental and object variables: inferring the type and strength of interactions that have a causal effect on the behavior of the dynamical system. Our model
consists of (a) a perception module that extracts a semantically meaningful and
temporally consistent keypoint representation from images, (b) an inference module for determining the graph distribution induced by the detected keypoints, and
(c) a dynamics module that can predict the future by conditioning on the inferred
graph. We assume access to different configurations and environmental conditions,
i.e., data from unknown interventions on the underlying system; thus, we can hope
to discover the correct underlying causal graph without explicit interventions. We
evaluate our method in a planar multi-body interaction environment and scenarios
involving fabrics of different shapes like shirts and pants. Experiments demonstrate
that our model can correctly identify the interactions from a short sequence of
images and make long-term future predictions. The causal structure assumed by the
model also allows it to make counterfactual predictions and extrapolate to systems
of unseen interaction graphs or graphs of various sizes. Please refer to our project
page for additional results: https://yunzhuli.github.io/V-CDN/.

1

Introduction

Causal understanding of the world around us is part of the bedrock of intelligence. This ability enables
counterfactual reasoning, which often distinguishes algorithmic models from intelligent behavior in
humans. This ability to discover latent causal mechanisms from data poses an important technical
question towards building intelligent and interactive systems [1–3]. For instance, Figure 1 shows an
example of a multi-body system. While the images may convey the identity and position of balls, the
structural causal mechanism is latent. Each pair of balls is connected to each other through an edge
(say a spring, a rigid rod, or be free). Further, each edge may have a set of hidden confounders, like
the rest length of a spring or the rigid rod, that causally affect the physical interaction behavior. The
underlying causal structure and governing functional mechanism may not be apparent if observations,
such as images, are implicit measurements of ground-truth variables [4]. Furthermore, they can also
vary across different configurations and scenarios within a domain. Hence, we need few-shot causal
discovery algorithms purely from image data.
In a special case, where the entities are all disconnected and the only interactions are of collision-type,
there have been a number of models proposed to employ an object-centric formulation in recent
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

