Robust Persistence Diagrams
using Reproducing Kernels

Kenji Fukumizu∗
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
fukumizu@ism.ac.jp

Siddharth Vishwanath
The Pennsylvania State University
suv87@psu.edu
Satoshi Kuriki∗
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
kuriki@ism.ac.jp

Bharath Sriperumbudur∗
The Pennsylvania State University
bks18@psu.edu

Abstract
Persistent homology has become an important tool for extracting geometric and
topological features from data, whose multi-scale features are summarized in a
persistence diagram. From a statistical perspective, however, persistence diagrams
are very sensitive to perturbations in the input space. In this work, we develop a
framework for constructing robust persistence diagrams from superlevel filtrations
of robust density estimators constructed using reproducing kernels. Using an analogue of the influence function on the space of persistence diagrams, we establish
the proposed framework to be less sensitive to outliers. The robust persistence
diagrams are shown to be consistent estimators in bottleneck distance, with the
convergence rate controlled by the smoothness of the kernel—this in turn allows us
to construct uniform confidence bands in the space of persistence diagrams. Finally,
we demonstrate the superiority of the proposed approach on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Given a set of points Xn = {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn } observed from a probability distribution P on an input
space X ⊆ Rd , understanding the shape of Xn sheds important insights on low-dimensional geometric
and topological features which underlie P, and this question has received increasing attention in
the past few decades. To this end, Topological Data Analysis (TDA), with a special emphasis on
persistent homology [20, 44], has become a mainstay for extracting the shape information from data.
In statistics and machine-learning, persistent homology has facilitated the development of novel
methodology (e.g., [8, 11, 14]), which has been widely used in a variety of applications dealing with
massive, unconventional forms of data (e.g., [5, 22, 43]).
Informally speaking, persistent homology detects the presence of topological features across a range
of resolutions by examining a nested sequence of spaces, typically referred to as a filtration. The
filtration encodes the birth and death of topological features as the resolution varies, and is presented
in the form of a concise representation—a persistence diagram or barcode. In the context of dataanalysis, there are two different methods for obtaining filtrations. The first is computed from the
pairwise Euclidean distances of Xn , such as the Vietoris-Rips, Čech, and Alpha filtrations [20].
The second approach is based on choosing a function on X that reflects the density of P (or its
approximation based on Xn ), and, then, constructing a filtration. While the two approaches explore
the topological features governing P in different ways, in essence, they generate similar insights.
∗

Authors arranged alphabetically

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

