Triple descent and the two kinds of overfitting:
Where & why do they appear?
Stéphane d’Ascoli
Department of Physics
École Normale Supérieure
Paris, France
stephane.dascoli@ens.fr

Levent Sagun
Facebook AI Research
Paris, France
leventsagun@fb.com

Giulio Biroli
Department of Physics
École Normale Supérieure
Paris, France
giulio.biroli@ens.fr

Abstract
A recent line of research has highlighted the existence of a “double descent”
phenomenon in deep learning, whereby increasing the number of training examples
N causes the generalization error of neural networks to peak when N is of the same
order as the number of parameters P . In earlier works, a similar phenomenon was
shown to exist in simpler models such as linear regression, where the peak instead
occurs when N is equal to the input dimension D. Since both peaks coincide with
the interpolation threshold, they are often conflated in the litterature. In this paper,
we show that despite their apparent similarity, these two scenarios are inherently
different. In fact, both peaks can co-exist when neural networks are applied to
noisy regression tasks. The relative size of the peaks is then governed by the degree
of nonlinearity of the activation function. Building on recent developments in
the analysis of random feature models, we provide a theoretical ground for this
sample-wise triple descent. As shown previously, the nonlinear peak at N = P is
a true divergence caused by the extreme sensitivity of the output function to both
the noise corrupting the labels and the initialization of the random features (or the
weights in neural networks). This peak survives in the absence of noise, but can be
suppressed by regularization. In contrast, the linear peak at N = D is solely due to
overfitting the noise in the labels, and forms earlier during training. We show that
this peak is implicitly regularized by the nonlinearity, which is why it only becomes
salient at high noise and is weakly affected by explicit regularization. Throughout
the paper, we compare analytical results obtained in the random feature model with
the outcomes of numerical experiments involving deep neural networks.

Introduction
A few years ago, deep neural networks achieved breakthroughs in a variety of contexts [1, 2, 3, 4].
However, their remarkable generalization abilities have puzzled rigorous understanding [5, 6, 7]:
classical learning theory predicts that generalization error should follow a U-shaped curve as the
number of parameters P increases, and a monotonous decrease as the number of training examples
N increases. Instead, recent developments show that deep neural networks, as well as other machine
learning models, exhibit a starkly different behaviour. In the absence of regularization, increasing P
and N respectively yields parameter-wise and sample-wise double descent curves [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13],
whereby the generalization error first decreases, then peaks at the interpolation threshold (at which
point training error vanishes), then decreases monotonically again. This peak1 was shown to be related
1

Also called the jamming peak due to similarities with a well-studied phenomenon in the Statistical Physics
literature [14, 15, 16, 17, 18].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

