Coresets via Bilevel Optimization for Continual
Learning and Streaming

Zalán Borsos
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
zalan.borsos@inf.ethz.ch

Mojmír Mutný
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
mojmir.mutny@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Coresets are small data summaries that are sufficient for model training. They
can be maintained online, enabling efficient handling of large data streams under
resource constraints. However, existing constructions are limited to simple models such as k-means and logistic regression. In this work, we propose a novel
coreset construction via cardinality-constrained bilevel optimization. We show
how our framework can efficiently generate coresets for deep neural networks, and
demonstrate its empirical benefits in continual learning and in streaming settings.

1

Introduction

More and more applications rely on predictive models that are learnt online. A crucial, and in general
open problem is to reliably maintain accurate models as data arrives over time. Continual learning, for
example, refers to the setting where a learning algorithm is applied to a sequence of tasks, without the
possibility of revisiting old tasks. In the streaming setting, the data arrives sequentially and the notion
of task is not defined. For such practically important settings where data arrives in a non-iid manner,
the performance of models can degrade arbitrarily. This is especially problematic in the non-convex
setting of deep learning, where this phenomenon is referred to as catastrophic forgetting [42, 23].
One of the oldest and most efficient ways to combat catastrophic forgetting is the replay memorybased approach, where a small subset of past data is maintained and revisited during training. In this
work, we investigate how to effectively generate and maintain such summaries via coresets, which
are small, weighted subsets of the data. They have the property that a model trained on the coreset
performs almost as well as when trained on the full dataset. Moreover, coresets can be effectively
maintained over data streams, thus yielding an efficient way of handling massive datasets and streams.
Contributions. We present a novel and general coreset construction framework,1 where we formulate the coreset selection as a cardinality-constrained bilevel optimization problem that we solve by
greedy forward selection via matching pursuit. Using a reformulation via a proxy model, we show
that our method is especially well suited for replay memory-based continual learning and streaming
with neural networks. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in an extensive empirical
study. A demo of our method for streaming can be seen in Figure 1.

2

Related Work

Continual Learning and Streaming. Continual learning with neural networks has received an
increasing interest recently. The approaches for alleviating catastrophic forgetting fall into three main
categories: using weight regularization to restrict deviation from parameters learned on old tasks
1

Our coreset library is available at https://github.com/zalanborsos/bilevel_coresets.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

