On the Similarity between the Laplace
and Neural Tangent Kernels

Amnon Geifman1
Meirav Galun1
1

Abhay Yadav2
David Jacobs2

Yoni Kasten1
Ronen Basri1

Department of Computer Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
{amnon.geifman, yoni.kasten, meirav.galun, ronen.basri}@weizmann.ac.il
2

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD
{jaiabhay,djacobs}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Recent theoretical work has shown that massively overparameterized neural networks are equivalent to kernel regressors that use Neural Tangent Kernels (NTKs).
Experiments show that these kernel methods perform similarly to real neural networks. Here we show that NTK for fully connected networks with ReLU activation
is closely related to the standard Laplace kernel. We show theoretically that for
normalized data on the hypersphere both kernels have the same eigenfunctions and
their eigenvalues decay polynomially at the same rate, implying that their Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS) include the same sets of functions. This
means that both kernels give rise to classes of functions with the same smoothness
properties. The two kernels differ for data off the hypersphere, but experiments
indicate that when data is properly normalized these differences are not significant.
Finally, we provide experiments on real data comparing NTK and the Laplace
kernel, along with a larger class of γ-exponential kernels. We show that these
perform almost identically. Our results suggest that much insight about neural
networks can be obtained from analysis of the well-known Laplace kernel, which
has a simple closed form.

1

Introduction

Neural networks with significantly more parameters than training examples have been successfully
applied to a variety of tasks. Somewhat contrary to common wisdom, these models typically
generalize well to unseen data. It has been shown that in the limit of infinite model size, these neural
networks are equivalent to kernel regression using a family of novel Neural Tangent Kernels (NTK)
[26, 2]. NTK methods can be analyzed to explain many properties of neural networks in this limit,
including their convergence in training and ability to generalize [8, 9, 13, 32]. Recent experimental
work has shown that in practice, kernel methods using NTK perform similarly, and in some cases
better, than neural networks [4], and that NTK can be used to accurately predict the dynamics of
neural networks [1, 2, 7]. This suggests that a better understanding of NTK can lead to new ways to
analyze neural networks.
These results raise an important question: Is NTK significantly different from standard kernels? For
the case of fully connected (FC) networks, [4] provides experimental evidence that NTK is especially
effective, showing that it outperforms the Gaussian kernel on a large suite of machine learning
problems. Consequently, they argue that NTK should be added to the standard machine learning
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

