GRAF: Generative Radiance Fields
for 3D-Aware Image Synthesis

Katja Schwarz∗

Yiyi Liao∗ Michael Niemeyer Andreas Geiger
Autonomous Vision Group
MPI for Intelligent Systems and University of Tübingen
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
While 2D generative adversarial networks have enabled high-resolution image synthesis, they largely lack an understanding of the 3D world and the image formation
process. Thus, they do not provide precise control over camera viewpoint or object
pose. To address this problem, several recent approaches leverage intermediate
voxel-based representations in combination with differentiable rendering. However,
existing methods either produce low image resolution or fall short in disentangling
camera and scene properties, e.g., the object identity may vary with the viewpoint.
In this paper, we propose a generative model for radiance fields which have recently
proven successful for novel view synthesis of a single scene. In contrast to voxelbased representations, radiance fields are not confined to a coarse discretization
of the 3D space, yet allow for disentangling camera and scene properties while
degrading gracefully in the presence of reconstruction ambiguity. By introducing a
multi-scale patch-based discriminator, we demonstrate synthesis of high-resolution
images while training our model from unposed 2D images alone. We systematically
analyze our approach on several challenging synthetic and real-world datasets. Our
experiments reveal that radiance fields are a powerful representation for generative
image synthesis, leading to 3D consistent models that render with high fidelity.

1

Introduction

Convolutional generative adversarial networks have demonstrated impressive results in synthesizing
high-resolution images [6, 26, 34, 53] from unstructured image collections. However, despite this
success, state-of-the-art models struggle to properly disentangle the underlying generative factors
including 3D shape and viewpoint. This is in stark contrast to humans who have the remarkable
ability to reason about the 3D structure of the world and imagine objects from novel viewpoints.
As reasoning in 3D is fundamental for applications in robotics, virtual reality or data augmentation,
several recent works consider the task of 3D-aware image synthesis [19, 39, 76], aiming at photorealistic image generation with explicit control over the camera pose. In contrast to 2D generative
adversarial networks, approaches for 3D-aware image synthesis learn a 3D scene representation
which is explicitly mapped to an image using differentiable rendering techniques, hence providing
control over both, scene content and viewpoint. Since 3D supervision or posed images are often
hard to obtain in practice, recent works try to solve this task using 2D supervision only [19, 39].
Towards this goal, existing approaches generate discretized 3D representations, i.e., a voxel-grid
representing either the full 3D object [19] or intermediate 3D features [39] as illustrated in Fig. 1.
While modeling the 3D object in color space allows for exploiting differentiable rendering, the cubic
memory growth of voxel-based representations limits [19] to low resolution and results in visible
artifacts. Intermediate 3D features [39] are more compact and scale better with image resolution.
∗

Joint first authors with equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

