Belief-Dependent Macro-Action Discovery
in POMDPs using the Value of Information

Genevieve Flaspohler1,2 , Nicholas Roy1 , and John W. Fisher III1
Massachusetts Intitute of Technology1 and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution2
{geflaspo, nickroy, fisher}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
This work introduces macro-action discovery using value-of-information (VoI) for
robust and efficient planning in partially observable Markov decision processes
(POMDPs). POMDPs are a powerful framework for planning under uncertainty.
Previous approaches have used high-level macro-actions within POMDP policies
to reduce planning complexity. However, macro-action design is often heuristic
and rarely comes with performance guarantees. Here, we present a method for
extracting belief-dependent, variable-length macro-actions directly from a low-level
POMDP model. We construct macro-actions by chaining sequences of open-loop
actions together when the task-specific value of information (VoI) — the change in
expected task performance caused by observations in the current planning iteration
— is low. Importantly, we provide performance guarantees on the resulting VoI
macro-action policies in the form of bounded regret relative to the optimal policy.
In simulated tracking experiments, we achieve higher reward than both closed-loop
and hand-coded macro-action baselines, selectively using VoI macro-actions to
reduce planning complexity while maintaining near-optimal task performance.

1

Introduction

Partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) are a powerful and general framework
for model-based planning under uncertainty [9]. A core challenge in POMDP planning is that the
optimally reachable belief space R∗ (b0 ) — the set of beliefs that are reachable from an initial belief
b0 under stochastic observation transitions when following an optimal policy — grows exponentially
with the planning horizon in the size of the observation set. The complexity of computing an optimal
POMDP policy is related to the covering number of R∗ (b0 ) [13], and this exponential growth poses
a challenge for planning algorithms that attempt to approximate R∗ (b0 ) using offline, point-based
approximations [11, 15, 17] or online, sampling methods [18–20].
Previous approaches have introduced high-level macro-actions 1 or options [21], such as drive to the
nearest exit, to reduce planning complexity in complex tasks. Policies that use open-loop macroactions have the dual benefits of a shorter effective planning horizon and smaller reachable belief
space (RBS), as a policy’s reachable belief space grows linearly rather than exponentially when acting
in open-loop (Figure 1). However, macro-actions are largely hand-coded [2, 6, 22] or learned without
formal guarantees [1, 3, 8]. Here, we address the key challenge of generating macro-actions from a
low-level POMDP model such that the resulting policies have bounded regret.
This paper introduces a method for generating belief-dependent, variable-length macro-actions using
a point-based representation of the POMDP value function. Our key insight is to introduce a value
of information (VoI) function — which estimates the change in expected task performance caused
by sensing in the current planning iteration — and constrain policies to selectively act open-loop
1

We use the term macro-action synonymously with open loop action sequence.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

