Adaptive Experimental Design with Temporal
Interference: A Maximum Likelihood Approach
Peter Glynn, Ramesh Johari, Mohammad Rasouli
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305
{glynn, rjohari, rasoulim}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Suppose an online platform wants to compare a treatment and control policy, e.g.,
two different matching algorithms in a ridesharing system, or two different inventory management algorithms in an online retail site. Standard experimental
approaches to this problem are biased (due to temporal interference between the
policies), and not sample efficient. We study optimal experimental design for this
setting. We view testing the two policies as the problem of estimating the steady
state difference in reward between two unknown Markov chains (i.e., policies).
We assume estimation of the steady state reward for each chain proceeds via nonparametric maximum likelihood, and search for consistent (i.e., asymptotically
unbiased) experimental designs that are efficient (i.e., asymptotically minimum
variance). Characterizing such designs is equivalent to a Markov decision problem
with a minimum variance objective; such problems generally do not admit tractable
solutions. Remarkably, in our setting, using a novel application of classical martingale analysis of Markov chains via Poisson’s equation, we characterize efficient
designs via a succinct convex optimization problem. We use this characterization to
propose a consistent, efficient online experimental design that adaptively samples
the two Markov chains.

1

Introduction

Suppose an online platform wants to compare a treatment and control policy, e.g., two different
matching algorithms in a ridesharing system, or two different inventory management algorithms in an
online retail site. Standard randomized controlled trials are typically not feasible, since the goal is
to estimate policy performance on the entire system. Instead, the typical current practice involves
dynamically alternating between the two policies for fixed lengths of time, and comparing the average
performance of each over the intervals in which they were run as an estimate of the treatment effect;
this is referred to as a switchback experimental design [4, 17].
However, switchback designs suffer from temporal interference: the initial condition in each interval
of each policy is determined by the previous interval of the other policy, and so standard estimation
techniques in this setting are biased. Bias due to temporal interference has been observed in ridesharing [5], in delivery services [15], and ad auctions [3]. Further, the simple, non-adaptive nature of
such designs implies they are not sample efficient. Optimal consistent, efficient experimental design
in this setting has remained a significant theoretical and practical challenge.
Our paper provides an optimal experimental design within a benchmark theoretical model for settings
with temporal interference (Section 2). The central challenge posed by temporal interference is
the following: we are effectively allowed only one real-world run of the system, with only finitely
many observations. On the other hand, we need to use this single run to estimate performance of
both the systems induced by each of the treatment and control policies. We model the problem by
viewing each policy as its own Markov chain on a common underlying state space. The experimental
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

