Simulating a Primary Visual Cortex at the Front of
CNNs Improves Robustness to Image Perturbations

Martin Schrimpf

1,2,4

Joel Dapello∗,1,2,3 , Tiago Marques∗,1,2,4
, Franziska Geiger2,5,6,7 , David D. Cox8,3 , James J. DiCarlo1,2,4
∗

Joint first authors (equal contribution)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA02139
2
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA02139
3
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA02139
4
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, MIT, Cambridge, MA02139
5
University of Augsburg
6
Ludwig Maximilian University
7
Technical University of Munich
8
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
1

dapello@mit.edu

tmarques@mit.edu

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art object recognition models are largely based on convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures, which are loosely inspired by the
primate visual system. However, these CNNs can be fooled by imperceptibly small,
explicitly crafted perturbations, and struggle to recognize objects in corrupted
images that are easily recognized by humans. Here, by making comparisons with
primate neural data, we first observed that CNN models with a neural hidden layer
that better matches primate primary visual cortex (V1) are also more robust to adversarial attacks. Inspired by this observation, we developed VOneNets, a new class of
hybrid CNN vision models. Each VOneNet contains a fixed weight neural network
front-end that simulates primate V1, called the VOneBlock, followed by a neural
network back-end adapted from current CNN vision models. The VOneBlock
is based on a classical neuroscientific model of V1: the linear-nonlinear-Poisson
model, consisting of a biologically-constrained Gabor filter bank, simple and complex cell nonlinearities, and a V1 neuronal stochasticity generator. After training,
VOneNets retain high ImageNet performance, but each is substantially more robust, outperforming the base CNNs and state-of-the-art methods by 18% and 3%,
respectively, on a conglomerate benchmark of perturbations comprised of white
box adversarial attacks and common image corruptions. Finally, we show that
all components of the VOneBlock work in synergy to improve robustness. While
current CNN architectures are arguably brain-inspired, the results presented here
demonstrate that more precisely mimicking just one stage of the primate visual
system leads to new gains in ImageNet-level computer vision applications.

1

Introduction

For the past eight years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) of various kinds have dominated
object recognition [1, 2, 3, 4], even surpassing human performance in some benchmarks [5]. However,
scratching beneath the surface reveals a different picture. These CNNs are easily fooled by imperceptibly small perturbations explicitly crafted to induce mistakes, usually referred to as adversarial
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

