Fast Adaptive Non-Monotone Submodular
Maximization Subject to a Knapsack Constraint

Georgios Amanatidis
University of Essex & University of Amsterdam
georgios.amanatidis@essex.ac.uk
Philip Lazos
Sapienza University of Rome
lazos@diag.uniroma1.it

Federico Fusco
Sapienza University of Rome
fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it

Stefano Leonardi
Sapienza University of Rome
leonardi@diag.uniroma1.it

Rebecca Reiffenhäuser
Sapienza University of Rome
rebeccar@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract
Constrained submodular maximization problems encompass a wide variety of
applications, including personalized recommendation, team formation, and revenue
maximization via viral marketing. The massive instances occurring in modernday applications can render existing algorithms prohibitively slow. Moreover,
frequently those instances are also inherently stochastic. Focusing on these challenges, we revisit the classic problem of maximizing a (possibly non-monotone)
submodular function subject to a knapsack constraint. We present a simple randomized greedy algorithm that achieves a 5.83 approximation and runs in O(n log n)
time, i.e., at least a factor n faster than other state-of-the-art algorithms. The
robustness of our approach allows us to further transfer it to a stochastic version of
the problem. There, we obtain a 9-approximation to the best adaptive policy, which
is the first constant approximation for non-monotone objectives. Experimental
evaluation of our algorithms showcases their improved performance on real and
synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Constrained submodular maximization is a fundamental problem at the heart of discrete optimization.
The reason for this is as simple as it is clear: submodular functions capture the notion of diminishing
returns present in a wide variety of real-world settings.
Consequently to its striking importance and coinciding NP-hardness [22], extensive research has
been conducted on submodular maximization since the seventies (e.g., [16, 44]), with focus lately
shifting towards handling the massive datasets emerging in modern applications. With a wide variety
of possible constraints, often regarding cardinality, independence in a matroid, or knapsack-type
restrictions, the number of applications is vast. To name just a few, there are recent works on feature
selection in machine learning [14, 15, 34], influence maximization in viral marketing [3, 33], and data
summarization [45, 40, 47]. Many of these applications have non-monotone submodular objectives,
meaning that adding an element to an existing set might actually decrease its value. Two such
examples are discussed in detail in Section 5.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

