Contrastive learning of global and local features for
medical image segmentation with limited annotations

Krishna Chaitanya

Ertunc Erdil

Neerav Karani

Ender Konukoglu

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
Sternwartstrasse 7, Zurich 8092, Switzerland
krishna.chaitanya@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
A key requirement for the success of supervised deep learning is a large labeled
dataset - a condition that is difficult to meet in medical image analysis. Selfsupervised learning (SSL) can help in this regard by providing a strategy to pre-train
a neural network with unlabeled data, followed by fine-tuning for a downstream
task with limited annotations. Contrastive learning, a particular variant of SSL, is
a powerful technique for learning image-level representations. In this work, we
propose strategies for extending the contrastive learning framework for segmentation of volumetric medical images in the semi-supervised setting with limited
annotations, by leveraging domain-specific and problem-specific cues. Specifically,
we propose (1) novel contrasting strategies that leverage structural similarity across
volumetric medical images (domain-specific cue) and (2) a local version of the
contrastive loss to learn distinctive representations of local regions that are useful for per-pixel segmentation (problem-specific cue). We carry out an extensive
evaluation on three Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) datasets. In the limited
annotation setting, the proposed method yields substantial improvements compared
to other self-supervision and semi-supervised learning techniques. When combined
with a simple data augmentation technique, the proposed method reaches within 8%
of benchmark performance using only two labeled MRI volumes for training, corresponding to only 4% (for ACDC) of the training data used to train the benchmark.
The code is made public at https://github.com/krishnabits001/domain_specific_cl.

1

Introduction

Supervised deep learning provides state-of-the-art medical image segmentation [47, 39, 31, 32],
when large labeled datasets are available. However, assembling such large annotated datasets is
challenging, thus methods that can alleviate this requirement are highly desirable. Self-supervised
learning (SSL) is a promising direction to this end: it provides a pre-training strategy that relies only on
unlabeled data to obtain a suitable initialization for training downstream tasks with limited annotations.
In recent years, SSL methods [16, 44, 42, 21] have been highly successful for downstream analysis
of not only natural images [48, 35, 20], but also medical images [71, 5, 60, 30, 52, 11].
In this work, we focus on contrastive learning [12, 40, 4, 27, 57, 43], a successful variant of SSL.
The intuition of this approach is that different transformations of an image should have similar
representations and that these representations should be dissimilar from those of a different image.
In practice, a suitable contrastive loss [24, 12] is formulated to express this intuition and a neural
network (NN) is trained with unlabeled data to minimize this loss. The resulting NN extracts image
representations that are useful for downstream tasks, such as classification or object detection, and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

