Revisiting Frank-Wolfe for Polytopes:
Strict Complementarity and Sparsity

Dan Garber
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel 3200003
dangar@technion.ac.il

Abstract
In recent years it was proved that simple modifications of the classical Frank-Wolfe
algorithm (aka conditional gradient algorithm) for smooth convex minimization
over convex and compact polytopes, converge with linear rate, assuming the
objective function has the quadratic growth property. However, the rate of these
methods depends explicitly on the dimension of the problem which cannot explain
their empirical success for large scale problems. In this paper we first demonstrate
that already for very simple problems and even when the optimal solution lies on a
low-dimensional face of the polytope, such dependence on the dimension cannot
be avoided in worst case. We then revisit the addition of a strict complementarity
assumption already considered in Wolfe’s classical book [29], and prove that under
this condition, the Frank-Wolfe method with away-steps and line-search converges
linearly with rate that depends explicitly only on the dimension of the optimal face.
We motivate strict complementarity by proving that it implies sparsity-robustness
of optimal solutions to noise.

1

Introduction

The Frank-Wolfe method (aka conditional gradient, see Algorithm 1 below), originally due to [8] is a
classical first-order method for minimizing a smooth and convex function over a convex and compact
set [8, 24, 19]. It regained significant interest in the machine learning, optimization and statistics
communities in recent years, with some notable applications including structured prediction [22] and
video co-localization [20], mainly due to two reasons: i) in terms of the feasible set, the method only
requires access to an oracle for minimizing a linear function over the set. Such an oracle could be
implemented very efficiently for many feasible sets that arise in applications, as opposed to most
standard first-order methods which usually require to solve non-linear problems over the feasible set
(e.g., Euclidean projection onto the set) which can be much less efficient (e.g., see detailed examples
in [19, 18]), and ii) when the number of iterations is not too large, the method naturally produces
sparse solutions, in the sense that they are given explicitly as a convex combination of a small number
of extreme points of the feasible set, which in many cases (e.g., optimization with sparse vectors
/low-rank matrices) is much desired ([19, 6]).
The convergence rate of the method is of the order O(1/t) where t is the iteration counter. This rate
is known to be tight and does not improve even when the objective function is strongly convex, a
property that, when combined with smoothness, is well known to yield a linear convergence rate, i.e.,
exp(−Θ(t)) for standard first-order methods such as the proximal/projected gradient methods. For
optimization over convex and compact polytopes, in his classical book [29], Wolfe himself suggested
a simple variant of the method that does not only add new vertices to the solution using the linear
optimization oracle, but also moves away more aggressively from previously found vertices of the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

