Improving Auto-Augment via Augmentation-Wise
Weight Sharing

Keyu Tian
SenseTime Research
Beihang University
tiankeyu.00@gmail.com

Chen Lin
SenseTime Research
linchen@sensetime.com

Luping Zhou
University of Sydney
luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au

Ming Sun
SenseTime Research
sunming1@sensetime.com

Junjie Yan
SenseTime Research
yanjunjie@sensetime.com

Wanli Ouyang
University of Sydney
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
The recent progress on automatically searching augmentation policies has boosted
the performance substantially for various tasks. A key component of automatic
augmentation search is the evaluation process for a particular augmentation policy,
which is utilized to return reward and usually runs thousands of times. A plain
evaluation process, which includes full model training and validation, would be
time-consuming. To achieve efficiency, many choose to sacrifice evaluation reliability for speed. In this paper, we dive into the dynamics of augmented training
of the model. This inspires us to design a powerful and efficient proxy task based
on the Augmentation-Wise Weight Sharing (AWS) to form a fast yet accurate
evaluation process in an elegant way. Comprehensive analysis verifies the superiority of this approach in terms of effectiveness and efficiency. The augmentation
policies found by our method achieve superior accuracies compared with existing
auto-augmentation search methods. On CIFAR-10, we achieve a top-1 error rate of
1.24%, which is currently the best performing single model without extra training
data. On ImageNet, we get a top-1 error rate of 20.36% for ResNet-50, which leads
to 3.34% absolute error rate reduction over the baseline augmentation.

1

Introduction

Deep learning techniques have been heavily utilized in the computer vision area and made remarkable
progress in lots of tasks, such as image classification [16, 34, 40], object detection [23, 28, 18, 24],
segmentation [2, 11], image captioning [36], and human pose estimation [35]. Overfit is a commonly
acknowledged issue of deep learning algorithms. Various Regularization techniques are proposed in
different tasks to fight overfit. Data augmentation, which increases both the amount and the diversity
of the data by applying semantic invariant image transformations to training samples [34, 1], is
the most commonly used regularization due to its simplicity and effectiveness. There are various
frequently used augmentation operations for image data, including traditional image transformations
such as resizing, cropping, shearing, horizontal flipping, translation, and rotation. Recently, several
special operations, such as Cutout [7] and Sample Pairing [14], are also proposed. It has been widely
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

