Online learning with dynamics:
A minimax perspective

Kush Bhatia
EECS, UC Berkeley
kush@cs.berkeley.edu

Karthik Sridharan
CS, Cornell University
sridharan@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of online learning with dynamics, where a learner interacts
with a stateful environment over multiple rounds. In each round of the interaction,
the learner selects a policy to deploy and incurs a cost that depends on both the
chosen policy and current state of the world. The state-evolution dynamics and the
costs are allowed to be time-varying, in a possibly adversarial way. In this setting,
we study the problem of minimizing policy regret and provide non-constructive
upper bounds on the minimax rate for the problem.
Our main results provide sufficient conditions for online learnability for this setup
with corresponding rates. The rates are characterized by: 1) a complexity term
capturing the expressiveness of the underlying policy class under the dynamics
of state change, and 2) a dynamic stability term measuring the deviation of the
instantaneous loss from a certain counterfactual loss. Further, we provide matching
lower bounds which show that both the complexity terms are indeed necessary.
Our approach provides a unifying analysis that recovers regret bounds for several
well studied problems including online learning with memory, online control
of linear quadratic regulators, online Markov decision processes, and tracking
adversarial targets. In addition, we show how our tools help obtain tight regret
bounds for a new problems (with non-linear dynamics and non-convex losses) for
which such bounds were not known prior to our work.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems deployed in the real-world interact with people through their decision
making. Such systems form a feedback loop with their environment: they learn to make decisions
from real-world data and decisions made by these systems in turn affect the data that is collected. In
addition, people often learn to adapt to such automated decision makers in an attempt to maximize
their own utility rendering any assumption on the data generation process futile. Motivated by these
aspects of decision making, we propose the problem of online learning with dynamics which involves
repeated interaction between a learner and an environment with an underlying state. The decisions
made by the learner affect this state of the environment which evolves as a dynamical system. Further,
we place no distributional assumptions on the learning data and allow this to be adversarial.
Given such a setup, a natural question to ask is how does one measure the performance of the learner?
Classical online learning studies one such notion of performance known as regret. This measure
compares the performance of the learner to that of a fixed best policy in hindsight, when evaluated on
the same states which were observed by the learner. Such a measure of performance clearly does not
work for the above setup: if we would have deployed a different policy, we would have observed
different states of the environment. To overcome this, we study a counterfactual notion of regret,
called Policy Regret, where the comparator term is the performance of a policy on the states one
would have observed if this policy was deployed from the beginning of time.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

