CrossTransformers: spatially-aware few-shot transfer

Carl Doersch∗
∗

DeepMind, London

Ankush Gupta∗
†

Andrew Zisserman∗†

VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
Given new tasks with very little data—such as new classes in a classification
problem or a domain shift in the input—performance of modern vision systems
degrades remarkably quickly. In this work, we illustrate how the neural network
representations which underpin modern vision systems are subject to supervision
collapse, whereby they lose any information that is not necessary for performing
the training task, including information that may be necessary for transfer to new
tasks or domains. We then propose two methods to mitigate this problem. First, we
employ self-supervised learning to encourage general-purpose features that transfer
better. Second, we propose a novel Transformer based neural network architecture
called CrossTransformers, which can take a small number of labeled images and
an unlabeled query, find coarse spatial correspondence between the query and the
labeled images, and then infer class membership by computing distances between
spatially-corresponding features. The result is a classifier that is more robust to
task and domain shift, which we demonstrate via state-of-the-art performance on
Meta-Dataset, a recent dataset for evaluating transfer from ImageNet to many other
vision datasets. Code available at: https://github.com/google-research/
meta-dataset.

1

Introduction

General-purpose vision systems must be adaptable. Home robots must be able to operate in new,
unseen homes; photo-organizing software must recognize unseen objects (e.g., to find examples of
“my sixth-grade son’s abstract art project”); industrial quality-assurance systems must spot defects in
new products. Deep neural network representations can bring some visual knowledge from datasets
like ImageNet [68] to bear on different tasks beyond ImageNet [15, 32, 62], but empirically, this
requires a non-trivial amount of labeled data in the new task. With too little labeled data, or for a
large change in distribution, such systems empirically perform poorly.
Research on meta-learning directly benchmarks adaptability. At training time, the algorithm receives
a large amount of data and accompanying supervision (e.g., labels). At test time, however, the
algorithm receives a series of episodes, each of which consists of a small number of datapoints from a
different distribution than the training set (e.g., a different domain or different classes). Only a subset
of this data has the accompanying supervision (called the support set); the algorithm must make
predictions about the rest (the query set). Meta-Dataset [86] is particularly relevant for vision, as the
challenge is few-shot fine-grained image classification. The training data is a subset of ImageNet
classes. At test time, each episode either contains images from the other ImageNet classes, or from
one of nine other visually distinct fine-grained recognition datasets. The algorithm must rapidly adapt
its representations to the new classes and domains.
Simple centroid-based algorithms like Prototypical Nets [17, 76] are near state-of-the-art on MetaDataset, achieving around 50% accuracy on the held-out ImageNet classes in Meta-Dataset’s validation set (chance is roughly 1 in 20). An equivalent classifier trained on those validation classes can
achieve roughly 84% accuracy on the same challenge. What accounts for the enormous discrepancy
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

