Multiview Neural Surface Reconstruction
by Disentangling Geometry and Appearance

Lior Yariv
Meirav Galun

Yoni Kasten

Dror Moran

Matan Atzmon
Ronen Basri
Weizmann Institute of Science

Yaron Lipman

{lior.yariv, yoni.kasten, dror.moran, meirav.galun, matan.atzmon, ronen.basri, yaron.lipman}@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
In this work we address the challenging problem of multiview 3D surface reconstruction. We introduce a neural network architecture that simultaneously learns the
unknown geometry, camera parameters, and a neural renderer that approximates the
light reflected from the surface towards the camera. The geometry is represented
as a zero level-set of a neural network, while the neural renderer, derived from
the rendering equation, is capable of (implicitly) modeling a wide set of lighting
conditions and materials. We trained our network on real world 2D images of
objects with different material properties, lighting conditions, and noisy camera
initializations from the DTU MVS dataset. We found our model to produce state
of the art 3D surface reconstructions with high fidelity, resolution and detail.

1

Introduction

Learning 3D shapes from 2D images is a fundamental computer vision problem. A recent successful
neural network approach to solving this problem involves the use of a (neural) differentiable rendering
system along with a choice of (neural) 3D geometry representation. Differential rendering systems are
mostly based on ray casting/tracing [41, 33, 24, 26, 38, 27], or rasterization [28, 20, 10, 25, 4], while
popular models to represent 3D geometry include point clouds [49], triangle meshes [4], implicit
representations defined over volumetric grids [17], and recently also neural implicit representations,
namely, zero level sets of neural networks [26, 33].
The main advantage of implicit neural representations is their flexibility in representing surfaces with
arbitrary shapes and topologies, as well as being mesh-free (i.e., no fixed a-priori discretization such
as a volumetric grid or a triangular mesh). Thus far, differentiable rendering systems with implicit
neural representations [26, 27, 33] did not incorporate lighting and reflectance properties required for
producing faithful appearance of 3D geometry in images, nor did they deal with trainable camera
locations and orientations.
The goal of this paper is to devise an end-to-end neural architecture system that can learn 3D geometries from masked 2D images and rough camera estimates, and requires no additional supervision,
see Figure 1. Towards that end we represent the color of a pixel as a differentiable function in the
three unknowns of a scene: the geometry, its appearance, and the cameras. Here, appearance means
collectively all the factors that define the surface light field, excluding the geometry, i.e., the surface
bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) and the scene’s lighting conditions. We call
this architecture the Implicit Differentiable Renderer (IDR). We show that IDR is able to approximate
the light reflected from a 3D shape represented as the zero level set of a neural network. The approach
can handle surface appearances from a certain restricted family, namely, all surface light fields that
can be represented as continuous functions of the point on the surface, its normal, and the viewing
direction. Furthermore, incorporating a global shape feature vector into IDR increases its ability to
handle more complex appearances (e.g., indirect lighting effects).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

