Thunder: a Fast Coordinate Selection Solver for
Sparse Learning
Shaogang Ren, Weijie Zhao, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{shaogangren, weijiezhao, liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract
`1 regularization has been broadly employed to pursue model sparsity. Despite the
non-smoothness, researchers have developed efficient algorithms by leveraging the
sparsity and convexity of the problem. In this paper, we propose a novel active
incremental approach to further improve the efficiency of the solvers. We show
that our method performs well even when the existing methods fail due to the low
sparseness or high solution accuracy request. Theoretical analysis and experimental
results on synthetic and real-world data sets validate the advantages of the method.

1

Introduction

`1 regularization has been used broadly in problems such as sparse learning, compressed sensing, and
so on [31, 5, 7, 6, 4, 37]. By leveraging the sparsity, people have developed many methods to scale
up the solutions of `1 regularized problems. Assume n data samples with p features form an n ⇥ p
design matrix X, with an n ⇥ 1 label vector, y. Let the general loss function f in (1) be a convex
function with L-Lipschitz gradient. The primal of `1 regularized problems is given as
P : min

n
X
j=1

f (xj• , yj ) + || ||1 .

(1)

Here > 0 is the regularization hyper-parameter. xj• is the j-th row (vector) of X. (Later we will
denote xi the i-th column (vector) of X.) 2 Rp⇥1 is model parameter vector. We first review the
existing methods for `1 convex problems, and then briefly state our contributions.
1.1

Sequential and Dynamic Screening

The basic idea of screening method is to use an approximate solution (usually the dual variable) to
estimate the activity (the likelihood of the corresponding entry in model fitting parameter is non-zero)
of each feature. There are two main categories of screening methods for sparse models: sequential
and dynamic screening methods. Sequential screening requires to solve a sequence of sparse learning
problems corresponding to a sequence of descending model penalty parameters to tighten the range
estimates of the dual variable to achieve the high screening power. The strong rule [32] derives the
sequential screening rule based on the assumption that the absolute values of the inner products
between features and the residue are non-expansive with respect to the parameter values. The
sequential screening methods proposed by [13, 24, 35, 33, 28, 34] do not take the unsafe assumptions
that the strong rule uses, but try to develop safe feature screening rules based on the structure of the
problem. Such a sequential procedure is suitable and efficient when solving a sequence of sparse
learning problems with different regularization parameters.
Sequential screening methods are not absolutely safe since most of these methods do not consider the
safe duality gap, which is pointed out by the authors of dynamic screening methods [21]. Instead of
using the solution information from a heavier parameter, dynamic screening methods [2, 9, 21, 22] rely
on many iterations of sub-gradient computation regarding the whole feature set to gain a small duality
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

