Logarithmic Pruning is All You Need
Laurent Orseau
DeepMind, London, UK
lorseau@google.com

Marcus Hutter
DeepMind, London, UK
www.hutter1.net

Omar Rivasplata
DeepMind, London, UK
rivasplata@google.com

Abstract
The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis is a conjecture that every large neural network
contains a subnetwork that, when trained in isolation, achieves comparable performance to the large network. An even stronger conjecture has been proven
recently: Every sufficiently overparameterized network contains a subnetwork
that, at random initialization, but without training, achieves comparable accuracy
to the trained large network. This latter result, however, relies on a number of
strong assumptions and guarantees a polynomial factor on the size of the large
network compared to the target function. In this work, we remove the most limiting
assumptions of this previous work while providing significantly tighter bounds:
the overparameterized network only needs a logarithmic factor (in all variables but
depth) number of neurons per weight of the target subnetwork.

1

Introduction

The recent success of neural network (NN) models in a variety of tasks, ranging from vision [Khan
et al., 2020] to speech synthesis [van den Oord et al., 2016] to playing games [Schrittwieser et al.,
2019, Ebendt and Drechsler, 2009], has sparked a number of works aiming to understand how and
why they work so well. Proving theoretical properties for neural networks is quite a difficult task, with
challenges due to the intricate composition of the functions they implement and the high-dimensional
regimes of their training dynamics. The field is vibrant but still in its infancy, many theoretical tools
are yet to be built to provide guarantees on what and how NNs can learn. A lot of progress has been
made towards understanding the convergence properties of NNs (see e.g., Allen-Zhu et al. [2019],
Zou and Gu [2019] and references therein). The fact remains that training and deploying deep NNs
has a large cost [Livni et al., 2014], which is problematic. To avoid this problem, one could stick
to a small network size. However, it is becoming evident that there are benefits to using oversized
networks, as the literature on overparametrized models [Ma et al., 2018] points out. Another solution,
commonly used in practice, is to prune a trained network to reduce the size and hence the cost of
prediction/deployment. While missing theoretical guarantees, experimental works show that pruning
can considerably reduce the network size without sacrificing accuracy.
The influential work of Frankle and Carbin [2019] has pointed out the following observation: a) train
a large network for long enough and observe its performance on a dataset, b) prune it substantially
to reveal a much smaller subnetwork with good (or better) performance, c) reset the weights of the
subnetwork to their original values and remove the rest of the weights, and d) retrain the subnetwork
in isolation; then the subnetwork reaches the same test performance as the large network, and trains
faster. Frankle and Carbin [2019] thus conjecture that every successfully trained network contains
a much smaller subnetwork that, when trained in isolation, has comparable performance to the
large network, without sacrificing computing time. They name this phenomenon the Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis, and a ‘winning ticket’ is a subnetwork of the kind just described.
Ramanujan et al. [2019] went even further by observing that if the network architecture is large
enough, then it contains a smaller network that, even without any training, has comparable accuracy
to the trained large network. They support their claim with empirical results using a new pruning
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

