Optimistic Dual Extrapolation for
Coherent Non-monotone Variational Inequalities
Chaobing Song†⇤

Zhengyuan Zhou+

Yichao Zhou‡

Yong Jiang†

Yi Ma‡

†
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
songcb16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
‡
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
zyc@berkeley.edu, yima@eecs.berkeley.edu
+
Stern School of Business, New York University, zzhou@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
The optimization problems associated with training generative adversarial neural
networks can be largely reduced to certain non-monotone variational inequality
problems (VIPs), whereas existing convergence results are mostly based on monotone or strongly monotone assumptions. In this paper, we propose optimistic dual
extrapolation (OptDE), a method that only performs one gradient evaluation per
iteration. We show that OptDE is provably convergent to a strong solution under
different coherent non-monotone assumptions. In particular, when a weak solution
exists, the convergence rate of our method is O(1/✏2 ), which matches the best
existing result of the methods with two gradient evaluations. Further, when a
-weak solution exists, the convergence guarantee is improved to the linear rate
O(log 1✏ ). Along the way–as a byproduct of our inquiries into non-monotone variational inequalities–we provide the near-optimal O 1✏ log 1✏ convergence guarantee
in terms of restricted strong merit function for monotone variational inequalities.
We also show how our results can be naturally generalized to the stochastic setting,
and obtain corresponding new convergence results. Taken together, our results
contribute to the broad landscape of variational inequality–both non-monotone
and monotone alike–by providing a novel and more practical algorithm with the
state-of-the-art convergence guarantees.

1

Introduction

Variational inequality (VI) provides a principled framework for minimax problems via their first-order
optimality conditions. Given a closed convex set W ⇢ Rd and an operator F : W ! Rd , the
variational inequality problem VIP(F, W) aims to find a solution w⇤ 2 W such that:
8w 2 W, hF (w⇤ ), w

w⇤ i

0,

(1)

where w⇤ is called a strong solution of VIP(F, W). For the minimax problem
min max f (x, y),

x2X y2Y

(2)

h
i
rx f (x,y)
let W ⌘ X ⇥ Y, w ⌘ [ x
y ] , F (w) ⌘
ry f (x,y) . Then solving (1) is equivalent to finding a
first-order Nash equilibrium of the minimax problem (2) [32].
⇤

This work was conducted during Chaobing Song’s visit to Professor Yi Ma’s group at UC Berkeley.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

