A Scalable Approach for Privacy-Preserving
Collaborative Machine Learning

J. So
ECE Department
University of Southern California (USC)
jinhyuns@usc.edu

B. Guler
ECE Department
University of California, Riverside
bguler@ece.ucr.edu

A.S. Avestimehr
ECE Department
University of Southern California (USC)
avestimehr@ee.usc.edu

Abstract
We consider a collaborative learning scenario in which multiple data-owners wish
to jointly train a logistic regression model, while keeping their individual datasets
private from the other parties. We propose COPML, a fully-decentralized training
framework that achieves scalability and privacy-protection simultaneously. The
key idea of COPML is to securely encode the individual datasets to distribute
the computation load effectively across many parties and to perform the training computations as well as the model updates in a distributed manner on the
securely encoded data. We provide the privacy analysis of COPML and prove
its convergence. Furthermore, we experimentally demonstrate that COPML can
achieve significant speedup in training over the benchmark protocols. Our protocol
provides strong statistical privacy guarantees against colluding parties (adversaries)
with unbounded computational power, while achieving up to 16× speedup in the
training time against the benchmark protocols.

1

Introduction

Machine learning applications can achieve significant performance gains by training on large volumes
of data. In many applications, the training data is distributed across multiple data-owners, such as
patient records at multiple medical institutions, and furthermore contains sensitive information, e.g.,
genetic information, financial transactions, and geolocation information. Such settings give rise to
the following key problem that is the focus of this paper: How can multiple data-owners jointly train
a machine learning model while keeping their individual datasets private from the other parties?
More specifically, we consider a distributed learning scenario in which N data-owners (clients)
wish to train a logistic regression model jointly without revealing information about their individual
datasets to the other parties, even if up to T out of N clients collude. Our focus is on the semi-honest
adversary setup, where the corrupted parties follow the protocol but may leak information in an
attempt to learn the training dataset. To address this challenge, we propose a novel framework,
COPML1 , that enables fast and privacy-preserving training by leveraging information and coding
theory principles. COPML has three salient features:
• speeds up the training time significantly, by distributing the computation load effectively across a
large number of parties,
1

COPML stands for collaborative privacy-preserving machine learning.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

