Adversarially-learned Inference via an Ensemble of
Discrete Undirected Graphical Models

Adarsh K. Jeewajee
MIT CSAIL
jaks19@mit.edu

Leslie P. Kaelbling
MIT CSAIL
lpk@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Undirected graphical models are compact representations of joint probability distributions over random variables. To solve inference tasks of interest, graphical
models of arbitrary topology can be trained using empirical risk minimization.
However, to solve inference tasks that were not seen during training, these models
(EGMs) often need to be re-trained. Instead, we propose an inference-agnostic
adversarial training framework which produces an infinitely-large ensemble of
graphical models (AGMs). The ensemble is optimized to generate data within
the GAN framework, and inference is performed using a finite subset of these
models. AGMs perform comparably with EGMs on inference tasks that the latter
were specifically optimized for. Most importantly, AGMs show significantly better generalization to unseen inference tasks compared to EGMs, as well as deep
neural architectures like GibbsNet and VAEAC which allow arbitrary conditioning.
Finally, AGMs allow fast data sampling, competitive with Gibbs sampling from
EGMs.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic graphical models [Koller and Friedman, 2009, Murphy, 2012] are compact representations of joint probability distributions. We focus on discrete pairwise undirected graphical models,
which represent the independence structure between pairs of random variables. Algorithms such as
belief propagation allow for inference on these graphical models, with arbitrary choices of observed,
query and hidden variables. When the graph topology is loopy, or when the structure is mis-specified,
inference through belief propagation is approximate [Murphy et al., 2013].
A purely generative way to train such a model is to maximize the likelihood of training data (ML),
under the probability distribution induced by the model. However, evaluating the gradient of this
objective involves computing marginal probability distributions over the random variables. As
these marginals are approximate in loopy graphs, the applicability of likelihood-trained models to
discriminative tasks is diminished [Kulesza and Pereira, 2008]. In these tasks, the model is called
upon to answer queries expressed compactly as (XE = xE , XQ , XH ), where from a data point
(x1 , . . . , xN ) sampled from a certain data distribution P, we observe the values of a subset E of the
indices, and have to predict the values at indices in Q from a discrete set X , with the possibility of
some hidden variable indices H which have to be marginalized over:
arg max P(Xi = x|XE = xE ), ∀i ∈ Q.

(1)

x∈X

A distribution over queries of this form will be referred to as an inference task. If the distribution over
queries that the model will be called upon to answer is known a priori, then the model’s performance
can be improved by shaping the query distribution used at parameter estimation time, accordingly.
In degenerate tasks, E, Q and H are fixed across queries. When this is the case and H is empty,
we could use a Bayesian feed-forward neural network [Husmeier and Taylor, 1999] to model the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

