CLEARER: Multi-Scale Neural Architecture Search
for Image Restoration

Yuanbiao Gou
College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, China
gouyuanbiao@gmail.com

Boyun Li
College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, China
liboyun.gm@gmail.com

Zitao Liu
TAL Education Group
Beijing, China
liuzitao@100tal.com

Xi Peng∗
College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, China
pengx.gm@gmail.com

Songfan Yang
TAL Education Group
Beijing, China
songfan.yang@qq.com

Abstract
Multi-scale neural networks have shown effectiveness in image restoration tasks,
which are usually designed and integrated in a handcrafted manner. Different from
the existing labor-intensive handcrafted architecture design paradigms, we present
a novel method, termed as multi-sCaLe nEural ARchitecture sEarch for image
Restoration (CLEARER), which is a specifically designed neural architecture
search (NAS) for image restoration. Our contributions are twofold. On one
hand, we design a multi-scale search space that consists of three task-flexible
modules. Namely, 1) Parallel module that connects multi-resolution neural blocks
in parallel, while preserving the channels and spatial-resolution in each neural block,
2) Transition module remains the existing multi-resolution features while extending
them to a lower resolution, 3) Fusion module integrates multi-resolution features
by passing the features of the parallel neural blocks to the current neural blocks.
On the other hand, we present novel losses which could 1) balance the tradeoff
between the model complexity and performance, which is highly expected to image
restoration; and 2) relax the discrete architecture parameters into a continuous
distribution which approximates to either 0 or 1. As a result, a differentiable
strategy could be employed to search when to fuse or extract multi-resolution
features, while the discretization issue faced by the gradient-based NAS could
be alleviated. The proposed CLEARER could search a promising architecture in
two GPU hours. Extensive experiments show the promising performance of our
method comparing with nine image denoising methods and eight image deraining
approaches in quantitative and qualitative evaluations. The codes are available at
https://github.com/limit-scu.

1

Introduction

Due to the complicated environments and the quality of digital image acquisition devices, the captured
images are often contaminated by various of signal-dependent or -independent noises. To recover the
clean image from the observed noisy image, a huge number of image restoration methods [30, 1, 5, 10]
have been proposed based on different handcrafted priors. However, once the prior is inconsistent
with the real data distribution, an unpleasant recovery will be achieved.
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

