Stochastic Optimization with Heavy-Tailed Noise via
Accelerated Gradient Clipping

Eduard Gorbunov∗
MIPT and HSE, Russia

Marina Danilova†
ICS RAS and MIPT, Russia

Alexander Gasnikov‡
MIPT and HSE, Russia

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new accelerated stochastic first-order method called
clipped-SSTM for smooth convex stochastic optimization with heavy-tailed distributed noise in stochastic gradients and derive the first high-probability complexity
bounds for this method closing the gap in the theory of stochastic optimization
with heavy-tailed noise. Our method is based on a special variant of accelerated
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and clipping of stochastic gradients. We extend
our method to the strongly convex case and prove new complexity bounds that outperform state-of-the-art results in this case. Finally, we extend our proof technique
and derive the first non-trivial high-probability complexity bounds for SGD with
clipping without light-tails assumption on the noise.

1

Introduction

In this paper we focus on the following problem
minn f (x), f (x) = Eξ [f (x, ξ)] ,
x∈R

(1)

where f (x) is a smooth convex function and the mathematical expectation in (1) is taken with respect
to the random variable ξ defined on the probability space (X , F, P) with some σ-algebra F and
probability measure P. Such problems appear in various applications of machine learning [21, 61, 64]
and mathematical statistics [66]. Perhaps, the most popular method to solve problems like (1) is
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [26, 50, 51, 59, 63]. There is a lot of literature on the convergence
in expectation of SGD for (strongly) convex [20, 24, 25, 46, 48, 49, 55] and non-convex [6, 20, 34]
problems under different assumptions on stochastic gradient. When the problem is good enough, i.e.
when the distributions of stochastic gradients are light-tailed, this theory correlates well with the
real behavior of trajectories of SGD in practice. Moreover, the existing high-probability bounds for
SGD [9, 11, 49] coincide with its counterpart from the theory of convergence in expectation up to
logarithmical factors depending on the confidence level.
However, there are a lot of important applications where the noise distribution in the stochastic
gradient is significantly heavy-tailed [65, 71]. For such problems SGD is often less robust and shows
poor performance in practice. Furthermore, existing results for the convergence with high-probability
for SGD are also much worse in the presence of heavy-tailed noise than its “light-tailed counterparts”.
In this case, rates of the convergence in expectation can be insufficient to describe the behavior of the
method.
To illustrate this phenomenon we consider a simple example of stochastic optimization problem
and apply SGD with constant stepsize to solve it. After that, we present a natural and simple way to
resolve the issue of SGD based on the clipping of stochastic gradients. However, we need to introduce
some important notations and definitions before we start to discuss this example.
∗

eduard.gorbunov@phystech.edu, eduardgorbunov.github.io
danilovamarina15@gmail.com, marinadanya.github.io
‡
gasnikov@yandex.ru

†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

