Entropic Causal Inference: Identifiability and
Finite Sample Results

Spencer Compton
MIT
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
scompton@mit.edu

Murat Kocaoglu
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
murat@ibm.com

Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com

Dmitriy Katz
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
dkatzrog@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Entropic causal inference is a framework for inferring the causal direction between
two categorical variables from observational data. The central assumption is that the
amount of unobserved randomness in the system is not too large. This unobserved
randomness is measured by the entropy of the exogenous variable in the underlying
structural causal model, which governs the causal relation between the observed
variables. [15] conjectured that the causal direction is identifiable when the entropy
of the exogenous variable is not too large. In this paper, we prove a variant of
their conjecture. Namely, we show that for almost all causal models where the
exogenous variable has entropy that does not scale with the number of states of the
observed variables, the causal direction is identifiable from observational data. We
also consider the minimum entropy coupling-based algorithmic approach presented
by [15], and for the first time demonstrate algorithmic identifiability guarantees
using a finite number of samples. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate
the robustness of the method to relaxing some of the assumptions in our theory
and demonstrate that both the constant-entropy exogenous variable and the no
latent confounder assumptions can be relaxed in practice. We also empirically
characterize the number of observational samples needed for causal identification.
Finally, we apply the algorithm on Tübingen cause-effect pairs dataset.

1

Introduction

Understanding causal mechanisms is essential in many fields of science and engineering [26, 29].
Distinguishing causes from effects allows us to obtain a causal model of the environment, which
is critical for informed policy decisions [21]. Causal inference has been recently utilized in several
machine learning applications, e.g., to explain the decisions of a classifier [1], to design fair classifiers
that mitigate dataset bias [14, 32] and to construct classifiers that generalize [28].
Consider a system that we observe through a set of random variables. For example, to monitor the
state of a classroom, we might measure temperature, humidity and atmospheric pressure in the room.
These measurements are random variables which come about due to the workings of the underlying
system, the physical world. Changes in one are expected to cause changes in the other, e.g., decreasing
the temperature might reduce the atmospheric pressure and increase humidity. As long as there are no
feedback loops, we can represent the set of causal relations between these variables using a directed
acyclic graph (DAG). This is called the causal graph of the system. Pearl and others showed that
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

