Demixed shared component analysis of neural
population data from multiple brain areas

Yu Takagi∗
University of Oxford, UK
yutakagi322@gmail.com

Steven W. Kennerley
University College London, UK
s.kennerley@ucl.ac.uk

Jun-ichiro Hirayama†
AIST/RIKEN AIP, Japan
junichiro.hirayama@aist.go.jp

Laurence T. Hunt†
University of Oxford, UK
laurence.hunt@psych.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent advances in neuroscience data acquisition allow for the simultaneous recording of large populations of neurons across multiple brain areas while subjects
perform complex cognitive tasks. Interpreting these data requires us to index
how task-relevant information is shared across brain regions, but this is often
confounded by the mixing of different task parameters at the single neuron level.
Here, inspired by a method developed for a single brain area, we introduce a
new technique for demixing variables across multiple brain areas, called demixed
shared component analysis (dSCA). dSCA decomposes population activity into a
few components, such that the shared components capture the maximum amount
of shared information across brain regions while also depending on relevant task
parameters. This yields interpretable components that express which variables
are shared between different brain regions and when this information is shared
across time. To illustrate our method, we reanalyze two datasets recorded during
decision-making tasks in rodents and macaques. We find that dSCA provides new
insights into the shared computation between different brain areas in these datasets,
relating to several different aspects of decision formation.

1

Introduction

Recent methodological advances make it possible to record thousands of neurons simultaneously
[1]. Although such high-dimensional recording yields insights that are not apparent from studying
single neuron activity, analysing population data remains a non-trivial problem because of the
heterogeneity of responses and ‘mixing’ of encoded variables observed in neural data [2]. While
traditionally such heterogeneity was discarded by simply averaging across neurons, more recently
several dimensionality reduction methods have been developed for neurophysiological data that isolate
key features of the population response structure [3]. One popular approach is demixed principal
component analysis (dPCA; [4, 5]). dPCA identifies components that explain maximum population
variance while also ‘demixed’ from non-interesting task parameters, in other words depending upon
key task parameters. This allows experimenters to combine rich population recordings with equally
rich task design, as dPCA isolates low-dimensional components that vary along axes defined by
features of the experimental task.
∗
†

Corresponding author.
These authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

