Hierarchical Granularity Transfer Learning

Shaobo Min1 , Hongtao Xie1 , Hantao Yao2∗, Xuran Deng1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Beijing, China
mbobo@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie,zhazj,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, hantao.yao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
In the real world, object categories usually have a hierarchical granularity tree.
Nowadays, most researchers focus on recognizing categories in a specific granularity, e.g., basic-level or sub(ordinate)-level. Compared with basic-level categories,
the sub-level categories provide more valuable information, but its training annotations are harder to acquire. Therefore, an attractive problem is how to transfer the
knowledge learned from basic-level annotations to sub-level recognition. In this
paper, we introduce a new task, named Hierarchical Granularity Transfer Learning
(HGTL), to recognize sub-level categories with basic-level annotations and semantic descriptions for hierarchical categories. Different from other recognition tasks,
HGTL has a serious granularity gap, i.e., the two granularities share an image space
but have different category domains, which impede the knowledge transfer. To this
end, we propose a novel Bi-granularity Semantic Preserving Network (BigSPN) to
bridge the granularity gap for robust knowledge transfer. Explicitly, BigSPN constructs specific visual encoders for different granularities, which are aligned with a
shared semantic interpreter via a novel subordinate entropy loss. Experiments on
three benchmarks with hierarchical granularities show that BigSPN is an effective
framework for Hierarchical Granularity Transfer Learning.

1

Introduction

In the real world, object categories usually form a hierarchical tree of different granularities [5, 33,
21, 48], e.g., a hierarchical tree of bird is shown in Fig. 1. For example, a bird has a basic-category
“Albatross" and several sub(ordinate)-categories, such as “Footed Albatross" and “Sooty Albatross"
species. Compared with basic-level categories, the sub-level categories contain more information,
but the annotations are also harder to obtain [41], which require expert taxonomy knowledge to
distinguish subtle differences. Thus, how to recognize sub-categories without sub-level image
annotations is an interesting and important problem.
To address this issue, we introduce a new task of Hierarchical Granularity Transfer Learning (HGTL),
which targets to recognize the subordinate-level categories with only basic-level image annotations
and semantic descriptions for hierarchical categories, e.g., attributes [39], as shown in Fig. 1. The
insight of HGTL is inspired by the semantic cognition of human. For example, when informed
that the “Footed Albatross" has brown wing and the “Sooty Albatross" has black wing, human can
distinguish these two sub-species visually.
Among the existing visual recognition tasks, the fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) [16, 17,
49, 24], domain adaptation (DA) [27–29], and zero-shot learning (ZSL) [12, 13, 39, 23] are most
related to HGTL. Different from FGVC that depends on sub-level image annotations, HGTL requires
only basic-level annotations and extra semantic information. Compared with DA whose categories
of two domains are overlapped, HGTL has disjoint category domains, i.e., basic-categories and
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

