Equivariant Maps for Hierarchical Structures

Renhao Wang, Marjan Albooyeh∗
University of British Columbia,
{renhaow,albooyeh}@cs.ubc.ca

Siamak Ravanbakhsh
McGill University & Mila
siamak@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
While using invariant and equivariant maps, it is possible to apply deep learning to a
range of primitive data structures, a formalism for dealing with hierarchy is lacking.
This is a significant issue because many practical structures are hierarchies of
simple building blocks; some examples include sequences of sets, graphs of graphs,
or multiresolution images. Observing that the symmetry of a hierarchical structure
is the “wreath product” of symmetries of the building blocks, we express the
equivariant map for the hierarchy using an intuitive combination of the equivariant
linear layers of the building blocks. More generally, we show that any equivariant
map for the hierarchy has this form. To demonstrate the effectiveness of this
approach to model design, we consider its application in the semantic segmentation
of point-cloud data. By voxelizing the point cloud, we impose a hierarchy of
translation and permutation symmetries on the data and report state-of-the-art
on SEMANTIC 3 D, S 3 DIS, and VKITTI, that include some of the largest real-world
point-cloud benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In designing deep models for structured data, equivariance (invariance) of the model to transformation
groups has proven to be a powerful inductive bias, which enables sample efficient learning. A
widely used family of equivariant deep models constrain the feed-forward layer so that specific
transformations of the input lead to the corresponding transformations of the output. A canonical
example is the convolution layer, in which the constrained MLP is equivariant to translation operations.
Many recent works have extended this idea to design equivariant networks for more exotic structures
such as sets, exchangeable tensors and graphs, as well as relational and geometric structures.
This paper considers a nested hierarchy of such structures, or more generally, any hierarchical
composition of transformation symmetries. These hierarchies naturally appear in many settings: for
example, the interaction between nodes in a social graph may be a sequence or a set of events. Or in
diffusion tensor imaging of the brain, each subject may be modeled as a set of sequences, where each
sequence is a fibre bundle in the brain. The application we consider in this paper models point clouds
as 3D images, where each voxel is a set of points with coordinates relative to the center of that voxel.
To get an intuition for a hierarchy of symmetry transformations, consider the example of a sequence
of sequences – e.g., a text document can be viewed as a sequence of sentences, where each sentence
is itself a sequence of words. Here, each inner sequence as well as the outer sequence is assumed
to possess an “independent” translation symmetry. Contrast this with symmetries of an image (2D
translation), where all inner sequences (say row pixels) translate together, so we have a total of two
translations. This is the key difference between the wreath product of two translation groups (former)
and their direct product (latter). It is the wreath product that often appears in nested structures. As is
evident from this example, the wreath product results in a significantly larger set of transformations,
and as we elaborate later, it provides a stronger inductive bias.
∗

Currently at Borealis AI. Work done while at UBC.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

