The interplay between randomness and structure
during learning in RNNs

Friedrich Schuessler
Technion
schuessler@campus.technion.ac.il
Alexis Dubreuil
ENS Paris
alexis.dubreuil@gmail.com

Francesca Mastrogiuseppe
Gatsby Unit, UCL
f.mastrogiuseppe@ucl.ac.uk

Srdjan Ostojic
ENS Paris
srdjan.ostojic@ens.fr

Omri Barak
Technion
omri.barak@gmail.com

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) trained on low-dimensional tasks have been
widely used to model functional biological networks. However, the solutions found
by learning and the effect of initial connectivity are not well understood. Here,
we examine RNNs trained using gradient descent on different tasks inspired by
the neuroscience literature. We find that the changes in recurrent connectivity
can be described by low-rank matrices, despite the unconstrained nature of the
learning algorithm. To identify the origin of the low-rank structure, we turn to an
analytically tractable setting: training a linear RNN on a simplified task. We show
how the low-dimensional task structure leads to low-rank changes to connectivity.
This low-rank structure allows us to explain and quantify the phenomenon of
accelerated learning in the presence of random initial connectivity. Altogether, our
study opens a new perspective to understanding trained RNNs in terms of both the
learning process and the resulting network structure.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been used both as tools for machine learning, and as models
for neuroscience. In the latter context, RNNs are typically initialized with random connectivity and
trained on abstractions of tasks used in experimental settings [3, 20, 23, 32, 33, 35, 37, 40]. The
obtained networks are then compared to both behavioral and neural experimental results, with the
added advantage that the RNNs are more amenable to analysis than their biological counterparts [34].
Despite this advantage, the understanding of how RNNs implement neuroscience tasks is still limited.
Open questions concern especially the relationship between the final connectivity and the task, and
its formation through training.
Here, we examine the relation between the initial connectivity of the RNN, the task at hand, and
the changes to connectivity through training. We use unconstrained gradient descent that can
potentially alter the connectivity completely. However, evaluating nonlinear RNNs trained on several
neuroscience-inspired tasks, we observe that the connectivity changes are small compared to the
initial connectivity. We thus split the connectivity matrix W at the end of training into the initial part
W0 and the changes ∆W , writing
W = W0 + ∆W .
(1)
For all tasks we consider, we find that the training-induced connectivity structure ∆W is of low
rank, despite the unconstrained nature of training used. This finding directly connects gradient-based
learning with a number of existing neuroscience frameworks based on low-rank aspects of connectivity
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

