Constant-Expansion Suffices for Compressed Sensing
with Generative Priors
Constantinos Daskalakis
MIT
costis@mit.edu

Dhruv Rohatgi
MIT
drohatgi@mit.edu

Manolis Zampetakis
MIT
mzampet@mit.edu

Abstract
Generative neural networks have been empirically found very promising in providing effective structural priors for compressed sensing, since they can be trained to
span low-dimensional data manifolds in high-dimensional signal spaces. Despite
the non-convexity of the resulting optimization problem, it has also been shown
theoretically that, for neural networks with random Gaussian weights, a signal in
the range of the network can be efficiently, approximately recovered from a few
noisy measurements. However, a major bottleneck of these theoretical guarantees
is a network expansivity condition: that each layer of the neural network must be
larger than the previous by a logarithmic factor. Our main contribution is to break
this strong expansivity assumption, showing that constant expansivity suffices to
get efficient recovery algorithms, besides it also being information-theoretically
necessary. To overcome the theoretical bottleneck in existing approaches we prove
a novel uniform concentration theorem for random functions that might not be
Lipschitz but satisfy a relaxed notion which we call “pseudo-Lipschitzness.” Using
this theorem we can show that a matrix concentration inequality known as the
Weight Distribution Condition (WDC), which was previously only known to hold
for Gaussian matrices with logarithmic aspect ratio, in fact holds for constant aspect
ratios too. Since WDC is a fundamental matrix concentration inequality in the
heart of all existing theoretical guarantees on this problem, our tighter bound immediately yields improvements in all known results in the literature on compressed
sensing with deep generative priors, including one-bit recovery, phase retrieval,
and more.

1

Introduction

Compressed sensing is the study of recovering a high-dimensional signal from as few measurements
as possible, under some structural assumption about the signal that pins it into a low-dimensional
subset of the signal space. The assumption that has driven the most research is sparsity; it is well
known that a k-sparse signal from Rn can be efficiently recovered from only O(k log n) linear
measurements [4]. Numerous variants of this problem have been studied, e.g. tolerating measurement
noise, recovering signals that are only approximately sparse, recovering signals from phaseless
measurements or one-bit measurements, to name just a few [1].
However, in many applications sparsity in some basis may not be the most natural structural assumption to make for the signal to be reconstructed. Given recent strides in performance of generative
neural networks [6, 5, 11, 3, 12], there is strong evidence that data from some domain D, e.g. faces,
can be used to identify a deep neural network G : Rk → Rn , where k  n, whose range G(x) over
varying “latent codes” x ∈ Rk covers well the objects of D. Thus, if we want to perform compressed
sensing on signals from this domain D, the machine learning paradigm suggests that a reasonable
structural assumption to make is that the signal lies in the range of G, suggesting the following
problem, first proposed in [2]:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

