Hard Negative Mixing for Contrastive Learning

Yannis Kalantidis

Mert Bulent Sariyildiz

Philippe Weinzaepfel

Noe Pion

Diane Larlus

NAVER LABS Europe
Grenoble, France

Abstract
Contrastive learning has become a key component of self-supervised learning
approaches for computer vision. By learning to embed two augmented versions of
the same image close to each other and to push the embeddings of different images
apart, one can train highly transferable visual representations. As revealed by recent
studies, heavy data augmentation and large sets of negatives are both crucial in
learning such representations. At the same time, data mixing strategies, either at the
image or the feature level, improve both supervised and semi-supervised learning
by synthesizing novel examples, forcing networks to learn more robust features. In
this paper, we argue that an important aspect of contrastive learning, i.e. the effect of
hard negatives, has so far been neglected. To get more meaningful negative samples,
current top contrastive self-supervised learning approaches either substantially
increase the batch sizes, or keep very large memory banks; increasing memory
requirements, however, leads to diminishing returns in terms of performance.
We therefore start by delving deeper into a top-performing framework and show
evidence that harder negatives are needed to facilitate better and faster learning.
Based on these observations, and motivated by the success of data mixing, we
propose hard negative mixing strategies at the feature level, that can be computed
on-the-fly with a minimal computational overhead. We exhaustively ablate our
approach on linear classification, object detection, and instance segmentation and
show that employing our hard negative mixing procedure improves the quality of
visual representations learned by a state-of-the-art self-supervised learning method.
Project page: https://europe.naverlabs.com/mochi

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning was recently shown to be
a highly effective way of learning visual representations in a self-supervised manner [8, 21].
Pushing the embeddings of two transformed versions of the same image (forming the positive
pair) close to each other and further apart from
the embedding of any other image (negatives)
using a contrastive loss, leads to powerful and
transferable representations. A number of recent
studies [10, 17, 39] show that carefully handcrafting the set of data augmentations applied to Figure 1: MoCHi generates synthetic hard negaimages is instrumental in learning such represen- tives for each positive (query).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

