Hitting the High Notes: Subset Selection for
Maximizing Expected Order Statistics

Aranyak Mehta
Google Research
aranyak@google.com

Uri Nadav
Google Research
urinadav@google.com

Alexandros Psomas∗
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.purdue.edu

Aviad Rubinstein
Stanford University
aviad@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the fundamental problem of selecting k out of n random variables
in a way that the expected highest or second-highest value is maximized. This
question captures several applications where we have uncertainty about the quality
of candidates (e.g. auction bids, search results) and have the capacity to explore
only a small subset due to an exogenous constraint. For example, consider a second
price auction where system constraints (e.g., costly retrieval or model computation)
allow the participation of only k out of n bidders, and the goal is to optimize the
expected efficiency (highest bid) or expected revenue (second highest bid).
We study the case where we are given an explicit description of each random
variable. We give a PTAS for the problem of maximizing the expected highest value.
For the second-highest value, we prove a hardness result: assuming the Planted
Clique Hypothesis, there is no constant factor approximation algorithm that runs
in polynomial time. Surprisingly, under the assumption that each random variable
has monotone hazard rate (MHR), a simple score-based
algorithm, namely picking
√
the k random variables with the largest 1/ k top quantile value, is a constant
approximation to the expected highest and second highest value, simultaneously.

1

Introduction

We study a basic algorithmic meta-question: given n independent random variables, select k of them,
with the objective of maximizing the expected largest value, and/or the expected second highest value.
We are motivated by the following applications:
Search engine Given a search query, the search engine has to return k results of n candidates. The
random variables model the uncertainty about the user’s utility from each result. Among the k, the
human can select the most relevant result, and our goal is to maximize their utility. In their seminal
WAND paper, Broder et. al. [BCH+ 03] point out that a search engine’s latency constraint prevents it
from perfectly scoring all possible candidates, and propose a two-tier solution for scoring documents
in a search engine, where first they run a fast approximate evaluation and then a full slower evaluation
limited to only promising candidates.
Procurement auctions A buyer in a complex procurement auction (e.g. for a large engineering
project [RL07, Tan92]) receives n initial proposals. They need to select a subset of k bidders who
will be allowed to submit a more detailed second-stage proposal, of which the best will be selected.
∗

This work was done while Alexandros Psomas was a visiting scientist at Google research MTV.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

