Iterative Deep Graph Learning for Graph Neural
Networks: Better and Robust Node Embeddings
Yu Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
cheny39@rpi.edu

Lingfei Wu˚
IBM Research
lwu@email.wm.edu

Mohammed J. Zaki
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
zaki@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end graph learning framework, namely Iterative
Deep Graph Learning (IDGL), for jointly and iteratively learning graph structure
and graph embedding. The key rationale of IDGL is to learn a better graph structure
based on better node embeddings, and vice versa (i.e., better node embeddings
based on a better graph structure). Our iterative method dynamically stops when
the learned graph structure approaches close enough to the graph optimized for
the downstream prediction task. In addition, we cast the graph learning problem
as a similarity metric learning problem and leverage adaptive graph regularization
for controlling the quality of the learned graph. Finally, combining the anchorbased approximation technique, we further propose a scalable version of IDGL,
namely IDGL-A NCH, which significantly reduces the time and space complexity of
IDGL without compromising the performance. Our extensive experiments on nine
benchmarks show that our proposed IDGL models can consistently outperform
or match the state-of-the-art baselines. Furthermore, IDGL can be more robust to
adversarial graphs and cope with both transductive and inductive learning.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen a significantly growing amount of interest in graph neural networks (GNNs),
especially on efforts devoted to developing more effective GNNs for node classification [29, 36, 17,
52], graph classification [60, 43] and graph generation [47, 37, 61]. Despite GNNs’ powerful ability
in learning expressive node embeddings, unfortunately, they can only be used when graph-structured
data is available. Many real-world applications naturally admit network-structured data (e.g., social
networks). However, these intrinsic graph-structures are not always optimal for the downstream tasks.
This is partially because the raw graphs were constructed from the original feature space, which may
not reflect the “true" graph topology after feature extraction and transformation. Another potential
reason is that real-world graphs are often noisy or even incomplete due to the inevitably error-prone
data measurement or collection. Furthermore, many applications such as those in natural language
processing [7, 57, 58] may only have sequential data or even just the original feature matrix, requiring
additional graph construction from the original data matrix.
To address these limitations, we propose an end-to-end graph learning framework, namely Iterative
Deep Graph Learning (IDGL), for jointly and iteratively learning the graph structure and the GNN
parameters that are optimized toward the downstream prediction task. The key rationale of our IDGL
˚

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

