Bandit Samplers for Training Graph Neural Networks

Ziqi Liu∗
Ant Group
ziqiliu@antfin.com
Zhiqiang Zhang
Ant Group
lingyao.zzq@antfin.com

Zhengwei Wu∗
Ant Group
zejun.wzw@antfin.com

Jun Zhou†
Ant Group
jun.zhoujun@antfin.com

Le Song
Ant Group
Georgia Institute of Technology
lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Shuang Yang
Alibaba Group
shuang.yang@antfin.com

Yuan Qi
Ant Group
yuan.qi@antfin.com

Abstract
Several sampling algorithms with variance reduction have been proposed for accelerating the training of Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs). However, due
to the intractable computation of optimal sampling distribution, these sampling
algorithms are suboptimal for GCNs and are not applicable to more general graph
neural networks (GNNs) where the message aggregator contains learned weights
rather than fixed weights, such as Graph Attention Networks (GAT). The fundamental reason is that the embeddings of the neighbors or learned weights involved
in the optimal sampling distribution are changing during the training and not known
a priori, but only partially observed when sampled, thus making the derivation
of an optimal variance reduced samplers non-trivial. In this paper, we formulate
the optimization of the sampling variance as an adversary bandit problem, where
the rewards are related to the node embeddings and learned weights, and can vary
constantly. Thus a good sampler needs to acquire variance information about more
neighbors (exploration) while at the same time optimizing the immediate sampling
variance (exploit). We theoretically show that our algorithm asymptotically approaches the optimal variance within a factor of 3. We show the efficiency and
effectiveness of our approach on multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks [13, 11] have emerged as a powerful tool for representation learning of
graph data in irregular or non-euclidean domains [3, 21]. For instance, graph neural networks have
demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on learning tasks such as node classification, link and
graph property prediction, with applications ranging from drug design [8], social networks [11],
transaction networks [14], gene expression networks [9], and knowledge graphs [17].
One major challenge of training GNNs comes from the requirements of heavy floating point operations
and large memory footprints, due to the recursive expansions over the neighborhoods. For a minibatch
(L)
with a single vertex vi , to compute its embedding hi at the L-th layer, we have to expand its
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

