Evolving Normalization-Activation Layers

Hanxiao Liu† , Andrew Brock‡ , Karen Simonyan‡ , Quoc V. Le†
†
Google Research, Brain Team ‡ DeepMind
{hanxiaol,ajbrock,simonyan,qvl}@google.com

Abstract
Normalization layers and activation functions are fundamental components in deep
networks and typically co-locate with each other. Here we propose to design them
using an automated approach. Instead of designing them separately, we unify them
into a single tensor-to-tensor computation graph, and evolve its structure starting
from basic mathematical functions. Examples of such mathematical functions are
addition, multiplication and statistical moments. The use of low-level mathematical
functions, in contrast to the use of high-level modules in mainstream NAS, leads
to a highly sparse and large search space which can be challenging for search
methods. To address the challenge, we develop efficient rejection protocols to
quickly filter out candidate layers that do not work well. We also use multiobjective evolution to optimize each layer’s performance across many architectures
to prevent overfitting. Our method leads to the discovery of EvoNorms, a set of new
normalization-activation layers with novel, and sometimes surprising structures
that go beyond existing design patterns. For example, some EvoNorms do not
assume that normalization and activation functions must be applied sequentially,
nor need to center the feature maps, nor require explicit activation functions.
Our experiments show that EvoNorms work well on image classification models
including ResNets, MobileNets and EfficientNets but also transfer well to Mask
R-CNN with FPN/SpineNet for instance segmentation and to BigGAN for image
synthesis, outperforming BatchNorm and GroupNorm based layers in many cases.1

1

Introduction

Normalization layers and activation functions are fundamental building blocks in deep networks
for stable optimization and improved generalization. Although they frequently co-locate, they are
designed separately in previous works. There are several heuristics widely adopted during the design
process of these building blocks. For example, a common heuristic for normalization layers is to
use mean subtraction and variance division [1–4], while a common heuristic for activation functions
is to use scalar-to-scalar transformations [5–11]. These heuristics may not be optimal as they treat
normalization layers and activation functions as separate. Can automated machine learning discover
a novel building block to replace these layers and go beyond the existing heuristics?
Here we revisit the design of normalization layers and activation functions using an automated
approach. Instead of designing them separately, we unify them into a normalization-activation layer.
With this unification, we can formulate the layer as a tensor-to-tensor computation graph consisting
of basic mathematical functions such as addition, multiplication and cross-dimensional statistical
moments. These low-level mathematical functions form a highly sparse and large search space,
in contrast to mainstream NAS which uses high-level modules (e.g., Conv-BN-ReLU). To address
the challenge of the size and sparsity of the search space, we develop novel rejection protocols
to efficiently filter out candidate layers that do not work well. To promote strong generalization
across different architectures, we use multi-objective evolution to explicitly optimize each layer’s
1

Code for EvoNorms on ResNets: https://github.com/tensorflow/tpu/tree/master/models/official/resnet

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

