Towards Problem-dependent Optimal Learning Rates

Yunbei Xu
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
yunbei.xu@gsb.columbia.edu

Assaf Zeevi
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
assaf@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
We study problem-dependent rates, i.e., generalization errors that scale tightly
with the variance or the effective loss at the "best hypothesis." Existing uniform
convergence and localization frameworks, the most widely used tools to study this
problem, often fail to simultaneously provide parameter localization and optimal
dependence on the sample size. As a result, existing problem-dependent rates are
often rather weak when the hypothesis class is "rich" and the worst-case bound of
the loss is large. In this paper we propose a new framework based on a "uniform localized convergence" principle. We provide the first (moment-penalized) estimator
that achieves the optimal variance-dependent rate for general "rich" classes; we also
establish improved loss-dependent rate for standard empirical risk minimization.

1

Introduction

Problem Statement. Consider the following statistical learning setting. Assume that a random
sample z follows an unknown distribution P with support Z . For each realization of z, let `(·; z) be a
real-valued loss function, defined over the hypothesis class H. Let h∗ ∈ H be the optimal hypothesis
that minimizes the population risk
P`(h; z) := E[`(h; z)].
Given n i.i.d. samples {zi }ni=1 drawn from P, our goal, roughly speaking, is to "learn" a hypothesis
ĥ ∈ H that makes the generalization error
E (ĥ) := P`(ĥ; z) − P`(h∗ ; z)
as small as possible. This pursuit is ubiquitous in machine learning, statistics and stochastic optimization.
Let V ∗ and L∗ be the variance and the "effective loss" at the best hypothesis h∗ :

V ∗ := Var[`(h∗ ; z)],

L∗ := P[`(h∗ ; z) − inf `(h; z)].
H

We study finite-sample generalization errors that scale tightly with V ∗ or L∗ , which we call problemdependent rates, without invoking strong convexity or margin conditions. While the direct dependence
of E (ĥ) on the sample size n is often well-understood, it typically only reflects an "asymptotic"
perspective, placing less emphasis on the scale of problem-dependent parameters V ∗ and L∗ .
Main challenges. In absence of strong convexity and margin conditions, perhaps the most popular
framework to study problem-dependent rates is the traditional "local Rademacher complexity"
analysis [2, 7, 17], which has become a standard tool in learning theory. However, as we will discuss
later, this analysis makes the "direct dependence" on the sample size (n) sub-optimal for all "rich"
classes with the exception of parametric classes.
The absence of more precise localization analysis also challenges the design of more refined estimation
procedures. For example, designing estimators to achieve variance-dependent rates requires penalizing
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

