Matérn Gaussian processes on Riemannian manifolds

Viacheslav Borovitskiy∗1,4 Alexander Terenin∗2 Peter Mostowsky∗1 Marc Peter Deisenroth3
1

2
3
St. Petersburg State University
Imperial College London
University College London
St. Petersburg Department of Steklov Mathematical Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences

4

Abstract
Gaussian processes are an effective model class for learning unknown functions,
particularly in settings where accurately representing predictive uncertainty is of
key importance. Motivated by applications in the physical sciences, the widelyused Matérn class of Gaussian processes has recently been generalized to model
functions whose domains are Riemannian manifolds, by re-expressing said processes as solutions of stochastic partial differential equations. In this work, we
propose techniques for computing the kernels of these processes on compact Riemannian manifolds via spectral theory of the Laplace–Beltrami operator in a fully
constructive manner, thereby allowing them to be trained via standard scalable
techniques such as inducing point methods. We also extend the generalization from
the Matérn to the widely-used squared exponential Gaussian process. By allowing Riemannian Matérn Gaussian processes to be trained using well-understood
techniques, our work enables their use in mini-batch, online, and non-conjugate
settings, and makes them more accessible to machine learning practitioners.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are a widely-used class of models for learning an unknown function within
a Bayesian framework. They are particularly attractive for use within decision-making systems, e.g.
in Bayesian optimization [36] and reinforcement learning [10, 11], where well-calibrated uncertainty
is crucial for enabling the system to balance trade-offs, such as exploration and exploitation.
A GP is specified through its mean and covariance kernel. The Matérn family is a widely-used class
of kernels, often favored in Bayesian optimization due to its ability to specify smoothness of the GP
by controlling differentiability of its sample paths. Throughout this work, we view the widely-used
squared exponential kernel as a Matérn kernel with infinite smoothness.
Motivated by applications areas such as robotics [4, 22] and climate science [5], recent work has
sought to generalize a number of machine learning algorithms from the vector space to the manifold
setting. This allows one to work with data that lives on spheres, cylinders, and tori, for example. To
define such a GP, one needs to define a positive semi-definite kernel on those spaces.
In the Riemannian setting, as a simple candidate generalization for the Matérn or squared exponential
kernel, one can consider replacing Euclidean distance in the formula with the Riemannian geodesic
distance. Unfortunately, this approach leads to ill-defined kernels in many cases of interest [14].
An alternative approach was recently proposed by Lindgren et al. [25], who adopt a perspective
introduced in the pioneering work of Whittle [42] and define a Matérn GP to be the solution of
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: VIACHESLAV. BOROVITSKIY @ GMAIL . COM,
A . TERENIN 17@ IMPERIAL . AC . UK , and PMOSTOWSKY @ GMAIL . COM .
Code available at HTTPS :// GITHUB . COM / SPBU - MATH - CS /R IEMANNIAN - G AUSSIAN - P ROCESSES and
HTTPS :// GITHUB . COM / ATERENIN /S PARSE G AUSSIAN P ROCESSES . JL .
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

