Learning to Play Sequential Games
versus Unknown Opponents
Pier Giuseppe Sessa
ETH Zürich
sessap@ethz.ch

Ilija Bogunovic
ETH Zürich
ilijab@ethz.ch

Maryam Kamgarpour
ETH Zürich
maryamk@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
We consider a repeated sequential game between a learner, who plays first, and an
opponent who responds to the chosen action. We seek to design strategies for the
learner to successfully interact with the opponent. While most previous approaches
consider known opponent models, we focus on the setting in which the opponent’s
model is unknown. To this end, we use kernel-based regularity assumptions
to capture and exploit the structure in the opponent’s response. We propose a
novel algorithm for the learner when playing against an adversarial sequence of
opponents. The algorithm combines ideas from bilevel optimization and online
learning to effectively balance between exploration (learning about the opponent’s
model) and exploitation (selecting highly rewarding actions for the learner). Our
results include algorithm’s regret guarantees that depend on the regularity of the
opponent’s response and scale sublinearly with the number of game rounds. Moreover, we specialize our approach to repeated Stackelberg games, and empirically
demonstrate its effectiveness in a traffic routing and wildlife conservation task.

1

Introduction

Several important real-world problems involve sequential interactions between two parties. These
problems can often be modeled as two-player games, where the first player chooses a strategy and
the second player responds to it. For example, in traffic networks, traffic operators plan routes for a
subset of network vehicles (e.g., public transport), while the remaining vehicles (e.g., private cars)
can choose their routes in response to that. The goal of the first player in these games is to find the
optimal strategy (e.g., traffic operators seek the routing strategy that minimizes the overall network’s
congestion, cf., [20]). Several algorithms have been previously proposed, successfully deployed, and
used in domains such as urban roads [17], airport security [29], wildlife protection [40], and markets
[15], to name a few.
In many applications, complete knowledge of the game is not available and, thus, finding a good
strategy for the first player becomes more challenging. The response function of the second player,
that is, how the second player responds to strategies of the first player, is typically unknown and
can only be inferred by repeatedly playing and observing the responses and game outcomes [22, 6].
Consequently, we refer to the first and second players as learner and opponent, respectively. An
additional challenge for the learner in such repeated games lies in facing a potentially different type
of opponent at every game round. In various domains (e.g., in security applications), the learner can
even face an adversarially chosen sequence of opponent/attacker types [4].
Motivated by these important considerations, we study a repeated sequential game against an unknown opponent with multiple types. We propose a novel algorithm for the learner when facing
an adversarially chosen sequence of types. No-regret guarantees of our algorithm in these settings
ensure that the learner’s performance converges to the optimal one in hindsight (i.e., the idealized
scenario in which the types’ sequence and opponent’s response function are known ahead of time).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

