MeshSDF: Differentiable Iso-Surface Extraction
Edoardo Remelli ∗ 1
Benoît Guillard 1

Artem Lukoianov ∗ 1,2
Timur Bagautdinov 2

Stephan R. Richter 3

Pierre Baque 2

Pascal Fua 1

1

2

CVLab, EPFL, {name.surname}@epfl.ch
Neural Concept SA, {name.surname}@neuralconcept.com
3
Intel Labs, {name.surname}@intel.com

Abstract
Geometric Deep Learning has recently made striking progress with the advent of
continuous Deep Implicit Fields. They allow for detailed modeling of watertight
surfaces of arbitrary topology while not relying on a 3D Euclidean grid, resulting
in a learnable parameterization that is not limited in resolution.
Unfortunately, these methods are often not suitable for applications that require
an explicit mesh-based surface representation because converting an implicit field
to such a representation relies on the Marching Cubes algorithm, which cannot be
differentiated with respect to the underlying implicit field.
In this work, we remove this limitation and introduce a differentiable way to produce explicit surface mesh representations from Deep Signed Distance Functions.
Our key insight is that by reasoning on how implicit field perturbations impact
local surface geometry, one can ultimately differentiate the 3D location of surface
samples with respect to the underlying deep implicit field. We exploit this to define
MeshSDF, an end-to-end differentiable mesh representation which can vary its
topology.
We use two different applications to validate our theoretical insight: Single-View
Reconstruction via Differentiable Rendering and Physically-Driven Shape Optimization. In both cases our differentiable parameterization gives us an edge over
state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Geometric Deep Learning has recently witnessed a breakthrough with the advent of continuous Deep
Implicit Fields [35, 29, 8]. These enable detailed modeling of watertight surfaces, while not relying on
a 3D Euclidean grid or meshes with fixed topology, resulting in a learnable surface parameterization
that is not limited in resolution.
However, a number of important applications require explicit surface representations, such as triangulated meshes or 3D point clouds. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations and the
associated learning-based surrogate methods used for shape design in many engineering fields [3, 49]
are a good example of this where 3D meshes serve as boundary conditions for the Navier-Stokes
Equations. Similarly, many advanced physically-based rendering engines require surface meshes to
model the complex interactions of light and physical surfaces efficiently [33, 36].
Combining explicit representations with the benefits of deep implicit fields requires converting
the implicit surface parameterization to an explicit representation, which typically relies on one of
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

