Matrix Completion with Hierarchical
Graph Side Information

Adel Elmahdy∗
ECE, University of Minnesota
adel@umn.edu

Junhyung Ahn∗
EE, KAIST
tonyahn96@kaist.ac.kr

Changho Suh
EE, KAIST
chsuh@kaist.ac.kr

Soheil Mohajer
ECE, University of Minnesota
soheil@umn.edu

Abstract
We consider a matrix completion problem that exploits social or item similarity
graphs as side information. We develop a universal, parameter-free, and computationally efficient algorithm that starts with hierarchical graph clustering and then
iteratively refines estimates both on graph clustering and matrix ratings. Under a
hierarchical stochastic block model that well respects practically-relevant social
graphs and a low-rank rating matrix model (to be detailed), we demonstrate that our
algorithm achieves the information-theoretic limit on the number of observed matrix entries (i.e., optimal sample complexity) that is derived by maximum likelihood
estimation together with a lower-bound impossibility result. One consequence of
this result is that exploiting the hierarchical structure of social graphs yields a
substantial gain in sample complexity relative to the one that simply identifies different groups without resorting to the relational structure across them. We conduct
extensive experiments both on synthetic and real-world datasets to corroborate our
theoretical results as well as to demonstrate significant performance improvements
over other matrix completion algorithms that leverage graph side information.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been powerful in a widening array of applications for providing users
with relevant items of their potential interest [1]. A prominent well-known technique for operating
the systems is low-rank matrix completion [2–18]: Given partially observed entries of an interested
matrix, the goal is to predict the values of missing entries. One challenge that arises in the big data era
is the so-called cold start problem in which high-quality recommendations are not feasible for new
users/items that bear little or no information. One natural and popular way to address the challenge
is to exploit other available side information. Motivated by the social homophily theory [19] that
users within the same community are more likely to share similar preferences, social networks such
as Facebook’s friendship graph have often been employed to improve the quality of recommendation.
While there has been a proliferation of social-graph-assisted recommendation algorithms [1, 20–40],
few works were dedicated to developing theoretical insights on the usefulness of side information,
and therefore the maximum gain due to side information has been unknown. A few recent efforts
have been made from an information-theoretic perspective [41–44]. Ahn et al. [41] have identified
the maximum gain by characterizing the optimal sample complexity of matrix completion in the
presence of graph side information under a simple setting in which there are two clusters and users
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Changho Suh.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

