A/B Testing in Dense Large-Scale Networks: Design
and Inference
Preetam Nandy, Kinjal Basu, Shaunak Chatterjee, Ye Tu
LinkedIn Corporation
Mountain View, CA 94083
{ pnandy, kbasu, shchatte, ytu } @linkedin.com

Abstract
Design of experiments and estimation of treatment effects in large-scale networks,
in the presence of strong interference, is a challenging and important problem. Most
existing methods’ performance deteriorates as the density of the network increases.
In this paper, we present a novel strategy for accurately estimating the causal
effects of a class of treatments in a dense large-scale network. First, we design an
approximate randomized controlled experiment by solving an optimization problem
to allocate treatments in the presence of competition among neighboring nodes.
Then we apply an importance sampling adjustment to correct for any leftover bias
(from the approximation) in estimating average treatment effects. We provide
theoretical guarantees, verify robustness in a simulation study, and validate the
scalability and usefulness of our procedure in a real-world experiment on a large
social network.

1

Introduction

Measuring the effect of treatment variants is a fundamental problem in several fields of study
[2, 22, 14]. A/B testing is a commonly used method in the internet industry [18, 19, 25, 29] and
beyond, wherein randomized experiments are run with two or more such variants. Traditional
A/B testing depends on the key assumption that the effect of treatment on an experiment unit is
independent of the treatment allocation to other experiment units – commonly called “Stable Unit
Treatment Value Assumption” (SUTVA) [22]. However, in many important network settings, this
assumption is violated due to various forms of interference [3, 4, 13, 16, 17, 23, 26, 28].
We focus on one such class of problems – a marketplace of commodity producers and consumers. An
example is a social media platform, where the commodity is content, and the return utility is feedback.
Examples include Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, Twitter, etc. Other marketplace problems differ
primarily on the commodity and return utility in question. Rides are commodities in Uber and Lyft,
retail items are commodities in marketplaces like Amazon and eBay, and money is the common
return utility. Note that we do not make any assumptions on how the utility affects a producer’s
behavior (i.e., the incentive function).
In the marketplace setting, we define a treatment class represented by a modification of the edgelevel probability pij of showing a commodity of a producer i to a consumer j. This abstraction
represents a very general class of treatments since any redistribution or shift in producer and consumer
exposure can be expressed via the change in the edge-level probabilities. In content marketplaces, such
treatments can reshape the content creator’s exposure to their audience, whereas, in a transportation
marketplace, it can reshape the likelihood of specific drivers and riders being matched.
In such marketplace problems, SUTVA is violated because of interference from the network. For
instance, the effect of treatment on a producer (the experimental unit) is influenced by the allocation
and effect of the treatment on all potential consumers of that producer, which in turn depend on each
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

