Stateful Posted Pricing with Vanishing Regret via
Dynamic Deterministic Markov Decision Processes

Yuval Emek
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
yemek@technion.ac.il
Rad Niazadeh
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
Chicago, IL, United States
rad.niazadeh@chicagobooth.edu

Ron Lavi
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
ronlavi@ie.technion.ac.il
Yangguang Shi
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
shiyangguang@campus.technion.ac.il

Abstract
In this paper, a rather general online problem called dynamic resource allocation
with capacity constraints (DRACC) is introduced and studied in the realm of posted
price mechanisms. This problem subsumes several applications of stateful pricing,
including but not limited to posted prices for online job scheduling and matching
over a dynamic bipartite graph. As the existing online learning techniques do not
yield vanishing-regret mechanisms for this problem, we develop a novel online
learning framework defined over deterministic Markov decision processes with
dynamic state transition and reward functions. We then prove that if the Markov
decision process is guaranteed to admit an oracle that can simulate any given
policy from any initial state with bounded loss — a condition that is satisfied in the
DRACC problem — then the online learning problem can be solved with vanishing
regret. Our proof technique is based on a reduction to online learning with switching
cost, in which an online decision maker incurs an extra cost every time she switches
from one arm to another. We formally demonstrate this connection and further
show how DRACC can be used in our proposed applications of stateful pricing.

1

Introduction

Price posting is a common selling mechanism across various corners of e-commerce. Its applications
span from more traditional domains such as selling flight tickets on Delta’s website or selling products
on Amazon, to more emerging domains such as selling cloud services on AWS or pricing ride-shares
in Uber. The prevalence of price posting comes from its several important advantages: it is incentive
compatible, simple to grasp, and can easily fit in an online (or dynamic) environment where buyers
arrive sequentially over time. Therefore, online posted pricing mechanisms, also known as dynamic
pricing, have been studied quite extensively in computer science, operations research, and economics
(for a comprehensive survey, see [19]).
A very useful method for devising online posted prices is via vanishing-regret online learning
algorithms in an adversarial environment [12, 11, 23, 9, 10, 28]. Here, a sequence of buyers arrive,
each associated with her own valuation function that is assumed to be devised by a malicious
adversary, and the goal is to post a sequence of price vectors that perform almost as good as the best
fixed pricing policy in hindsight. Despite its success, a technical limitation of this method (shared
by the aforementioned papers) forces the often less natural assumption of unlimited item supply to
ensure that the selling platform is stateless. However, in many applications of online posted pricing,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

