Deep Reinforcement and InfoMax Learning
Bogdan Mazoure1⇤
McGill University, Mila

Rémi Tachet des Combes⇤
Microsoft Research Montréal

Philip Bachman
Microsoft Research Montréal

Thang Doan
McGill University, Mila

R Devon Hjelm
Microsoft Research Montréal
Université de Montréal, Mila

Abstract
We begin with the hypothesis that a model-free agent whose representations are
predictive of properties of future states (beyond expected rewards) will be more
capable of solving and adapting to new RL problems. To test that hypothesis,
we introduce an objective based on Deep InfoMax (DIM) which trains the agent
to predict the future by maximizing the mutual information between its internal
representation of successive timesteps. We test our approach in several synthetic
settings, where it successfully learns representations that are predictive of the future.
Finally, we augment C51, a strong RL baseline, with our temporal DIM objective
and demonstrate improved performance on a continual learning task and on the
recently introduced Procgen environment.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), model-based agents are characterized by their ability to predict
future states and rewards based on past states and actions [Sutton and Barto, 1998, Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018, Hafner et al., 2019a]. Model-based methods can be seen through the representation
learning [Goodfellow et al., 2017] lens as endowing the agent with internal representations that are
predictive of the future conditioned on its actions. This ultimately gives the agent means to plan – by
e.g. considering a distribution of possible future trajectories and picking the best course of action.
In contrast, model-free methods do not explicitly model the environment, and instead learn a policy
that maximizes reward or a function that estimates the optimal values of states and actions [Mnih
et al., 2015, Schulman et al., 2017, Pong et al., 2018]. They can use large amounts of training data
and excel in high-dimensional state and action spaces. However, this is mostly true for fixed reward
functions; despite success on many benchmarks, model-free agents typically generalize poorly when
the environment or reward function changes [Farebrother et al., 2018, Tachet des Combes et al., 2018]
and can have high sample complexity.
Viewing model-based agents from a representation learning perspective, a desired outcome is an agent
that understands the underlying generative factors of the environment that determine the observed
state/action sequences, leading to generalization to other environments built from the same generative
factors. In addition, learning a predictive model affords a richer learning signal than those provided
by reward alone, which could reduce sample complexity compared to model-free methods.
Our work is based on the hypothesis that a model-free agent whose representations are predictive of
properties of future states (beyond expected rewards) will be more capable of solving and adapting to
new RL problems and, in a way, incorporate aspects of model-based learning. To learn representations
⇤
Equal contribution. 1 Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Montréal. Correspondence to:
bogdan.mazoure@mail.mcgill.ca

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

