Intra Order-Preserving Functions for
Calibration of Multi-Class Neural Networks
Amir Rahimi∗
ANU, ACRV
amir.rahimi@anu.edu.au

Amirreza Shaban∗
Georgia Tech
ashaban@uw.edu

Richard Hartley
Google Research, ANU, ACRV
richard.hartley@anu.edu.au

Ching-An Cheng∗
Microsoft Research
chinganc@microsoft.com

Byron Boots
University of Washington
bboots@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Predicting calibrated confidence scores for multi-class deep networks is important
for avoiding rare but costly mistakes. A common approach is to learn a post-hoc
calibration function that transforms the output of the original network into calibrated confidence scores while maintaining the network’s accuracy. However,
previous post-hoc calibration techniques work only with simple calibration functions, potentially lacking sufficient representation to calibrate the complex function
landscape of deep networks. In this work, we aim to learn general post-hoc calibration functions that can preserve the top-k predictions of any deep network.
We call this family of functions intra order-preserving functions. We propose a
new neural network architecture that represents a class of intra order-preserving
functions by combining common neural network components. Additionally, we
introduce order-invariant and diagonal sub-families, which can act as regularization for better generalization when the training data size is small. We show the
effectiveness of the proposed method across a wide range of datasets and classifiers.
Our method outperforms state-of-the-art post-hoc calibration methods, namely
temperature scaling and Dirichlet calibration, in several evaluation metrics for the
task.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have demonstrated impressive accuracy in classification tasks, such as image
recognition [8, 28] and medical research [10, 3]. These exciting results have recently motivated
engineers to adopt deep networks as default components in building decision systems; for example,
a multi-class neural network can be treated as a probabilistic predictor and its softmax output can
provide the confidence scores of different actions for the downstream decision making pipeline [6,
2, 21]. While this is an intuitive idea, recent research has found that deep networks, despite being
accurate, can be overconfident in their predictions, exhibiting high calibration error [20, 7, 11]. In
other words, trusting the network’s output naively as confidence scores in system design could cause
undesired consequences: a serious issue for applications where mistakes are costly, such as medical
diagnosis and autonomous driving.
A promising approach to address the miscalibration is to augment a given network with a parameterized calibration function, such as extra learnable layers. This additional component is
tuned post-hoc using a held-out calibration dataset, so that the effective full network becomes calibrated [7, 14, 16, 15, 27, 35]. In contrast to usual deep learning, the calibration dataset here is typically
∗

Equal Contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

