Coresets for Robust Training of Neural Networks
against Noisy Labels

Baharan Mirzasoleiman
Department of Computer Science
University of California Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA
baharan@cs.ucla.edu

Kaidi Cao
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
kaidicao@cs.stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Modern neural networks have the capacity to overfit noisy labels frequently found
in real-world datasets. Although great progress has been made, existing techniques
are limited in providing theoretical guarantees for the performance of the neural
networks trained with noisy labels. Here we propose a novel approach with strong
theoretical guarantees for robust training of deep networks trained with noisy labels.
The key idea behind our method is to select weighted subsets (coresets) of clean
data points that provide an approximately low-rank Jacobian matrix. We then prove
that gradient descent applied to the subsets do not overfit the noisy labels. Our
extensive experiments corroborate our theory and demonstrate that deep networks
trained on our subsets achieve a significantly superior performance compared to
state-of-the art, e.g., 6% increase in accuracy on CIFAR-10 with 80% noisy labels,
and 7% increase in accuracy on mini Webvision1 .

1

Introduction

The success of deep neural networks relies heavily on the quality of training data, and in particular
accurate labels of the training examples. However, maintaining label quality becomes very expensive
for large datasets, and hence mislabeled data points are ubiquitous in large real-world datasets [21].
As deep neural networks have the capacity to essentially memorize any (even random) labeling of
the data [49], noisy labels have a drastic effect on the generalization performance of deep neural
networks. Therefore, it becomes crucial to develop methods with strong theoretical guarantees for
robust training of neural networks against noisy labels. Such guarantees become of the utmost
importance in safety-critical systems, such as aircraft, autonomous cars, and medical devices.
There has been a great empirical progress in robust training of neural networks against noisy labels.
Existing directions mainly focus on: estimating the noise transition matrix [13, 34], designing robust
loss functions [12, 42, 44, 52], correcting noisy labels [26, 36, 41], using explicit regularization
techniques [7, 50, 51], and selecting or reweighting training examples [9, 14, 17, 27, 37, 44]. In
general, estimating the noise transition matrix is challenging, correcting noisy labels is vulnerable
to overfitting, and designing robust loss functions or using explicit regularization cannot achieve
1

Code available at https://github.com/snap-stanford/crust.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

