Stage-wise Conservative Linear Bandits
Ahmadreza Moradipari, Christos Thrampoulidis, Mahnoosh Alizadeh
Department of Electrical and Computer Enginnering
University of California, Santa Barbara
ahmadreza_moradipari@ucsb.edu

Abstract
We study stage-wise conservative linear stochastic bandits: an instance of bandit
optimization, which accounts for (unknown) “safety constraints" that appear in
applications such as online advertising and medical trials. At each stage, the learner
must choose actions that not only maximize cumulative reward across the entire
time horizon, but further satisfy a linear baseline constraint that takes the form
of a lower bound on the instantaneous reward. For this problem, we present two
novel algorithms, stage-wise conservative linear Thompson Sampling (SCLTS)
and stage-wise conservative linear UCB (SCLUCB), that respect
the baseline
p
3/2
constraints
and
enjoy
probabilistic
regret
bounds
of
order
O(
T
log
T ) and
p
O( T log T ), respectively. Notably, the proposed algorithms can be adjusted with
only minor modifications to tackle different problem variations, such as, constraints
with bandit-feedback, or an unknown sequence of baseline rewards. We discuss
these and other improvements over the state-of-the art. For instance, compared to
existing solutions, we show that SCLTS plays
p the (non-optimal) baseline action
at most O(log T ) times (compared to O( T )). Finally, we make connections
to another studied form of “safety constraints" that takes the form of an upper
bound on the instantaneous reward. While this incurs additional complexity to
the learning process as the optimal action is not guaranteed to belong to the “safe
set” at each round, we show that SCLUCB can properly adjust in this setting via a
simple modification.

1

Introduction

With the growing range of applications of bandit algorithms for safety critical real-world systems,
the demand for safe learning is receiving increasing attention Tucker et al. (2020). In this paper, we
investigate the effect of stage-wise safety constraints on the linear stochastic bandit problem. Inspired
by the earlier work of Kazerouni et al. (2017); Wu et al. (2016), the type of safety constraint we
consider in this paper was first introduced by Khezeli and Bitar (2019). As with the classic linear
stochastic bandit problem, the learner wishes to choose a sequence of actions xt that maximize the
expected reward over the horizon. However, here the learner is also given a baseline policy that
suggests an action with a guaranteed level of expected reward at each stage of the algorithm. This
could be based on historical data, e.g., historical ad placement or medical treatment policies with
known success rates. The safety constraint imposed on the learner requires her to ensure that the
expected reward of her chosen action at every single round be no less than a predetermined fraction of
the expected reward of the action suggested by baseline policy. An example that might benefit from
the design of stage-wise conservative learning algorithms arises in recommender systems, where the
recommender might wish to avoid recommendations that are extremely disliked by the users at any
single round. Our proposed stage-wise conservative constraints ensure that at no round would the
recommendation system cause severe dissatisfaction for the user, and the reward of action employed
by the learning algorithm, if not better, should be close to that of baseline policy. Another example is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

