Cross-validation Confidence Intervals for Test Error
Pierre Bayle∗
Princeton University
pbayle@princeton.edu
Lucas Janson
Harvard University
ljanson@fas.harvard.edu

Alexandre Bayle∗
Harvard University
alexandre bayle@g.harvard.edu
Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research New England
lmackey@microsoft.com

Abstract
This work develops central limit theorems for cross-validation and consistent estimators of its asymptotic variance under weak stability conditions on the learning
algorithm. Together, these results provide practical, asymptotically-exact confidence intervals for k-fold test error and valid, powerful hypothesis tests of whether
one learning algorithm has smaller k-fold test error than another. These results are
also the first of their kind for the popular choice of leave-one-out cross-validation.
In our real-data experiments with diverse learning algorithms, the resulting intervals and tests outperform the most popular alternative methods from the literature.

1

Introduction

Cross-validation (CV) [49, 26] is a de facto standard for estimating the test error of a prediction
rule. By partitioning a dataset into k equal-sized validation sets, fitting a prediction rule with each
validation set held out, evaluating each prediction rule on its corresponding held-out set, and averaging the k error estimates, CV produces an unbiased estimate of the test error with lower variance
than a single train-validation split could provide. However, these properties alone are insufficient
for high-stakes applications in which the uncertainty of an error estimate impacts decision-making.
In predictive cancer prognosis and mortality prediction for instance, scientists and clinicians rely
on test error confidence intervals (CIs) based on CV and other repeated sample splitting estimators
to avoid spurious findings and improve reproducibility [42, 45]. Unfortunately, the CIs most often
used have no correctness guarantees and can be severely misleading [30]. The difficulty comes from
the dependence across the k averaged error estimates: if the estimates were independent, one could
derive an asymptotically-exact CI (i.e., a CI with coverage converging exactly to the target level)
for test error using a standard central limit theorem. However, the error estimates are seldom independent, due to the overlap amongst training sets and between different training and validation sets.
Thus, new tools are needed to develop valid, informative CIs based on CV.
The same uncertainty considerations are relevant when comparing two machine learning methods:
before selecting a prediction rule for deployment, one would like to be confident that its test error
is better than a baseline or an available alternative. The standard practice amongst both method
developers and consumers is to conduct a formal hypothesis test for a difference in test error between
two prediction rules [22, 38, 43, 13, 19]. Unfortunately, the most popular tests from the literature
like the cross-validated t-test [22], the repeated train-validation t-test [43], and the 5 × 2 CV test
[22] have no correctness guarantees and hence can produce misleading conclusions. The difficulty
parallels that of the confidence interval setting: standard tests assume independence and do not
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

