Geometric All-Way Boolean Tensor Decomposition
Changlin Wan1,2 , Wennan Chang1,2 , Tong Zhao3 , Sha Cao2 , Chi Zhang2
1
Purdue University, 2 Indiana University, 3 Amazon
{wan82,chang534}@purdue.edu, zhaoton@amazon.com, {shacao,czhang87}@iu.edu

Abstract
Boolean tensor has been broadly utilized in representing high dimensional logical
data collected on spatial, temporal and/or other relational domains. Boolean
Tensor Decomposition (BTD) factorizes a binary tensor into the Boolean sum of
multiple rank-1 tensors, which is an NP-hard problem. Existing BTD methods
have been limited by their high computational cost, in applications to large scale
or higher order tensors. In this work, we presented a computationally efficient
BTD algorithm, namely Geometric Expansion for all-order Tensor Factorization
(GETF), that sequentially identifies the rank-1 basis components for a tensor
from a geometric perspective. We conducted rigorous theoretical analysis on the
validity as well as algorithemic efficiency of GETF in decomposing all-order tensor.
Experiments on both synthetic and real-world data demonstrated that GETF has
significantly improved performance in reconstruction accuracy, extraction of latent
structures and it is an order of magnitude faster than other state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

A tensor is a multi-dimensional array that can effectively capture the complex multidimensional
features. A Boolean tensor is a tensor that assumes binary values endowed with the Boolean algebra.
Boolean tensor has been widely adopted in many fields, including knowledge graph, recommendation
system, spatial-temporal data etc [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Tensor decomposition is a powerful tool in extracting
meaningful latent structures in the data, for which the popular CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP)
decomposition is a generalization of the matrix singular value decomposition to tensor [6]. However,
these algorithms are not directly usable for Boolean tensors. In this study, we focus on Boolean tensor
decomposition (BTD) under similar framework to the CP decomposition.
As illustrated in Figure 1, BTD factorizes a binary tensor X as the Boolean sum of multiple rank
1 tensors. In cases when the error distribution of the tensor data is hard to model, BTD applied
to binarized data can retrieve more desirable patterns with better interpretation than regular tensor
decomposition [7, 8]. This is probably due to the robustness of logic representation of BTD. BTD is
an NP-hard problem [7]. Existing BTD methods suffer from low efficiency due to high space/time
complexity, and particularly, most BTD algorithms adopted a least square updating approach with
substantially high computational cost [9, 10]. This has hindered their application to either large scale
datasets, such as social network or genomics data, or tensors of high-order.
We proposed an efficient BTD algorithm motivated by the geometric underpinning of rank-1 tensor
bases, namely GETF (Geometric Expansion for all-order Tensor Factorization). To the best of
our knowledge, GETF is the first algorithm that can efficiently deal with all-order Boolean tensor
decomposition with an O(n) complexity, where n represents the total number of entries in a tensor.
Supported by rigorous theoretical analysis, GETF solves the BTD problem via sequentially identifying
the fibers that most likely coincides with a rank-1 tensor basis component. Our synthetic and realworld data based experiments validated the high accuracy of GETF and its drastically improved
efficiency compared with existing methods, in addition to its potential utilization on large scale
or high order data, such as complex relational or spatial-temporal data. The key contributions of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

