Self-supervised learning through the eyes of a child

A. Emin Orhanδ
Vaibhav V. Guptaδ
Brenden M. Lakeδ,ψ
δ
ψ
Center for Data Science, Department of Psychology
New York University
{eo41, vvg239, brenden}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Within months of birth, children develop meaningful expectations about the world
around them. How much of this early knowledge can be explained through generic
learning mechanisms applied to sensory data, and how much of it requires more
substantive innate inductive biases? Addressing this fundamental question in its full
generality is currently infeasible, but we can hope to make real progress in more
narrowly defined domains, such as the development of high-level visual categories,
thanks to improvements in data collecting technology and recent progress in deep
learning. In this paper, our goal is precisely to achieve such progress by utilizing
modern self-supervised deep learning methods and a recent longitudinal, egocentric
video dataset recorded from the perspective of three young children (Sullivan et
al., 2020). Our results demonstrate the emergence of powerful, high-level visual
representations from developmentally realistic natural videos using generic selfsupervised learning objectives.

1

Introduction

Experimental evidence suggests that even very young children have wide-ranging and sophisticated
knowledge about the world around them. For example, within the first few months of life, infants
show meaningful expectations about objects and agents (Spelke and Kinzler, 2007). Similarly, well
before learning to speak, infants can discriminate between many common categories; at 3-4 months,
infants can discriminate simple shapes (Bomba and Siqueland, 1983) and animal classes (Quinn et al.,
1993), preferring to look at exemplars from a novel class (e.g., bird) after observing exemplars from a
different class (dogs). Yet, the origin of this early knowledge is often unclear. How much of this early
knowledge can be learned by relatively generic learning architectures receiving sensory data through
the eyes of a developing child, and how much of it requires more substantive inductive biases?
This is, of course, a modern reformulation of the age-old nature vs. nurture question that is central
in psychology. Answering this question requires both a precise characterization of the sensory data
received by humans during development and determining what generic models can learn from this
data without assuming strong priors. Although addressing this question in its full generality would
require unprecedentedly large and rich datasets and hence still remains out of reach, we can hope to
make real progress in more narrowly defined domains, such as the development of visual categories,
thanks to new large-scale developmental datasets (Sullivan et al., 2020; Smith and Slone, 2017;
Bambach et al., 2018) and the recent progress in deep learning methods.
In this paper, our goal is precisely to achieve such progress by utilizing modern self-supervised deep
learning techniques (He et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020a) and a recent longitudinal egocentric dataset
of headcam videos (SAYCam) recorded from the perspective of three developing children (Sullivan
et al., 2020). The scale and longitudinal nature of this dataset allows us to train a large-scale model
“through the eyes” of individual developing children; in this case, based on ∼150-200 hours of video
sampled regularly from 6 months to 32 months of age. Our choice of self-supervised learning avoids
extra supervision that a child would not have access to; training only on data from individual children
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

