Conformal Symplectic and Relativistic Optimization

Guilherme França∗
UC Berkeley
Johns Hopkins

Jeremias Sulam
Johns Hopkins

Daniel P. Robinson
Lehigh

René Vidal
Johns Hopkins

Abstract
Arguably, the two most popular accelerated or momentum-based optimization
methods are Nesterov’s accelerated gradient and Polyaks’s heavy ball, both corresponding to different discretizations of a particular second order differential
equation with a friction term. Such connections with continuous-time dynamical
systems have been instrumental in demystifying acceleration phenomena in optimization. Here we study structure-preserving discretizations for a certain class
of dissipative (conformal) Hamiltonian systems, allowing us to analyze the symplectic structure of both Nesterov and heavy ball, besides providing several new
insights into these methods. Moreover, we propose a new algorithm based on
a dissipative relativistic system that normalizes the momentum and may result
in more stable/faster optimization. Importantly, such a method generalizes both
Nesterov and heavy ball, each being recovered as distinct limiting cases, and has
potential advantages at no additional cost.

1

Introduction

Gradient based optimization methods are ubiquitous in machine learning since they only require first
order information on the objective function. This makes them computationally efficient. However,
vanilla gradient descent can be slow. Alternatively, accelerated gradient methods, whose construction can be traced back to Polyak [1] and Nesterov [2], became popular due to their ability to achieve
best worst-case complexity bounds. The heavy ball method, also known as classical momentum
(CM) method, is given by
vk+1 = µvk − ∇f (xk ),

xk+1 = xk + vk+1 ,

(1)

where µ ∈ (0, 1) is the momentum factor,  > 0 is the learning rate, and f : Rn → R is the function
being minimized. Similarly, Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (NAG) can be found in the form
vk+1 = µvk − ∇f (xk + µvk ),

xk+1 = xk + vk+1 .

(2)

Both methods have a long history in optimization and machine learning [3]. They are also the basis
for the construction of other methods, such as adaptive ones that additionally include some gradient
normalization [4–7].
In discrete-time optimization the “acceleration phenomena” are considered counterintuitive. A
promising direction has been emerging in connection with continuous-time dynamical systems
[8–18] where many of these difficulties disappear or have an intuitive explanation. Since one is
free to discretize a continuous system in many different ways, it is only natural to ask which discretization strategies would be most suitable for optimization? Such a question is unlikely to have
a simple answer, and may be problem dependent. Unfortunately, typical discretizations are also
known to introduce spurious artifacts and do not reproduce the most important properties of the
continuous system [19]. Nevertheless, a special class of discretizations in the physics literature
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed: guifranca@gmail.com, guifranca@berkeley.edu

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

