Variance-Reduced Off-Policy TDC Learning:
Non-Asymptotic Convergence Analysis

Shaocong Ma
Department of ECE
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
s.ma@utah.edu

Yi Zhou
Department of ECE
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
yi.zhou@utah.edu

Shaofeng Zou
Department of EE
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
szou3@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Variance reduction techniques have been successfully applied to temporaldifference (TD) learning and help to improve the sample complexity in policy
evaluation. However, the existing work applied variance reduction to either the less
popular one time-scale TD algorithm or the two time-scale GTD algorithm but with
a finite number of i.i.d. samples, and both algorithms apply to only the on-policy
setting. In this work, we develop a variance reduction scheme for the two time-scale
TDC algorithm in the off-policy setting and analyze its non-asymptotic convergence
rate over both i.i.d. and Markovian samples. In the i.i.d. setting, our algorithm
3
achieves a sample complexity O(− 5 log −1 ) that is lower than the state-of-the-art
−1
−1
result O( log  ). In the Markovian setting, our algorithm achieves the stateof-the-art sample complexity O(−1 log −1 ) that is near-optimal. Experiments
demonstrate that the proposed variance-reduced TDC achieves a smaller asymptotic
convergence error than both the conventional TDC and the variance-reduced TD.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning applications, we often need to evaluate the value function of a target
policy by sampling the Markov decision process (MDP) generated by either the target policy (onpolicy) or a certain behavior policy (off-policy) [3, 9, 20, 24, 22, 27]. In the on-policy setting,
temporal-difference (TD) learning [23, 24] and Q-learning [9] algorithms have been developed with
convergence guarantee. However, in the more popular off-policy setting, these conventional policy
evaluation algorithms have been shown to possibly diverge under linear function approximation [2].
To address this issue, [18, 25, 26] developed a family of gradient-based TD (GTD) algorithms that
have convergence guarantee in the off-policy setting. In particular, the TD with gradient correction
(TDC) algorithm has been shown to have superior performance and is widely used in practice.
Although TD-type algorithms achieve a great success in policy evaluation, their convergence suffer
from a large variance caused by the stochastic samples obtained from a dynamic environment.
A conventional approach that addresses this issue is to use a diminishing stepsize [4, 21], but it
significantly slows down the convergence in practice. Recently, several work proposed to apply
the variance reduction technique developed in the stochastic optimization literature to reduce the
variance of TD learning. Specifically, [11] considered a convex-concave TD learning problem
with a finite number of i.i.d. samples, and they applied the SVRG [12] and SAGA [10] variance
reduction techniques to develop variance-reduced primal-dual batch gradient algorithms for solving
the problem. In [19], two variants of SVRG-based GTD2 algorithms for i.i.d. samples were proposed
to save the computation cost. While these work developed variance-reduced TD-type algorithms
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

