Wavelet Flow: Fast Training of High Resolution
Normalizing Flows

1

Jason J. Yu1,3 , Konstantinos G. Derpanis2,4,5 and Marcus A. Brubaker1,3,5
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, York University, Toronto
2
Department of Computer Science, Ryerson University, Toronto
3
Borealis AI, 4 Samsung AI Centre Toronto, 5 Vector Institute
jjyu@eecs.yorku.ca kosta@cs.ryerson.ca mab@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
Normalizing flows are a class of probabilistic generative models which allow for
both fast density computation and efficient sampling and are effective at modelling
complex distributions like images. A drawback among current methods is their
significant training cost, sometimes requiring months of GPU training time to
achieve state-of-the-art results. This paper introduces Wavelet Flow, a multi-scale,
normalizing flow architecture based on wavelets. A Wavelet Flow has an explicit
representation of signal scale that inherently includes models of lower resolution
signals and conditional generation of higher resolution signals, i.e., super resolution.
A major advantage of Wavelet Flow is the ability to construct generative models for
high resolution data (e.g., 1024 × 1024 images) that are impractical with previous
models. Furthermore, Wavelet Flow is competitive with previous normalizing
flows in terms of bits per dimension on standard (low resolution) benchmarks while
being up to 15× faster to train.

1

Introduction

Here we introduce Wavelet Flow, a multi-scale, conditional normalizing flow architecture based on
wavelets. Wavelet Flows are not only fast when sampling and computing probability density, but are
also efficient to train even with high resolution data. Further, the model has an explicit, wavelet-based,
representation of scale which, among other benefits, includes consistent models of low resolution
signals and conditional generation of higher resolutions. Wavelet Flow is applicable to any suitably
structured data domain including audio, images, videos, and 3D scans. Our experiments focus on
images as they are the most widely considered domain. The results demonstrate that Wavelet Flow is
competitive with state-of-the-art normalizing flows on (typically low resolution) standard benchmarks
while being significantly more efficient to train, e.g., up to 15 times more in some cases. Further, we
introduce the first normalizing flow model trained on high resolution images, i.e., 1024 × 1024.
Normalizing flows are a class of probabilistic generative models which enable fast density computation
and efficient sampling [9, 10, 26, 35]. They have also been shown to be effective at modelling complex
distributions like images [24]. However, current approaches come with a significant computational
cost, typically requiring months of GPU training time to achieve state-of-the-art results. This is
partly driven by the requirement that normalizing flows be invertible and preserve dimensionality.
Dinh et al. [10] identified this challenge and introduced a form of multi-scale flow which uses an
identity transform on increasing subsets of dimensions to reduce computation. As an addition to this
multi-scale flow, Ardizzone et al. [2] further proposed using a Haar wavelet transform for reshaping
and reducing spatial resolution within a normalizing flow. In either case, the structure progressively
limits the complexity of the transformation in certain dimensions but neither exposes nor exploits the
natural scale structure in the signal itself. In contrast, Wavelet Flow uses a wavelet transformation
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

