Learning to Execute Programs with
Instruction Pointer Attention Graph Neural Networks

David Bieber
Google
dbieber@google.com

Charles Sutton
Google
charlessutton@google.com

Hugo Larochelle
Google
hugolarochelle@google.com

Daniel Tarlow
Google
dtarlow@google.com

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for learning
software engineering tasks including code completion, bug finding, and program
repair. They benefit from leveraging program structure like control flow graphs,
but they are not well-suited to tasks like program execution that require far more
sequential reasoning steps than number of GNN propagation steps. Recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), on the other hand, are well-suited to long sequential
chains of reasoning, but they do not naturally incorporate program structure and
generally perform worse on the above tasks. Our aim is to achieve the best of both
worlds, and we do so by introducing a novel GNN architecture, the Instruction
Pointer Attention Graph Neural Network (IPA-GNN), which achieves improved
systematic generalization on the task of learning to execute programs using control
flow graphs. The model arises by considering RNNs operating on program traces
with branch decisions as latent variables. The IPA-GNN can be seen either as a
continuous relaxation of the RNN model or as a GNN variant more tailored to
execution. To test the models, we propose evaluating systematic generalization on
learning to execute using control flow graphs, which tests sequential reasoning and
use of program structure. More practically, we evaluate these models on the task of
learning to execute partial programs, as might arise if using the model as a heuristic
function in program synthesis. Results show that the IPA-GNN outperforms a
variety of RNN and GNN baselines on both tasks.

1

Introduction

Static analysis methods underpin thousands of programming tools from compilers and debuggers to
IDE extensions, offering productivity boosts to software engineers at every stage of development.
Recently machine learning has broadened the capabilities of static analysis, offering progress on
challenging problems like code completion [5], bug finding [2, 13], and program repair [25]. Graph
neural networks in particular have emerged as a powerful tool for these tasks due to their suitability
for learning from program structures such as parse trees, control flow graphs, and data flow graphs.
These successes motivate further study of neural network models for static analysis tasks. However,
existing techniques are not well suited for tasks that involve reasoning about program execution.
Recurrent neural networks are well suited for sequential reasoning, but provide no mechanism for
learning about complex program structures. Graph neural networks generally leverage local program
structure to complete static analysis tasks. For tasks requiring reasoning about program execution,
we expect the best models will come from a study of both RNN and GNN architectures. We design
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

