When and How to Lift the Lockdown?
Global COVID-19 Scenario Analysis and Policy
Assessment using Compartmental Gaussian Processes

Zhaozhi Qian∗
University of Cambridge

Ahmed M. Alaa∗
UCLA

zhaozhi.qian@maths.cam.ac.uk

ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge, UCLA, The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) global pandemic has led many countries
to impose unprecedented lockdown measures in order to slow down the outbreak.
Questions on whether governments have acted promptly enough, and whether lockdown measures can be lifted soon, have since been central in public discourse. Datadriven models that predict COVID-19 fatalities under different lockdown policy scenarios are essential for addressing these questions and informing governments on future policy directions. To this end, this paper develops a Bayesian model for predicting the effects of COVID-19 lockdown policies in a global context — we treat each
country as a distinct data point, and exploit variations of policies across countries
to learn country-specific policy effects. Our model utilizes a two-layer Gaussian
process (GP) prior — the lower layer uses a compartmental SEIR (Susceptible,
Exposed, Infected, Recovered) model as a prior mean function with “country-andpolicy-specific” parameters that capture fatality curves under “counterfactual” policies within each country, whereas the upper layer is shared across all countries,
and learns lower-layer SEIR parameters as a function of a country’s features and its
policy indicators. Our model combines the solid mechanistic foundations of SEIR
models (Bayesian priors) with the flexible data-driven modeling and gradient-based
optimization routines of machine learning (Bayesian posteriors) — i.e., the entire
model is trained end-to-end via stochastic variational inference. We compare the
projections of COVID-19 fatalities in our model with other models listed by the
Center for Disease Control (CDC), and provide scenario analyses for various lockdown and reopening strategies highlighting their impact on COVID-19 fatalities.2

1

Introduction

The ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) global pandemic poses immense threats not only
to public health, but also to the stability of healthcare infrastructures and economies around the world.
In an attempt to slow down the outbreak, many countries have imposed unprecedented lockdown
and social distancing measures that have eventually proven to be effective in downscaling the
volume of COVID-19 fatalities [1, 2, 3] — however, the instigation of such measures gave rise
to various “What if?” questions that have become central to public discourse, e.g., what the number
∗

Equal contribution.
Source code: https://github.com/ZhaozhiQIAN/Compartmental-GP-NeurIPS-2020
or https://bitbucket.org/mvdschaar/mlforhealthlabpub/src/master/.
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

