Top-KAST: Top-K Always Sparse Training
Siddhant M. Jayakumar
DeepMind
University College London

Razvan Pascanu
DeepMind
University College London

Simon Osindero
DeepMind

Jack W. Rae
DeepMind

Erich Elsen
DeepMind

Abstract
Sparse neural networks are becoming increasingly important as the field seeks to improve the performance of existing models by scaling them up, while simultaneously
trying to reduce power consumption and computational footprint. Unfortunately,
most existing methods for inducing performant sparse models still entail the instantiation of dense parameters, or dense gradients in the backward-pass, during
training. For very large models this requirement can be prohibitive. In this work
we propose Top-KAST, a method that preserves constant sparsity throughout training (in both the forward and backward-passes). We demonstrate the efficacy of
our approach by showing that it performs comparably to or better than previous
works when training models on the established ImageNet benchmark, whilst fully
maintaining sparsity. In addition to our ImageNet results, we also demonstrate our
approach in the domain of language modeling where the current best performing
architectures tend to have tens of billions of parameters and scaling up does not yet
seem to have saturated performance. Sparse versions of these architectures can be
run with significantly fewer resources, making them more widely accessible and
applicable. Furthermore, in addition to being effective, our approach is straightforward and can easily be implemented in a wide range of existing machine learning
frameworks with only a few additional lines of code. We therefore hope that our
contribution will help enable the broader community to explore the potential held
by massive models, without incurring massive computational cost.

1

Introduction

The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis [9] has spurred interest in training sparse neural networks [44], as
it highlights a prior exciting result – that only a small subset of weights of a converged model are
sufficient to represent the learnt function to high accuracy [14, 40, 29, 17, 36]. Perhaps even more
exciting is the finding of Kalchbrenner et al. [17] that large sparse models outperform smaller dense
models for a fixed parameter and floating point operation (FLOP) budget.
However, while encouraging, the primary method of finding such sparse subsets involves training a
dense model. While there is a plethora of works proposing increasingly efficient ways to prune dense
networks for sparse inference (dense-to-sparse training) [45, 27, 5], the field has only more recently
begun to look at approaches that start training at the desired sparsity (sparse-to-sparse training)
[26, 3, 28, 7].
Additionally, a high performance and scalable sparse-to-sparse approach would considerably benefit
the democratisation of deep learning, as state-of-the-art models are ever increasing in size [34, 18, 39].
This increasingly leads to situations wherein state-of-the-art models require large clusters to train
which most researchers would have limited access to. The large compute footprints and energy
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

