Fine-Grained Dynamic Head for Object Detection

Lin Song1 Yanwei Li2 Zhengkai Jiang3 Zeming Li4
Hongbin Sun1∗ Jian Sun4 Nanning Zheng1
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Megvii Inc. (Face++)
stevengrove@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, ywli@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jiangzhengkai2017@ia.ac.cn,
{hsun, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {lizeming, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
The Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) presents a remarkable approach to alleviate
the scale variance in object representation by performing instance-level assignments. Nevertheless, this strategy ignores the distinct characteristics of different
sub-regions in an instance. To this end, we propose a fine-grained dynamic head
to conditionally select a pixel-level combination of FPN features from different
scales for each instance, which further releases the ability of multi-scale feature
representation. Moreover, we design a spatial gate with the new activation function
to reduce computational complexity dramatically through spatially sparse convolutions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the proposed method on several state-of-the-art detection benchmarks. Code is
available at https://github.com/StevenGrove/DynamicHead.

1

Introduction

Locating and recognizing objects is a fundamental challenge in the computer vision domain. One of
the difficulties comes from the scale variance among objects. In recent years, tremendous progress
has been achieved on designing architectures to alleviate the scale variance in object representation.
A remarkable approach is the pyramid feature representation, which is commonly adopted by several
state-of-the-art object detectors [1–5].
Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) [6] is one of the most classic architectures to establish pyramid
network for object representation. It assigns instances to different pyramid levels according to the
object sizes. The allocated objects are then handled and represented in separate pyramid levels
with corresponding feature resolutions. Recently, numerous methods have been developed for better
pyramid representations, including human-designed architectures (e.g., PANet [7], FPG [8]) and
searched connection patterns (e.g., NAS-FPN [9], Auto-FPN [10]). The above-mentioned works
lay more emphasis on instance-level coarse-grained assignments and considering each instance
as a whole indivisible region. However, this strategy ignores the distinct characteristic of the finegrained sub-regions in an instance, which is demonstrated to improve the semantic representation of
objects [11–18]. Moreover, the conventional head [2, 3, 19–22] for FPN encodes each instance in a
single resolution stage only, which could ignore the small but representative regions, e.g., the hands
of the person in Fig. 1(a).
In this paper, we propose a conceptually novel method for fine-grained object representation, called
fine-grained dynamic head. Different from the conventional head for FPN, whose prediction only
associates with the single-scale FPN feature, the proposed method dynamically allocates pixel-level
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

