Learning Sparse Prototypes for Text Generation

†

Junxian He† , Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick‡ , Graham Neubig†
Carnegie Mellon University; ‡ University of California San Diego
{junxianh,gneubig}@cs.cmu.edu, tberg@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Prototype-driven text generation uses non-parametric models that first choose from
a library of sentence “prototypes” and then modify the prototype to generate the
output text. While effective, these methods are inefficient at test time as a result
of needing to store and index the entire training corpus. Further, existing methods
often require heuristics to identify which prototypes to reference at training time.
In this paper, we propose a novel generative model that automatically learns a
sparse prototype support set that, nonetheless, achieves strong language modeling
performance. This is achieved by (1) imposing a sparsity-inducing prior on the
prototype selection distribution, and (2) utilizing amortized variational inference
to learn a prototype retrieval function. In experiments, our model outperforms
previous prototype-driven language models while achieving up to a 1000x memory
reduction, as well as a 1000x speed-up at test time. More interestingly, we show
that the learned prototypes are able to capture semantics and syntax at different
granularity as we vary the sparsity of prototype selection, and that certain sentence
attributes can be controlled by specifying the prototype for generation.1

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs) predict a probability distribution over text, and are a fundamental technology
widely studied in the natural language processing (NLP) community (Bengio et al., 2003; Merity
et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2019). Modern LMs are almost exclusively based on parametric recurrent
(Mikolov et al., 2010; Sundermeyer et al., 2012) or self-attentional (Vaswani et al., 2017; Al-Rfou
et al., 2019) neural networks. These models are of interest scientifically as one of the purest tests of
our ability to capture the intricacies of human language mathematically (Linzen et al., 2016; Kuncoro
et al., 2017; Petroni et al., 2019). They also have broad downstream applications in generating text in
systems such as machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015), summarization (Rush et al., 2015), or
dialog generation (Sordoni et al., 2015), as well as in the unsupervised representation learners that
now power many applications in NLP (Devlin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019).
However, there has been a recent move towards non-parametric neural LMs (Guu et al., 2018;
Khandelwal et al., 2020b) that generate sentences by first selecting examples from an external
datastore. For instance, Khandelwal et al. (2020b) model the token-level probability at test time
by interpolating the language model with a kNN distribution from the nearest context-token pairs
in the datastore, while Guu et al. (2018) store external memories on sentence level and feature a
prototype-then-edit process of (1) selecting a prototype sentence from a the prototype datastore, and
(2) editing this prototype to the final desired output. In this paper, we focus on the prototype-then-edit
model family which is a lot lighter relatively in terms of memory and time cost at test time.
Intuitively, these non-parametric LMs are attractive because they help remove some of the pressure
on the parametric model to memorize the entirety of the language it must model. These intuitive
advantages are also borne out in superior performance on language modeling tasks (Guu et al.,
1

Code is available at https://github.com/jxhe/sparse-text-prototype.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

