Privacy Amplification via Random Check-Ins

Borja Balle∗

Peter Kairouz†

H. Brendan McMahan†

Om Thakkar†

Abhradeep Thakurta†

Abstract
Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD) forms a fundamental building block in many applications for learning over sensitive data. Two standard approaches, privacy amplification by subsampling, and privacy amplification
by shuffling, permit adding lower noise in DP-SGD than via naı̈ve schemes. A
key assumption in both these approaches is that the elements in the data set can
be uniformly sampled, or be uniformly permuted — constraints that may become
prohibitive when the data is processed in a decentralized or distributed fashion.
In this paper, we focus on conducting iterative methods like DP-SGD in the setting of federated learning (FL) wherein the data is distributed among many devices (clients). Our main contribution is the random check-in distributed protocol,
which crucially relies only on randomized participation decisions made locally
and independently by each client. It has privacy/accuracy trade-offs similar to
privacy amplification by subsampling/shuffling. However, our method does not
require server-initiated communication, or even knowledge of the population size.
To our knowledge, this is the first privacy amplification tailored for a distributed
learning framework, and it may have broader applicability beyond FL. Along the
way, we improve the privacy guarantees of amplification by shuffling and show
that, in practical regimes, this improvement allows for similar privacy and utility
using data from an order of magnitude fewer users.

1

Introduction

Modern mobile devices and web services benefit significantly from large-scale machine learning,
often involving training on user (client) data. When such data is sensitive, steps must be taken to
ensure privacy, and a formal guarantee of differential privacy (DP) [16, 15] is the gold standard.
For this reason, DP has been adopted by companies including Google [20, 10, 18], Apple [2], Microsoft [13], and LinkedIn [31], as well as the US Census Bureau [26].
Other privacy-enhancing techniques can be combined with DP to obtain additional benefits. In particular, cross-device federated learning (FL) [27] allows model training while keeping client data
decentralized (each participating device keeps its own local dataset, and only sends model updates
or gradients to the coordinating server). However, existing approaches to combining FL and DP
make a number of assumptions that are unrealistic in real-world FL deployments such as [11]. To
highlight these challenges, we must first review the state-of-the-art in centralized DP training, where
differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) [33, 9, 1] is ubiquitous. It achieves optimal error for convex problems [9], and can also be applied to non-convex problems, including deep
learning, where the privacy amplification offered by randomly subsampling data to form batches is
critical for obtaining meaningful DP guarantees under computational constraints [25, 9, 1, 5, 35].
∗
†

DeepMind. borja.balle@gmail.com
Google. {kairouz, mcmahan, omthkkr, athakurta}@google.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

