An efficient nonconvex reformulation of stagewise
convex optimization problems

Rudy Bunel∗
DeepMind
rbunel@google.com

Oliver Hinder∗
Google Research, University of Pittsburgh
ohinder@pitt.edu

Srinadh Bhojanapalli
Google Research
bsrinadh@google.com

Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham
DeepMind
dvij@google.com

Abstract
Convex optimization problems with staged structure appear in several contexts,
including optimal control, verification of deep neural networks, and isotonic regression. Off-the-shelf solvers can solve these problems but may scale poorly.
We develop a nonconvex reformulation designed to exploit this staged structure.
Our reformulation has only simple bound constraints, enabling solution via projected gradient methods and their accelerated variants. The method automatically
generates a sequence of primal and dual feasible solutions to the original convex
problem, making optimality certification easy. We establish theoretical properties
of the nonconvex formulation, showing that it is (almost) free of spurious local
minima and has the same global optimum as the convex problem. We modify PGD
to avoid spurious local minimizers so it always converges to the global minimizer.
For neural network verification, our approach obtains small duality gaps in only
a few gradient steps. Consequently, it can quickly solve large-scale verification
problems faster than both off-the-shelf and specialized solvers.

1

Introduction

This paper studies efficient algorithms for a particular class of stage-wise optimization problems:
minimize f (s, z)

(1a)

(s,z)∈S×Rn

s.t. µi (s, z1:i−1 ) ≤ zi ≤ ηi (s, z1:i−1 )

∀i ∈ {1, . . . , n} (1b)

where n and m are positive integers, S ⊆ R , the function f has domain S × Rn and range R, the
functions µi and ηi have domain S × Ri−1 and range R. Given a vector z, we use the notation z1:i
to denote the vector [z1 , . . . , zi ]. We let z1:0 be a vector of length zero. Throughout the paper we
assume that η1 , . . . , ηn are proper concave functions, f , µ1 , . . . , µn are proper convex functions, and
S is a nonempty convex set.
m

Problems that fall into this problem class are ubiquitous. They appear in optimal control [1], finite
horizon Markov decision processes with cost function controlled by an adversary [2], generalized
Isotonic regression [3, 4], and verification of neural networks [5–7]. Details explaining how these
problems can be written in the form of (1) are given in Appendix A. Here we briefly outline how
neural network verification falls into (1b). Letting s represent the input image and z the activation
values, neural networks verification can be written (unconventionally) as
minimize f (s, z) s.t. zi = σ([s, z1:i−1 ] · wi ),

(s,z)∈S×Rn

∗
Equal contribution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

