A Statistical Mechanics Framework for
Task-Agnostic Sample Design in Machine Learning
Bhavya Kailkhura1 , Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan1 , Qunwei Li 2 , Jize Zhang1 ,
Yi Zhou3 , Peer-Timo Bremer1
1
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 2 Ant Financial, 3 The University of Utah
{kailkhura1,jjayaram,zhang64,bremer5}@llnl.gov,qunwei.qw@antfin.com,yi.zhou@utah.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present a statistical mechanics framework to understand the effect
of sampling properties of training data on the generalization gap of machine learning (ML) algorithms. We connect the generalization gap to the spatial properties
of a sample design characterized by the pair correlation function (PCF). In particular, we express generalization gap in terms of the power spectra of the sample
design and that of the function to be learned. Using this framework, we show
that space-filling sample designs, such as blue noise and Poisson disk sampling,
which optimize spectral properties, outperform random designs in terms of the
generalization gap and characterize this gain in a closed-form. Our analysis also
sheds light on design principles for constructing optimal task-agnostic sample
designs that minimize the generalization gap. We corroborate our findings using
regression experiments with neural networks on: a) synthetic functions, and b) a
complex scientific simulator for inertial confinement fusion (ICF).

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) techniques have led to incredible advances in a wide variety of commercial
applications, and similar approaches are rapidly being adopted in several scientific and engineering
problems. Traditionally, ML research has focused on developing modeling techniques and training
algorithms to learn generalizable models from historic labeled data (i.e., a known set of inputs and
their corresponding responses). However, in several applications, we encounter a key challenge
even before building the model – determining the input samples for which the responses should be
collected (referred to as task-agnostic sample design problem). This is particularly true for emerging
applications in physical sciences and engineering where curated datasets are not available a priori
and data acquisition involves time-consuming computational simulations or expensive real-world
experiments. For example, in inertial confinement fusion (ICF) [2], one needs to build a high-fidelity
mapping from the process inputs, say target and laser settings, to process outputs, such as ICF
implosion neutron yield and X-ray diagnostics. In such scenarios, the properties of collected data
directly control the generalization error of ML models. However, determining the right samples to
use for model training hinges on understanding the intricate interplay between sampling properties
and the ML generalization error. Unfortunately, our theoretical understanding is very limited in this
regard, and hence existing sample design approaches rely upon a variety of heuristics, e.g., generating
so called space-filling sample designs [15] to cover the input space as uniformly as possible.
Most existing theoretical frameworks only study the generalization properties of random i.i.d. designs or other simple probabilistic variants. Intuitively, this assumption ignores the dependency
of generalization gap on data properties except the sample size (data-independent bounds). While
some efforts exist to obtain data-dependent bounds, they still focus on studying model design related
questions while ignoring sample design aspects. To the best of our knowledge, there does not exist
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

