Random Reshuffling: Simple Analysis
with Vast Improvements
Konstantin Mishchenko
KAUST
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Ahmed Khaled
Cairo University
Giza, Egypt

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Random Reshuffling (RR) is an algorithm for minimizing finite-sum functions that
utilizes iterative gradient descent steps in conjunction with data reshuffling. Often
contrasted with its sibling Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), RR is usually faster
in practice and enjoys significant popularity in convex and non-convex optimization.
The convergence rate of RR has attracted substantial attention recently and, for
strongly convex and smooth functions, it was shown to converge faster than SGD if
1) the stepsize is small, 2) the gradients are bounded, and 3) the number of epochs
is large. We remove these 3 assumptions,
√improve the dependence on the condition
number from κ2 to κ (resp. from κ to κ) and, in addition, show that RR has a
different type of variance. We argue through theory and experiments that the new
variance type gives an additional justification of the superior performance of RR.
To go beyond strong convexity, we present several results for non-strongly convex
and non-convex objectives. We show that in all cases, our theory improves upon
existing literature. Finally, we prove fast convergence of the Shuffle-Once (SO)
algorithm, which shuffles the data only once, at the beginning of the optimization
process. Our theory for strongly convex objectives tightly matches the known lower
bounds for both RR and SO and substantiates the common practical heuristic of
shuffling once or only a few times. As a byproduct of our analysis, we also get new
results for the Incremental Gradient algorithm (IG), which does not shuffle the data
at all.

1

Introduction

We study the finite-sum minimization problem
h
i
n
P
minx∈Rd f (x) = n1
fi (x) ,

(1)

i=1

where each fi : Rd → R is differentiable and smooth, and are particularly interested in the big data
machine learning setting where the number of functions n is large. Thanks to their scalability and
low memory requirements, first-order methods are especially popular in this setting (Bottou et al.,
2018). Stochastic first-order algorithms in particular have attracted a lot of attention in the machine
learning community and are often used in combination with various practical heuristics. Explaining
these heuristics may lead to further development of stable and efficient training algorithms. In this
work, we aim at better and sharper theoretical explanation of one intriguingly simple but notoriously
elusive heuristic: data permutation/shuffling.
1.1

Data permutation

In particular, the goal of our paper is to obtain deeper theoretical understanding of methods for
solving (1) which rely on random or deterministic permutation/shuffling of the data {1, 2, . . . , n} and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

