Lightweight Generative Adversarial Networks for
Text-Guided Image Manipulation

Bowen Li1 , Xiaojuan Qi2 , Philip H. S. Torr1 , Thomas Lukasiewicz1
1
University of Oxford, 2 University of Hong Kong
{bowen.li, thomas.lukasiewicz}@cs.ox.ac.uk
xjqi@eee.hku.hk, philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel lightweight generative adversarial network for efficient image
manipulation using natural language descriptions. To achieve this, a new word-level
discriminator is proposed, which provides the generator with fine-grained training
feedback at word-level, to facilitate training a lightweight generator that has a small
number of parameters, but can still correctly focus on specific visual attributes of an
image, and then edit them without affecting other contents that are not described in
the text. Furthermore, thanks to the explicit training signal related to each word, the
discriminator can also be simplified to have a lightweight structure. Compared with
the state of the art, our method has a much smaller number of parameters, but still
achieves a competitive manipulation performance. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that our method can better disentangle different visual attributes, then
correctly map them to corresponding semantic words, and thus achieve a more
accurate image modification using natural language descriptions.

1

Introduction

How to effectively edit a given image without tedious human operation is a challenging but meaningful task, which may potentially boost enormous applications in different areas, such as design,
architecture, video games, and art. Recently, with the great progress on the development of deep
learning, various applications in terms of image manipulation have been developed, including style
transfer [5, 6, 9, 11], image colourisation [2, 13, 32], and image translation [3, 10, 20, 21, 26, 28].
Differently from above works, the goal of this paper is to provide a more user-friendly method, which
can automatically edit a given image by simply using natural language descriptions. In particular,
we aim to semantically modify parts of an image (e.g., colour, texture, and global style) according
to user-provided text descriptions, where the descriptions contain desired visual attributes that the
modified image should have. Meanwhile, the modified result should preserve text-irrelevant contents
of the original image that are not required by the text.
Currently, only few studies [4, 15, 19] work on this task. Methods introduced in [4, 19] both fail
to effectively modify text-required attributes, and results are also far from satisfactory (see Fig. 1).
Recently, Li et al. [15] proposed a new multi-stage network, which is able to produce more realistic
images. However, as the model [15] is based on a multi-stage framework with multiple pairs of
generator and discriminator, it very likely requires a large memory and needs a lot of time for training
and inference, which is less practical to memory-limited devices, such as mobile phones.
This motivates us to investigate a lightweight architecture of the network. However, simply reducing
the number of stages and parameters in the model [15] cannot achieve a satisfactory result, shown in
Fig. 1 (e). As we can see, compared with the original ManiGAN (d), the image quality of synthetic
results drops significantly as both images are obviously blurred. Also, the manipulation ability of this
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

