Graph Policy Network for Transferable
Active Learning on Graphs
Shengding Hu1 , Zheng Xiong1 , Meng Qu2,5 , Xingdi Yuan3 , Marc-Alexandre Côté3 , Zhiyuan
Liu1 , and Jian Tang2,4,6
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Mila-Quebec AI Institute, 3 Microsoft Research
HEC Montreal, Canada, 5 Université de Montréal, 6 CIFAR AI Research Chair
hsd20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xiongz17@tsinghua.org.cn, meng.qu@umontreal.ca,
{eric.yuan,macote}@microsoft.com, liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn, jian.tang@hec.ca
4

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been attracting increasing popularity due to
their simplicity and effectiveness in a variety of fields. However, a large number
of labeled data is generally required to train these networks, which could be very
expensive to obtain in some domains. In this paper, we study active learning for
GNNs, i.e., how to efficiently label the nodes on a graph to reduce the annotation
cost of training GNNs. We formulate the problem as a sequential decision process
on graphs and train a GNN-based policy network with reinforcement learning
to learn the optimal query strategy. By jointly training on several source graphs
with full labels, we learn a transferable active learning policy which can directly
generalize to unlabeled target graphs. Experimental results on multiple datasets
from different domains prove the effectiveness of the learned policy in promoting
active learning performance in both settings of transferring between graphs in the
same domain and across different domains.

1

Introduction

Graphs encode the relations between different objects and are ubiquitous in real world. Learning
effective representation of graphs is critical to a variety of applications. Recently, graph neural
networks (GNNs) have been attracting growing attention for their effectiveness in graph representation
learning [30, 33]. They have achieved great success on various tasks such as node classification
[15, 27] and link prediction [4, 32]. Despite their appealing performance, GNNs typically require a
large amount of labeled data for training [29]. However, in many domains, such as chemistry [11] and
health care [6], it could be very expensive and time-consuming to collect a large amount of labeled
data, which significantly limits the performance of GNNs in these domains.
Active learning [1, 22, 25] is a promising strategy to tackle this challenge. The general idea of
active learning is to dynamically query the labels of the most informative instances selected from the
unlabeled data. Although active learning has been proven effective on independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) data such as natural language processing [24] and computer vision [9], how to
apply it to graph-structured data with dense interconnections between different instances remains
under-explored. This motivates us to study active learning on graphs, i.e., how to efficiently label the
nodes on a graph to reduce the annotation cost of training GNNs.
Towards this goal, several methods have been proposed recently [8, 13, 12, 3, 10, 5]. To measure
the informativeness of each node, they either design a single selection criterion based on the graph
characteristics, or adaptively combine several selection criteria. Then the most "informative" node is
labeled at each query step according to the selection criterion. However, these methods suffer from
the following limitations. (1) Ignoring Long-term Performance: Existing methods usually adopt
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

