Multiparameter Persistence Images for Topological
Machine Learning

Mathieu Carrière
DataShape
Inria Sophia-Antipolis
Biot, France
mathieu.carriere@inria.fr

Andrew J. Blumberg
Department of Mathematics
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
blumberg@math.utexas.edu

Abstract
In the last decade, there has been increasing interest in topological data analysis, a
new methodology for using geometric structures in data for inference and learning.
A central theme in the area is the idea of persistence, which in its most basic form
studies how measures of shape change as a scale parameter varies. There are now a
number of frameworks that support statistics and machine learning in this context.
However, in many applications there are several different parameters one might
wish to vary: for example, scale and density. In contrast to the one-parameter
setting, techniques for applying statistics and machine learning in the setting of
multiparameter persistence are not well understood due to the lack of a concise
representation of the results.
We introduce a new descriptor for multiparameter persistence, which we call
the Multiparameter Persistence Image, that is suitable for machine learning and
statistical frameworks, is robust to perturbations in the data, has finer resolution
than existing descriptors based on slicing, and can be efficiently computed on
data sets of realistic size. Moreover, we demonstrate its efficacy by comparing its
performance to other multiparameter descriptors on several classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Topological data analysis (TDA) is a new and rapidly evolving branch of computer science and
statistics that provides tools to analyze geometric structures in data using ideas from algebraic
topology. The success of clustering methods and nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques make
it clear that even crude approaches to leveraging the geometry of data can be very effective. TDA
provides more refined geometric information, and indeed, there have been a variety of successful
applications of TDA, including, among others: graph analysis [CCI+ 20, ZW19], computational
biology [ACC+ 20, CR20, GPCI15, HMMB19, KDS+ 18, RB19], finance [dCBSB17, GGK+ 18,
GK18] and computer graphics [COO15, LOC14, PSO18].
The standard setup for the use of TDA is a data set given as a finite metric space X (i.e., points and a
distance function) and a continuous function f : X → R. This function can be understood as giving
a parameter that filters X and encodes how the topology changes as the parameter varies. A classical
setting is when X = Rn with the standard Euclidean distance and f is given as the distance to a point
cloud P ⊂ Rn , that is, f (x) = min {kx − pk : p ∈ P }. See Figure 1. Another example is when X
is a graph G and f is a function defined on the nodes of G (see Supplementary Material, Section 4).
The fundamental geometric summary of TDA, the persistence diagram, characterizes the changing
topology of the family of sublevel sets of f , that is, the family {Fα }α∈R = {x ∈ X : f (x) ≤ α}α∈R .
For instance, in the point cloud setting, the sublevel set Fα is the union of balls of radius α centered
on the points of P . See Figure 1. Persistence diagrams are built by increasing α from −∞ to +∞,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

