Deep Subspace Clustering with Data Augmentation

Mahdi Abavisani
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ
mahdi.abavisani@rutgers.edu

Alireza Naghizadeh
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ
ar.naghizadeh@rutgers.edu.

Dimitris N. Metaxas
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ
dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD
vpatel36@jhu.edu

Abstract
The idea behind data augmentation techniques is based on the fact that slight
changes in the percept do not change the brain cognition. In classification, neural
networks use this fact by applying transformations to the inputs to learn to predict
the same label. However, in deep subspace clustering (DSC), the ground-truth
labels are not available, and as a result, one cannot easily use data augmentation
techniques. We propose a technique to exploit the benefits of data augmentation
in DSC algorithms. We learn representations that have consistent subspaces for
slightly transformed inputs. In particular, we introduce a temporal ensembling
component to the objective function of DSC algorithms to enable the DSC networks
to maintain consistent subspaces for random transformations in the input data.
In addition, we provide a simple yet effective unsupervised procedure to find
efficient data augmentation policies. An augmentation policy is defined as an
image processing transformation with a certain magnitude and probability of being
applied to each image in each epoch. We search through the policies in a search
space of the most common augmentation policies to find the best policy such that
the DSC network yields the highest mean Silhouette coefficient in its clustering
results on a target dataset. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on four standard subspace clustering datasets. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/mahdiabavisani/DSCwithDA.git.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in technology have provided massive amounts of complex high dimensional data
for computer vision and machine learning applications. High dimensionality has adverse effects,
including confusion of algorithms with irrelevant dimensions and curse of dimensionality as well as
increased computation time and memory. This motivates us to explore techniques for representing
high-dimensional data in lower dimensions. In many practical applications such as face images
under various illumination conditions [1] and hand-written digits [2], high-dimensional data can be
represented by union of low-dimensional subspaces. The subspace clustering problem aims at finding
these subspaces. In particular, the objective of subspace clustering is to find the number of subspaces,
their basis and dimensions, and assign data to these subspaces [3].
Conventional subspace clustering algorithms assume that data lie in linear subspaces [4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
In practice, however, many datasets are better modeled by non-linear manifolds. To deal with this
issue, many works have incorporated projections and kernel tricks to express non-linearity [9, 10,
7, 11, 12, 13]. Recently, deep subspace clustering (DSC) methods [14, 15, 16, 17, 18] have been
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

