Weakly Supervised Deep Functional Map for Shape
Matching

Abhishek Sharma
LIX, École Polytechnique

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique

kein.iitian@gmail.com

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
A variety of deep functional maps have been proposed recently, from fully supervised to totally unsupervised, with a range of loss functions as well as different
regularization terms. However, it is still not clear what are minimum ingredients of a deep functional map pipeline and whether such ingredients unify or
generalize all recent work on deep functional maps. We show empirically the
minimum components for obtaining state-of-the-art results with different loss
functions, supervised as well as unsupervised. Furthermore, we propose a novel
framework designed for both full-to-full as well as partial to full shape matching
that achieves state of the art results on several benchmark datasets outperforming, even the fully supervised methods. Our code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/Not-IITian/Weakly-supervised-Functional-map

1

Introduction

Shape correspondence is a fundamental problem in computer vision, computer graphics and related
fields since it facilitates many applications such as texture or deformation transfer and statistical
shape analysis Bogo et al. [2014] to name a few. While classical correspondence methods have been
based on handcrafted features or deformation models Van Kaick et al. [2011], more recent approaches
have focused on learning an optimal model directly from 3D data. This includes approaches based
on template fitting and reconstruction Groueix et al. [2018, 2019], and methods that exploit different
definitions of convolution and phrase correspondence as a dense labeling problem Wei et al. [2016],
Masci et al. [2015], Boscaini et al. [2016] among others.
A prominent direction in learning-based shape matching was pioneered by the FMNet work, Litany
et al. [2017a] by exploiting the functional map representation Ovsjanikov et al. [2012] and learning
features that recover optimal functional maps rather than e.g. individual point labels. The use of the
functional map representation allows to efficiently impose global correspondence constraints, and has
been recently been extended in both unsupervised Halimi et al. [2019], Roufosse et al. [2019] and
supervised settings Donati et al. [2020]. Despite significant progress in this area, there still exist three
major issues. First, the most accurate recent approach Donati et al. [2020] is limited to supervised
setting that requires ground truth correspondences that are difficult to obtain considering the cost of
annotating a dense point-to-point map on each shape pair. Second, despite a variety of deep functional
maps-based methods, it is still not clear what are minimum ingredients of a deep functional map
pipeline. More importantly, do such minimum ingredients unify or generalize all recent work on deep
functional maps. While a battery of loss functions and regularization have been proposed for different
deep functional maps, as we demonstrate below, the devil is not in the loss functions. Instead, using
a low number of Laplacian eigen-basis, very weak supervision in the form of rigid alignment and
enforcing basic structural properties of resulting functional map are sufficient to obtain high quality
results. Moreover, our approach generalize to many loss functions proposed recently and does not
require Geodesic matrices, as in FMnet Litany et al. [2017a] and UnSupFmnet Halimi et al. [2019],
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

