Sparse Learning with CART
Jason M. Klusowski
Department of Operations Research &
Financial Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08544
jason.klusowski@princeton.edu

Abstract
Decision trees with binary splits are popularly constructed using Classification
and Regression Trees (CART) methodology. For regression models, this approach
recursively divides the data into two near-homogenous daughter nodes according
to a split point that maximizes the reduction in sum of squares error (the impurity)
along a particular variable. This paper aims to study the statistical properties of
regression trees constructed with CART methodology. In doing so, we find that the
training error is governed by the Pearson correlation between the optimal decision
stump and response data in each node, which we bound by constructing a prior
distribution on the split points and solving a nonlinear optimization problem. We
leverage this connection between the training error and Pearson correlation to show
that CART with cost-complexity pruning achieves an optimal complexity/goodnessof-fit tradeoff when the depth scales with the logarithm of the sample size. Data
dependent quantities, which adapt to the dimensionality and latent structure of the
regression model, are seen to govern the convergence rates of the prediction error.

1

Introduction

Decision trees are the building blocks of some of the most important and powerful algorithms in
statistical learning. For example, ensembles of decision trees are used for some bootstrap aggregated
prediction rules (e.g., bagging [2] and random forests [3]). In addition, each iteration of gradient tree
boosting (e.g., TreeBoost [7]) fits the pseudo-residuals with decision trees as base learners. From
an applied perspective, decision trees have an appealing interpretability and are accompanied by a
rich set of analytic and visual diagnostic tools. These attributes make tree-based learning particularly
well-suited for applied sciences and related disciplines—which may rely heavily on understanding
and interpreting the output from the training algorithm. Although, as with many aspects of statistical
learning, good empirical performance often comes at the expense of rigor. Tree-structured learning
with decision trees is no exception—statistical guarantees for popular variants, i.e., those that are
actually used in practice, are hard to find. Indeed, the recursive manner in which decision trees are
constructed makes them unamenable to analysis, especially when the split protocol involves both the
input and output data. Despite these challenges, we take a step forward in advancing the theory of
decision trees and aim to tackle the following fundamental question:
When do decision trees adapt to the sparsity of a predictive model?
To make our work informative to the applied user of decision trees, we strive to make the least
departure from practice and therefore focus specifically on Classification and Regression Tree
(CART) [4] methodology—by far the most popular for regression and classification problems. With
this methodology, the tree construction importantly depends on both the input and output data and
is therefore data dependent. This aspect lends itself favorably to the empirical performance of
CART, but poses unique mathematical challenges. It is perhaps not surprising then that, despite the
widespread use of CART, there have been only a small handful of papers that study its theoretical
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

