3D Shape Reconstruction from Vision and Touch

Edward J. Smith1,2∗

Roberto Calandra1

David Meger2

1

Facebook AI Research

Adriana Romero1,2

Jitendra Malik1,3

2

McGill University

3

Georgia Gkioxari1

Michal Drozdzal1

University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
When a toddler is presented a new toy, their instinctual behaviour is to pick it up
and inspect it with their hand and eyes in tandem, clearly searching over its surface
to properly understand what they are playing with. At any instance here, touch
provides high fidelity localized information while vision provides complementary
global context. However, in 3D shape reconstruction, the complementary fusion of
visual and haptic modalities remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we study
this problem and present an effective chart-based approach to multi-modal shape
understanding which encourages a similar fusion vision and touch information.
To do so, we introduce a dataset of simulated touch and vision signals from the
interaction between a robotic hand and a large array of 3D objects. Our results
show that (1) leveraging both vision and touch signals consistently improves singlemodality baselines; (2) our approach outperforms alternative modality fusion
methods and strongly benefits from the proposed chart-based structure; (3) the
reconstruction quality increases with the number of grasps provided; and (4) the
touch information not only enhances the reconstruction at the touch site but also
extrapolates to its local neighborhood.

1

Introduction

From an early age children clearly and often loudly demonstrate that they need to both look and
touch any new object that has peaked their interest. The instinctual behavior of inspecting with both
their eyes and hands in tandem demonstrates the importance of fusing vision and touch information
for 3D object understanding. Through machine learning techniques, 3D models of both objects
and environments have been built by independent leveraging a variety of perception-based sensors,
such as those for vision (e.g. a single RGB image) [58, 19] and touch [72, 66]. However, vision
and touch possess a clear complementary nature. On one hand, vision provides a global context
for object understanding, but is hindered by occlusions introduced by the object itself and from
other objects in the scene. Moreover, vision is also affected by bas-relief [39] and scale/distance
ambiguities, as well as slant/tilt angles [3]. On the other hand, touch provides localized 3D shape
information, including the point of contact in space as well as high spatial resolution of the shape,
but fails quickly when extrapolating without global context or strong priors. Hence, combining both
modalities should lead to richer information and better models for 3D understanding. An overview of
3D shape reconstruction from vision and touch is displayed in Figure 1.
Visual and haptic modalities have been combined in the literature [2] to learn multi-modal representations of the 3D world, and improve upon subsequent 3D understanding tasks such as object
manipulation [41] or any-modal conditional generation [42]. Tactile information has also been used
∗

Correspondence to: ejsmith@fb.com and edward.smith@mail.mcgill.ca

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

