Object Goal Navigation using
Goal-Oriented Semantic Exploration

Devendra Singh Chaplot1†, Dhiraj Gandhi2 , Abhinav Gupta1,2∗, Ruslan Salakhutdinov1∗
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Facebook AI Research
Project webpage: https://devendrachaplot.github.io/projects/semantic-exploration
Code: https://github.com/devendrachaplot/Object-Goal-Navigation

Abstract
This work studies the problem of object goal navigation which involves navigating
to an instance of the given object category in unseen environments. End-to-end
learning-based navigation methods struggle at this task as they are ineffective at
exploration and long-term planning. We propose a modular system called, ‘GoalOriented Semantic Exploration’ which builds an episodic semantic map and uses it
to explore the environment efficiently based on the goal object category. Empirical
results in visually realistic simulation environments show that the proposed model
outperforms a wide range of baselines including end-to-end learning-based methods
as well as modular map-based methods and led to the winning entry of the CVPR2020 Habitat ObjectNav Challenge. Ablation analysis indicates that the proposed
model learns semantic priors of the relative arrangement of objects in a scene,
and uses them to explore efficiently. Domain-agnostic module design allows us to
transfer our model to a mobile robot platform and achieve similar performance for
object goal navigation in the real-world.

1

Introduction

Autonomous navigation is a core requirement in building intelligent embodied agents. Consider an
autonomous agent being asked to navigate to a ‘dining table’ in an unseen environment as shown in
Figure 1. In terms of semantic understanding, this task not only involves object detection, i.e. what
does a ‘dining table’ look like, but also scene understanding of where ‘dining tables’ are more likely
to be found. The latter requires a long-term episodic memory as well as learning semantic priors on
the relative arrangement of objects in a scene. Long-term episodic memory allows the agent to keep
track of explored and unexplored areas. Learning semantic priors allows the agent to also use the
episodic memory to decide which region to explore next in order to find the target object in the least
amount of time.
How do we design a computational model for building an episodic memory and using it effectively
based on semantic priors for efficient navigation in unseen environments? One popular approach is to
use end-to-end reinforcement or imitation learning with recurrent neural networks to build episodic
memory and learn semantic priors implicitly [31, 17, 50, 32]. However, end-to-end learning-based
methods suffer from large sample complexity and poor generalization as they memorize object
locations and appearance in training environments.
Recently, Chaplot et al. [10] introduced a modular learning-based system called ‘Active Neural
SLAM’ which builds explicit obstacle maps to maintain episodic memory. Explicit maps also allow
analytical path planning and thus lead to significantly better exploration and sample complexity.
However, Active Neural SLAM, designed for maximizing exploration coverage, does not encode
†
∗

Correspondence: chaplot@cs.cmu.edu
Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

