What shapes feature representations?
Exploring datasets, architectures, and training

Katherine L. Hermann∗
Stanford University
hermannk@stanford.edu

Andrew K. Lampinen∗
Stanford University
andrewlampinen@gmail.com

Abstract
In naturalistic learning problems, a model’s input contains a wide range of features,
some useful for the task at hand, and others not. Of the useful features, which
ones does the model use? Of the task-irrelevant features, which ones does the
model represent? Answers to these questions are important for understanding
the basis of models’ decisions, as well as for building models that learn versatile,
adaptable representations useful beyond the original training task. We study these
questions using synthetic datasets in which the task-relevance of input features can
be controlled directly. We find that when two features redundantly predict the labels,
the model preferentially represents one, and its preference reflects what was most
linearly decodable from the untrained model. Over training, task-relevant features
are enhanced, and task-irrelevant features are partially suppressed. Interestingly,
in some cases, an easier, weakly predictive feature can suppress a more strongly
predictive, but more difficult one. Additionally, models trained to recognize both
easy and hard features learn representations most similar to models that use only the
easy feature. Further, easy features lead to more consistent representations across
model runs than do hard features. Finally, models have greater representational
similarity to an untrained model than to models trained on a different task. Our
results highlight the complex processes that determine which features a model
represents.

1

Introduction

How does a deep neural model see the world at initialization, and what changes over the course
of training? If there are many latent features in the training data — such as the colors, textures,
and shapes of objects in visual datasets — how does the model separate task-relevant features from
irrelevant ones? Does a model gain sensitivity to diagnostic features by enhancing its representation
of them, or by suppressing its representations of other features? What does a model represent among
task-irrelevant features, features that are task-relevant but unreliable, and features that are redundantly
predictive, each of which are present in naturalistic datasets? How similar are feature representations
across models as a function of training task? How does the similarity depend on the feature?
From an engineering perspective, these questions are important as the field tries to build models whose
representations are versatile and general-purpose enough to support out-of-distribution generalization,
and to transfer to new downstream tasks. For example, it is common practice to transfer weights
or activations from ImageNet models to models used for other vision tasks [15, e.g.], and to use
BERT [7] as a starting point for language tasks. Yet untrained models can sometimes provide an
initialization that is nearly as good as ImageNet pretraining [12, 23], raising the questions of what
information is present in an untrained model, and how it is modified during training. Furthermore,
models sometimes learn to use “shortcut features” [10] – an object’s texture, rather than shape
∗

Contributed equally

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

