GPU-Accelerated Primal Learning for Extremely
Fast Large-Scale Classification

John T. Halloran
Department of Public Health Sciences
University of California, Davis
jthalloran@ucdavis.edu

David M. Rocke
Department of Public Health Sciences
University of California, Davis
dmrocke@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
One of the most efficient methods to solve L2 -regularized primal problems, such
as logistic regression and linear support vector machine (SVM) classification, is
the widely used trust region Newton algorithm, TRON [39]. While TRON has
recently been shown to enjoy substantial speedups on shared-memory multi-core
systems [36, 22], exploiting graphical processing units (GPUs) to speed up the
method is significantly more difficult, owing to the highly complex and heavily
sequential nature of the algorithm. In this work, we show that using judicious
GPU-optimization principles, TRON training time for different losses and feature
representations may be drastically reduced. For sparse feature sets, we show that
using GPUs to train logistic regression classifiers in LIBLINEAR is up to an orderof-magnitude faster than solely using multithreading. For dense feature sets–which
impose far more stringent memory constraints–we show that GPUs substantially
reduce the lengthy SVM learning times required for state-of-the-art proteomics
analysis, leading to dramatic improvements over recently proposed speedups.
Furthermore, we show how GPU speedups may be mixed with multithreading to
enable such speedups when the dataset is too large for GPU memory requirements;
on a massive dense proteomics dataset of nearly a quarter-billion data instances,
these mixed-architecture speedups reduce SVM analysis time from over half a
week to less than a single day while using limited GPU memory.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, GPUs have become valuable computing resources to accelerate the training of
popular machine learning models, playing a key role in the widespread use of deep models and the
growing ecosystem of deep learning packages [9, 11, 1, 30, 44]. When a training algorithm admits an
efficient GPU implementation (such as gradient boosted trees [42], nonlinear kernel learning [8, 50],
and primal methods like L-BFGS [40] and variants of gradient descent), the speedups gained using
GPUs, as opposed to only CPUs, are often substantial. For instance, in PyTorch [44], training a
logistic regression classifier on the rcv1 [37] dataset with gradient descent is 14.6 times faster using
a Tesla V100 GPU versus using 24 CPU threads with an Intel Xeon Gold 5118 (similarly, training
with L-BFGS in this example is 13.1 times faster using the V100, detailed in [23]).
Specialized solvers commonly provide even more speed. For the previous logistic regression example,
using just a single CPU thread with scikit-learn’s [45] TRON solver–the primal learning algorithm
for logistic regression and SVM classification/regression adapted from LIBLINEAR [13]–is 94.7 and
10.9 times faster than GPU-accelerated gradient descent and L-BFGS, respectively, implemented
in PyTorch. However, while significant work has been done to further accelerate TRON and many
other extremely fast machine learning solvers [27, 54, 35, 31, 32] using multiple CPU cores [6, 29,
28, 36, 10, 46, 55, 22], analogous GPU speedups for such efficient algorithms are often lacking.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

