RELATE: Physically Plausible Multi-Object Scene
Synthesis Using Structured Latent Spaces

Sébastien Ehrhardt 1∗
Oliver Groth1∗
Áron Monszpart2,3
Martin Engelcke1
1
2,4
Ingmar Posner
Niloy J. Mitra
Andrea Vedaldi1
1
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
2
Department of Computer Science, University College London
3
Niantic, 4 Adobe Research
{hyenal,ogroth}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We present RELATE, a model that learns to generate physically plausible scenes
and videos of multiple interacting objects. Similar to other generative approaches,
RELATE is trained end-to-end on raw, unlabeled data. RELATE combines an
object-centric GAN formulation with a model that explicitly accounts for correlations between individual objects. This allows the model to generate realistic scenes
and videos from a physically-interpretable parameterization. Furthermore, we show
that modeling the object correlation is necessary to learn to disentangle object
positions and identity. We find that RELATE is also amenable to physically realistic
scene editing and that it significantly outperforms prior art in object-centric scene
generation in both synthetic (CLEVR, ShapeStacks) and real-world data (cars).
In addition, in contrast to state-of-the-art methods in object-centric generative
modeling, RELATE also extends naturally to dynamic scenes and generates videos
of high visual fidelity. Source code, datasets and more results are available at
http://geometry.cs.ucl.ac.uk/projects/2020/relate/.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of learning to generate plausible images of scenes starting from parameters
that are physically interpretable. Furthermore, we wish to learn such a capability from raw images
alone, without any manual or external supervision. Image generation is often approached via
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [10]. These models learn to map noise vectors, used as a
source of randomness, to image samples. While the resulting images are realistic, the random vectors
that parameterize them are not interpretable. To address this issue, authors have recently proposed to
structure the latent space of deep generative models, giving it a partial physical interpretability [28,
29, 36]. For example, HoloGAN [28] samples volumes and cameras to generate 2D images of 3D
objects, and BlockGAN [29] creates scenes by composing multiple objects. The resulting GANs
have been shown to learn concepts such as viewpoint and object disentangling from raw images.
BlockGAN is of particular interest because, via its relatively strong architectural biases, it provides
interpretable parameters for the scene, incorporating concepts such as position and orientation.
However, BlockGAN comes with a significant limitation in that it assumes that objects are mutually
independent. This approximation is acceptable only when objects interact weakly, but it is badly
violated for medium to densely packed scenes, or for scenes such as stacking wooden blocks or cars
following a path, where the (object) correlation is strong.
∗

indicates equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

