The Surprising Simplicity of the Early-Time Learning
Dynamics of Neural Networks

Wei Hu∗

Lechao Xiao†

Ben Adlam‡

Jeffrey Pennington§

Abstract
Modern neural networks are often regarded as complex black-box functions whose
behavior is difficult to understand owing to their nonlinear dependence on the data
and the nonconvexity in their loss landscapes. In this work, we show that these
common perceptions can be completely false in the early phase of learning. In
particular, we formally prove that, for a class of well-behaved input distributions,
the early-time learning dynamics of a two-layer fully-connected neural network
can be mimicked by training a simple linear model on the inputs. We additionally
argue that this surprising simplicity can persist in networks with more layers and
with convolutional architecture, which we verify empirically. Key to our analysis
is to bound the spectral norm of the difference between the Neural Tangent Kernel
(NTK) at initialization and an affine transform of the data kernel; however, unlike
many previous results utilizing the NTK, we do not require the network to have
disproportionately large width, and the network is allowed to escape the kernel
regime later in training.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning models are enormously complex function approximators, with many stateof-the-art architectures employing millions or even billions of trainable parameters [Radford et al.,
2019, Adiwardana et al., 2020]. While the raw parameter count provides only a crude approximation
of a model’s capacity, more sophisticated metrics such as those based on PAC-Bayes [McAllester,
1999, Dziugaite and Roy, 2017, Neyshabur et al., 2017b], VC dimension [Vapnik and Chervonenkis,
1971], and parameter norms [Bartlett et al., 2017, Neyshabur et al., 2017a] also suggest that modern
architectures have very large capacity. Moreover, from the empirical perspective, practical models
are flexible enough to perfectly fit the training data, even if the labels are pure noise [Zhang et al.,
2017]. Surprisingly, these same high-capacity models generalize well when trained on real data, even
without any explicit control of capacity.
These observations are in conflict with classical generalization theory, which contends that models of
intermediate complexity should generalize best, striking a balance between the bias and the variance
of their predictive functions. To reconcile theory with observation, it has been suggested that deep
neural networks may enjoy some form of implicit regularization induced by gradient-based training
algorithms that biases the trained models towards simpler functions. However, the exact notion of
simplicity and the mechanism by which it might be achieved remain poorly understood except in
certain simplistic settings.
∗

Princeton University. Work partly performed at Google. Email: huwei@cs.princeton.edu
Google Research, Brain Team. Email: xlc@google.com
‡
Google Research, Brain Team. Work done as a member of the Google AI Residency program (http:
//g.co/brainresidency). Email: adlam@google.com
§
Google Research, Brain Team. Email: jpennin@google.com
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

