Minimax Bounds for Generalized Linear Models
Kuan-Yun Lee and Thomas A. Courtade
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
{timkylee,courtade}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We establish a new class of minimax prediction error bounds for generalized linear
models. Our bounds significantly improve previous results when the design matrix
is poorly structured, including natural cases where the matrix is wide or does
not have full column rank. Apart from the typical L2 risks, we study a class of
entropic risks which recovers the usual L2 prediction and estimation risks, and
demonstrate that a tight analysis of Fisher information can uncover underlying
structural dependency in terms of the spectrum of the design matrix. The minimax
approach we take differs from the traditional metric entropy approach, and can be
applied to many other settings.

1

Introduction

Throughout, we consider a parametric framework where observations X ∈ Rn are generated
according to X ∼ Pθ , where Pθ denotes a probability measure on a measurable space (X ⊆ Rn , F)
indexed by an underlying parameter θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rd . For each Pθ , we associate a density f (·; θ) with
respect to an underlying measure λ on (X , F) according to
dPθ (x) = f (x; θ)dλ(x).
This setup contains a vast array of fundamental applications in machine learning, engineering,
neuroscience, finance, statistics and information theory [1–10]. As examples, mean estimation [1],
covariance and precision matrix estimation [2], phase retrieval [3,4], group or membership testing [5],
pairwise ranking [10], can all be modeled in terms of parametric statistics. The central question to
address in all of these problems is essentially the same: how accurately can we infer the parameter θ
given the observation X?
One of the most popular parameteric families is the exponential family, which captures a rich variety
of parametric models such as binomial, Gaussian, Poisson, etc. Given a parameter η ∈ R, a density
f (·; η) is said to belong to the exponential family if it can be written as


ηx − Φ(η)
f (x; η) = g(x) exp
.
(1)
s(σ)
Here, the parameter η is the natural parameter, g : X ⊆ R → [0, ∞) is the base measure, Φ : R → R
is the cumulant function, and s(σ) > 0 is a variance parameter. The density f (·; η) is understood to
be on a probability space (X ⊆ R, F) with respect to a dominating σ-finite measure λ.
In this work, we are interested in the following generalized linear model (GLM), where observation
X ∈ Rn is generated according to an exponential family with natural parameter equal to a linear
transformation of the underlying parameter θ. In other words,


n 
Y
xi hmi , θi − Φ(hmi , θi)
f (x; θ) =
g(xi ) exp
,
(2)
s(σ)
i=1
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

