Compositional Generalization
by Learning Analytical Expressions

Qian Liu†∗ , Shengnan An♦∗ , Jian-Guang Lou§ , Bei Chen§ , Zeqi Lin§ ,
Yan Gao§ , Bin Zhou† , Nanning Zheng♦ , Dongmei Zhang§
†
Beihang University, Beijing, China;♦ Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China;
§
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
†
{qian.liu, zhoubin}@buaa.edu.cn; ♦ {an1006634493@stu, nnzheng@mail}.xjtu.edu.cn;
§
{jlou, beichen, Zeqi.Lin, Yan.Gao, dongmeiz}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Compositional generalization is a basic and essential intellective capability of
human beings, which allows us to recombine known parts readily. However,
existing neural network based models have been proven to be extremely deficient in
such a capability. Inspired by work in cognition which argues compositionality can
be captured by variable slots with symbolic functions, we present a refreshing view
that connects a memory-augmented neural model with analytical expressions, to
achieve compositional generalization. Our model consists of two cooperative neural
modules, Composer and Solver, fitting well with the cognitive argument while
being able to be trained in an end-to-end manner via a hierarchical reinforcement
learning algorithm. Experiments on the well-known benchmark SCAN demonstrate
that our model seizes a great ability of compositional generalization, solving all
challenges addressed by previous works with 100% accuracies.

1

Introduction

When using language, humans have a remarkable ability to recombine known parts to understand
novel sentences they have never encountered before [8, 12]. For example, once humans have learned
the meanings of “walk”, “jump” and “walk twice”, it is effortless for them to understand the meaning
of “jump twice”. This kind of ability relies on the compositionality that characterizes languages.
The principle of compositionality refers to the idea that the meaning of a complex expression (e.g.
a sentence) is determined by the meanings of its constituents (e.g. the verb “jump” and the adverb
“twice”) together with the way these constituents are combined (e.g. an adverb modifies a verb) [34].
Understanding language compositionality is a basic and essential capacity for human beings, which
is argued to be one of the key skills towards human-like machine intelligence [25].
Recently, Lake and Baroni [19] made a step towards exploring and benchmarking compositional
generalization of neural networks. They argued that leveraging compositional generalization was
an essential ability for neural networks to understand out-of-domain sentences. The test suite, their
proposed Simplified version of the CommAI Navigation (SCAN) dataset, contains compositional
navigation commands, such as “walk twice”, and corresponding action sequences, like WALK WALK.
Such a task lies in the category of machine translation, and thus is expected to be well solved
by current state-of-the-art translation models (e.g. sequence to sequence with attention [32, 3]).
However, experiments on SCAN demonstrated that modern translation models dramatically fail
to obtain a satisfactory performance on compositional generalization. For example, although the
meanings of “walk”, “walk twice” and “jump” have been seen, current models fail to generalize
∗

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research. The first two authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

