The Discrete Gaussian for Differential Privacy

Clément L. Canonne
IBM Research, Almaden
ccanonne@cs.columbia.edu

Gautam Kamath
University of Waterloo
g@csail.mit.edu

Thomas Steinke
IBM Research, Almaden
dgauss@thomas-steinke.net

Abstract
A key tool for building differentially private systems is adding Gaussian noise to
the output of a function evaluated on a sensitive dataset. Unfortunately, using a
continuous distribution presents several practical challenges. First and foremost,
finite computers cannot exactly represent samples from continuous distributions,
and previous work has demonstrated that seemingly innocuous numerical errors
can entirely destroy privacy. Moreover, when the underlying data is itself discrete (e.g., population counts), adding continuous noise makes the result less
interpretable.
With these shortcomings in mind, we introduce and analyze the discrete Gaussian in
the context of differential privacy. Specifically, we theoretically and experimentally
show that adding discrete Gaussian noise provides essentially the same privacy and
accuracy guarantees as the addition of continuous Gaussian noise. We also present
an simple and efficient algorithm for exact sampling from this distribution. This
demonstrates its applicability for privately answering counting queries, or more
generally, low-sensitivity integer-valued queries.

1

Introduction

Differential Privacy [DMNS06] provides a rigorous standard for ensuring that the output of an
algorithm does not leak the private details of individuals contained in its input. A standard technique
for ensuring differential privacy is to evaluate a function on the input and then add a small amount of
random noise to the result before releasing it. Specifically, it is common to add noise drawn from a
Laplace or Gaussian distribution, which is scaled according to the sensitivity of the function – i.e.,
how much one person’s data can change the function value. These are two of the most fundamental
algorithms in differential privacy, which are used as subroutines in almost all differentially private
systems. For example, differentially private algorithms for convex empirical risk minimization and
deep learning are based on adding noise to gradients [BST14; ACGMMTZ16].
However, the Laplace and Gaussian distributions are both continuous over the real numbers. As
such, it is not possible to even represent a sample from them on a finite computer, much less produce
such a sample. One might suppose that such issues are purely of theoretical interest, and that they
can be resolved in practice by simply using standard floating-point arithmetic and representations.
Unfortunately, this is not the case: Mironov [Mir12] demonstrated that the naïve use of finite-precision
approximations can result in catastrophic failures of privacy. In particular, by examining the low-order
bits of the noisy output, the noiseless value can often be determined. Mironov showed that this
information can allow the entire input dataset to be rapidly reconstructed, while only a negligible
privacy loss is recorded by the system. Despite this demonstration, the flawed methods continue to
appear in open source implementations of differentially private mechanisms [Cen18; Dif19; Goo20;
Whi20]. This demonstrates a real need for us to provide safe and practical solutions to enable the
deployment of differentially private systems in real-world privacy-critical settings. In this work, we
0

Alphabetical authorship. Full version available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.00010

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

