Classification Under Misspecification: Halfspaces,
Generalized Linear Models, and Evolvability
Sitan Chen
MIT
sitanc@mit.edu

Frederic Koehler
MIT
fkoehler@mit.edu

Ankur Moitra
MIT
moitra@mit.edu

Morris Yau
UC Berkeley
morrisyau@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we revisit the problem of distribution-independently learning halfspaces under Massart noise with rate ⌘. Recent work [DGT19] resolved a longstanding problem in this model of efficiently learning to error ⌘+✏ for any ✏ > 0, by
giving an improper learner that partitions space into poly(d, 1/✏) regions. Here we
give a much simpler algorithm and settle a number of outstanding open questions:
(1) We give the first proper learner for Massart halfspaces that achieves ⌘ + ✏.
(2) Based on (1), we develop a blackbox knowledge distillation procedure to
convert an arbitrarily complex classifier to an equally good proper classifier.
(3) By leveraging a simple but overlooked connection to evolvability, we show any
SQ algorithm requires super-polynomially many queries to achieve OPT + ✏.
We then zoom out to study generalized linear models and give an efficient algorithm
for learning under a challenging new corruption model generalizing Massart noise.
Lastly, we empirically evaluate our algorithm for Massart halfspaces and find it
exhibits some intriguing fairness properties.

1

Introduction

A central challenge in theoretical machine learning is to design learning algorithms that are provably
robust to noise. We will focus on supervised learning problems, where we are given samples (X, Y )
where the distribution on X is arbitrary and the label Y is chosen to be either +1 or 1 according to
some unknown ground truth function. We will then allow an adversary to tamper with our samples in
various ways. We will be particularly interested in the following models:
(1) Halfspaces: Y = sgn(hw⇤ , Xi) for some unknown vector w⇤ .
(2) Generalized Linear Models: Y 2 {±1} is a random variable with conditional expectation
where the link function

E[Y | X] = (hw⇤ , Xi)

is odd, monotone, and L-Lipschitz.

It is well-known that without noise there are simple, practical, and provable algorithms that work in
the PAC learning model [Val84]. For example, the perceptron algorithm [Ros58] learns halfspaces
with margin, and the Isotron algorithm [KS09] is an elegant generalization which learns generalized
linear models (GLMs), even when is unknown.
There are many natural models for noise. While it is tempting to gravitate towards the most general
models, it turns out that they often make the learning problem computationally hard. For example,
we could allow the adversary to change the labels however they want, and ask to find a hypothesis
with nearly the best possible agreement over the class. This is called the agnostic learning model
[Hau92, KSS94]; Daniely [Dan16] recently showed it is computationally hard to learn halfspaces in
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

