Feature Shift Detection: Localizing Which Features
Have Shifted via Conditional Distribution Tests
Sean M. Kulinski

Saurabh Bagchi

David I. Inouye

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
{skulinsk,sbagchi,dinouye}@purdue.edu

Abstract
While previous distribution shift detection approaches can identify if a shift has
occurred, these approaches cannot localize which specific features have caused a
distribution shift—a critical step in diagnosing or fixing any underlying issue. For
example, in military sensor networks, users will want to detect when one or more
of the sensors has been compromised, and critically, they will want to know which
specific sensors might be compromised. Thus, we first define a formalization of
this problem as multiple conditional distribution hypothesis tests and propose both
non-parametric and parametric statistical tests. For both efficiency and flexibility,
we then propose to use a test statistic based on the density model score function
(i.e., gradient with respect to the input)—which can easily compute test statistics
for all dimensions in a single forward and backward pass. Any density model could
be used for computing the necessary statistics including deep density models such
as normalizing flows or autoregressive models. We additionally develop methods
for identifying when and where a shift occurs in multivariate time-series data and
show results for multiple scenarios using realistic attack models on both simulated
and real world data. 1

1

Introduction and Motivation

Adversarial attacks on sensor streams that feed into complex machine learning systems can create
serious vulnerabilities. To support decision making in an adversarial setting, it is critical to identify
when an adversarial attack has started and in a multi-sensor environment, which sensors have been
compromised. The identification of which particular sensors have been compromised, a process
referred to as “localization”, is critically important for correction either by physical intervention or
hardware reset. While there has been much work on anomaly detection and some on distribution
shift [2, 19, 27], the task of identifying or explaining the anomalous behavior or distribution shift
remains a relatively open problem. We consider primarily a sensor network attack, where the adversary
is able to observe and to control one or more nodes, which are then denoted as "compromised
(or attacked) sensors". While most previous adversarial or anomaly detection methods focus on
identifying an attack from a single sample [9, 22, 31], we focus on detecting sequences of samples that
show anomalous behavior—which we argue is more natural for sensor streams and enables detection
of powerful adversaries. For example, consider Figure 1a, which shows that taken in isolation a
single sensor reading may not appear as anomalous, but a sequence of readings may appear to deviate
from a notional correct distribution, thus identifying the attack. Thus, we frame our core problem as
distribution shift detection via hypothesis testing instead of standard anomaly detection. We make
the significant observation that dependencies between samples within a sensor (i.e., captured by their
marginal distribution) and dependencies across sensors (i.e., captured by conditional distributions of
1

The code for our experiments and methods is at https://github.com/SeanKski/feature-shift.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

