Task-Agnostic Amortized Inference of
Gaussian Process Hyperparameters

Sulin Liu, Xingyuan Sun, Peter J. Ramadge, Ryan P. Adams
Princeton University
{sulinl, xs5, ramadge, rpa}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) are flexible priors for modeling functions. However,
their success depends on the kernel accurately reflecting the properties of the data.
One of the appeals of the GP framework is that the marginal likelihood of the
kernel hyperparameters is often available in closed form, enabling optimization and
sampling procedures to fit these hyperparameters to data. Unfortunately, point-wise
evaluation of the marginal likelihood is expensive due to the need to solve a linear
system; searching or sampling the space of hyperparameters thus often dominates
the practical cost of using GPs. We introduce an approach to the identification
of kernel hyperparameters in GP regression and related problems that sidesteps
the need for costly marginal likelihoods. Our strategy is to “amortize” inference
over hyperparameters by training a single neural network, which consumes a
set of regression data and produces an estimate of the kernel function, useful
across different tasks. To accommodate the varying dimension and cardinality of
different regression problems, we use a hierarchical self-attention-based neural
network that produces estimates of the hyperparameters which are invariant to the
order of the input data points and data dimensions. We show that a single neural
model trained on synthetic data is able to generalize directly to several different
unseen real-world GP use cases. Our experiments demonstrate that the estimated
hyperparameters are comparable in quality to those from the conventional model
selection procedures, while being much faster to obtain, significantly accelerating
GP regression and its related applications such as Bayesian optimization and
Bayesian quadrature. The code and pre-trained model are available at https:
//github.com/PrincetonLIPS/AHGP.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) are powerful tools for modeling distributions over functions. They are
highly flexible Bayesian nonparametric models for which the posterior is often available in closed
form. GPs are successful models for a variety of machine learning tasks, from regression and
classification [53], to Bayesian optimization [65], to modeling of dynamics [36, 70]. The predictive
performance of a Gaussian process, however, is highly dependent on the specifics of the prior on
functions, as determined by the associated positive definite kernel function [53]. To find a good prior,
one needs to first come up with a family of kernel functions that is capable of capturing the structure
of the data.
The kernel hyperparameters must then be determined from data, usually by maximizing the log
marginal likelihood (MLL), i.e., empirical Bayes [53]. There are two major issues associated
with this procedure. First, evaluating the log marginal likelihood (and its gradient) for different
hyperparameters is generally expensive, with O(N 3 ) computational complexity for N training data.
Second, the log MLL is usually highly non-concave, making both sampling and optimization difficult.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

