Linear Dynamical Systems as a
Core Computational Primitive

Shiva Kaul
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
skkaul@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Running nonlinear RNNs for T steps takes Ω(T ) time. Our construction, called
LDStack, approximately runs them in O(log T ) parallel time, and obtains arbitrarily
low error via repetition. First, we show nonlinear RNNs can be approximated by a
stack of multiple-input, multiple-output (MIMO) LDS. This replaces nonlinearity
across time with nonlinearity along depth. Next, we show that MIMO LDS can
be approximated by an average or a concatenation of single-input, multiple-output
(SIMO) LDS. Finally, we present an algorithm for running (and differentiating)
SIMO LDS in O(log T ) parallel time. On long sequences, LDStack is much
faster than traditional RNNs, yet it achieves similar accuracy in our experiments.
Furthermore, LDStack is amenable to linear systems theory. Therefore, it improves
not only speed, but also interpretability and mathematical tractability.

1

Introduction

Nonlinear RNNs have two crucial shortcomings. The first is computational: running an RNN for
T steps is a sequential operation which takes Ω(T ) time. The second is analytical: it is challenging
to gain intuition about the behavior of a nonlinear RNN, and even harder to prove this behavior
is desirable. These shortcomings have motivated practitioners to abandon RNNs altogether and to
model time series by other means. These include hierarchies of (dilated) convolutions [Oord et al.,
2016, Gehring et al., 2017] and attention mechanisms which are differentiable analogues of key-value
lookups [Bahdanau et al., 2014, Vaswani et al., 2017]. In these models, the underlying parallel
primitives are convolution and matrix multiplication, respectively.
This paper addresses both of these shortcomings. We present a method to approximately run and
differentiate nonlinear RNNs in O(log T ) parallel time, by rebuilding them from linear dynamical
systems (LDS). In these, the next state st+1 = Ast + Bxt is a linear function of the current state st
and input xt . They are a mainstay of control theory and many engineering applications because their
behavior can be understood and regulated [Zhou et al., 1996]. Single-input, multiple-output (SIMO)
LDS, which map a sequence of input numbers to a sequence of output vectors, are our core primitive:
we present an algorithm to run and differentiate them in O(log T ) parallel time.
Summary of Main Ideas. Our approach is to (1) approximate the RNN by a stack of multiple-input,
multiple output (MIMO) LDS, then (2) approximate the MIMO LDS by an aggregation of singleinput, multiple-output (SIMO) LDS, and finally (3) run the SIMO LDS in O(log T ) parallel time
using scans and reductions. In step (1), we take the LDS, measure the deviations of its linear steps
from desired nonlinear ones, and add those as corrections to the LDS in the subsequent layer. This
scheme is naturally parallel, since the corrections are based on only local information; surprisingly, it
is provably consistent. A multiplicative variant has already been extensively used to analyze nonlinear,
continuous-time dynamical systems [Tomás-Rodríguez and Banks, 2010].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

