Exploiting MMD and Sinkhorn Divergences for Fair
and Transferable Representation Learning

Luca Oneto
University of Genoa
luca.oneto@unige.it

Michele Donini
Amazon Web Services
donini@amazon.com

Carlo Ciliberto
Imperial College London
c.ciliberto@imperial.ac.uk

Giulia Luise
University College London
g.luise.16@ucl.ac.uk

Andreas Maurer
Isitituto Italiano di Tecnologia
am@andreas-maurer.eu

Massimiliano Pontil
Isitituto Italiano di Tecnologia & University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
Developing learning methods which do not discriminate subgroups in the population is a central goal of algorithmic fairness. One way to reach this goal is by
modifying the data representation in order to meet certain fairness constraints. In
this work we measure fairness according to demographic parity. This requires
the probability of the possible model decisions to be independent of the sensitive
information. We argue that the goal of imposing demographic parity can be substantially facilitated within a multitask learning setting. We present a method for
learning a shared fair representation across multiple tasks, by means of different
new constraints based on MMD and Sinkhorn Divergences. We derive learning
bounds establishing that the learned representation transfers well to novel tasks.
We present experiments on three real world datasets, showing that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches by a significant margin.

1

Introduction

During the last decade, the widespread distribution of automatic systems for decision making is
raising concerns about their potential for unfair behaviour [3, 7, 37]. As a consequence, machine
learning models have often to meet fairness requirements, ensuring the correction and limitation of
– for example – racist or sexist decisions. In literature, it is possible to find a plethora of different
methods to generate fair models with respect to one or more sensitive attributes (e.g. gender, ethnic
group, age). These methods can be mainly divided into three families: (i) methods in the first family
change a pre-trained model in order to make it more fair (while trying to maintain the classification
performance, i.e., post-processing of the model) [14, 19, 34]; (ii) in the second family, we can find
methods that enforce fairness directly during the training phase, e.g. [1, 12, 41, 42]; (iii) the third
family of methods implements fairness by modifying the data representation (i.e., pre-processing of
the data), and then employs standard machine learning methods [9, 43].
All methods in the previous three families have in common the goal of creating a fair and accurate
model from scratch on the specific task at hand. This solution may work well in specific cases, but in
a large number of real world applications, using the same model (or at least part of it) over different
tasks is helpful if not mandatory. For example, it is common to perform a fine tuning over pre-trained
models [11], keeping fixed the internal representation. Indeed, most modern machine learning
frameworks (especially the deep learning ones) offer a set of pre-trained models that are distributed in
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

