Decision-Making with
Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes

Romain Lopez1 , Pierre Boyeau1 , Nir Yosef1,2,3 , Michael I. Jordan1,4 , and Jeffrey Regier5
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Berkeley
2
Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco
3
Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard
4
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
5
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan

Abstract
To make decisions based on a model fit with auto-encoding variational Bayes
(AEVB), practitioners often let the variational distribution serve as a surrogate for
the posterior distribution. This approach yields biased estimates of the expected
risk, and therefore leads to poor decisions for two reasons. First, the model fit
with AEVB may not equal the underlying data distribution. Second, the variational
distribution may not equal the posterior distribution under the fitted model. We
explore how fitting the variational distribution based on several objective functions
other than the ELBO, while continuing to fit the generative model based on the
ELBO, affects the quality of downstream decisions. For the probabilistic principal
component analysis model, we investigate how importance sampling error, as well
as the bias of the model parameter estimates, varies across several approximate
posteriors when used as proposal distributions. Our theoretical results suggest that
a posterior approximation distinct from the variational distribution should be used
for making decisions. Motivated by these theoretical results, we propose learning
several approximate proposals for the best model and combining them using
multiple importance sampling for decision-making. In addition to toy examples, we
present a full-fledged case study of single-cell RNA sequencing. In this challenging
instance of multiple hypothesis testing, our proposed approach surpasses the current
state of the art.

1

Introduction

The auto-encoding variational Bayes (AEVB) algorithm performs model selection by maximizing a
lower bound on the model evidence [1, 2]. In the specific case of variational autoencoders (VAEs), a
low-dimensional representation of data is transformed through a learned nonlinear function (another
neural network) into the parameters of a conditional likelihood. VAEs achieve impressive performance
on pattern-matching tasks like representation/manifold learning and synthetic image generation [3].
Many machine learning applications, however, require decisions, not just compact representations
of the data. Researchers have accordingly attempted to use VAEs for decision-making applications,
including novelty detection in control applications [4], mutation-effect prediction for genomic
sequences [5], artifact detection [6], and Bayesian hypothesis testing for single-cell RNA sequencing
data [7, 8]. To make decisions based on VAEs, these researchers implicitly appeal to Bayesian
decision theory, which counsels taking the action that minimizes expected loss under the posterior
distribution [9].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

