Adversarial Bandits with Corruptions
Lin Yang and Mohammad H. Hajiesmaili
University of Massachusetts Amherst

M. Sadegh Talebi
University of Copenhagen

John C. S. Lui and Wing S. Wong
Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
This paper studies adversarial bandits with corruptions. In the basic adversarial
bandit setting, the reward of arms is predetermined by an adversary who is oblivious
to the learner’s policy. In this paper, we consider an extended setting in which
an attacker sits in-between the environment and the learner, and is endowed with
a limited budget to corrupt the reward of the selected arm. We have two main
results. First, we derive a lower bound on the regret of any bandit algorithm that
is aware of the budget of the attacker. Also, for budget-agnostic algorithms, we
characterize an impossibility result demonstrating that even when the attacker
has a sublinear budget, i.e., a budget growing sublinearly with time horizon T ,
they fail to achieve a sublinear regret. Second, we propose
, a bandit
algorithm that incorporates a biased estimator and a robustness parameter to deal
with corruption. We characterize the regret of
and show that for the case of
a known corruption budget, the regret of
is tight.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandits (MABs) [23] present a powerful online learning framework that is applicable to
a broad range of application domains including medical trials, web search advertisement, datacenter
design, and recommender systems; see, e.g., [5, 24] and references therein. In the basic MAB
problem, in each round a learner pulls an arm (corresponding to selecting an action) from a finite
set of arms, and observes the reward associated to the selected arm, but not for the other unselected
arms. The goal of the learner is to maximize the rewards accumulated in the course of her interaction.
MAB problems are typically categorized into stochastic and non-stochastic (or adversarial) problems
depending on how the reward sequences are generated. In stochastic bandits [23, 14], rewards are
drawn from fixed but unknown distributions, whereas in non-stochastic bandits [3], no statistical
assumption on rewards are made and rewards are arbitrary as if they were generated by an adversary.
Motivated by malicious activities in bandit-related applications such as click fraud via malware [26,
22], fake reviews and ratings in recommender systems [11, 17, 27], and email spam [13, 6], there
have been recent effort on studying bandit problems under some notion of corruption [12, 28, 16, 18,
9, 15, 8, 19]. In the case of click fraud, for example, botnets maliciously simulate users clicking on an
ad to mislead learning algorithms. More specifically, there are some rewards (click rates) associated
to each arm (ad), and an attacker (the botnet) corrupts the rewards based on the learner’s action. The
majority of past efforts, however, are limited to studying stochastic bandits with corruption, either on
understanding the vulnerability of existing algorithms and designing attacks [12, 28, 16, 15, 8, 19],
or developing algorithms that are robust against corruption [18, 9, 30]. In those works, stochastic
patterns are corrupted by an attacker and bandit algorithms strive to be robust against the corruption.
A detailed literature review is provided in §A of the supplementary material.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

