Hierarchically Organized Latent Modules for
Exploratory Search in Morphogenetic Systems

Mayalen Etcheverry∗, Clément Moulin-Frier, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
Flowers Team
Inria, Univ. Bordeaux, Ensta ParisTech (France)
{mayalen.etcheverry,clement.moulin-frier,pierre-yves.oudeyer}@inria.fr

Abstract
Self-organization of complex morphological patterns from local interactions is a
fascinating phenomenon in many natural and artificial systems. In the artificial
world, typical examples of such morphogenetic systems are cellular automata. Yet,
their mechanisms are often very hard to grasp and so far scientific discoveries of
novel patterns have primarily been relying on manual tuning and ad hoc exploratory
search. The problem of automated diversity-driven discovery in these systems was
recently introduced [26, 62], highlighting that two key ingredients are autonomous
exploration and unsupervised representation learning to describe “relevant” degrees
of variations in the patterns. In this paper, we motivate the need for what we call
Meta-diversity search, arguing that there is not a unique ground truth interesting
diversity as it strongly depends on the final observer and its motives. Using a
continuous game-of-life system for experiments, we provide empirical evidences
that relying on monolithic architectures for the behavioral embedding design tends
to bias the final discoveries (both for hand-defined and unsupervisedly-learned
features) which are unlikely to be aligned with the interest of a final end-user. To
address these issues, we introduce a novel dynamic and modular architecture that
enables unsupervised learning of a hierarchy of diverse representations. Combined
with intrinsically motivated goal exploration algorithms, we show that this system
forms a discovery assistant that can efficiently adapt its diversity search towards
preferences of a user using only a very small amount of user feedback.

1

Introduction

Self-organisation refers to a broad range of pattern-formation processes in which globally-coherent
structures spontaneously emerge out of local interactions. In many natural and artificial systems,
understanding this phenomenon poses fundamental challenges [1]. In biology, morphogenesis, where
cellular populations self-organize into a structured morphology, is a prime example of complex
developmental process where much remains to be assessed. Since Turing’s influential paper “The
Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis” [74], many mathematical and computational models of morphogenetic systems have been proposed and extensively studied [24]. For example, cellular automata
abstract models like Conway’s Game of Life (GoL), despite their apparent simplicity, generate a wide
range of life-like structures ranging from Turing-like patterns reminiscent of animal skins stripes and
spots [1] to localized autonomous patterns showing key behaviors like self-replication [38].
A modern goal of morphogenesis research has become the manipulation, exploration and control of
self-organizing systems. With the recent advances in synthetic biology and high-precision roboticized
experimental conditions, potential applications range from automated material design [72], drug
discovery [66] and regenerative medicine [18] to unraveling the chemical origins of life [26, 48]. Yet,
∗

Source code, videos and additional results can be found at http://mayalenE.github.io/holmes/

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

