Cooperative Heterogeneous Deep Reinforcement
Learning

Han Zheng
AAII,University of Technology Sydney
Han.Zheng-1@student.uts.edu.au

Pengfei Wei
National University of Singapore
wpf89928@gmail.com

Jing Jiang
AAII,University of Technology Sydney
jing.jiang@uts.edu.au

Guodong Long
AAII,University of Technology Sydney
guodong.long@uts.edu.au

Qinghua Lu
Data61, CSIRO
qinghua.lu@data61.csiro.au

Chengqi Zhang
AAII,University of Technology Sydney
Chengqi.Zhang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Numerous deep reinforcement learning agents have been proposed, and each
of them has its strengths and flaws. In this work, we present a Cooperative
Heterogeneous Deep Reinforcement Learning (CHDRL) framework that can learn
a policy by integrating the advantages of heterogeneous agents. Specifically, we
propose a cooperative learning framework that classifies heterogeneous agents into
two classes: global agents and local agents. Global agents are off-policy agents
that can utilize experiences from the other agents. Local agents are either on-policy
agents or population-based evolutionary algorithms (EAs) agents that can explore
the local area effectively. We employ global agents, which are sample-efficient,
to guide the learning of local agents so that local agents can benefit from sampleefficient agents and simultaneously maintain their advantages, e.g., stability. Global
agents also benefit from effective local searches. Experimental studies on a range of
continuous control tasks from the Mujoco benchmark show that CHDRL achieves
better performance compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) integrates deep neural networks with reinforcement learning
principles, e.g.,Q-learning and policy-gradient, to create a more efficient agent. Recent studies have
shown a great success of DRL in numerous challenging real-world problems, e.g., video games
and robotic control [19]. Although promising, existing DRL algorithms still suffer from several
challenges including sample complexity, instability, and temporal credit assignment problems [28, 9].
One popular research line of DRL is policy-gradient based on-policy methods attempting to evaluate
or improve the same policy that is used to make decisions [29], e.g., trust region policy optimization
(TRPO) [24] and proximal policy optimization (PPO) [25]. Recent works [31, 17] have proved that
policy-gradient based methods can converge to a stationary point under some conditions, which
theoretically guarantees their stability. However, they are extremely sample-expensive since they
require new samples to be collected in each gradient step [29].
On the contrary, Q-learning based off-policy methods, which is another research line evaluating
or improving a policy different from the one that is used to generate the behavior, can improve
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

