The LoCA Regret: A Consistent Metric to Evaluate
Model-Based Behavior in Reinforcement Learning

Harm van Seijen1 , Hadi Nekoei2 , Evan Racah2 , Sarath Chandar2,3,4
1
3

Microsoft Research Montréal, 2 Mila - Quebec AI Institute,
École Polytechnique de Montréal, 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Deep model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) has the potential to substantially
improve the sample-efficiency of deep RL. While various challenges have long held
it back, a number of papers have recently come out reporting success with deep
model-based methods. This is a great development, but the lack of a consistent metric to evaluate such methods makes it difficult to compare various approaches. For
example, the common single-task sample-efficiency metric conflates improvements
due to model-based learning with various other aspects, such as representation
learning, making it difficult to assess true progress on model-based RL. To address
this, we introduce an experimental setup to evaluate model-based behavior of RL
methods, inspired by work from neuroscience on detecting model-based behavior in
humans and animals. Our metric based on this setup, the Local Change Adaptation
(LoCA) regret, measures how quickly an RL method adapts to a local change in the
environment. Our metric can identify model-based behavior, even if the method
uses a poor representation and provides insight in how close a method’s behavior is
from optimal model-based behavior. We use our setup to evaluate the model-based
behavior of MuZero on a variation of the classic Mountain Car task.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has seen great success [13, 17, 6, 2], but it’s no coincidence that
these successes are almost exclusively on simulated environments—where samples are cheap—as
contemporary deep RL methods have notoriously poor sample complexity. Deep model-based RL is
a promising direction to substantially improve sample-efficiency. With model-based RL, an estimate
of the transition dynamics and reward function is formed and planning techniques are employed to
derive a policy from these estimates. For long, this approach did not combine well with function
approximation, especially deep neural networks, due to fundamental problems such as compounding
errors when predicting multiple steps into the future [20]. Recently, however, a number of papers
have come out reporting success with deep model-based RL [15, 7–9, 4], including state-of-the-art
performance on the Atari benchmark [16].
These recent successes bring to the forefront some interesting research questions, such as, "What
strategies are employed to mitigate the compounding error issue?", "What are the relative strengths
and weaknesses of the various deep model-based methods?", and, last but not least, "How much room
is there for further improvement?". Addressing such questions requires a clear notion of the target of
model-based learning and a metric to measure progress along this target.
Currently, a common metric to evaluate model-based methods is single-task sample efficiency.
However, this is a poor metric to measure progress on model-based learning for a number of reasons.
First, it conflates improvements due to model-based learning with various other aspects, such as
generalization and exploration. Second, it provides little insight into the relative performance
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

