The Implications of Local Correlation on Learning
Some Deep Functions
Eran Malach
School of Computer Science,
The Hebrew University, Israel.
eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il

Shai Shalev-Shwartz
School of Computer Science,
The Hebrew University, Israel.
shais@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
It is known that learning deep neural-networks is computationally hard in the
worst-case. In fact, the proofs of such hardness results show that even weakly
learning deep networks is hard. In other words, no efficient algorithm can find a
predictor that is slightly better than a random guess. However, we observe that
on natural distributions of images, small patches of the input image are correlated to the target label, which implies that on such natural data, efficient weak
learning is trivial. While in the distribution-free setting, the celebrated boosting
results show that weak learning implies strong learning, in the distribution-specific
setting this is not necessarily the case. We introduce a property of distributions,
denoted “local correlation”, which requires that small patches of the input image
and of intermediate layers of the target function are correlated to the target label.
We empirically demonstrate that this property holds for the CIFAR and ImageNet
data sets. The main technical results of the paper is proving that, for some classes
of deep functions, weak learning implies efficient strong learning under the “local
correlation” assumption.

1

Introduction and Motivation

It is well known (e.g. [26]) that while deep neural-networks can express any function that can
be run efficiently on a computer, in the general case, learning neural-networks is computationally
hard. Despite this theoretic pessimism, in practice, deep neural networks are successfully trained on
real world datasets. Bridging this theoretical-practical gap seems to be the holy grail of theoretical
machine learning nowadays. Maybe the most natural direction to bridge this gap is to find a property
of data distributions that determines whether learning them is computationally easy or hard. The goal
of this paper is to propose such a property.
To start off, let us take a closer look into computational hardness results on learning neural-networks.
Over the years, the theoretical machine learning community has established many such hardness
results, drawing from different hardness assumptions [26, 29, 9, 33]. While these results differ
in their technical details, they all share one thing in common: they all show that weakly learning
neural-networks is computationally hard. That is, all these works analyze cases where no efficient
algorithm can achieve test performance that is even slightly better than a random guess, although
there exists a neural-network that perfectly fits the data.
While these results have great theoretical implications, we claim that they have nothing to do with
understanding learnability of neural-networks on natural data. Indeed, in natural problems, even
ones that are considered very challenging, achieving better-than-random performance is usually
trivial. To demonstrate this, we perform the following simple experiment: we train a linear classifier
on a single patch taken from images in some image classification task. We observe that even on a
complex task such as ImageNet, a linear predictor that gets only a 3 ⇥ 3 patch as an input, achieves
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

