Depth Uncertainty in Neural Networks
Javier Antoránú
University of Cambridge
ja666@cam.ac.uk

James Urquhart Allinghamú
University of Cambridge
jua23@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
Microsoft Research
The Alan Turing Institute
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Existing methods for estimating uncertainty in deep learning tend to require
multiple forward passes, making them unsuitable for applications where
computational resources are limited. To solve this, we perform probabilistic
reasoning over the depth of neural networks. Different depths correspond to
subnetworks which share weights and whose predictions are combined via
marginalisation, yielding model uncertainty. By exploiting the sequential
structure of feed-forward networks, we are able to both evaluate our training
objective and make predictions with a single forward pass. We validate
our approach on real-world regression and image classification tasks. Our
approach provides uncertainty calibration, robustness to dataset shift, and
accuracies competitive with more computationally expensive baselines.

1

Introduction

Despite the widespread adoption of deep learning, building models that provide robust
uncertainty estimates remains a challenge. This is especially important for real-world
applications, where we cannot expect the distribution of observations to be the same as that
of the training data. Deep models tend to be pathologically overconfident, even when their
predictions are incorrect (Nguyen et al., 2015; Amodei et al., 2016). If AI systems would
reliably identify cases in which they expect to underperform, and request human intervention,
they could more safely be deployed in medical scenarios (Filos et al., 2019) or self-driving
vehicles (Fridman et al., 2019), for example.
In response, a rapidly growing subfield has emerged seeking to build uncertainty aware
neural networks (Hernández-Lobato and Adams, 2015; Gal and Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). Regrettably, these methods rarely make the leap from research
to production due to a series of shortcomings. 1) Implementation Complexity: they can be
technically complicated and sensitive to hyperparameter choice. 2) Computational cost: they
can take orders of magnitude longer to converge than regular networks or require training
multiple networks. At test time, averaging the predictions from multiple models is often
required. 3) Weak performance: they rely on crude approximations to achieve scalability,
often resulting in limited or unreliable uncertainty estimates (Foong et al., 2019a).
In this work, we introduce Depth Uncertainty Networks (DUNs), a probabilistic model that
treats the depth of a Neural Network (NN) as a random variable over which to perform
ú

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

