Promoting Coordination
through Policy Regularization
in Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning

Julien Roy∗
Québec AI institute (Mila)
Polytechnique Montréal
julien.roy@mila.quebec
Félix G. Harvey
Québec AI institute (Mila)
Polytechnique Montréal

Paul Barde∗
Québec AI institute (Mila)
McGill University
bardepau@mila.quebec

Derek Nowrouzezahrai
Québec AI institute (Mila)
McGill University

Christopher Pal‡
Québec AI institute (Mila)
Polytechnique Montréal
Element AI

Abstract
In multi-agent reinforcement learning, discovering successful collective behaviors
is challenging as it requires exploring a joint action space that grows exponentially
with the number of agents. While the tractability of independent agent-wise
exploration is appealing, this approach fails on tasks that require elaborate
group strategies. We argue that coordinating the agents’ policies can guide their
exploration and we investigate techniques to promote such an inductive bias. We
propose two policy regularization methods: TeamReg, which is based on interagent action predictability and CoachReg that relies on synchronized behavior
selection. We evaluate each approach on four challenging continuous control tasks
with sparse rewards that require varying levels of coordination as well as on the
discrete action Google Research Football environment. Our experiments show
improved performance across many cooperative multi-agent problems. Finally, we
analyze the effects of our proposed methods on the policies that our agents learn
and show that our methods successfully enforce the qualities that we propose as
proxies for coordinated behaviors.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) refers to the task of training an agent to maximize its
expected return by interacting with an environment that contains other learning agents. It represents a
challenging branch of Reinforcement Learning (RL) with interesting developments in recent years
[11]. A popular framework for MARL is the use of a Centralized Training and a Decentralized
Execution (CTDE) procedure [24, 8, 14, 7, 28]. Typically, one leverages centralized critics to
approximate the value function of the aggregated observations-actions pairs and train actors restricted
to the observation of a single agent. Such critics, if exposed to coordinated joint actions leading to
high returns, can steer the agents’ policies toward these highly rewarding behaviors. However, these
approaches depend on the agents luckily stumbling on these collective actions in order to grasp their
benefit. Thus, it might fail in scenarios where such behaviors are unlikely to occur by chance. We
hypothesize that in such scenarios, coordination-promoting inductive biases on the policy search
∗
‡

Equal contribution.
Canada CIFAR AI Chair.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

