Towards Minimax Optimal Reinforcement Learning
in Factored Markov Decision Processes
Yi Tian*
Department of EECS
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
yitian@mit.edu

Jian Qian∗
Department of EECS
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
jianqian@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
Department of EECS
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
We study minimax optimal reinforcement learning in episodic factored Markov
decision processes (FMDPs), which are MDPs with conditionally independent
transition components. Assuming the factorization is known, we propose two
model-based algorithms. The first one achieves minimax optimal regret guarantees
for a rich class of factored structures, while the second one enjoys better computational complexity with a slightly worse regret. A key new ingredient of our
algorithms is the design of a bonus term to guide exploration. We complement our
algorithms by presenting several structure-dependent lower bounds on regret for
FMDPs that reveal the difficulty hiding in the intricacy of the structures.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL) an agent interacts with an unknown environment seeking to maximize
its cumulative reward. The dynamics of the environment and the agent’s interaction with it are
typically modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP). We consider the specific setting of episodic
MDPs with a fixed interaction horizon. Here, at each step the agent observes the current state of the
environment, takes an action, and receives a reward. Given the agent’s action, the environment then
transitions to the next state. The interaction horizon is the number of steps in an episode. Both the
transitions and rewards may be unknown to the agent.
The agent’s performance can be quantified using regret: the gap between the expected cumulative
rewards the agent receives and those obtainable by following an optimal policy. An optimal RL
algorithm is then one
√that incurs the minimum regret. For episodic MDPs, the minimax regret bound
is known to be Õ( HSAT ) [1] (the notation Õ(·) hides log factors), where H, S, A, T denote
the horizon, the size of the state space, the size of the action space, and the total number of steps,
respectively.
√
Background and our focus. In problems with large state and action spaces even the Õ( SA)
dependence of the regret is impractical. We focus on problems where one can circumvent this
dependence. Specifically, we focus on problems with conditional independence structure that can be
modeled via factored MDPs (FMDPs) [2, 3]. The state for an FMDP is represented as a tuple, where
each component is determined by a potentially small portion of the state-action space, termed its
“scope”. For example, for a home robot, whether the table is clean has nothing to do with whether the
robot vacuums the floor. FMDPs also arise naturally from cooperative RL [15, 32] and constrained
RL [7]; furthermore, they are useful to model subtask dependencies in hierarchical RL [36].
A key benefit of FMDPs is their more compact representation that requires exponentially smaller
space to store state transitions than corresponding nonfactored MDPs. Early works [16, 24, 37, 39]
show that FMDPs can also reduce the sample complexity exponentially, albeit with some higher order
terms. Osband and Van Roy [28] and Xu and Tewari [43] develop near-optimal regret bounds for
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

