Dynamic Regret of Convex and Smooth Functions

Peng Zhao, Yu-Jie Zhang, Lijun Zhang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{zhaop, zhangyj, zhanglj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate online convex optimization in non-stationary environments and
choose the dynamic regret as the performance measure, defined as the difference
between cumulative loss incurred by the online algorithm and that of any feasible
comparator sequence. Let T be the time horizon and PT be the path-length
that essentially reflects
p the non-stationarity of environments, the state-of-the-art
dynamic regret is O( T (1 + PT )). Although this bound is proved to be minimax
optimal for convex functions, in this paper, we demonstrate that it is possible
to further enhance the dynamic regret by exploiting the smoothness condition.
Specifically, we propose novel online algorithms that are capable of leveraging
smoothness and replace the dependence on T in the dynamic regret by problemdependent quantities: the variation in gradients of loss functions, the cumulative
loss of the comparator sequence, and the minimum of the previous two terms. These
quantities are at most O(T ) while could be much smaller in benign environments.
Therefore, our results are adaptive to the intrinsic difficulty of the problem, since
the bounds are tighter than existing results for easy problems and meanwhile
guarantee the same rate in the worst case.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, data are inherently accumulated over time, and thus it is of great
importance to develop a learning system that updates in an online fashion. Online Convex Optimization (OCO) is a powerful paradigm for learning in such a circumstance, which can be regarded as an
iterative game between a player and an adversary. At iteration t, the player selects a decision xt from
a convex set X and the adversary reveals a convex function ft : X 7→ R. The player subsequently
suffers an instantaneous loss ft (xt ). The performance measure is the (static) regret [1],
S-RegretT =

T
X

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

t=1

T
X

ft (x),

(1)

t=1

which is the difference between cumulative loss incurred by the online algorithm and that of the best
decision in hindsight. The rationale behind such a metric is that the best fixed decision in hindsight is
reasonably good over all the iterations. However, this is too optimistic and may not hold in changing
environments, where data are evolving and the optimal decision is drifting over time. To address this
limitation, dynamic regret is proposed to compete with changing comparators u1 , . . . , uT ∈ X ,
D-RegretT (u1 , . . . , uT ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) −

T
X

ft (ut ),

(2)

t=1

which draws considerable attention recently [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. The measure is also
called the universal dynamic regret (or general dynamic regret), in the sense that it gives a universal
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

