Learning to Detect Objects with a 1 Megapixel Event
Camera
Etienne Perot
PROPHESEE, Paris
eperot@prophesee.ai
Davide Nitti
PROPHESEE, Paris
dnitti@prophesee.ai

Pierre de Tournemire
PROPHESEE, Paris
pdetournemire@prophesee.ai

Jonathan Masci
NNAISENSE, Lugano
jonathan@nnaisense.com

Amos Sironi
PROPHESEE, Paris
asironi@prophesee.ai

Abstract
Event cameras encode visual information with high temporal precision, low datarate, and high-dynamic range. Thanks to these characteristics, event cameras are
particularly suited for scenarios with high motion, challenging lighting conditions
and requiring low latency. However, due to the novelty of the field, the performance
of event-based systems on many vision tasks is still lower compared to conventional
frame-based solutions. The main reasons for this performance gap are: the lower
spatial resolution of event sensors, compared to frame cameras; the lack of largescale training datasets; the absence of well established deep learning architectures
for event-based processing. In this paper, we address all these problems in the
context of an event-based object detection task. First, we publicly release the first
high-resolution large-scale dataset for object detection. The dataset contains more
than 14 hours recordings of a 1 megapixel event camera, in automotive scenarios,
together with 25M bounding boxes of cars, pedestrians, and two-wheelers, labeled
at high frequency. Second, we introduce a novel recurrent architecture for eventbased detection and a temporal consistency loss for better-behaved training. The
ability to compactly represent the sequence of events into the internal memory of
the model is essential to achieve high accuracy. Our model outperforms by a large
margin feed-forward event-based architectures. Moreover, our method does not
require any reconstruction of intensity images from events, showing that training
directly from raw events is possible, more efficient, and more accurate than passing
through an intermediate intensity image. Experiments on the dataset introduced in
this work, for which events and gray level images are available, show performance
on par with that of highly tuned and studied frame-based detectors.

1

Introduction

Event cameras [1, 2, 3, 4] promise a paradigm shift in computer vision by representing visual
information in a fundamentally different way. Rather than encoding dynamic visual scenes with a
sequence of still images, acquired at a fixed frame rate, event cameras generate data in the form of a
sparse and asynchronous events stream. Each event is represented by a tuple (x, y, p, t) corresponding
to an illuminance change by a fixed relative amount, at pixel location (x, y) and time t, with the
polarity p ∈ {0, 1} indicating whether the illuminance was increasing or decreasing. Fig. 1 shows
examples of data from an event camera in a driving scenario.
Since the camera does not rely on a global clock, but each pixel independently emits an event as soon
as it detects an illuminance change, the events stream has a very high temporal resolution, typically
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

