Learning abstract structure for drawing by efficient
motor program induction
Lucas Y. Tian1,2,3 , Kevin Ellis1,2 , Marta Kryven1,2 , and Joshua B. Tenenbaum1,2
1
Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
3
Laboratory of Neural Systems, Rockefeller University
{lyt,ellisk,mkryven,jbt}@mit.edu
2

Abstract
Humans flexibly solve new problems that differ from those previously practiced.
This ability to flexibly generalize is supported by learned concepts that represent
useful structure common across different problems. Here we develop a naturalistic
drawing task to study how humans rapidly acquire structured prior knowledge.
The task requires drawing visual figures that share underlying structure, based
on a set of composable geometric rules and simple objects. We show that people
spontaneously learn abstract drawing procedures that support generalization, and
propose a model of how learners can discover these reusable drawing procedures.
Trained in the same setting as humans, and constrained to produce efficient motor
actions, this model discovers new drawing program subroutines that generalize
to test figures and resemble learned features of human behavior. These results
suggest that two principles guiding motor program induction in the model - abstraction (programs can reflect high-level structure that ignores figure-specific details)
and compositionality (new programs are discovered by recombining previously
learned programs) - are key for explaining how humans learn structured internal
representations that guide flexible reasoning and learning.

1

Introduction

A long-term goal of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is to build machines that can quickly learn to solve
new problems. Inspiration may be gained from studying human intelligence. People readily learn to
perform many kinds of tasks without extensive supervision or direct experience, such as inferring what
kinds of objects a new word is referring to, or rapidly learning new video games [1]. These abilities
are partly supported by learned internal models, or inductive biases, whose structure represents
regularities useful for reasoning about new situations (e.g., the hierarchical structure of object
categories, or rules common across different video games) [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In this work we adopt
a scientific, rather than engineering, goal: to probe diagnostic elements of how humans acquire
structured prior knowledge, and to understand it in computational terms.
To study such learning in a controlled setting, we introduce a drawing task to investigate rapid, fewshot updating of structured internal models. On its surface, the task is simple: to copy, by drawing on
a touchscreen, a series of novel visual figures. However, how people draw provides rich insight into
their internal representations and prior knowledge. This is intuitive when one considers the inherent
ambiguity in how even simple line-drawings should be copied. How do different line segments group
into coherent objects? How are different objects related? Drawing has therefore been studied for
insight into how reasoning and problem-solving is guided by structured prior knowledge, including
concepts as diverse as geometry, real-world objects, and geological formations [8, 9, 10, 4, 11, 12, 13].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

