Can Temporal-Difference and Q-Learning
Learn Representation? A Mean-Field Analysis
Yufeng Zhang
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
yufengzhang2023@u.northwestern.edu
Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
zy6@princeton.edu

Qi Cai
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
qicai2022@u.northwestern.edu

Yongxin Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
yongchen@gatech.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Abstract
Temporal-difference and Q-learning play a key role in deep reinforcement learning,
where they are empowered by expressive nonlinear function approximators such
as neural networks. At the core of their empirical successes is the learned feature
representation, which embeds rich observations, e.g., images and texts, into the
latent space that encodes semantic structures. Meanwhile, the evolution of such
a feature representation is crucial to the convergence of temporal-difference and
Q-learning.
In particular, temporal-difference learning converges when the function approximator is linear in a feature representation, which is fixed throughout learning, and
possibly diverges otherwise. We aim to answer the following questions:
When the function approximator is a neural network, how does the associated
feature representation evolve? If it converges, does it converge to the optimal one?
We prove that, utilizing an overparameterized two-layer neural network, temporaldifference and Q-learning globally minimize the mean-squared projected Bellman
error at a sublinear rate. Moreover, the associated feature representation converges
to the optimal one, generalizing the previous analysis of [21] in the neural tangent kernel regime, where the associated feature representation stabilizes at the
initial one. The key to our analysis is a mean-field perspective, which connects
the evolution of a finite-dimensional parameter to its limiting counterpart over an
infinite-dimensional Wasserstein space. Our analysis generalizes to soft Q-learning,
which is further connected to policy gradient.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning achieves phenomenal empirical successes, especially in challenging
applications where an agent acts upon rich observations, e.g., images and texts. Examples include
video gaming [56], visuomotor manipulation [51], and language generation [39]. Such empirical
successes are empowered by expressive nonlinear function approximators such as neural networks,
which are used to parameterize both policies (actors) and value functions (critics) [46]. In particular,
the neural network learned from interacting with the environment induces a data-dependent feature
representation, which embeds rich observations into a latent space encoding semantic structures
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

