Distributionally Robust Federated Averaging

Yuyang Deng

Mohammad Mahdi Kamani
Mehrdad Mahdavi
The Pennsylvania State University
{yzd82,mqk5591,mzm616}@psu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study communication efficient distributed algorithms for distributionally robust federated learning via periodic averaging with adaptive sampling.
In contrast to standard empirical risk minimization, due to the minimax structure of
the underlying optimization problem, a key difficulty arises from the fact that the
global parameter that controls the mixture of local losses can only be updated infrequently on the global stage. To compensate for this, we propose a Distributionally
Robust Federated Averaging (DRFA) algorithm that employs a novel snapshotting scheme to approximate the accumulation of history gradients of the mixing
parameter. We analyze the convergence rate of DRFA in both convex-linear and
nonconvex-linear settings. We also generalize the proposed idea to objectives with
regularization on the mixture parameter and propose a proximal variant, dubbed
as DRFA-Prox, with provable convergence rates. We also analyze an alternative
optimization method for regularized case in strongly-convex-strongly-concave and
non-convex (under PL condition)-strongly-concave settings. To the best of our
knowledge, this paper is the first to solve distributionally robust federated learning with reduced communication, and to analyze the efficiency of local descent
methods on distributed minimax problems. We give corroborating experimental
evidence for our theoretical results in federated learning settings.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has been a key learning paradigm to train a centralized model from an
extremely large number of devices/users without accessing their local data [21]. A commonly used
approach is to aggregate the individual loss functions usually weighted proportionally to their sample
sizes and solve the following optimization problem in a distributed manner:
min F (w) :=

w∈W

N
X
ni
i=1

n

{fi (w) := Eξ∼Pi [`(w; ξ)]} ,

(1)

where N is number of clients each with ni training samples drawn from some unknown distribution
Pi (possibly different from other clients), fi (w) is the local objective at device i for a given loss
function `, W is a closed convex set, and n is total number of samples.
In a federated setting, in contrast to classical distributed optimization, in solving the optimization
problem in Eq. 1, three key challenges need to be tackled including i) communication efficiency,
ii) the low participation of devices, and iii) heterogeneity of local data shards. To circumvent the
communication bottleneck, an elegant idea is to periodically average locally evolving models as
employed in FedAvg algorithm [34]. Specifically, each local device optimizes its own model for τ
local iterations using SGD, and then a subset of devices is selected by the server to communicate their
models for averaging. This approach, which can be considered as a variant of local SGD [44, 13, 14]
but with partial participation of devices, can significantly reduce the number of communication
rounds, as demonstrated both empirically and theoretically in various studies [26, 20, 12, 15, 46].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

