Top-k Training of GANs: Improving GAN
Performance by Throwing Away Bad Samples
Samarth Sinha ⇤
University of Toronto
samarth.sinha@mail.utoronto.ca
Anirudh Goyal
Mila, Université de Montréal

Zhengli Zhao ⇤
University of California, Irvine
zhengliz@uci.edu
Colin Raffel
Google Brain

Augustus Odena
Google Brain

Abstract
We introduce a simple (one line of code) modification to the Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) training algorithm that materially improves results with no increase
in computational cost: When updating the generator parameters, we simply zero
out the gradient contributions from the elements of the batch that the critic scores
as ‘least realistic’. Through experiments on many different GAN variants, we show
that this ‘top-k update’ procedure is a generally applicable improvement. In order
to understand the nature of the improvement, we conduct extensive analysis on a
simple mixture-of-Gaussians dataset and discover several interesting phenomena.
Among these is that, when gradient updates are computed using the worst-scoring
batch elements, samples can actually be pushed further away from their nearest
mode. We also apply our method to recent GAN variants and improve state-of-theart FID for conditional generation from 9.21 to 8.57 on CIFAR-10.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15] have been successfully used for image synthesis
[32, 47, 4], audio synthesis [10, 11], domain adaptation [53, 48], and other applications [45, 27, 50].
It is well known that GANs are difficult to train, and much research focuses on ways to modify the
training procedure to reduce this difficulty. Since the generator parameters are updated by performing
gradient descent through the critic, much of this work focuses on modifying the critic in some way
[1, 30, 33, 16] so that the gradients the generator gets will be more ‘useful’. What ‘usefulness’ means
is generally somewhat ill-defined, but we can define it implicitly and say that useful gradients are
those which result in the generator learning a better model of the target distribution.
Recent work by [44] suggests that gradients can be more useful when computed on samples closer
to the data-manifold – that is, if we tend to update the generator and critic weights using samples
that are more realistic, the generator will tend to output more realistic samples. [44] achieves stateof-the-art results on the ImageNet conditional image synthesis task by generating samples from the
generator, computing the gradient of the critic with respect to the sampled prior that generated those
samples, updating that sampled prior in the direction of that gradient, and then finally updating the
generator parameters using this new draw from the prior. In short, they update the generator and
critic parameters using a z 0 such that the critic thinks G(z 0 ) is ‘more realistic’ than G(z). However,
this procedure is complicated and computationally expensive: it requires twice as many operations
per gradient update. In this work, we demonstrate that similar improvements can be achieved with a
much simpler technique: we propose to simply zero out the gradient contributions from the elements
of the batch that the critic scores as ‘least realistic’.
⇤

Samarth Sinha and Zhengli Zhao contributed equally as joint first authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

