Munchausen Reinforcement Learning

Nino Vieillard
Google Research, Brain Team
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, IECL
F-54000 Nancy, France
vieillard@google.com

Olivier Pietquin
Google Research, Brain Team
pietquin@google.com

Matthieu Geist
Google Research, Brain Team
mfgeist@google.com

Abstract
Bootstrapping is a core mechanism in Reinforcement Learning (RL). Most algorithms, based on temporal differences, replace the true value of a transiting state
by their current estimate of this value. Yet, another estimate could be leveraged to
bootstrap RL: the current policy. Our core contribution stands in a very simple idea:
adding the scaled log-policy to the immediate reward. We show that slightly modifying Deep Q-Network (DQN) in that way provides an agent that is competitive
with distributional methods on Atari games, without making use of distributional
RL, n-step returns or prioritized replay. To demonstrate the versatility of this idea,
we also use it together with an Implicit Quantile Network (IQN). The resulting
agent outperforms Rainbow on Atari, installing a new State of the Art with very
little modifications to the original algorithm. To add to this empirical study, we
provide strong theoretical insights on what happens under the hood – implicit
Kullback-Leibler regularization and increase of the action-gap.

1

Introduction

Most Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms make use of Temporal Difference (TD) learning [29]
in some ways. It is a well-known bootstrapping mechanism that consists in replacing the unknown
true value of a transiting state by its current estimate and use it as a target for learning. Yet, agents
compute another estimate while learning that could be leveraged to bootstrap RL: their current policy.
Indeed, it reflects the agent’s hunch about which actions should be executed next and thus, which
actions are good. Building upon this observation, our core contribution stands in a very simple idea:
optimizing for the immediate reward augmented by the scaled log-policy of the agent when using any
TD scheme. We insist right away that this is different from maximum entropy RL [36], that subtracts
the scaled log-policy to all rewards, and aims at maximizing both the expected return and the expected
entropy of the resulting policy. We call this general approach “Munchausen Reinforcement Learning”
(M-RL), as a reference to a famous passage of The Surprising Adventures of Baron Munchausen
by Raspe [24], where the Baron pulls himself out of a swamp by pulling on his own hair.
To demonstrate the genericity and the strength of this idea, we introduce it into the most popular RL
agent: the seminal Deep Q-Network (DQN) [23]. Yet, DQN does not compute stochastic policies,
which prevents using log-policies. So, we first introduce a straightforward generalization of DQN to
maximum entropy RL [36, 17], and then modify the resulting TD update by adding the scaled logpolicy to the immediate reward. The resulting algorithm, referred to as Munchausen-DQN (M-DQN),
is thus genuinely a slight modification of DQN. Yet, it comes with strong empirical performances.
On the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) [6], not only it surpasses the original DQN by a large
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

