Deep Reinforcement Learning with Stacked
Hierarchical Attention for Text-based Games
Yunqiu Xu∗
University of Technology Sydney
Yunqiu.Xu@student.uts.edu.au

Meng Fang∗
Tencent Robotics X
mfang@tencent.com

Ling Chen
University of Technology Sydney
Ling.Chen@uts.edu.au
Joey Tianyi Zhou
IHPC A*STAR
zhouty@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

Yali Du
University College London
yali.du@ucl.ac.uk
Chengqi Zhang
University of Technology Sydney
Chengqi.Zhang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning (RL) for text-based games, which are interactive
simulations in the context of natural language. While different methods have been
developed to represent the environment information and language actions, existing
RL agents are not empowered with any reasoning capabilities to deal with textual
games. In this work, we aim to conduct explicit reasoning with knowledge graphs
for decision making, so that the actions of an agent are generated and supported by
an interpretable inference procedure. We propose a stacked hierarchical attention
mechanism to construct an explicit representation of the reasoning process by
exploiting the structure of the knowledge graph. We extensively evaluate our
method on a number of man-made benchmark games, and the experimental results
demonstrate that our method performs better than existing text-based agents.

1

Introduction

Language plays a core role in human intelligence and cognition [14, 43]. Text-based games [13, 20],
where both the states and actions are described by textual descriptions, are suitable simulation
environments for studying the language-informed decision making process. These games can be
regarded as an intersection of natural language processing (NLP) and reinforcement learning (RL)
tasks [35]. To solve text-based games via RL, the agent has to tackle many challenges, such as
learning representation from text [42], making decisions based on partial observations [4], handling
combinatorial action space [57] and sparse rewards [56]. Generally, existing agents for text-based
games can be classified as rule-based agents and learning-based agents. Rule-based agents, such as
NAIL [21], solve the games based on pre-defined rules, engineering tricks, and pre-trained language
models. By heavily relying on prior knowledge of the games, these agents lack flexibility and
adaptability. With the progress of deep reinforcement learning [38, 39], learning-based agents such
as LSTM-DRQN [42] become increasingly popular since they learn purely from interaction without
requiring expensive human knowledge as prior. Recently, considering the rich information that can
be maintained by its structural memory, knowledge graphs (KGs) have been incorporated into RL
agents to facilitate solving text-based games [1, 4, 3].
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

