Byzantine Resilient Distributed Multi-Task Learning

Jiani Li, Waseem Abbas, and Xenofon Koutsoukos
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
{jiani.li, waseem.abbas, xenofon.koutsoukos}@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Distributed multi-task learning provides significant advantages in multi-agent
networks with heterogeneous data sources where agents aim to learn distinct but
correlated models simultaneously. However, distributed algorithms for learning
relatedness among tasks are not resilient in the presence of Byzantine agents. In
this paper, we present an approach for Byzantine resilient distributed multi-task
learning. We propose an efficient online weight assignment rule by measuring
the accumulated loss using an agent’s data and its neighbors’ models. A small
accumulated loss indicates a large similarity between the two tasks. In order to
ensure the Byzantine resilience of the aggregation at a normal agent, we introduce
a step for filtering out larger losses. We analyze the approach for convex models
and show that normal agents converge resiliently towards the global minimum.
Further, aggregation with the proposed weight assignment rule always results in an
improved expected regret than the non-cooperative case. Finally, we demonstrate
the approach using three case studies, including regression and classification
problems, and show that our method exhibits good empirical performance for
non-convex models, such as convolutional neural networks.

1

Introduction

Distributed machine learning models are gaining much attention recently as they improve the learning
capabilities of agents distributed within a network with no central entity. In a distributed multi-agent
system, agents interact with each other to improve their learning capabilities by leveraging the shared
information via exchanging either data or models. In particular, agents that do not have enough data
to build refined models or agents that have limited computational capabilities, benefit most from
such cooperation. Distributed learning also addresses the single point of failure problem as well as
scalability issues and is naturally suited to mobile phones, autonomous vehicles, drones, healthcare,
smart cities, and many other applications [1, 2, 3, 4].
In networks with heterogeneous data sources, it is natural to consider the multi-task learning (MTL)
framework, where agents aim to learn distinct but correlated models simultaneously [5]. Typically,
prior knowledge of the relationships among models is assumed in MTL. The relationships among
agents can be promoted via several methods, such as mean regularization, clustered regularization,
low-rank and sparse structures regularization [6, 7, 8]. However, in real-world applications, such
relationships are unknown beforehand and need to be estimated online from data. Learning similarities
among tasks to promote effective cooperation is a primary consideration in MTL. There has been
extensive work for learning the relationship matrix centrally by optimizing a global convex regularized
function [9, 10, 11]. In contrast, this paper focuses on computationally efficient distributed learning
of the relationship among agents that does not require optimizing a relationship matrix centrally
[12, 13, 14, 15].
Although the distributed approach to learning and promoting similarities among neighbors from
online data has many advantages, it is not resilient to Byzantine agents. Fault-tolerance for MTL
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

