Universal Domain Adaptation through
Self-Supervision

Kuniaki Saito1

1

Donghyun Kim1

Stan Sclaroff1

Kate Saenko1,2
Boston University 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

[keisaito,dohnk,sclaroff,saenko]@bu.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation methods traditionally assume that all source
categories are present in the target domain. In practice, little may be known about
the category overlap between the two domains. While some methods address target
settings with either partial or open-set categories, they assume that the particular
setting is known a priori. We propose a more universally applicable domain
adaptation framework that can handle arbitrary category shift, called Domain
Adaptative Neighborhood Clustering via Entropy optimization (DANCE). DANCE
combines two novel ideas: First, as we cannot fully rely on source categories
to learn features discriminative for the target, we propose a novel neighborhood
clustering technique to learn the structure of the target domain in a self-supervised
way. Second, we use entropy-based feature alignment and rejection to align target
features with the source or reject them as unknown categories based on their entropy.
We show through extensive experiments that DANCE outperforms baselines across
open-set, open-partial, and partial domain adaptation settings. Implementation is
available at https://github.com/VisionLearningGroup/DANCE.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks can learn highly discriminative representations for image recognition tasks [8,
37, 20, 31, 16], but do not generalize well to new domains that are not distributed identically to the
training data. Domain adaptation (DA) aims to transfer representations of source categories to novel
target domains without additional supervision. Recent deep DA methods primarily achieve this by
minimizing the feature distribution shift between the source and target samples [11, 24, 38]. However,
these methods make strong assumptions about the degree to which the source categories overlap with
the target domain, which limits their applicability to many real-world settings.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of Universal DA. Suppose Ls and Lt are the label sets in the
source and target domain. In Universal DA we want to handle all of the following potential “category
shifts”: closed-set (Ls = Lt ), open-set (Ls ⊂ Lt ) [1, 35], partial (Lt ⊂ Ls ) [2], or a mix of open and
partial [43]. Existing DA methods cannot address Universal DA well because they are each designed
to handle just one of the above settings. However, since the target domain is unlabeled, we may not
know in advance which of these situations will occur. Thus, an unexpected category shift could lead
to catastrophic misalignment. For example, using a closed-set method when the target has novel
(“unknown”) classes could incorrectly align them to source (“known”) classes. The underlying issue
at play is that existing work heavily relies on prior knowledge about the category shift.
The second problem is that the over-reliance on source supervision makes it challenging to obtain
discriminative features on the target. Prior methods focus on aligning target features with source,
rather than on exploiting structure specific to the target domain. In the universal DA setting, this
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

