Comprehensive Attention Self-Distillation
for Weakly-Supervised Object Detection

Zeyi Huang∗ , Yang Zou∗, Vijayakumar Bhagavatula, and Dong Huang
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA
{zeyih@andrew, yzou2@andrew, kumar@ece, donghuang@}.cmu.edu

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Object Detection (WSOD) has emerged as an effective tool to
train object detectors using only the image-level category labels. However, without
object-level labels, WSOD detectors are prone to detect bounding boxes on salient
objects, clustered objects and discriminative object parts. Moreover, the imagelevel category labels do not enforce consistent object detection across different
transformations of the same images. To address the above issues, we propose a
Comprehensive Attention Self-Distillation (CASD) training approach2 for WSOD.
To balance feature learning among all object instances, CASD computes the comprehensive attention aggregated from multiple transformations and feature layers
of the same images. To enforce consistent spatial supervision on objects, CASD
conducts self-distillation on the WSOD networks, such that the comprehensive
attention is approximated simultaneously by multiple transformations and feature
layers of the same images. CASD produces new state-of-the-art WSOD results on
standard benchmarks such as PASCAL VOC 2007/2012 and MS-COCO.

1

Introduction

Visual object detection has achieved remarkable progress in the last decade thanks to the advances of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [1, 2]. An integral part of the achievement is the availability
of large-scale training data with precise bounding-box annotations (PASCAL VOC [3], MS-COCO
[4], etc). However, obtaining such fine-grained annotations at a large scale is labor-intensive and
time-consuming, which drove many researchers to explore the weakly-supervised setting. WeaklySupervised Object Detection (WSOD) [5] aims to learn object detectors with only the image-level
category labels indicating whether an image contains an object or not.
Most previous methods for WSOD are based on the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [6]. These
methods regard images as bags and object proposals as instances. A positive bag contains at least
one positive instance while all instances being negative in a negative bag. WSOD instance classifiers
(object detectors) are trained over these bags. Recently, leveraging the powerful representation
learning capacity of CNNs, several researchers proposed end-to-end MIL networks (OICR [7], PCL
[7], MIST [8], [9, 10]) with promising WSOD performances. These CNN methods regard the
instance classification (object detection) problem as a latent model learning within a bag classification
(image classification) problem, where the final image scores are the aggregation of the instance
scores. However, due to the under-determined and ill-posed nature of WSOD, there is still a large
performance gap between the weakly-supervised detectors and fully-supervised detectors.
The existing methods have two main sets of issues as demonstrated in Fig. 1. First, in the “Biased
WSOD” column of Fig. 1 (a) , there are three typical problems. Missing instance: Salient objects
∗
2

The authors contributed equally.
Code are avaliable at https://github.com/DeLightCMU/CASD

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

