No-Regret Learning and Mixed Nash Equilibria:
They Do Not Mix

Lampros Flokas∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
lamflokas@cs.columbia.edu

Emmanouil V. Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
emvlatakis@cs.columbia.edu

Thanasis Lianeas∗
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
National Technical University of Athens
Athens,Greece
lianeas@corelab.ntua.gr
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, LIG &
Criteo AI Lab
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Georgios Piliouras
Engineering Systems and Design
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Singapore
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Understanding the behavior of no-regret dynamics in general 𝑁-player games is
a fundamental question in online learning and game theory. A folk result in the
field states that, in finite games, the empirical frequency of play under no-regret
learning converges to the game’s set of coarse correlated equilibria. By contrast,
our understanding of how the day-to-day behavior of the dynamics correlates to the
game’s Nash equilibria is much more limited, and only partial results are known
for certain classes of games (such as zero-sum or congestion games). In this paper,
we study the dynamics of follow the regularized leader (FTRL), arguably the most
well-studied class of no-regret dynamics, and we establish a sweeping negative
result showing that the notion of mixed Nash equilibrium is antithetical to no-regret
learning. Specifically, we show that any Nash equilibrium which is not strict (in
that every player has a unique best response) cannot be stable and attracting under
the dynamics of FTRL. This result has significant implications for predicting the
outcome of a learning process as it shows unequivocally that only strict (and hence,
pure) Nash equilibria can emerge as stable limit points thereof.

1

Introduction

Regret minimization is one of the most fundamental requirements for online learning and decisionmaking in the presence of uncertainty and unpredictability [11]. Defined as the difference between
the cumulative performance of an adaptive policy and that of the best fixed action in hindsight, the
regret of an agent provides a concise and meaningful benchmark for quantifying the ability of an
online algorithm to adapt to an otherwise unknown and unpredictable environment.
∗ Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

