Synbols: Probing Learning Algorithms with
Synthetic Datasets
Alexandre Lacoste1 , Pau Rodríguez1 , Frédéric Branchaud-Charron1 , Parmida Atighehchian1 ,
Massimo Caccia1,2 , Issam Laradji1 , Alexandre Drouin1 , Matt Craddock1 , Laurent Charlin2 , and
David Vázquez1
1

Element AI
{allac, pau.rodriguez, frederic.branchaud-charron, parmida, massimo.caccia,
issam.laradji, adrouin, matt.craddock, dvazquez}@elementai.com
2
Mila, Université de Montréal
{massimo.p.caccia, lcharlin}@gmail.com

Abstract
Progress in the field of machine learning has been fueled by the introduction of
benchmark datasets pushing the limits of existing algorithms. Enabling the design
of datasets to test specific properties and failure modes of learning algorithms is
thus a problem of high interest, as it has a direct impact on innovation in the field.
In this sense, we introduce Synbols — Synthetic Symbols — a tool for rapidly
generating new datasets with a rich composition of latent features rendered in low
resolution images. Synbols leverages the large amount of symbols available in
the Unicode standard and the wide range of artistic font provided by the open
font community. Our tool’s high-level interface provides a language for rapidly
generating new distributions on the latent features, including various types of
textures and occlusions. To showcase the versatility of Synbols, we use it to dissect
the limitations and flaws in standard learning algorithms in various learning setups
including supervised learning, active learning, out of distribution generalization,
unsupervised representation learning, and object counting.

1

Introduction

Open access to new datasets has been a hallmark of machine learning progress. Perhaps the most
iconic example is ImageNet [9], which spurred important improvements in a variety of convolutional
architectures and training methods. However, obtaining state-of-the-art performances on ImageNet
can take up to 2 weeks of training with a single GPU [51]. While it is beneficial to evaluate our
methods on real-world large-scale datasets, relying on and requiring massive computation cycles is
limiting and even contributes to biasing the problems and methods we develop:
• Slow iteration cycles: Waiting weeks for experimental results reduces our ability to explore
and gather insights about our methods and data.
• Low accessibility: It creates disparities, especially for researchers and organizations with
limited computation and hardware budgets.
• Poor exploration: Our research is biased toward fast methods.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

