Effective Diversity in Population Based
Reinforcement Learning
Jack Parker-Holder⇤
University of Oxford
jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk

Aldo Pacchiano⇤
UC Berkeley
pacchiano@berkeley.edu

Krzysztof Choromanski
Google Brain Robotics
kchoro@google.com

Stephen Roberts
University of Oxford
sjrob@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Exploration is a key problem in reinforcement learning, since agents can only
learn from data they acquire in the environment. With that in mind, maintaining
a population of agents is an attractive method, as it allows data be collected with
a diverse set of behaviors. This behavioral diversity is often boosted via multiobjective loss functions. However, those approaches typically leverage mean field
updates based on pairwise distances, which makes them susceptible to cycling
behaviors and increased redundancy. In addition, explicitly boosting diversity often
has a detrimental impact on optimizing already fruitful behaviors for rewards. As
such, the reward-diversity trade off typically relies on heuristics. Finally, such
methods require behavioral representations, often handcrafted and domain specific.
In this paper, we introduce an approach to optimize all members of a population
simultaneously. Rather than using pairwise distance, we measure the volume of
the entire population in a behavioral manifold, defined by task-agnostic behavioral
embeddings. In addition, our algorithm Diversity via Determinants (DvD), adapts
the degree of diversity during training using online learning techniques. We
introduce both evolutionary and gradient-based instantiations of DvD and show
they effectively improve exploration without reducing performance when better
exploration is not required.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) considers the problem of an agent taking actions in an environment to
maximize total (discounted/expected) reward [59]. An agent can typically only learn from experience
acquired in the environment, making exploration crucial to learn high performing behaviors.
Training a population of agents is a promising approach to gathering a diverse range of experiences,
often with the same (wall-clock) training time [44, 32]. Population-based methods are particularly
prominent in the Neuroevolution community [56], but have recently been of increased interest in
RL [23, 33, 25, 23, 24, 42]. One particularly exciting class of neuroevolution methods is Quality
Diversity (QD, [43]) where algorithms explicitly seek high performing, yet diverse behaviors [10].
However, these methods often have a few key shortcomings.
Typically, each agent is optimized with a mean field assumption, only considering its individual
contribution to the population’s joint reward-diversity objective. Consequently, cycles may arise,
whereby different members of the population constantly switch between behaviors. This may prevent
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

