PyGlove: Symbolic Programming
for Automated Machine Learning

Daiyi Peng, Xuanyi Dong, Esteban Real, Mingxing Tan, Yifeng Lu
Hanxiao Liu, Gabriel Bender, Adam Kraft, Chen Liang, Quoc V. Le
Google Research, Brain Team
{daiyip, ereal, tanmingxing, yifenglu,
hanxiaol, gbender, adamkraft, crazydonkey, qvl}@google.com
xuanyi.dxy@gmail.com ∗

Abstract
Neural networks are sensitive to hyper-parameter and architecture choices. Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) is a promising paradigm for automating these
choices. Current ML software libraries, however, are quite limited in handling the
dynamic interactions among the components of AutoML. For example, efficient
NAS algorithms, such as ENAS [1] and DARTS [2], typically require an implementation coupling between the search space and search algorithm, the two key
components in AutoML. Furthermore, implementing a complex search flow, such
as searching architectures within a loop of searching hardware configurations, is
difficult. To summarize, changing the search space, search algorithm, or search flow
in current ML libraries usually requires a significant change in the program logic.
In this paper, we introduce a new way of programming AutoML based on symbolic
programming. Under this paradigm, ML programs are mutable, thus can be
manipulated easily by another program. As a result, AutoML can be reformulated
as an automated process of symbolic manipulation. With this formulation, we
decouple the triangle of the search algorithm, the search space and the child
program. This decoupling makes it easy to change the search space and search
algorithm (without and with weight sharing), as well as to add search capabilities
to existing code and implement complex search flows. We then introduce PyGlove,
a new Python library that implements this paradigm. Through case studies on
ImageNet and NAS-Bench-101, we show that with PyGlove users can easily
convert a static program into a search space, quickly iterate on the search spaces
and search algorithms, and craft complex search flows to achieve better results.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are sensitive to architecture and hyper-parameter choices [3, 4]. For example,
on the ImageNet dataset [5], we have observed a large increase in accuracy thanks to changes in
architectures, hyper-parameters, and training algorithms, from the seminal work of AlexNet [5]
to recent state-of-the-art models such as EfficientNet [6]. However, as neural networks become
increasingly complex, the potential number of architecture and hyper-parameter choices becomes
numerous. Hand-crafting neural network architectures and selecting the right hyper-parameters is,
therefore, increasingly difficult and often take months of experimentation.
Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) is a promising paradigm for tackling this difficulty. In
AutoML, selecting architectures and hyper-parameters is formulated as a search problem, where a
search space is defined to represent all possible choices and a search algorithm is used to find the
∗

Work done as a research intern at Google.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

