Minimax Lower Bounds for Transfer Learning with
Linear and One-hidden Layer Neural Networks

Seyed Mohammadreza Mousavi Kalan, Zalan Fabian, Salman Avestimehr,
and Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Southern California
California, Los Angeles 90089
mmousavi@usc.edu,zfabian@usc.edu,avestimehr@ee.usc.edu,soltanol@usc.edu

Abstract
Transfer learning has emerged as a powerful technique for improving the performance of machine learning models on new domains where labeled training data
may be scarce. In this approach a model trained for a source task, where plenty of
labeled training data is available, is used as a starting point for training a model on
a related target task with only few labeled training data. Despite recent empirical
success of transfer learning approaches, the benefits and fundamental limits of
transfer learning are poorly understood. In this paper we develop a statistical
minimax framework to characterize the fundamental limits of transfer learning in
the context of regression with linear and one-hidden layer neural network models.
Specifically, we derive a lower-bound for the target generalization error achievable
by any algorithm as a function of the number of labeled source and target data
as well as appropriate notions of similarity between the source and target tasks.
Our lowerbound provides new insights into the benefits and limitations of transfer
learning. We further corroborate our theoretical finding with various experiments.

1

Introduction

Deep learning approaches have recently enjoyed wide empirical success in many applications
spanning natural language processing to object recognition. A major challenge with deep learning
techniques however is that training accurate models typically requires lots of labeled data. While for
many of the aforementioned tasks labeled data can be collected by using crowd-sourcing, in many
other settings such data collection procedures are expensive, time consuming, or impossible due to the
sensitive nature of the data. Furthermore, deep learning techniques often are brittle and do not adapt
well to changes in the data or the environment. Transfer learning approaches have emerged as a way
to mitigate these issues. Roughly speaking, the goal of transfer learning is to borrow knowledge from
a source domain, where lots of training data is available, to improve the learning process in a related
but different target domain. Despite recent empirical success the benefits as well as fundamental
limitations of transfer learning remains unclear with many open challenges:
What is the best possible accuracy that can be obtained via any transfer learning algorithm? How
does this accuracy depend on how similar the source and target domain tasks are? What is a good
way to measure similarity/distance between two source and target domains? How does the transfer
learning accuracy scale with the number of source and target data? How do the answers to the above
questions change for different learning models?
At the heart of answering these questions is the ability to predict the best possible accuracy achievable
by any algorithm and characterize how this accuracy scales with how related the source and target
data are as well as the number of labeled data in the source and target domains. In this paper we take
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

