Value-driven Hindsight Modelling

Arthur Guez

Fabio Viola

Steven Kapturowski

Théophane Weber

Doina Precup

David Silver

Lars Buesing
Nicolas Heess

DeepMind
aguez@google.com

Abstract
Value estimation is a critical component of the reinforcement learning (RL)
paradigm. The question of how to effectively learn value predictors from data is
one of the major problems studied by the RL community, and different approaches
exploit structure in the problem domain in different ways. Model learning can
make use of the rich transition structure present in sequences of observations, but
this approach is usually not sensitive to the reward function. In contrast, model-free
methods directly leverage the quantity of interest from the future, but receive a
potentially weak scalar signal (an estimate of the return). We develop an approach
for representation learning in RL that sits in between these two extremes: we
propose to learn what to model in a way that can directly help value prediction.
To this end, we determine which features of the future trajectory provide useful
information to predict the associated return. This provides tractable prediction
targets that are directly relevant for a task, and can thus accelerate learning the
value function. The idea can be understood as reasoning, in hindsight, about which
aspects of the future observations could help past value prediction. We show how
this can help dramatically even in simple policy evaluation settings. We then test
our approach at scale in challenging domains, including on 57 Atari 2600 games.

1

Introduction

Consider a baseball player trying to perfect their pitch. The player performs an arm motion and
releases the ball towards the batter, but suppose that instead of observing where the ball lands and the
reaction of the batter, the player only hears the result of the play in terms of points or, worse, only the
final result of the game. Improving their pitch from this experience appears hard and inefficient, yet
this is essentially the paradigm we employ when optimizing policies in model-free reinforcement
learning. The scalar feedback that estimates the return from a state (and action), encoding how well
things went, drives the learning while the accompanying observations that may explain that result (e.g.,
flight path of the ball or the way the batter anticipated and struck the incoming baseball) are ignored.
To intuitively understand how such information could help value prediction, consider a simple discrete
Markov chain X → Y → Z, where Z is the scalar return and X is the observation from which we
are trying to predict Z. If the space of possible values of Y is smaller than X, then it may be more
efficient to estimate P (Y |X) and P (Z|Y ) rather than directly estimating P (Z|X).1 In other words,
observing and then predicting Y can be advantageous compared to directly estimating the signal of
interest Z. Model-based RL approaches would duly exploit the observed Y (by modelling P (Y |X)),
but Y would, in general scenarios, contain information that is irrelevant to Z and hard to predict.
Building a full high-dimensional predictive model to indiscriminately estimate all possible future
observations, including potentially chaotic details of the ball trajectory and the spectators’ response,
is a challenge that may not pay off if the task-relevant predictions (e.g., was the throw accepted, was
1

See appendix A.1 for a worked out example.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

