Hold me tight! Influence of discriminative features on
deep network boundaries

Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
guillermo.ortizjimenez@epfl.ch

Apostolos Modas∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
apostolos.modas@epfl.ch

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli
ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland
seyed.moosavi@inf.ethz.ch

Pascal Frossard
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abstract
Important insights towards the explainability of neural networks reside in the characteristics of their decision boundaries. In this work, we borrow tools from the field
of adversarial robustness, and propose a new perspective that relates dataset features
to the distance of samples to the decision boundary. This enables us to carefully
tweak the position of the training samples and measure the induced changes on the
boundaries of CNNs trained on large-scale vision datasets. We use this framework
to reveal some intriguing properties of CNNs. Specifically, we rigorously confirm
that neural networks exhibit a high invariance to non-discriminative features, and
show that the decision boundaries of a DNN can only exist as long as the classifier
is trained with some features that hold them together. Finally, we show that the
construction of the decision boundary is extremely sensitive to small perturbations
of the training samples, and that changes in certain directions can lead to sudden
invariances in the orthogonal ones. This is precisely the mechanism that adversarial
training uses to achieve robustness.

1

Introduction

The set of points that partitions the input space onto labeled regions is known as the decision boundary
of a classifier. Describing how a classifier creates such boundaries is crucial for its explainability.
Interestingly, even when deep networks succeed on a task, their high vulnerability to imperceptible
perturbations [1, 2] implies that their boundaries lie alarmingly close to any input sample. This
unintuitive behaviour contradicts the common belief that a successful classifier should be invariant to
non-discriminative information of its input data. However, it seems that such perturbations are not
irrelevant signals, but rather discriminative features of the training set [3, 4].
In that sense, explaining the mechanisms that construct the decision boundary of deep neural networks
is key to understand the dynamics of adversarial training [5]. This training scheme only differs from
standard training in that it slightly perturbs the training samples during optimization. However, these
small changes can utterly change the geometry of these classifiers [6].
An example of such change can be seen in Fig. 1, which shows the minimal perturbations – constrained
to lie on a low and a high frequency subspace – required to flip the decision of a network. The norm of
the perturbations measures the distance (margin) to the decision boundary in these subspaces. Clearly,
reaching the boundary using high frequency perturbations requires much more energy than using
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to {guillermo.ortizjimenez, apostolos.modas}@epfl.ch.
The code to reproduce our experiments can be found at https://github.com/LTS4/hold-me-tight.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

