Enabling certification of verification-agnostic networks
via memory-efficient semidefinite programming
Sumanth Dathathri˚1 , Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham˚1 , Alex Kurakin˚2 ,
Aditi Raghunathan˚3 , Jonathan Uesato˚1 , Rudy Bunel1 , Shreya Shankar3 ,
Jacob Steinhardt4 , Ian Goodfellow5 , Percy Liang3 , Pushmeet Kohli1
1

DeepMind 2 Google Brain 3 Stanford 4 UC Berkeley 5 Work done at Google

{sdathath,dvij,kurakin,juesato}@google.com, aditir@stanford.edu

Abstract
Convex relaxations have emerged as a promising approach for verifying desirable
properties of neural networks like robustness to adversarial perturbations. Widely
used Linear Programming (LP) relaxations only work well when networks are
trained to facilitate verification. This precludes applications that involve verificationagnostic networks, i.e., networks not specially trained for verification. On the other
hand, semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxations have successfully be applied to
verification-agnostic networks, but do not currently scale beyond small networks due
to poor time and space asymptotics. In this work, we propose a first-order dual SDP
algorithm that (1) requires memory only linear in the total number of network activations, (2) only requires a fixed number of forward/backward passes through the network per iteration. By exploiting iterative eigenvector methods, we express all solver
operations in terms of forward and backward passes through the network, enabling
efficient use of hardware like GPUs/TPUs. For two verification-agnostic networks
on MNIST and CIFAR-10, we significantly improve `8 verified robust accuracy
from 1% Ñ 88% and 6% Ñ 40% respectively. We also demonstrate tight verification
of a quadratic stability specification for the decoder of a variational autoencoder.

1

Introduction

Applications of neural networks to safety-critical domains requires ensuring that they behave as
expected under all circumstances [32]. One way to achieve this is to ensure that neural networks
conform with a list of specifications, i.e., relationships between the inputs and outputs of a neural
network that ought to be satisfied. Specifications can come from safety constraints (a robot should
never enter certain unsafe states [40, 29, 12]), prior knowledge (a learned physical dynamics model
should be consistent with the laws of physics [49]), or stability considerations (certain transformations
of the network inputs should not significantly change its outputs [57, 7]).
Evaluating whether a network satisfies a given specification is a challenging task, due to the difficulty
of searching for violations over the high dimensional input spaces. Due to this, several techniques
that claimed to enhance neural network robustness were later shown to break under stronger attacks
[61, 5]. This has motivated the search for verification algorithms that can provide provable guarantees
on neural networks satisfying input-output specifications.
Popular approaches based on linear programming (LP) relaxations of neural networks are computationally efficient and have enabled successful verification for many specifications [37, 18, 30, 21].
LP relaxations are sound (they would never incorrectly conclude that a specification is satisfied) but
˚
:

Equal contribution. Alphabetical order.
Code available at https://github.com/deepmind/jax_verify.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

