Stochastic Gradient Descent in Correlated Settings:
A Study on Gaussian Processes

Hao Chen∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
haochen@stat.wisc.edu
Raed Al Kontar
University of Michigan
alkontar@umich.edu

Lili Zheng∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
lilizheng@stat.wisc.edu
Garvesh Raskutti
University of Wisconsin-Madison
raskutti@stat.wisc.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants have established themselves as
the go-to algorithms for large-scale machine learning problems with independent
samples due to their generalization performance and intrinsic computational advantage. However, the fact that the stochastic gradient is a biased estimator of the full
gradient with correlated samples has led to the lack of theoretical understanding
of how SGD behaves under correlated settings and hindered its use in such cases.
In this paper, we focus on the Gaussian process (GP) and take a step forward
towards breaking the barrier by proving minibatch SGD converges to a critical
1
point of the full loss function and recovers model hyperparameters with rate O( K
)
up to a statistical error term depending on the minibatch size. Numerical studies
on both simulated and real datasets demonstrate that minibatch SGD has better
generalization over state-of-the-art GP methods while reducing the computational
burden and opening up a new, previously unexplored, data size regime for GPs.

1

Introduction

The Gaussian process (GP) has seen many success stories in various domains, be it in optimization
[42, 32], reinforcement learning [33, 20], time series analysis [19, 1], control theory [17, 23] and simulation meta-modeling [44, 26]. One can attribute such success to its natural Bayesian interpretation,
uncertainty quantification capability and highly flexible model priors. Yet its main limitation is the
O(n3 ) computation and O(n2 ) storage for n training points [29]. Indeed, as mentioned in [13], a
traditional large dataset for a GP is one with a few thousand data points and even those often require
approximation techniques.
As a result, during the past two decades, a large proportion of papers on GPs tackled approximate
inference procedures to reduce the computational demands and numerical instabilities (mainly due
to the need for matrix inversions). This push towards scalability dates back to the seminal paper by
Quiñonero-Candela and Rasmussen [27] in 2005 which unified previous approximation methods
into a single probabilistic framework based on inducing points. Since then, many new methods have
also been introduced. Most notable are: variational inference procedures that laid the theoretical
foundation for the class of inducing point methods [8, 25, 43, 3, 40], mixture of experts models
[9, 36], covariance tapering [11, 16] and kernel expansions [21, 28, 41]. On the other hand, there
has been a recent push to utilize increasing computational power and GPU acceleration to solve
exact GPs. This recent literature inlcudes distributed Cholesky factorizations [24], preconditioned
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

