Fast Unbalanced Optimal Transport on a Tree

Ryoma Sato1,2

Makoto Yamada1,2
Hisashi Kashima1,2
2
Kyoto University
RIKEN AIP
{r.sato@ml.ist.i, myamada@i, kashima@i}.kyoto-u.ac.jp
1

Abstract
This study examines the time complexities of the unbalanced optimal transport
problems from an algorithmic perspective for the first time. We reveal which problems in unbalanced optimal transport can/cannot be solved efficiently. Specifically,
we prove that the Kantorovich Rubinstein distance and optimal partial transport in
the Euclidean metric cannot be computed in strongly subquadratic time under the
strong exponential time hypothesis. Then, we propose an algorithm that solves a
more general unbalanced optimal transport problem exactly in quasi-linear time on
a tree metric. The proposed algorithm processes a tree with one million nodes in
less than one second. Our analysis forms a foundation for the theoretical study of
unbalanced optimal transport algorithms and opens the door to the applications of
unbalanced optimal transport to million-scale datasets.

1

Introduction

The optimal transport (OT) distance is an effective tool to compare measures and is used in a variety
of fields. The applications of OT include image processing [45, 50, 23], natural language processing
[38, 52], biology [57, 43, 26], and generative models [4, 54]. However, one of the major limitations
of OT is that it cannot handle measures with different total mass.
We illustrate two specific issues here. First, the amount
of mass is an important signal, e.g., in shape analysis
[58, 17] and comparing persistence diagrams [39, 61].
Secondly, the OT distance is susceptible to noise because
we must transport noise mass with high costs if noise
occurs far away from other mass. In many cases, the measures are normalized so that they become probabilistic
measures for applying the OT distance to them. However,
normalization loses the information of the amount of
mass and does not solve the noise problem, as illustrated
in Figure 1, where blue and red bars represent two input
measures, and the gray bar represents destructed mass.

Normalized

Raw Input

clutter

Balanced
OT

Unbalanced
OT

destructed

Figure 1: Illustrative example.

To overcome these issues, many variants of the OT distance in the unbalanced setting have been
proposed, such as the optimal partial transport [12, 27] and Kantorovich Rubinstein distance [41, 31].
We first propose a unified framework to discuss these problems as the generalized Kantorovich
Rubinstein (GKR) distance, which encompasses many existing unbalanced OT distances.
Z
min
−

π∈U (µ,ν)

Z
c(x, y)dπ(x, y) +

X ×X

X

Z
λd (x)d(µ − proj1 π)(x) +

X

λc (y)d(ν − proj2 π)(y).

The formal notations will be provided later. Intuitively, the GKR distance can destruct a unit mass
at cost λd (x) and create a unit mass at cost λc (x) at x ∈ X . Therefore, λc = λd = ∞ recovers
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

