Fast, Accurate, and Simple Models for Tabular Data
via Augmented Distillation
Rasool Fakoor˚
Amazon Web Services
fakoor@amazon.com
Nick Erickson
Amazon Web Services
neerick@amazon.com

Jonas Mueller˚
Amazon Web Services
jonasmue@amazon.com

Pratik Chaudhari
University of Pennsylvania
pratikac@seas.upenn.edu

Alexander J. Smola
Amazon Web Services
smola@amazon.com

Abstract
Automated machine learning (AutoML) can produce complex model ensembles by
stacking, bagging, and boosting many individual models like trees, deep networks,
and nearest neighbor estimators. While highly accurate, the resulting predictors
are large, slow, and opaque as compared to their constituents. To improve the
deployment of AutoML on tabular data, we propose FAST-DAD to distill arbitrarilycomplex ensemble predictors into individual models like boosted trees, random
forests, and deep networks. At the heart of our approach is a data augmentation
strategy based on Gibbs sampling from a self-attention pseudolikelihood estimator.
Across 30 datasets spanning regression and binary/multiclass classification tasks,
FAST-DAD distillation produces significantly better individual models than one
obtains through standard training on the original data. Our individual distilled
models are over 10ˆ faster and more accurate than ensemble predictors produced
by AutoML tools like H2O/AutoSklearn.

1

Introduction

Modern AutoML tools provide good out-of-the-box
accuracy on diverse datasets. This is often achieved
through extensive model ensembling [1–3]. While
the resultant predictors may generalize well, they
can be large, slow, opaque, and expensive to deploy.
Fig. 1 shows that the most accurate predictors can be
10,000 times slower than their constituent models.
Model distillation [4, 5] offers a way to compress
the knowledge learnt by these complex models into
simpler predictors with reduced inference-time and
memory-usage that are also less opaque and easier to
work with. In distillation, we train a simpler model
(the student) to output similar predictions as those
of a more complex model (the teacher). Here we
use AutoML to create the most accurate possible
teacher, typically an ensemble of many individual
models via stacking, bagging, boosting, and weighted
combinations [6]. Unfortunately, distillation typically
comes with a sharp drop in accuracy.
˚

Figure 1: Normalized test accuracy vs. speed
of individual models and AutoML ensembles,
averaged over all 30 datasets. TEACHER denotes the performance of AutoGluon; H2O and
autosklearn represent the respective AutoML tools.
GIB-1 indicates the results of FAST-DAD after 1
round of Gibbs sampling. BASE denotes the student model fit on original data. GIB-1/BASE dots
represent the model Selected (out of the 4 types)
based on validation accuracy for each dataset.

Equal contribution.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

