Novelty Search in Representational Space for Sample
Efficient Exploration

Ruo Yu Tao1, 2, * , Vincent François-Lavet1, 2 , Joelle Pineau1, 2
1
McGill University
2
Mila, Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute
*
ruo.tao@mail.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We present a new approach for efficient exploration which leverages a lowdimensional encoding of the environment learned with a combination of modelbased and model-free objectives. Our approach uses intrinsic rewards that are
based on the distance of nearest neighbors in the low dimensional representational space to gauge novelty. We then leverage these intrinsic rewards for sampleefficient exploration with planning routines in representational space for hard exploration tasks with sparse rewards. One key element of our approach is the use of
information theoretic principles to shape our representations in a way so that our
novelty reward goes beyond pixel similarity. We test our approach on a number of
maze tasks, as well as a control problem and show that our exploration approach
is more sample-efficient compared to strong baselines.

1

Introduction

In order to solve a task efficiently in Reinforcement Learning (RL), one of the main challenges
is to gather informative experiences via an efficient exploration of the state space. A common
approach to exploration is to leverage intrinsic rewards correlated with some metric or score for
novelty (Schmidhuber, 2010; Stadie et al., 2015; Houthooft et al., 2016). With intrinsic rewards,
an agent can be incentivized to efficiently explore its state space. A direct approach to calculating
these novelty scores is to derive a reward based on the observations, such as a count-based reward
(Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski et al., 2017) or a prediction-error based reward (Burda et al.,
2018b). However, an issue occurs when measuring novelty directly from the raw observations, as
some information in pixel space (such as randomness or backgrounds) may be irrelevant. In this
case, if an agent wants to efficiently explore its state space it should only focus on meaningful and
novel information.
In this work, we propose a method of sample-efficient exploration by leveraging intrinsic rewards in
a meaningful latent state space. To build a meaningful state abstraction, we view Model-based RL
(MBRL) from an information theoretic perspective - we optimize our dynamics learning through
the Information Bottleneck (Tishby et al., 2000) principle. We also combine both model-based
and model-free components through a joint representation. This method encodes high-dimensional
observations into lower-dimensional representations such that states that are close in dynamics are
brought close together in representation space (François-Lavet et al., 2018). We also add additional
constraints to ensure that a measure of distance between abstract states is meaningful. We leverage
these properties of our representation to formulate a novelty score based on Euclidean distance in
low-dimensional representation space and we then use this score to generate intrinsic rewards that
we can exploit for efficient exploration.
One important element of our exploration algorithm is that we take a Model Predictive Control
(MPC) approach (Garcia et al., 1989) and perform actions only after our model is sufficiently accurate (and hence ensure an accurate novelty heuristic). Through this training scheme, our agent is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

