Linear-Sample Learning of Low-Rank Distributions

Ayush Jain and Alon Orlitsky
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{ayjain, aorlitsky}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Many latent-variable applications, including community detection, collaborative
filtering, genomic analysis, and NLP, model data as generated by low-rank matrices.
Yet despite considerable research, except for very special cases, the number of
samples required to efficiently recover the underlying matrices has not been known.
We determine the onset of learning in several common latent-variable settings. For
all of them, we show that learning k×k, rank-r, matrices to normalized L1 distance 
2 r
kr
requires Ω( kr
2 ) samples, and propose an algorithm that uses O( 2 log  ) samples,
a number linear in the high dimension, and nearly linear in the, typically low, rank.
The algorithm improves on existing spectral techniques and runs in polynomial time.
The proofs establish new results on the rapid convergence of the spectral distance
between the model and observation matrices, and may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

A great many scientific and technological applications concern relations between two objects that
range over large domains, yet are linked via a low-dimensional latent space. Often this relation is
precisely, or nearly, linear, hence can be modeled by a low-rank matrix. The problem of recovering
low-rank model matrices from observations they generate has therefore been studied extensively.
Following are five of the most common settings considered, each introduced via a typical application.
Distribution matrices In Probabilistic latent semantic analysis samples are co-occurrences (w, d)
of words and documents, assumed independent given one of r latent topic classes t [Hof99]. The
joint probability matrix [pw,d ] is therefore a mixture of at most r product matrices p(d|t) · p(w|t), and
has rank ≤ r. This setting also arises in many hidden Markov applications, e.g., [MR05, HKZ12].
For this setting, the model matrix is a distribution, hence its elements are non-negative and sum to
1. The model is sampled independently n times, and Xi,j is the number of times pair (i, j) was
observed. In the remaining settings, the model matrix consists of arbitrary parameters, it is sampled
just once, and each parameter is reflected in an independent observation Xi,j .
Poisson Parameters Recommendation systems infer consumer preferences from their consumption
patterns. The number of times customer i purchases product j is typically modeled as an independent
Poisson random variable Xi,j ∼ Poi(λi,j ). Often λi,j is the inner product of the consumer’s disposition
and product’s expression of r latent features [SKKR00], so the parameter matrix [λi,j ] has rank ≤ r.
Bernoulli Parameters In inhomogeneous Erdös-Rényi graphs, the edge between nodes i and j is an
independent random variable Xi,j ∼ Ber(pi,j ). In Community-detection, the Stochastic Block Model
(SBM), e.g., [Abb17, MNS18, ABH15, BLM15], assumes that graph nodes fall in few communities
C1 , . . . ,Cr such that the pi,j ’s are one constant if i and j are in the same community, and a different
constant if i and j are in two distinct communities. Clearly, the parameter matrix [pi,j ] has rank ≤ r.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

