A new convergent variant of Q-learning with linear
function approximation

Diogo S. Carvalho
Francisco S. Melo
Pedro A. Santos
INESC-ID & Instituto Superior Técnico, University of Lisbon
Lisbon, Portugal
{diogo.s.carvalho, pedro.santos}@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
fmelo@inesc-id.pt

Abstract
In this work, we identify a novel set of conditions that ensure convergence with
probability 1 of Q-learning with linear function approximation, by proposing a
two time-scale variation thereof. In the faster time scale, the algorithm features an
update similar to that of DQN, where the impact of bootstrapping is attenuated by
using a Q-value estimate akin to that of the target network in DQN. The slower
time-scale, in turn, can be seen as a modified target network update. We establish
the convergence of our algorithm, provide an error bound and discuss our results
in light of existing convergence results on reinforcement learning with function
approximation. Finally, we illustrate the convergent behavior of our method in
domains where standard Q-learning has previously been shown to diverge.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we investigate the convergence of reinforcement learning with linear function approximation in control settings. Specifically, we analyze the convergence of Q-learning when combined
with linear function approximation. Several well-known counter-examples exist in the literature that
showcase the divergence of this algorithm when used with even such a relatively “benign” form of
function approximation [2, 6, 21]. The divergent behavior has been blamed on the so-called “deadly
triad” [18, 24]—function approximation, bootstrapping and off-policy learning. Bootstrapping means
that successive estimates for the Q-function are built on previous estimates; over-estimation errors for
action values thus critically propagate across iterations [23]. Off-policy means that the policy used to
sample the environment differs from that which the algorithm is evaluating.
The few results that establish the convergence of Q-learning with function approximation either
restrict the approximation architecture, eventually minimizing the impact of over-estimation errors
[20, 21] or require a very restrictive coupling between the approximation architecture and the sampling
distribution which, in practice, occurs only when the sampling policy is very close to the optimal
policy, rendering Q-learning almost on-policy [13]. More recently, Q-learning was attributed finitetime error bounds when certain fixed behaviour policies are used [8]. Unfortunately, such policies are
scarce or may not even exist as the number of features grows.
Other convergence results for the control problem in RL with function approximation propose
algorithms in which at least one of the elements in the “deadly triad” is not present. For example,
in a work of Perkins and Precup (2003), the authors propose a novel algorithm that converges with
arbitrary function approximation, but is restricted to on-policy sampling. Greedy-GQ [12] is a variant
of Q-learning with convergence guarantees. However, the associated solution may not be globally
optimal, following from the fact it minimizes a non-convex objective function. Finite-time error
bounds for Asynchronous Dynamic Programming methods [3], including Fitted Q-iteration (FQI)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

