Neural Anisotropy Directions

Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
guillermo.ortizjimenez@epfl.ch

Apostolos Modas∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
apostolos.modas@epfl.ch

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli
ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland
seyed.moosavi@inf.ethz.ch

Pascal Frossard
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this work, we analyze the role of the network architecture in shaping the inductive
bias of deep classifiers. To that end, we start by focusing on a very simple problem,
i.e., classifying a class of linearly separable distributions, and show that, depending
on the direction of the discriminative feature of the distribution, many state-ofthe-art deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have a surprisingly hard time
solving this simple task. We then define as neural anisotropy directions (NADs)
the vectors that encapsulate the directional inductive bias of an architecture. These
vectors, which are specific for each architecture and hence act as a signature,
encode the preference of a network to separate the input data based on some
particular features. We provide an efficient method to identify NADs for several
CNN architectures and thus reveal their directional inductive biases. Furthermore,
we show that, for the CIFAR-10 dataset, NADs characterize the features used by
CNNs to discriminate between different classes.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, given a finite set of samples, there are usually multiple solutions that can
perfectly fit the training data, but the inductive bias of a learning algorithm selects and prioritizes
those solutions that agree with its a priori assumptions [1, 2]. Arguably, the main success of deep
learning has come from embedding the right inductive biases in the architectures, which allow them
to excel at tasks such as classifying ImageNet [3], understanding natural language [4], or playing
Atari [5].
Nevertheless, most of these biases have been generally introduced based on heuristics that rely
on generalization performance to naturally select certain architectural components. As a result,
although these deep networks work well in practice, we still lack a proper characterization and a full
understanding of their actual inductive biases. In order to extend the application of deep learning to
new domains, it is crucial to develop generic methodologies to systematically identify and manipulate
the inductive bias of deep architectures.
Towards designing architectures with desired properties, we need to better understand the bias of the
current networks. However, due to the co-existence of multiple types of inductive biases within a
neural network, such as the preference for simple functions [6], or the invariance to certain group
transformations [7], identifying all biases at once can be challenging. In this work, we take a bottomup stance and focus on a fundamental bias that arises in deep architectures even for classifying linearly
∗
Equal contribution. Correspondence to {guillermo.ortizjimenez, apostolos.modas}@epfl.ch.
The code to reproduce our experiments can be found at https://github.com/LTS4/neural-anisotropy-directions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

