List-Decodable Mean Estimation via Iterative
Multi-Filtering

Ilias Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin, Madison
Madison, WI 53706
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
Department of Computer Science
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Daniel Kongsgaard
Department of Mathematics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
dkongsga@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of list-decodable mean estimation for bounded covariance
distributions. Specifically, we are given a set T of points in Rd with the promise
that an unknown α-fraction of points in T , where 0 < α < 1/2, are drawn from
an unknown mean and bounded covariance distribution D, and no assumptions
are made on the remaining points. The goal is to output a small list of hypothesis
vectors such that at least one of them is close to the mean of D. We give the
first practically viable estimator for this problem. In more detail, our algorithm
is sample and computationally efficient, and achieves information-theoretically
near-optimal error. While the only prior algorithm for this setting inherently relied
on the ellipsoid method, our algorithm is iterative and only uses spectral techniques.
Our main technical innovation is the design of a soft outlier removal procedure for
high-dimensional heavy-tailed datasets with a majority of outliers.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and Motivation

Estimating the mean of a high-dimensional distribution is one of the most fundamental statistical
tasks. The standard assumption is that the input data are independent samples drawn from a known
family of distributions. However, this is rarely true in practice and it is important to design estimators
that are robust in the presence of outliers. In recent years, the design of outlier robust estimators has
become a pressing challenge in several data analysis tasks, including in designing defenses against
data poisoning [BNJT10, BNL12] and in analyzing biological datasets where natural outliers are
common [RPW+ 02, PLJD10, LAT+ 08].
The field of robust statistics [HRRS86, HR09] traditionally studies the setting where the fraction of
outliers is a small constant (smaller than 1/2), and therefore the clean data is the majority of the
input dataset. Classical work in this field pinned down the minimax risk of high-dimensional robust
estimation in several settings of interest. In contrast, until relatively recently, our understanding
of even the most basic computational questions was startlingly poor. Recent work in computer
science, starting with [DKK+ 16, LRV16], gave the first efficient robust estimators for various highdimensional statistical tasks, including mean estimation. Since the dissemination of [DKK+ 16,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

