Calibrated Reliable Regression using
Maximum Mean Discrepancy

Peng Cui1 2 , Wenbo Hu1 2 , Jun Zhu1∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
2
RealAI
xpeng.cui@gmail.com, wenbo.hu@realai.ai, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Accurate quantiﬁcation of uncertainty is crucial for real-world applications of machine learning. However, modern deep neural networks still produce unreliable
predictive uncertainty, often yielding over-conﬁdent predictions. In this paper, we
are concerned with getting well-calibrated predictions in regression tasks. We
propose the calibrated regression method using the maximum mean discrepancy
by minimizing the kernel embedding measure. Theoretically, the calibration error of our method asymptotically converges to zero when the sample size is large
enough. Experiments on non-trivial real datasets show that our method can produce well-calibrated and sharp prediction intervals, which outperforms the related
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved signiﬁcant progress on a wide range of complex tasks [22] mainly in
terms of some metrics on prediction accuracy. However, high accuracy alone is often not sufﬁcient
to characterize the performance in real applications, where uncertainty is pervasive because of various facts such as incomplete knowledge, ambiguities, and contradictions. Accurate quantiﬁcation
of uncertainty is crucial to derive a robust prediction rule. For example, an accurate uncertainty
estimate can reduce the occurrence of accidents in medical diagnosis [23], warn users in time in
self-driving systems [27], reject low-conﬁdence predictions [6], and better meet consumers’ order
needs of internet services especially on special events [39]. In general, there are two main types
of uncertainty, aleatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty [10]. Aleatoric uncertainty captures
inherent data noise (e.g., sensor noise), while epistemic uncertainty is considered to be caused by
model parameters and structure, which can be reduced by providing enough data.
Though important, it is highly nontrivial to properly characterize uncertainty. Deep neural networks
(DNNs) typically produce point estimates of parameters and predictions, and are insufﬁcient to characterize uncertainty because of their deterministic functions [11]. It has been widely observed that
the modern neural networks are not properly calibrated and often tend to produce over-conﬁdent predictions [3, 15]. An effective uncertainty estimation is to directly model the predictive distribution
with the observed data in a Bayesian style [26]. But performing Bayesian inference on deep networks is still a very challenging task, where the networks deﬁne highly nonlinear functions and are
often over-parameterized [38, 34]. The uncertainty estimates of Bayesian neural networks (BNNs)
may lead to an inaccurate uncertainty quantiﬁcation because of either model misspeciﬁcation or the
use of approximate inference [19]. Besides, BNNs are computationally more expensive and slower
to train in practice, compared to non-Bayesian NNs. For example, a simple method of MC-Dropout
∗

J.Z is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

