Projected Stein Variational Gradient Descent

Peng Chen
Omar Ghattas
Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712.
{peng, omar}@oden.utexas.edu

Abstract
The curse of dimensionality is a longstanding challenge in Bayesian inference in
high dimensions. In this work, we propose a projected Stein variational gradient
descent (pSVGD) method to overcome this challenge by exploiting the fundamental
property of intrinsic low dimensionality of the data informed subspace stemming
from ill-posedness of such problems. We adaptively construct the subspace using
a gradient information matrix of the log-likelihood, and apply pSVGD to the
much lower-dimensional coefficients of the parameter projection. The method is
demonstrated to be more accurate and efficient than SVGD. It is also shown to
be more scalable with respect to the number of parameters, samples, data points,
and processor cores via experiments with parameters dimensions ranging from the
hundreds to the tens of thousands.

1

Introduction

Given observation data for a system with unknown parameters, Bayesian inference provides an
optimal probability framework for learning the parameters by updating their prior distribution to a
posterior distribution. However, many conventional methods for solving high-dimensional Bayesian
inference problems face the curse of dimensionality, i.e., the computational complexity grows
rapidly, often exponentially, with respect to (w.r.t.) the number of parameters. To address the
curse of dimensionality, the intrinsic properties of the posterior distribution, such as its smoothness,
sparsity, and intrinsic low-dimensionality, have been exploited to reduce the parameter correlation
and develop efficient methods whose complexity grows slowly or remains the same with increasing
dimension. By exploiting the geometry of the log-likelihood function, accelerated Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods have been developed to reduce the sample correlation or increase
effective sample size independent of the dimension [21, 25, 27, 17, 18, 2]. Nevertheless, these random
and essentially serial sampling methods remain prohibitive for large-scale inference problems with
expensive likelihoods. Deterministic methods using sparse quadratures [32, 30, 10, 11] were shown
to converge rapidly with dimension-independent rates for problems with smooth and sparse posteriors.
However, for posteriors lacking smoothness or sparsity, the convergence deteriorates significantly,
despite incorporation of Hessian-based transformations [31, 12].
Transport-based variational inference is another type of deterministic method that seeks a transport
map in a function space (represented by, e.g., polynomials, kernels, or neural networks) that pushes
the prior to the posterior by minimizing the difference between the transported prior and the posterior,
measured in, e.g., Kullback–Leibler divergence [26, 24, 4, 3, 20]. In particular, kernel-based Stein
variational methods, using gradient-based (SVGD) [24, 16, 23, 8] and Hessian-based (SVN) [19,
35] optimization methods, are shown to achieve fast convergence in relatively low dimensions.
Nonetheless, the convergence and accuracy of these methods deteriorates in high dimensions due to
the curse of dimensionality in kernel representation. This can be partially addressed by a localized
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

