Revisiting the Sample Complexity of Sparse
Spectrum Approximation of Gaussian Processes

Quang Minh Hoang
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
qhoang@andrew.cmu.edu
Hai Pham
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
htpham@cs.cmu.edu

Trong Nghia Hoang
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
Cambridge, MA 02142
nghiaht@ibm.com
David P. Woodruff
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new scalable approximation for Gaussian processes with provable
guarantees which hold simultaneously over its entire parameter space. Our approximation is obtained from an improved sample complexity analysis for sparse
spectrum Gaussian processes (SSGPs). In particular, our analysis shows that under
a certain data disentangling condition, an SSGP’s prediction and model evidence
(for training) can well-approximate those of a full GP with low sample complexity.
We also develop a new auto-encoding algorithm that finds a latent space to disentangle latent input coordinates into well-separated clusters, which is amenable
to our sample complexity analysis. We validate our proposed method on several
benchmarks with promising results supporting our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

A Gaussian process (GP) [36] is a popular probabilistic kernel method for regression which has found
applications across many scientific disciplines. Examples of such applications include meteorological
forecasting, such as precipitation and sea-level pressure prediction [2]; sensing and monitoring of
ocean and freshwater phenomena such as temperature and plankton bloom [7, 12]; traffic flow and
mobility demand predictions over urban road networks [9, 10, 29]; flight delay predictions [15, 19, 20];
and persistent robotics tasks such as localization and filtering [43]. The broad applicability of GPs
is in part due to their expressive Bayesian non-parametric nature which provides a closed-form
prediction [36] in the form of a Gaussian distribution with formal measures of predictive uncertainty,
such as entropy and mutual information criteria [27, 39, 44]. Such expressiveness makes GPs not
only useful as predictive methods but also a go-to representation for active learning applications
[24, 23, 27, 44] or Bayesian optimization [38, 45, 22, 16] that need to optimize for information gain
while collecting training data.
Unfortunately, the expressive power of a GP comes at a cost of poor scalability (i.e., cubic time [36])
in the size of the training data (see Section 2.1 below), hence limiting its use to small datasets. This
prevents GPs from being applied more broadly to modern settings with increasingly growing volumes
of data [15, 19, 20]. To sidestep this limitation, a prevalent research trend is to impose sparse structural
assumptions [33, 34] on the GP’s kernel matrix to reduce its multiplication and inversion cost, which
comprises the main bulk of the training and inference complexity. This results in a broad family of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

