When Counterpoint Meets Chinese Folk Melodies

Nan Jiang† Sheng Jin † Zhiyao Duan‡ Changshui Zhang†
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Rochester
†

jiangn15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zhiyao.duan@rochester.edu

js17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Counterpoint is an important concept in Western music theory. In the past century,
there have been significant interests in incorporating counterpoint into Chinese
folk music composition. In this paper, we propose a reinforcement learning-based
system, named FolkDuet, towards the online countermelody generation for Chinese
folk melodies. With no existing data of Chinese folk duets, FolkDuet employs two
reward models based on out-of-domain data i.e., Bach chorales, and monophonic
Chinese folk melodies. An interaction reward model is trained on the duets formed
from outer parts of Bach chorales to model counterpoint interaction, while a style
reward model is trained on monophonic melodies of Chinese folk songs to model
melodic patterns. With both rewards, the generator of FolkDuet is trained to
generate countermelodies while maintaining the Chinese folk style. The entire
generation process is performed in an online fashion, allowing real-time interactive
human-machine duet improvisation. Experiments show that the proposed algorithm
achieves better subjective and objective results than the baselines.

1

Introduction

Counterpoint [31], as an important and unique concept in Western music theory, is commonly
identified in the works composed in the Baroque and Classical periods. It refers to the mediation of
two or more musical voices into a meaningful and pleasing whole, where the role of these voices are
somewhat equal. Chinese folk melodies, on the other hand, are typically presented in a monophonic
form or with accompaniments that are less melodic [28], with few exceptions [45]; they feature unique
melodic patterns and are mostly based on the pentatonic scale. In the past century, some renowned
Chinese composers, e.g., Xian Xinghai and He Luting, have explored incorporating counterpoints
and fugues to Chinese music [38] and these attempts have brought several successful choral and
orchestral works such as “Yellow River Cantata” and “Buffalo Boy’s Flute”. However, systematic
theories and broader influences on the general public of integrating counterpoint with Chinese folk
melodies are lacking. This motivates our work.
In this paper, we propose a system named FolkDuet to automatically generate countermelodies for
Chinese folk melodies, following the counterpoint concept in Western music theory while maintaining
the Chinese folk style. Instead of offline harmonization, we make the generation in an online (causal)
fashion, where the countermelody is generated in real time as the input melody streams in, for a
broader research scope and better engagement of users [2]. We believe that this is an innovative idea
and it would make broader impacts on two aspects: 1) It would facilitate music cultural exchanges
between the West and the East at a much larger scale through automatic music generation and style
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

