Off-Policy Evaluation via the Regularized Lagrangian

Mengjiao Yang∗1 Ofir Nachum∗1 Bo Dai∗1 Lihong Li1 Dale Schuurmans1,2
1

Google Research

2

University of Alberta

Abstract
The recently proposed distribution correction estimation (DICE) family of estimators has advanced the state of the art in off-policy evaluation from behavior-agnostic
data. While these estimators all perform some form of stationary distribution correction, they arise from different derivations and objective functions. In this paper,
we unify these estimators as regularized Lagrangians of the same linear program.
The unification allows us to expand the space of DICE estimators to new alternatives that demonstrate improved performance. More importantly, by analyzing the
expanded space of estimators both mathematically and empirically we find that dual
solutions offer greater flexibility in navigating the tradeoff between optimization
stability and estimation bias, and generally provide superior estimates in practice.

1

Introduction

One of the most fundamental problems in reinforcement learning (RL) is policy evaluation, where
we seek to estimate the expected long-term payoff of a given target policy in a decision making
environment. An important variant of this problem, off-policy evaluation (OPE) [23], is motivated by
applications where deploying a policy in a live environment entails significant cost or risk [20, 27].
To circumvent these issues, OPE attempts to estimate the value of a target policy by referring only to
a dataset of experience previously gathered by other policies in the environment. Often, such logging
or behavior policies are not known explicitly (e.g., the experience may come from human actors),
which necessitates the use of behavior-agnostic OPE methods [21].
While behavior-agnostic OPE appears to be a daunting problem, a number of estimators have recently
been developed for this scenario [21, 28, 30, 31], demonstrating impressive empirical results. Such
estimators, known collectively as the “DICE” family for DIstribution Correction Estimation, model
the ratio between the propensity of the target policy to visit particular state-action pairs relative to
their likelihood of appearing in the logged data. A distribution corrector of this form can then be
directly used to estimate the value of the target policy.
Although there are many commonalities between the various DICE estimators, their derivations
are distinct and seemingly incompatible. For example, DualDICE [21] is derived by a particular
change-of-variables technique, whereas GenDICE [30] observes that the substitution strategy cannot
work in the average reward setting, and proposes a distinct derivation based on distribution matching.
GradientDICE [31] notes that GenDICE exacerbates optimization difficulties, and proposes a variant
designed for limited sampling capabilities. Despite these apparent differences in these methods, the
algorithms all involve a minimax optimization that has a strikingly similar form, which suggests that
there is a common connection that underlies the alternative derivations.
We show that the previous DICE formulations are all in fact equivalent to regularized Lagrangians
of the same linear program (LP). This LP shares an intimate relationship with the policy evaluation
problem, and has a primal form we refer to as the Q-LP and a dual form we refer to as the d-LP. The
primal form has been concurrently identified and studied in the context of policy optimization [22],
∗

Indicates equal contribution. Email: {sherryy, ofirnachum, bodai}@google.com.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

