Self-Learning Transformations for Improving Gaze
and Head Redirection
Yufeng Zheng1 , Seonwook Park1 , Xucong Zhang1 , Shalini De Mello2 , Otmar Hilliges1
1
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
NVIDIA
{firstname.lastname}@inf.ethz.ch shalinig@nvidia.com

Abstract
Many computer vision tasks rely on labeled data. Rapid progress in generative
modeling has led to the ability to synthesize photorealistic images. However, controlling specific aspects of the generation process such that the data can be used for
supervision of downstream tasks remains challenging. In this paper we propose
a novel generative model for images of faces, that is capable of producing highquality images under fine-grained control over eye gaze and head orientation angles.
This requires the disentangling of many appearance related factors including gaze
and head orientation but also lighting, hue etc. We propose a novel architecture
which learns to discover, disentangle and encode these extraneous variations in a
self-learned manner. We further show that explicitly disentangling task-irrelevant
factors results in more accurate modelling of gaze and head orientation. A novel
evaluation scheme shows that our method improves upon the state-of-the-art in
redirection accuracy and disentanglement between gaze direction and head orientation changes. Furthermore, we show that in the presence of limited amounts of
real-world training data, our method allows for improvements in the downstream
task of semi-supervised cross-dataset gaze estimation. Please check our project
page at: https://ait.ethz.ch/projects/2020/STED-gaze/

1

Introduction

Extracting information from images of human faces is one of the core problems in artificial intelligence
and computer vision. For example, estimating eye gaze has many applications in the social sciences
[1, 2], cognitive sciences [3, 4], and can enable novel applications in graphics, HCI, AR and VR
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Given the need for large amounts of training data for learning-based gaze estimation
approaches, much attention has been given to synthesizing training data via a graphics pipeline
[11, 12] and synthetic-to-real domain adaptation [13]. However, domain adaptation approaches can
be sensitive to changes in the underlying distribution of gaze directions, producing unfaithful images
that do not help in improving gaze estimator performance [14]. More recently, approaches to re-direct
the gaze in real-images has emerged as an alternative approach to attain gaze estimation training data
[15, 16, 17, 12]. This task involves the learning of a mapping between two images with differing
gaze directions and requires either paired synthetic [16] or high-quality real-world images captured
under controlled conditions [17].
However, leveraging gaze data from in-the-wild settings [18, 19] for this purpose has so far been
elusive [15, 20]. The underlying factors that we wish to explicitly control (gaze, head orientation)
are entangled with many other extraneous factors (e.g., lighting, hue, etc) that are typically not
known a priori (see Fig. 2, first and last columns). Conditional unpaired image-to-image translation
methods such as StarGAN [21] and similar [22, 23, 24] provide a promising framework to tackle this
in-the-wild problem, where perfectly paired images are not available. However, accurately controlling
the explicit factors to a degree where the generated data is useful for downstream tasks remains
challenging.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

