Information theoretic limits of learning a sparse rule

Clément Luneau∗, Nicolas Macris
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Suisse

Jean Barbier
International Center for Theoretical Physics
Trieste, Italy

Abstract
We consider generalized linear models in regimes where the number of nonzero
components of the signal and accessible data points are sublinear with respect to
the size of the signal. We prove a variational formula for the asymptotic mutual
information per sample when the system size grows to infinity. This result allows
us to derive an expression for the minimum mean-square error (MMSE) of the
Bayesian estimator when the signal entries have a discrete distribution with finite
support. We find that, for such signals and suitable vanishing scalings of the
sparsity and sampling rate, the MMSE is nonincreasing piecewise constant. In
specific instances the MMSE even displays an all-or-nothing phase transition,
that is, the MMSE sharply jumps from its maximum value to zero at a critical
sampling rate. The all-or-nothing phenomenon has previously been shown to occur
in high-dimensional linear regression. Our analysis goes beyond the linear case and
applies to learning the weights of a perceptron with general activation function in a
teacher-student scenario. In particular, we discuss an all-or-nothing phenomenon
for the generalization error with a sublinear set of training examples.

1

Introduction

Modern tasks in statistical analysis, signal processing and learning require solving high-dimensional
inference problems with a very large number of parameters. This arises in areas as diverse as learning
with neural networks [1], high-dimensional regression [2] or compressed sensing [3, 4]. In many
situations, there appear barriers to what is possible to estimate or learn when the data becomes too
scarce or too noisy. Such barriers can be of algorithmic nature, but they can also be intrinsic to the
very nature of the problem. A celebrated example is the impossibility of reconstructing a noisy signal
when the noise is beyond the so-called Shannon capacity of the communication channel [5]. A large
amount of interdisciplinary work has shown that these intrinsic barriers can be understood as static
phase transitions (in the sense of physics) when the system size tends to infinity (see [6, 7, 8]).
When the problem can be formulated as an (optimal) Bayesian inference problem the mathematically
rigorous theory of these phase transitions is now quite well developed. Progress initially came from
applications of the Guerra-Toninelli interpolation method (developed for the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick
spin-glass model [9]) to coding and communication theory [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], and more recently
to low-rank matrix and tensor estimation [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24], compressive sensing and
high-dimensional regression [25, 26, 27, 28], and generalized linear models [29]. In particular, for all
these problems it has been possible to reduce the asymptotic mutual information to a low-dimensional
variational expression, and deduce from its solution relevant error measures (e.g., minimum meansquare and generalization errors). All these works consider the traditional regime of statistical
mechanics where the system size goes to infinity while relevant control parameters (such as signal
sparsity, sampling rate, or signal-to-noise ratio) are kept fixed.
∗

Corresponding author: clement.luneau@epfl.ch

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

