Fair Performance Metric Elicitation
Gaurush Hiranandani
UIUC
gaurush2@illinois.edu

Harikrishna Narasimhan
Google Research USA
hnarasimhan@google.com

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
UIUC & Google Research Accra
sanmi@illinois.edu

Abstract
What is a fair performance metric? We consider the choice of fairness metrics
through the lens of metric elicitation – a principled framework for selecting performance metrics that best reflect implicit preferences. The use of metric elicitation
enables a practitioner to tune the performance and fairness metrics to the task,
context, and population at hand. Specifically, we propose a novel strategy to elicit
group-fair performance metrics for multiclass classification problems with multiple sensitive groups that also includes selecting the trade-off between predictive
performance and fairness violation. The proposed elicitation strategy requires only
relative preference feedback and is robust to both finite sample and feedback noise.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are increasingly employed for critical decision-making tasks such as hiring
and sentencing [44, 3, 11, 14, 31]. Yet, it is increasingly evident that automated decision-making is
susceptible to bias, whereby decisions made by the algorithm are unfair to certain subgroups [5, 3,
10, 8, 31]. To this end, a wide variety of group fairness metrics have been proposed – all to reduce
discrimination and bias from automated decision-making [25, 13, 17, 29, 49, 32]. However, a dearth
of formal principles for selecting the most appropriate metric has highlighted the confusion of experts,
practitioners, and end users in deciding which group fairness metric to employ [53]. This is further
exacerbated by the observation that common metrics often lead to contradictory outcomes [29].
While the problem of selecting an appropriate fairness metric has gained prominence in recent
years [17, 32, 53], it perhaps best understood as a special case of the task of choosing evaluation
metrics in machine learning. For instance, when a cost-sensitive predictive model classifies patients
into cancer categories [50] even without considering fairness, it is often unclear how the costtradeoffs be chosen so that they reflect the expert’s decision-making, i.e., replacing expert intuition
by quantifiable metrics. The recently proposed Metric Elicitation (ME) framework [20, 21] provides
a solution. ME is a principled framework for eliciting performance metrics using feedback over
classifiers from an end user. The motivation behind ME is that employing the performance metrics
which reflect user tradeoffs will enable learning models that best capture user preferences [20]. As
humans are often inaccurate in providing absolute preferences [41], Hiranandani et al. [20] propose
to use pairwise comparison queries, where the user (oracle) is asked to compare two classifiers and
provide a relative preference. Using such queries, ME aims to recover the oracle’s metric. Figure 1
(reproduced from [20]) illustrates the ME framework.
Existing research suggests a fundamental trade-off between algorithmic fairness and performance [25,
51, 11, 7, 32, 53], where in addition to appropriate metrics, the practitioner or policymaker must
choose a trade-off operating point between the competing objectives [53]. To this end, we extend
the ME framework from eliciting multiclass classification metrics [21] to the task of eliciting fair
performance metrics from pairwise preference feedback in the presence of multiple sensitive groups.
In particular, we elicit metrics that reflect, jointly, the (i) predictive performance evaluated as a
weighting of classifier’s overall predictive rates, (ii) fairness violation assessed as the discrepancy in
predictive rates among groups, and (iii) a trade-off between the predictive performance and fairness
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

