Dual-Resolution Correspondence Networks
Xinghui Li1 , Kai Han2 , Shuda Li1 , and Victor Prisacariu1
1

1
Active Vision Lab, University of Oxford
{xinghui, shuda, victor}@robots.ox.ac.uk
2
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
2
khan@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We tackle the problem of establishing dense pixel-wise correspondences between
a pair of images. In this work, we introduce Dual-Resolution Correspondence
Networks (DualRC-Net), to obtain pixel-wise correspondences in a coarse-to-fine
manner. DualRC-Net extracts both coarse- and fine- resolution feature maps. The
coarse maps are used to produce a full but coarse 4D correlation tensor, which is
then refined by a learnable neighbourhood consensus module. The fine-resolution
feature maps are used to obtain the final dense correspondences guided by the refined coarse 4D correlation tensor. The selected coarse-resolution matching scores
allow the fine-resolution features to focus only on a limited number of possible
matches with high confidence. In this way, DualRC-Net dramatically increases
matching reliability and localisation accuracy, while avoiding to apply the expensive 4D convolution kernels on fine-resolution feature maps. We comprehensively
evaluate our method on large-scale public benchmarks including HPatches, InLoc,
and Aachen Day-Night. It achieves the state-of-the-art results on all of them.

1

Introduction

Establishing correspondences between a pair of images that shares a common field of view is critical
for many important tasks in computer vision such as 3D reconstruction [1, 2, 3], camera motion
estimation [4], relocalization [5, 6, 7, 8], etc. Most existing methods tackle the problem using a
classic 3-stage pipeline, i.e., detection, description and matching [7, 9]. They first detect local
repeatable salient points known as the keypoints, then describe these keypoints by extracting feature
vectors from some local regions around them, and finally form the keypoint pairs, also known
as the correspondences, by selecting a set of high confident matches from all possible candidate
matches. The resulting correspondences can then be used to triangulate 3D coordinates for model
reconstruction [1] or to feed the RANSAC Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithms [10, 11] for camera
pose estimation [12, 13]. This pipeline has demonstrated great success in dealing with certain
illumination or camera viewpoint variations using the classic hand-crafted local feature descriptors
such as SIFT [14], SURF [15], BRISK [16] or the modern CNN features [17]. However, many of
these methods are based on local support regions and therefore suffer from the missing detection
problems [6]. During matching, they only consider up to k nearest neighbours, instead of the entire
matching space, which also limits their performance especially under extreme appearance changes
such as day-to-night with wide viewpoint variations.
Recently, several approaches [18, 19, 5] aim to avoid the detection stage by considering every point
from a regular grid for matching. As a result, dense matches can be obtained by retrieving the
confident ones from all possible candidate matches. Hence, the missing detection problem can be
alleviated. Among these approaches, the Neighbourhood Consensus Networks (NCNet) [5] and its
variants [20, 21, 6] have shown encouraging results. These methods employ a CNN to extract features
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

