Incorporating BERT into
Parallel Sequence Decoding with Adapters

Junliang Guo1 , Zhirui Zhang2 , Linli Xu1,3∗, Hao-Ran Wei2 , Boxing Chen2 , Enhong Chen1
1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Alibaba DAMO Academy
3
IFLYTEK Co., Ltd.
1
guojunll@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {linlixu, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn
2
{zhirui.zzr, funan.whr, boxing.cbx}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
While large scale pre-trained language models such as BERT [5] have achieved
great success on various natural language understanding tasks, how to efficiently
and effectively incorporate them into sequence-to-sequence models and the corresponding text generation tasks remains a non-trivial problem. In this paper,
we propose to address this problem by taking two different BERT models as the
encoder and decoder respectively, and fine-tuning them by introducing simple and
lightweight adapter modules, which are inserted between BERT layers and tuned on
the task-specific dataset. In this way, we obtain a flexible and efficient model which
is able to jointly leverage the information contained in the source-side and targetside BERT models, while bypassing the catastrophic forgetting problem. Each component in the framework can be considered as a plug-in unit, making the framework
flexible and task agnostic. Our framework is based on a parallel sequence decoding
algorithm named Mask-Predict [8] considering the bi-directional and conditional
independent nature of BERT, and can be adapted to traditional autoregressive
decoding easily. We conduct extensive experiments on neural machine translation
tasks where the proposed method consistently outperforms autoregressive baselines
while reducing the inference latency by half, and achieves 36.49/33.57 BLEU
scores on IWSLT14 German-English/WMT14 German-English translation. When
adapted to autoregressive decoding, the proposed method achieves 30.60/43.56
BLEU scores on WMT14 English-German/English-French translation, on par with
the state-of-the-art baseline models.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained language models [26, 27, 5, 39] have received extensive attention in natural language
processing communities in recent years. Generally, training of these models consists of two stages.
Firstly, the model is trained on a large scale monolingual corpus in a self-supervised manner, and
then fine-tuned end-to-end on downstream tasks with task-specific loss functions and datasets. In
this way, pre-trained language models have achieved great success on various natural language
understanding tasks such as reading comprehension and text classification, and BERT [5] is one of
the most successful models among them.
While fine-tuning BERT for common language understanding tasks is straightforward, for natural
language generation which is one of the core problems in NLP [2, 34, 24], how to incorporate BERT
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

