Path Sample-Analytic Gradient Estimators
for Stochastic Binary Networks

Alexander Shekhovtsov
Czech Technical University in Prague
shekhovt@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Viktor Yanush
Lomonosov Moscow State University
yanushviktor@gmail.com

Boris Flach
Czech Technical University in Prague
flachbor@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
In neural networks with binary activations and or binary weights the training by
gradient descent is complicated as the model has piecewise constant response. We
consider stochastic binary networks, obtained by adding noises in front of activations. The expected model response becomes a smooth function of parameters, its
gradient is well defined but it is challenging to estimate it accurately. We propose
a new method for this estimation problem combining sampling and analytic approximation steps. The method has a significantly reduced variance at the price
of a small bias which gives a very practical tradeoff in comparison with existing
unbiased and biased estimators. We further show that one extra linearization step
leads to a deep straight-through estimator previously known only as an ad-hoc
heuristic. We experimentally show higher accuracy in gradient estimation and
demonstrate a more stable and better performing training in deep convolutional
models with both proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks with binary weights and binary activations are very computationally efficient.
Rastegari et al. [24] report up to 58 speed-up compared to floating point computations. There is
a further increase of hardware support for binary operations: matrix multiplication instructions in
recent NVIDIA cards, specialized projects on spike-like (neuromorphic) computation [3, 7], etc.
Binarized (or more generally quantized) networks have been shown to close up in performance to
real-valued baselines [2, 22, 25, 28, 12, 6]. We believe that good training methods can improve their
performance further. The main difficulty with binary networks is that unit outputs are computed
using sign activations, which renders common gradient descent methods inapplicable. Nevertheless,
experimentally oriented works ever so often define the lacking gradients in these models in a heuristic
way. We consider the more sound approach of stochastic Binary Networks (SBNs) [19, 23]. This
approach introduces injected noises in front of all sign activations. The network output becomes
smooth in the expectation and its derivative is well-defined. Furthermore, injecting noises in all layers
makes the network a deep latent variable model with a very flexible predictive distribution.
Estimating gradients in SBNs is the main problem that we address. We focus on handling deep
dependencies through binary activations, which we believe to be the crux of the problem. That is
why we consider all weights to be real-valued in the present work. An extension to binary weights
would be relatively simple, e.g. by adding an extra stochastic binarization layer for them.
SBN Model Let x0 denote the input to the network (e.g. an image to recognize). We define a
stochastic binary network (SBN) with L layers with neuron outputs X 1...L and injected noises Z 1...L
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

