Robustness of Bayesian Neural Networks to
Gradient-Based Attacks
Ginevra Carbone*
Department of Mathematics and Geosciences
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
ginevra.carbone@phd.units.it

Luca Laurenti
Departement of Computer Science,
University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom
luca.laurenti@cs.ox.ac.uk
Luca Bortolussi
Department of Mathematics and Geosciences
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy;
Modeling and Simulation Group,
Saarland University, Saarland, Germany
luca.bortolussi@gmail.com

Matthew Wicker*
Departement of Computer Science
University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom
matthew.wicker@wolfson.ox.ac.uk
Andrea Patane
Departement of Computer Science,
University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom
patane.andre@gmail.com
Guido Sanguinetti
School of Informatics, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom;
SISSA, Trieste, Italy
gsanguin@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Vulnerability to adversarial attacks is one of the principal hurdles to the adoption
of deep learning in safety-critical applications. Despite signiﬁcant efforts, both
practical and theoretical, the problem remains open. In this paper, we analyse
the geometry of adversarial attacks in the large-data, overparametrized limit for
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs). We show that, in the limit, vulnerability to
gradient-based attacks arises as a result of degeneracy in the data distribution,
i.e., when the data lies on a lower-dimensional submanifold of the ambient space.
As a direct consequence, we demonstrate that in the limit BNN posteriors are
robust to gradient-based adversarial attacks. Experimental results on the MNIST
and Fashion MNIST datasets, representing the ﬁnite data regime, with BNNs
trained with Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and Variational Inference support this line
of argument, showing that BNNs can display both high accuracy and robustness to
gradient based adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks are small, potentially imperceptible pertubations of test inputs that can lead to
catastrophic misclassiﬁcations in high-dimensional classiﬁers such as deep Neural Networks (NN).
Since the seminal work of Szegedy et al. [2013], adversarial attacks have been intensively studied,
and even state-of-the-art deep learning models, trained on very large data sets, have been shown to
be susceptible to such attacks [Goodfellow et al., 2014]. In the absence of effective defenses, the
widespread existence of adversarial examples has raised serious concerns about the security and
robustness of models learned from data [Biggio and Roli, 2018]. As a consequence, the development
of machine learnig models that are robust to adversarial perturbations is an essential pre-condition for
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

