Incorporating Interpretable Output Constraints
in Bayesian Neural Networks

Wanqian Yang
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
yangw@college.harvard.edu

Lars Lorch∗
ETH Zürich
8092 Zürich, Switzerland
llorch@student.ethz.ch

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
hlakkaraju@seas.harvard.edu

Moritz A. Graule
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
graulem@g.harvard.edu

Finale Doshi-Velez
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
finale@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Domains where supervised models are deployed often come with task-specific constraints, such as prior expert knowledge on the ground-truth function, or desiderata
like safety and fairness. We introduce a novel probabilistic framework for reasoning with such constraints and formulate a prior that enables us to effectively
incorporate them into Bayesian neural networks (BNNs), including a variant that
can be amortized over tasks. The resulting Output-Constrained BNN (OC-BNN) is
fully consistent with the Bayesian framework for uncertainty quantification and is
amenable to black-box inference. Unlike typical BNN inference in uninterpretable
parameter space, OC-BNNs widen the range of functional knowledge that can be
incorporated, especially for model users without expertise in machine learning. We
demonstrate the efficacy of OC-BNNs on real-world datasets, spanning multiple
domains such as healthcare, criminal justice, and credit scoring.

1

Introduction

In domains where predictive errors are prohibitively costly, we desire models that can both capture
predictive uncertainty (to inform downstream decision-making) as well as enforce prior human
expertise or knowledge (to induce appropriate model biases). Performing Bayesian inference on deep
neural networks, which are universal approximators [11] with substantial model capacity, results in
BNNs — models that combine high representation power with quantifiable uncertainty estimates
[21, 20] 1 . The ability to encode informative functional beliefs in BNN priors can significantly
reduce the bias and uncertainty of the posterior predictive, especially in regions of input space
sparsely covered by training data [27]. Unfortunately, the trade-off for their versatility is that BNN
priors, defined in high-dimensional parameter space, are uninterpretable. A general approach for
incorporating functional knowledge (that human experts might possess) is therefore intractable.
Recent work has addressed the challenge of incorporating richer functional knowledge into BNNs,
such as preventing miscalibrated model predictions out-of-distribution [9], enforcing smoothness
constraints [2] or specifying priors induced by covariance structures in the dataset (cf. Gaussian
processes) [25, 19]. In this paper 2 , we take a different direction by tackling functional knowledge
expressed as output constraints — the set of values y is constrained to hold for any given x. Unlike
other types of functional beliefs, output constraints are intuitive, interpretable and easily specified,
∗

Work done while at Harvard University.
See Appendix A for a technical overview of BNN inference and acronyms used throughout this paper.
2
Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/dtak/ocbnn-public.
1

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

