Efficient Online Learning of Optimal Rankings:
Dimensionality Reduction via Gradient Descent

Dimitris Fotakis
National Technical University of Athens
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr

Thanasis Lianeas
National Technical University of Athens
lianeas@corelab.ntua.gr

Georgos Piliouras
Singapore Univ. of Technology & Design
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Stratis Skoulakis
Singapore Univ. of Technology & Design
sskoul@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We consider a natural model of online preference aggregation, where sets of
preferred items R1 , R2 , . . . , Rt , . . ., along with a demand for kt items in each Rt ,
appear online. Without prior knowledge of (Rt , kt ), the learner maintains a ranking
πt aiming that at least kt items from Rt appear high in πt . This is a fundamental
problem in preference aggregation with applications to, e.g., ordering product or
news items in web pages based on user scrolling and click patterns.
The widely studied Generalized Min-Sum-Set-Cover (GMSSC) problem serves
as a formal model for the setting above. GMSSC is NP-hard and the standard
application of no-regret online learning algorithms is computationally inefficient,
because they operate in the space of rankings. In this work, we show how to
achieve low regret for GMSSC in polynomial-time. We employ dimensionality
reduction from rankings to the space of doubly stochastic matrices, where we apply
Online Gradient Descent. A key step is to show how subgradients can be computed
efficiently, by solving the dual of a configuration LP. Using oblivious deterministic
and randomized rounding schemes, we map doubly stochastic matrices back to
rankings with a small loss in the GMSSC objective.

1

Introduction

In applications where items are presented to the users sequentially (e.g., web search, news, online
shopping, paper bidding), the item ranking is of paramount importance (see e.g., [38, 12, 14, 43, 7]).
More often than not, only the items at the first few slots are immediately visible and the users may
need to scroll down, in an attempt to discover items that fit their interests best. If this does not
happen soon enough, the users get disappointed and either leave the service (in case of news or online
shopping, see e.g., the empirical evidence presented in [9]) or settle on a suboptimal action (in case
of paper bidding, see e.g., [8]).
To mitigate such situations and increase user retention, modern online services highly optimize item
rankings based on user scrolling and click patterns. Each user t is typically represented by her set
of preferred items (or item categories) Rt . The goal is to maintain an item ranking πt online such
that each new user t finds enough of her favorite items at relatively high positions in πt (“enough” is
typically user and application dependent). A typical (but somewhat simplifying) assumption is that
the user dis-utility is proportional to how deep in πt the user should reach before that happens.
The widely studied Generalized Min-Sum Set Cover (GMSSC) problem (see e.g., [28] for a short
survey) provides an elegant formal model for the practical setting above. In (the offline version of)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

