Kernelized information bottleneck leads to
biologically plausible 3-factor Hebbian learning in
deep networks
Roman Pogodin
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
roman.pogodin.17@ucl.ac.uk

Peter E. Latham
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
pel@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
The state-of-the art machine learning approach to training deep neural networks,
backpropagation, is implausible for real neural networks: neurons need to know
their outgoing weights; training alternates between a bottom-up forward pass
(computation) and a top-down backward pass (learning); and the algorithm often
needs precise labels of many data points. Biologically plausible approximations to
backpropagation, such as feedback alignment, solve the weight transport problem,
but not the other two. Thus, fully biologically plausible learning rules have so far
remained elusive. Here we present a family of learning rules that does not suffer
from any of these problems. It is motivated by the information bottleneck principle
(extended with kernel methods), in which networks learn to compress the input
as much as possible without sacrificing prediction of the output. The resulting
rules have a 3-factor Hebbian structure: they require pre- and post-synaptic firing
rates and an error signal – the third factor – consisting of a global teaching signal
and a layer-specific term, both available without a top-down pass. They do not
require precise labels; instead, they rely on the similarity between pairs of desired
outputs. Moreover, to obtain good performance on hard problems and retain
biological plausibility, our rules need divisive normalization – a known feature of
biological networks. Finally, simulations show that our rules perform nearly as
well as backpropagation on image classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning in deep networks is typically done using the backpropagation algorithm (or
backprop), but in its present form it cannot explain learning in the brain [1]. There are three reasons
for this: weight updates require neurons to know their outgoing weights, which they do not (the
weight transport problem); the forward pass for computation and the backward pass for weight
updates need separate pathways and have to happen sequentially (preventing updates of earlier layers
before the error is propagated back from the top ones, see Fig. 1A); and a large amount of precisely
labeled data is needed.
While approximations to backprop such as feedback alignment [2, 3] can solve the weight transport
problem, they do not eliminate the requirement for a backward pass or the need for labels. There
have been suggestions that a backward pass could be implemented with apical dendrites [4], but it’s
not clear how well the approach scales to large networks, and the backward pass still has to follow
the forward pass in time.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

