Accelerating Reinforcement Learning through GPU
Atari Emulation
Steven Dalton∗, Iuri Frosio∗
NVIDIA, USA
{sdalton,ifrosio}@nvidia.com

Abstract
We introduce CuLE (CUDA Learning Environment), a CUDA port of the Atari
Learning Environment (ALE) which is used for the development of deep reinforcement algorithms. CuLE overcomes many limitations of existing CPU-based
emulators and scales naturally to multiple GPUs. It leverages GPU parallelization
to run thousands of games simultaneously and it renders frames directly on the
GPU, to avoid the bottleneck arising from the limited CPU-GPU communication
bandwidth. CuLE generates up to 155M frames per hour on a single GPU, a finding
previously achieved only through a cluster of CPUs. Beyond highlighting the differences between CPU and GPU emulators in the context of reinforcement learning,
we show how to leverage the high throughput of CuLE by effective batching of
the training data, and show accelerated convergence for A2C+V-trace. CuLE is
available at https://github.com/NVlabs/cule.

1

Introduction

Initially triggered by the success of DQN [13], research in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has
grown in popularity in the last years [10, 12, 13], leading to intelligent agents that solve non-trivial
tasks in complex environments. But DRL also soon proved to be a challenging computational
problem, especially if one wants to achieve peak performance on modern architectures.
Traditional DRL training focuses on CPU environments that execute a set of actions {at−1 } at time
t − 1, and produce observable states {st } and rewards {rt }. Environment data is then processed
by a Deep Neural Network (DNN) on the GPU to select the next action, {at }, which is copied
back to the CPU. This sequence of operations defines the inference path, whose main aim is to
generate training data. A training buffer on the GPU stores the states generated on the inference
path; this is periodically used to update the DNN’s weights θ, according to the training rule of the
DRL algorithm (training path). A computationally efficient DRL system should balance the data
generation and training processes, while minimizing the communication overhead along the inference
path and consuming, along the training path, as many data per second as possible [1, 2]. The solution
to this problem is however non-trivial and many DRL implementations do not leverage the full
computational potential of modern systems [19].
We focus our attention on the inference path and move from the traditional CPU implementation
of the Atari Learning Environment (ALE), a set of Atari 2600 games that emerged as an excellent
DRL benchmark [3, 11]. We show that significant performance bottlenecks stem from CPU-based
environment emulation because the CPU cannot run a large set of environments simultaneously and
the CPU-GPU communication bandwidth is limited. To both investigate and mitigate these limitations
we introduce CuLE (CUDA Learning Environment), a DRL library containing a CUDA enabled
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

