MetaPerturb: Transferable Regularizer for
Heterogeneous Tasks and Architectures

Jeongun Ryu1∗ Jaewoong Shin1∗ Hae Beom Lee1∗ Sung Ju Hwang 1,2
1
KAIST, 2 AITRICS, South Korea
{rjw0205, shinjw148, haebeom.lee, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Regularization and transfer learning are two popular techniques to enhance model
generalization on unseen data, which is a fundamental problem of machine learning.
Regularization techniques are versatile, as they are task- and architecture-agnostic,
but they do not exploit a large amount of data available. Transfer learning methods
learn to transfer knowledge from one domain to another, but may not generalize
across tasks and architectures, and may introduce new training cost for adapting
to the target task. To bridge the gap between the two, we propose a transferable
perturbation, MetaPerturb, which is meta-learned to improve generalization performance on unseen data. MetaPerturb is implemented as a set-based lightweight
network that is agnostic to the size and the order of the input, which is shared
across the layers. Then, we propose a meta-learning framework, to jointly train
the perturbation function over heterogeneous tasks in parallel. As MetaPerturb
is a set-function trained over diverse distributions across layers and tasks, it can
generalize to heterogeneous tasks and architectures. We validate the efficacy and
generality of MetaPerturb trained on a specific source domain and architecture, by
applying it to the training of diverse neural architectures on heterogeneous target
datasets against various regularizers and fine-tuning. The results show that the
networks trained with MetaPerturb significantly outperform the baselines on most
of the tasks and architectures, with a negligible increase in the parameter size and
no hyperparameters to tune.

1

Introduction

The success of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) largely owes to their ability to accurately represent
arbitrarily complex functions. However, at the same time, the excessive number of parameters, which
enables such expressive power, renders them susceptible to overfitting especially when we do not
have a sufficient amount of data to ensure generalization. There are two popular techniques that can
help with generalization of deep neural networks: transfer learning and regularization.
Transfer learning [39] methods aim to overcome this data scarcity problem by transferring knowledge
obtained from a source dataset to effectively guide the learning on the target task. Whereas the
existing transfer learning methods have been proven to be very effective, there also exist some
limitations. Firstly, their performance gain highly depends on the similarity between source and target
domains, and knowledge transfer across different domains may not be effective or even degenerate
the performance on the target task. Secondly, many transfer learning methods require the neural
architectures for the source and the target tasks to be the same, as in the case of fine-tuning. Moreover,
transfer learning methods usually require additional memory and computational cost for knowledge
transfer. Many require to store the entire set of parameters for the source network (e.g. fine-tuning,
LwF [21], attention transfer [48]), and some methods require extra training to transfer the source
∗

: Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

