Batch Normalization Biases Residual Blocks
Towards the Identity Function in Deep Networks
Soham De
DeepMind, London
sohamde@google.com

Samuel L. Smith
DeepMind, London
slsmith@google.com

Abstract
Batch normalization dramatically increases the largest trainable depth of residual
networks, and this benefit has been crucial to the empirical success of deep residual
networks on a wide range of benchmarks. We show that this key benefit arises because, at initialization, batch normalization downscales the residual branch relative
to the skip connection, by a normalizing factor on the order of the square root of
the network depth. This ensures that, early in training, the function computed by
normalized residual blocks in deep networks is close to the identity function (on
average). We use this insight to develop a simple initialization scheme that can
train deep residual networks without normalization. We also provide a detailed empirical study of residual networks, which clarifies that, although batch normalized
networks can be trained with larger learning rates, this effect is only beneficial in
specific compute regimes, and has minimal benefits when the batch size is small.

1

Introduction

The combination of skip connections [1–3] and batch normalization [4] dramatically increases the
largest trainable depth of neural networks. Although the origin of this effect is poorly understood, it
has led to a rapid improvement in the performance of deep networks on popular benchmarks [5, 6].
Following the introduction of layer normalization [7] and the transformer architecture [8, 9], almost
all state-of-the-art networks currently contain both skip connections and normalization layers.
Our contributions. This paper provides a simple explanation for why batch normalized deep residual
networks are easily trainable. We prove that batch normalization downscales the hidden activations on
the residual branch by a factor on the order of the square root of the network depth (at initialization).
Therefore, as the depth of a residual network is increased, the residual blocks are increasingly
dominated by the skip connection, which drives the functions computed by residual blocks closer to
the identity, preserving signal propagation and ensuring well-behaved gradients [10–15].
If our theory is correct, it should be possible to train deep residual networks without normalization,
simply by downscaling the residual branch. Therefore, to verify our analysis, we introduce a one-line
code change (“SkipInit”) which imposes this property at initialization, and we confirm that this
alternative scheme can train one thousand layer deep residual networks without normalization.
In addition, we provide a detailed empirical study of residual networks at a wide range of batch sizes.
This study demonstrates that, although batch normalization does enable us to train residual networks
with larger learning rates, we only benefit from using large learning rates in practice if the batch size
is also large. When the batch size is small, both normalized and unnormalized networks have similar
optimal learning rates (which are typically much smaller than the largest stable learning rates) and
yet normalized networks still achieve significantly higher test accuracies and lower training losses.
These experiments demonstrate that, in residual networks, increasing the largest stable learning rate
is not the primary benefit of batch normalization, contrary to the claims made in prior work [16, 17].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

