Efficient Exact Verification of Binarized Neural
Networks
Kai Jia
MIT CSAIL
32 Vassar St, Cambridge, MA 02139
jiakai@mit.edu

Martin Rinard
MIT CSAIL
32 Vassar St, Cambridge, MA 02139
rinard@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Concerned with the reliability of neural networks, researchers have developed verification techniques to prove their robustness. Most verifiers work with real-valued
networks. Unfortunately, the exact (complete and sound) verifiers face scalability
challenges and provide no correctness guarantees due to floating point errors. We
argue that Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) provide comparable robustness
and allow exact and significantly more efficient verification. We present a new
system, EEV, for efficient and exact verification of BNNs. EEV consists of two
parts: (i) a novel SAT solver that speeds up BNN verification by natively handling
the reified cardinality constraints arising in BNN encodings; and (ii) strategies to
train solver-friendly robust BNNs by inducing balanced layer-wise sparsity and low
cardinality bounds, and adaptively cancelling the gradients. We demonstrate the effectiveness of EEV by presenting the first exact verification results for `∞ -bounded
adversarial robustness of nontrivial convolutional BNNs on the MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. Compared to exact verification of real-valued networks of the
same architectures on the same tasks, EEV verifies BNNs hundreds to thousands
of times faster, while delivering comparable verifiable accuracy in most cases.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive success in many applications including
image understanding, speech recognition, natural language processing, and game playing [26]. Unfortunately, DNNs exhibit unexpected or potentially dangerous behavior due to limited robustness [56].
In response, researchers have developed techniques that attempt to verify that a DNN satisfies
a robustness specification [34, 20, 57]. However, scalability is a formidable challenge for exact
verifiers [10]. For example, MIPVerify [57] needs hundreds of seconds to verify the robustness
of a network whose inference on CPU takes only a few milliseconds, even though the network is
trained to be solver-friendly [61]. Additionally, floating point errors make any correctness guarantees
effectively unobtainable for exact verification of nontrivial real-valued neural networks [32].
Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) comprise an attractive alternative to real-valued neural networks.
BNNs exhibit significant speed gain and energy savings during inference [29, 47, 42] while achieving
competitive accuracy on challenging datasets [7]. Because of the absence of floating point arithmetic,
BNNs can also support exact verification [13, 43]. To date, however, BNN verification has exhibited
even worse scalability than real-valued neural network verification [44].
We present a new system, EEV, for exact and efficient verification of BNNs. EEV incorporates a
novel SAT solver tailored for BNN verification and new training strategies that enhance the robustness
and verification efficiency of the trained BNNs. We use EEV to verify the robustness of BNNs against
input perturbations bounded by the `∞ norm. Our experimental results show that, compared to exact
verification of robustly trained real-valued networks with the same architectures, EEV delivers several
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

