Estimation and imputation in Probabilistic Principal
Component Analysis with Missing Not At Random
data
Aude Sportisse
Sorbonne University
Paris, France

Claire Boyer
Sorbonne University
Paris, France

Julie Josse
INRIA
Montpellier, France

aude.sportisse@sorbonne-universite.fr

claire.boyer@sorbonne-universite.fr

julie.josse@inria.fr

Abstract
Missing Not At Random (MNAR) values where the probability of having missing
data may depend on the missing value itself, are notoriously difficult to account
for in analyses, although very frequent in the data. One solution to handle MNAR
data is to specify a model for the missing data mechanism, which makes inference
or imputation tasks more complex. Furthermore, this implies a strong a priori
on the parametric form of the distribution. However, some works have obtained
guarantees on the estimation of parameters in the presence of MNAR data, without
specifying the distribution of missing data [18, 25]. This is very useful in practice,
but is limited to simple cases such as few self-masked MNAR variables in data
generated according to linear regression models. We continue this line of research,
but extend it to a more general MNAR mechanism, in a more general model of the
probabilistic principal component analysis (PPCA), i.e., a low-rank model with
random effects. We prove identifiability of the PPCA parameters. We then propose
an estimation of the loading coefficients, and a data imputation method. Both
are based on estimators of means, variances and covariances of missing variables,
for which consistency is discussed. These estimators have the great advantage of
being calculated using only the observed information, leveraging the underlying
low-rank structure of the data. We illustrate the relevance of the method with
numerical experiments on synthetic data and also on two datasets, one collected
from a medical register and the other one from a recommendation system.

1

Introduction

The problem of missing data is ubiquitous in the practice of data analysis. Theoretical guarantees
of estimation strategies or imputation methods rely on assumptions regarding the missing-data
mechanism, i.e. the cause of the lack of data. Rubin [22] introduced three missing-data mechanisms.
The data are said (i) Missing Completely At Random (MCAR) if the probability of being missing
does not depend on any values observed or missing, (ii) Missing At Random (MAR) if the probability
of being missing only depends on observed values, (iii) Missing Not At Random (MNAR) if the
unavailability of the data may depend on both observed and unobserved data such as its value itself.
We focus on this later case, which is frequent in practice, and theoretically challenging. A classic
example of MNAR data is surveys about salary for which rich people would be less willing to disclose
their income.
When the data is MCAR or MAR, statistical inference is carried out by ignoring the missing data
mechanism [10]. In the MNAR case, the observed data are no longer representative of the population,
which leads to selection bias in the sample, and therefore to bias in the parameters estimation when
using for instance complete case analysis. One solution to handle MNAR data, known as selection
model [10], is to model missing data distribution; most of the time, by logistic regression models
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

