Efficient Contextual Bandits with Continuous Actions
Maryam Majzoubi∗
New York University

Chicheng Zhang†
University of Arizona

Rajan Chari‡
Microsoft Research

Akshay Krishnamurthy§
Microsoft Research

John Langford¶
Microsoft Research

Aleksandrs Slivkinsk
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We create a computationally tractable algorithm for contextual bandits with continuous actions having unknown structure. Our reduction-style algorithm composes with most supervised learning representations. We prove that it works in a
general sense and verify the new functionality with large-scale experiments.

1

Introduction

In contextual bandit learning [6, 1, 39, 3], an agent repeatedly observes its environment, chooses
an action, and receives a reward feedback, with the goal of optimizing cumulative reward. When
the action space is discrete, there are many solutions to contextual bandit learning with successful
deployments in personalized health, content recommendation, and elsewhere [e.g., 42, 54, 2, 44, 25,
43]. However, in many practical settings the action chosen is actually continuous. How then can
we efficiently choose the best action given the context? This question is also extremely relevant to
reinforcement learning more generally since contextual bandit learning is one-step reinforcement
learning.
There are many concrete examples of reinforcement learning problems with continuous actions.
In precision medicine [20, 31], doctors may prescribe to a patient a medication with a continuous
value of dosage [32]. In data center optimization, the fan speeds and liquid coolant flow may be
controllable continuous values [41]. In operating systems, when a computer makes a connection
over the network, we may be able to adjust its packet send rate in response to the current network
status [30]. All of these may be optimizable based on feedback and context.
A natural baseline approach here is to posit smoothness assumptions on the world, as in much prior
work, e.g., [5, 34, 18, 50, 19]. This approach comes with practical drawbacks. Many applications do
not exhibit any smoothness structure. When/if they do, the smoothness parameters (such as a Lipschitz constant) must be known in advance. Unfortunately, discovering the smoothness parameters is
challenging, and requires knowing some other parameters and/or extensive exploration.
A recent approach to continuous actions [37] realizes similar performance guarantees without knowing the Lipschitz constant (let alone a more refined smoothness structure), while leveraging any
preferred policy representation. Here, each action is “smoothed” to a distribution over an interval,
and the benchmark one competes with is “smoothed” similarly. Unfortunately, their algorithm is
computationally infeasible since it requires enumeration of all possible policy parameter settings.
∗

mm7918@nyu.edu
chichengz@cs.arizona.edu
‡
rajan.chari@microsoft.com
§
akshaykr@microsoft.com
¶
jcl@microsoft.com
k
slivkins@microsoft.com
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

