On Warm-Starting Neural Network Training
Jordan T. Ash
Microsoft Research NYC
ash.jordan@microsoft.com

Ryan P. Adams
Princeton University
rpa@princeton.edu

Abstract
In many real-world deployments of machine learning systems, data arrive piecemeal. These learning scenarios may be passive, where data arrive incrementally
due to structural properties of the problem (e.g., daily financial data) or active,
where samples are selected according to a measure of their quality (e.g., experimental design). In both of these cases, we are building a sequence of models that
incorporate an increasing amount of data. We would like each of these models in
the sequence to be performant and take advantage of all the data that are available
to that point. Conventional intuition suggests that when solving a sequence of
related optimization problems of this form, it should be possible to initialize using
the solution of the previous iterate—to “warm start” the optimization rather than
initialize from scratch—and see reductions in wall-clock time. However, in practice
this warm-starting seems to yield poorer generalization performance than models
that have fresh random initializations, even though the final training losses are
similar. While it appears that some hyperparameter settings allow a practitioner to
close this generalization gap, they seem to only do so in regimes that damage the
wall-clock gains of the warm start. Nevertheless, it is highly desirable to be able to
warm-start neural network training, as it would dramatically reduce the resource
usage associated with the construction of performant deep learning systems. In
this work, we take a closer look at this empirical phenomenon and try to understand when and how it occurs. We also provide a surprisingly simple trick that
overcomes this pathology in several important situations, and present experiments
that elucidate some of its properties.

1

Introduction

Although machine learning research generally assumes a fixed set of training data, real life is more
complicated. One common scenario is where a production ML system must be constantly updated
with new data. This situation occurs in finance, online advertising, recommendation systems, fraud
detection, and many other domains where machine learning systems are used for prediction and
decision making in the real world [1–3]. When new data arrive, the model needs to be updated so
that it can be as accurate as possible and account for any domain shift that is occurring.
As a concrete example, consider a large-scale social media website, to which users are constantly
uploading images and text. The company requires up-to-the-minute predictive models in order to
recommend content, filter out inappropriate media, and select advertisements. There might be millions
of new data arriving every day, which need to be rapidly incorporated into production ML pipelines.
It is natural in this scenario to imagine maintaining a single model that is updated with the
latest data at regular cadence. Every day, for example, new training might be performed on
the model with the updated, larger dataset. Ideally, this new training procedure is initialized
from the parameters of yesterday’s model, i.e., it is “warm-started” from those parameters
rather than given a fresh initialization. Such an initialization makes intuitive sense: the data
used yesterday are mostly the same as the data today, and it seems wasteful to throw away all
previous computation. For convex optimization problems, warm starting is widely used and
highly successful (e.g., [1]), and the theoretical properties of online learning are well understood.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

