Improved Algorithms for Online Submodular
Maximization via First-order Regret Bounds

Nicholas J. A. Harvey
University of British Columbia
nickhar@cs.ubc.ca

Christopher Liaw
University of Toronto
cvliaw@cs.toronto.edu

Tasuku Soma
The University of Tokyo
tasuku_soma@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We consider the problem of nonnegative submodular maximization in the online
setting. At time step t, an algorithm selects a set St ∈ C ⊆ 2V where C is a feasible
family of sets. An adversary then reveals a submodular function ft . The goal is to
design an efficient algorithm for minimizing the expected approximate regret.
In this work, we give a general approach for improving regret bounds in online
submodular maximization by exploiting “first-order” regret bounds for online
linear optimization.
• For monotone submodular maximization subject to a matroid,
p we give an efficient
algorithm which achieves a (1 − c/e − ε)-regret of O( kT ln(n/k)) where n
is the size of the ground set, k is the rank of the matroid, ε > 0 is a constant,
and c is the average curvature. Even without assuming any curvature (i.e., taking
c = 1), this regret bound improves on previous results of Streeter et al. (2009)
and Golovin et al. (2014).
• For nonmonotone, √
unconstrained submodular functions, we give an algorithm
with 1/2-regret O( nT ), improving on the results of Roughgarden and Wang
(2018). Our approach is based on Blackwell approachability; in particular, we
give a novel first-order regret bound for the Blackwell instances that arise in this
setting.

1

Introduction

Submodular maximization is a ubiquitous optimization problem in machine learning, economics, and
social networks [26]. A set function f : 2V → R on a ground set V is submodular if it satisfies the
diminishing return property: f (X ∪ {i}) − f (X) ≥ f (Y ∪ {i}) − f (Y ) for X ⊆ Y and i ∈ V \ Y .
Given a nonnegative submodular function f and a set family C ⊆ 2V , submodular maximization is the
optimization problem maxS∈C f (S). Although submodular maximization is NP-hard in general [11],
approximation algorithms for various settings have been developed and they often perform very well
in real-world applications [5, 6, 8, 12, 26, 31].
In this paper, we consider online submodular maximization in the full-information setting, which is
formulated as the following repeated game between a player and an adversary. The player is given a
set family C in a ground set V in advance. For each round t = 1, 2 . . ., the player plays a set St ∈ C
possibly in a randomized manner and the adversary (perhaps knowing the player’s strategy but not the
randomized outcome) selects a submodular function ft : 2V → [0, 1]. The player gains the reward
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

