Robust Recovery via Implicit Bias of Discrepant
Learning Rates for Double Over-parameterization

Chong You†∗
‡

Zhihui Zhu‡∗

Qing Qu]

Yi Ma†

†
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Denver
]
Center for Data Science, New York University

Abstract
Recent advances have shown that implicit bias of gradient descent on overparameterized models enables the recovery of low-rank matrices from linear measurements, even with no prior knowledge on the intrinsic rank. In contrast, for
robust low-rank matrix recovery from grossly corrupted measurements, overparameterization leads to overfitting without prior knowledge on both the intrinsic rank and sparsity of corruption. This paper shows that with a double overparameterization for both the low-rank matrix and sparse corruption, gradient descent with discrepant learning rates provably recovers the underlying matrix even
without prior knowledge on neither rank of the matrix nor sparsity of the corruption. We further extend our approach for the robust recovery of natural images by
over-parameterizing images with deep convolutional networks. Experiments show
that our method handles different test images and varying corruption levels with
a single learning pipeline where the network width and termination conditions do
not need to be adjusted on a case-by-case basis. Underlying the success is again
the implicit bias with discrepant learning rates on different over-parameterized
parameters, which may bear on broader applications. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ChongYou/robust-image-recovery.

1

Introduction

Learning over-parameterized models, which have more parameters than the problem’s intrinsic dimension, is becoming a crucial topic in machine learning [1–11]. While classical learning theories
suggest that over-parameterized models tend to overfit [12], recent advances showed that an optimization algorithm may produce an implicit bias that regularizes the solution with desired properties.
This type of results has led to new insights and better understandings on gradient descent for solving
several fundamental problems, including logistic regression on linearly separated data [1], compressive sensing [2, 3], sparse phase retrieval [4], nonlinear least-squares [5], low-rank (deep) matrix
factorization [6–9, 13], and deep linear neural networks [10, 11], etc.
Inspired by these recent advances [1–11], in this work we present a new type of practical methods
for robust recovery of structured signals via model over-parameterization. In particular, we aim to
learn an unknown signal X? ∈ Rn×n from its grossly corrupted linear measurements
y = A(X? ) + s? ,

(1)

∗
Correspondence to Chong You (cyou@berkeley.edu) and Zhihui Zhu (zhihui.zhu@du.edu). The first
two authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

