UWSOD: Toward Fully-Supervised-Level Capacity
Weakly Supervised Object Detection

Yunhang Shen1
Rongrong Ji1,2,3∗
Zhiwei Chen1
Yongjian Wu4
Feiyue Huang4
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 361005, China
3
Peng Cheng Laborotory, Shenzhen, China
4
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
shenyunhang01@gmail.com
rrji@xmu.edu.cn
zhiweichen.xmu@gmail.com
littlekenwu@tencent.com
garyhuang@tencent.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) has attracted extensive research
attention due to its great flexibility of exploiting large-scale dataset with only
image-level annotations for detector training. Despite its great advance in recent
years, WSOD still suffers limited performance, which is far below that of fully
supervised object detection (FSOD). As most WSOD methods depend on object
proposal algorithms to generate candidate regions and are also confronted with
challenges like low-quality predicted bounding boxes and large scale variation. In
this paper, we propose a unified WSOD framework, termed UWSOD, to develop
a high-capacity general detection model with only image-level labels, which is
self-contained and does not require external modules or additional supervision. To
this end, we exploit three important components, i.e., object proposal generation,
bounding-box fine-tuning and scale-invariant features. First, we propose an anchorbased self-supervised proposal generator to hypothesize object locations, which
is trained end-to-end with supervision created by UWSOD for both objectness
classification and regression. Second, we develop a step-wise bounding-box finetuning to refine both detection scores and coordinates by progressively select highconfidence object proposals as positive samples, which bootstraps the quality of
predicted bounding boxes. Third, we construct a multi-rate resampling pyramid to
aggregate multi-scale contextual information, which is the first in-network feature
hierarchy to handle scale variation in WSOD. Extensive experiments on PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO show that the proposed UWSOD achieves competitive results
with the state-of-the-art WSOD methods while not requiring external modules
or additional supervision. Moreover, the upper-bound performance of UWSOD
with class-agnostic ground-truth bounding boxes approaches Faster R-CNN, which
demonstrates UWSOD has fully-supervised-level capacity. The code is available
at: https://github.com/shenyunhang/UWSOD.

1

Introduction

Different from fully supervised object detection (FSOD) [1–4] that requires bounding-box-level
annotations, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) [5–8] only needs image-level labels, which
indicate the presence or absence of an object category. More recently, WSOD has attracted extensive
attention to reducing the manual labelling effort to learn detectors. Unfortunately, due to the lack of
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

