Adaptive Shrinkage Estimation for Streaming Graphs

Nesreen K. Ahmed
Intel Labs
Santa Clara, CA 95054
nesreen.k.ahmed@intel.com

Nick Duffield
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
duffieldng@tamu.edu

Abstract
Networks are a natural representation of complex systems across the sciences,
and higher-order dependencies are central to the understanding and modeling of
these systems. However, in many practical applications such as online social
networks, networks are massive, dynamic, and naturally streaming, where pairwise
interactions among vertices become available one at a time in some arbitrary
order. The massive size and streaming nature of these networks allow only partial
observation, since it is infeasible to analyze the entire network. Under such
scenarios, it is challenging to study the higher-order structural and connectivity
patterns of streaming networks. In this work, we consider the fundamental problem
of estimating the higher-order dependencies using adaptive sampling. We propose
a novel adaptive, single-pass sampling framework and unbiased estimators for
higher-order network analysis of large streaming networks. Our algorithms exploit
adaptive techniques to identify edges that are highly informative for efficiently
estimating the higher-order structure of streaming networks from small sample
data. We also introduce a novel James-Stein shrinkage estimator to reduce the
estimation error. Our approach is fully analytic, computationally efficient, and can
be incrementally updated in a streaming setting. Numerical experiments on large
networks show that our approach is superior to baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Network analysis has been central to the understanding and modeling of large complex systems in
various domains, e.g., social, biological, neural, and technological systems [7, 37]. These complex
systems are usually represented as a network (graph) where vertices represent the components of the
system, and edges represent their direct (observed) interactions over time. The success of network
analysis throughout the sciences rests on the ability to describe the complex structure and dynamics of
arbitrary systems using only observed pairwise interaction data among the components of the system.
Many networked systems exhibit rich structural and connectivity patterns that can be captured at
the level of pairwise links (edges) or individual vertices. However, higher-order dependencies that
capture complex forms of interactions remain largely unknown, since they are beyond the reach
of methods that focus primarily on pairwise links. Recently, there has been a surge of studies on
higher-order network analysis [4, 9, 52, 43, 20]. These methods focus on generalizing the analysis
and modeling of network data from pairwise relationships (e.g., edges) to more complex forms of
relationships such as multi-node (many-body) relationships (e.g., motif patterns, hypergraphs) and
higher-order network paths that depend on more history [46]. Higher-order connectivity patterns
were shown to change node rankings [46, 57], reshape the community structure [52, 9, 56], reveal the
hub structure [4], learn more accurate embeddings [42, 41], and generative network models [16].
Many networks are massive, dynamic, and naturally streaming over time [33, 44, 3], with pairwise
interactions (i.e., edges that represent communication in the form of user-to-user, user-to-product
interactions) are becoming available one at a time in some arbitrary order (e.g., online social networks,
Emails, Twitter data, recommendation engines). The massive size and streaming nature of these
networks allow only partial observation, since it is infeasible to analyze the entire network. Under
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

