Sharpened Generalization Bounds based on
Conditional Mutual Information and an Application
to Noisy, Iterative Algorithms

Mahdi Haghifam
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Jeffrey Negrea
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Ashish Khisti
University of Toronto

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite
Element AI

Abstract
The information-theoretic framework of Russo and Zou (2016) and Xu and Raginsky (2017) provides bounds on the generalization error of a learning algorithm in
terms of the mutual information between the algorithm’s output and the training
sample. In this work, we study the proposal by Steinke and Zakynthinou (2020)
to reason about the generalization error of a learning algorithm by introducing a
super sample that contains the training sample as a random subset and computing
mutual information conditional on the super sample. We first show that these
new bounds based on the conditional mutual information are tighter than those
based on the unconditional mutual information. We then introduce yet tighter
bounds, building on the “individual sample” idea of Bu et al. (2019) and the “data
dependent” ideas of Negrea et al. (2019), using disintegrated mutual information.
Finally, we apply these bounds to the study of the Langevin dynamics algorithm,
showing that conditioning on the super sample allows us to exploit information in
the optimization trajectory to obtain tighter bounds based on hypothesis tests.

1

Introduction

Let D be an unknown distribution on a space Z, and let W be a set of parameters that index a set
of predictors, ` : Z × W → [0, 1] be a bounded loss function. Consider a (randomized) learning
algorithm A that selects an element W in W, based on an IID sample S = (Z1 , . . . , Zn ) ∼ D⊗n . For
w ∈ W, let RD (w) = E`(Z, w) denote the risk of predictor w, and R̂S (w) = 1n ∑m
i=1 `(Zi , w) denote the
empirical risk. Our interest in this paper is the (expected) generalization error of A with respect to D,
EGED (A) = E[RD (W ) − R̂S (W )].

In this work, we study bounds on generalization error in terms of information-theoretic measures of
dependence between the data and the output of the learning algorithm. This approach was initiated by
Russo and Zou [18, 19] and has since been extended [2, 3, 6, 9, 17, 24]. The basic result in this line
of work is that the generalization error can be bounded in terms of the mutual information I(W ; S)
between the data and the learned parameter, a quantity that has been called the information usage
or input–output mutual information of A with respect to D, which we denote by IOMID (A). The
following result is due to Russo and Zou [18] and Xu and Raginsky [24].
r
IOMID (A)
Theorem 1.1. EGED (A) ≤
.
2n
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

