Achieving Equalized Odds by Resampling Sensitive
Attributes
Yaniv Romano
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
yromano@stanford.edu

Stephen Bates
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
stephenbates@stanford.edu

Emmanuel J. Candès
Departments of Mathematics
and of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
candes@stanford.edu

Abstract
We present a flexible framework for learning predictive models that approximately
satisfy the equalized odds notion of fairness. This is achieved by introducing a
general discrepancy functional that rigorously quantifies violations of this criterion.
This differentiable functional is used as a penalty driving the model parameters
towards equalized odds. To rigorously evaluate fitted models, we develop a formal
hypothesis test to detect whether a prediction rule violates this property, the first
such test in the literature. Both the model fitting and hypothesis testing leverage a
resampled version of the sensitive attribute obeying equalized odds, by construction.
We demonstrate the applicability and validity of the proposed framework both in
regression and multi-class classification problems, reporting improved performance
over state-of-the-art methods. Lastly, we show how to incorporate techniques for
equitable uncertainty quantification—unbiased for each group under study—to
communicate the results of the data analysis in exact terms.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are now frequently used to inform high-stakes decisions—and even to
make them outright. As such, society has become increasingly critical of the ethical implications
of automated decision making, and researchers in algorithmic fairness are responding with new
tools. While fairness is context dependent and may mean different things to different people, a suite
of recent work has given rise to a useful vocabulary for discussing fairness in automated systems
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Fairness constraints can often be articulated as conditional independence relations,
and in this work we will focus on the equalized odds criterion [8], defined as
Ŷ ⊥
⊥ A | Y,

(1)

where the relationship above applies to test points; here, Y is the response variable, A is a sensitive
attribute (e.g. gender), X is a vector of features that may also contain A, and Ŷ = fˆ(X) is the
prediction obtained with a fixed prediction rule fˆ(·). While the idea that a prediction rule obeying the
equalized odds property is desirable has gained traction, actually finding such a rule for a real-valued
or multi-class response is a relatively open problem. Indeed, there are only a few recent works
attempting this task [9, 10]. Moreover, there are no existing methods to rigorously check whether a
learned model achieves this property.
We address these two questions by introducing a novel training scheme to fit models that approximately satisfy the equalized odds criterion and a hypothesis test to detect when a prediction rule
violates this same criterion. Both solutions build off of one key idea: we create a synthetic version
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

