Modeling Task Effects on Meaning Representation
in the Brain via Zero-Shot MEG Prediction
∗ 1,2

∗1

1

1,2

, Otilia Stretcu , Barnabás Póczos , Leila Wehbe , Tom M. Mitchell
Mariya Toneva
1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
2
Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
mktoneva@cs.cmu.edu, ostretcu@cs.cmu.edu

1,2

Abstract
How meaning is represented in the brain is still one of the big open questions in
neuroscience. Does a word (e.g., bird) always have the same representation, or
does the task under which the word is processed alter its representation (answering
“can you eat it?” versus “can it fly?”)? The brain activity of subjects who read
the same word while performing different semantic tasks has been shown to differ
across tasks. However, it is still not understood how the task itself contributes to
this difference. In the current work, we study Magnetoencephalography (MEG)
brain recordings of participants tasked with answering questions about concrete
nouns. We investigate the effect of the task (i.e. the question being asked) on the
processing of the concrete noun by predicting the millisecond-resolution MEG
recordings as a function of both the semantics of the noun and the task. Using
this approach, we test several hypotheses about the task-stimulus interactions by
comparing the zero-shot predictions made by these hypotheses for novel tasks
and nouns not seen during training. We find that incorporating the task semantics
significantly improves the prediction of MEG recordings, across participants. The
improvement occurs 475 − 550ms after the participants first see the word, which
corresponds to what is considered to be the ending time of semantic processing
for a word. These results suggest that only the end of semantic processing of a
word is task-dependent, and pose a challenge for future research to formulate new
hypotheses for earlier task effects as a function of the task and stimuli.

1

Introduction

One of the central goals of artificial intelligence (AI) is to build intelligent systems that understand
the meaning of concepts and use it to perform tasks in the real world. Despite the great strides in
learning representations, there are still many problems that could benefit from further improvements
in understanding and representing meaning, such as symbol grounding, common-sense reasoning, and
natural language understanding. While machines are limited in these areas, we do have one system
that is capable of representing meaning and performing these tasks well: the human brain. Thus,
looking to the brain for insights about how we represent and compose meaning may be beneficial.
Studies of meaning representation in neuroscience have revealed that the brain accesses meaning
differently depending on the demands of a task [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. For instance, the recorded brain activity
of a participant that observes the word “cat” differs according to whether the participant is asked
to answer whether “cat” is an animal or a vegetable [6]. The difference is shown to occur between
∗

Equal contribution and joint lead authorship.
Code available at https://github.com/otiliastr/brain_task_effect.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

