RATT: Recurrent Attention to Transient Tasks for
Continual Image Captioning

Riccardo Del Chiaro∗
MICC, University of Florence
Florence 50134, FI, Italy
riccardo.delchiaro@unifi.it

Bartłomiej Twardowski
CVC, Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona
08193 Barcelona, Spain
bartlomiej.twardowski@cvc.uab.es

Andrew D. Bagdanov
MICC, University of Florence
Florence 50134, FI, Italy
andrew.bagdanov@unifi.it

Joost van de Weijer
CVC, Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona
08193 Barcelona, Spain
joost@cvc.uab.es

Abstract
Research on continual learning has led to a variety of approaches to mitigating
catastrophic forgetting in feed-forward classification networks. Until now surprisingly little attention has been focused on continual learning of recurrent models
applied to problems like image captioning. In this paper we take a systematic look
at continual learning of LSTM-based models for image captioning. We propose
an attention-based approach that explicitly accommodates the transient nature of
vocabularies in continual image captioning tasks – i.e. that task vocabularies are not
disjoint. We call our method Recurrent Attention to Transient Tasks (RATT), and
also show how to adapt continual learning approaches based on weight regularization and knowledge distillation to recurrent continual learning problems. We apply
our approaches to incremental image captioning problem on two new continual
learning benchmarks we define using the MS-COCO and Flickr30 datasets. Our
results demonstrate that RATT is able to sequentially learn five captioning tasks
while incurring no forgetting of previously learned ones.

1

Introduction

Classical supervised learning systems acquire knowledge by providing them with a set of annotated
training samples from a task, which for classifiers is a single set of classes to learn. This view
of supervised learning stands in stark contrast with how humans acquire knowledge, which is
instead continual in the sense that mastering new tasks builds upon previous knowledge acquired
when learning previous ones. This type of learning is referred to as continual learning (sometimes
incremental or lifelong learning), and continual learning systems instead consume a sequence of
tasks, each containing its own set of classes to be learned. Through a sequence of learning sessions,
in which the learner has access only to labeled examples from the current task, the learning system
should integrate knowledge from past and current tasks in order to accurately master them all in the
end. A principal shortcoming of state-of-the-art learning systems in the continual learning regime is
the phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting [10, 17]: in the absence of training samples from previous
tasks, the learner is likely to forget them in the process of acquiring new ones.
Continual learning research has until now concentrated primarily on classification problems modeled
with deep, feed-forward neural networks [8, 28]. Given the importance of recurrent networks for
∗

Code for experiments available here: https://github.com/delchiaro/RATT

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

