Learning Multi-Agent Coordination for Enhancing
Target Coverage in Directional Sensor Networks

Jing Xu* 1, 6 , Fangwei Zhong* 2, 3, 5 , Yizhou Wang2, 4
1
Center for Data Science, Peking University
2
Dept. of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Adv. Inst. of Info. Tech, Peking University
4
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
5
Advanced Innovation Center For Future Visual Entertainment, Beijing Film Academy
6
Deepwise AI Lab
jing.xu@pku.edu.cn, zfw@pku.edu.cn, yizhou.wang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Maximum target coverage by adjusting the orientation of distributed sensors is
an important problem in directional sensor networks (DSNs). This problem is
challenging as the targets usually move randomly but the coverage range of sensors
is limited in angle and distance. Thus, it is required to coordinate sensors to get
ideal target coverage with low power consumption, e.g. no missing targets or
reducing redundant coverage. To realize this, we propose a Hierarchical Targetoriented Multi-Agent Coordination (HiT-MAC), which decomposes the target
coverage problem into two-level tasks: targets assignment by a coordinator and
tracking assigned targets by executors. Specifically, the coordinator periodically
monitors the environment globally and allocates targets to each executor. In turn,
the executor only needs to track its assigned targets. To effectively learn the HiTMAC by reinforcement learning, we further introduce a bunch of practical methods,
including a self-attention module, marginal contribution approximation for the
coordinator, goal-conditional observation filter for the executor, etc. Empirical
results demonstrate the advantage of HiT-MAC in coverage rate, learning efficiency,
and scalability, comparing to baselines. We also conduct an ablative analysis on
the effectiveness of the introduced components in the framework.

1

Introduction

We study the target coverage problem in Directional Sensor Networks (DSNs). In DSNs, every node is
equipped with a "directional" sensor, which perceives a physical phenomenon in a specific orientation.
Cameras, radars, and infrared sensors are typical examples of directional sensors. In some real-world
applications, the sensors in DSNs are required to dynamically adjust their own orientation to track
mobile targets, such as automatically capturing sports game videos1 , actively tracking interesting
objects [1]. To realize these applications, the target coverage acts as a crucial point, which puts
emphasis on how to cover the maximum number of targets with the finite number of directional
sensors. It is challenging as the targets usually move randomly but the locations of sensors are fixed.
Meanwhile, the coverage range for sensors is limited in angle and distance. To do this, it is required
to collaboratively adjust the orientation of each sensor in DSNs by a multi-agent system to cover
targets. In practice, the multi-agent system for DSNs should : 1) accomplish the global task via
1

* indicates equal contribution
https://playsight.com/automatic-production/

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

