Optimal Prediction of the Number of Unseen
Species with Multiplicity

Yi Hao § , Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
yih179@eng.ucsd.edu , pingli98@gmail.com

Abstract
Based on a sample of size n, we consider estimating the number of symbols that
appear at least µ times in an independent sample of size a · n, where a is a given
parameter. This formulation includes, as a special case, the well-known problem of
inferring the number of unseen species introduced by [Fisher et al.] in 1943 and
considered by many others. Of considerable interest in this line of works is the
largest a for which the quantity can be accurately predicted. We completely resolve
this problem by determining the limit of estimation to be a ≈ (log n)/µ, with both
lower and upper bounds matching up to constant factors. For the particular case
of µ = 1, this implies the recent result by [Orlitsky et al.] on the unseen species
problem. Experimental evaluations show that the proposed estimator performs
exceptionally well in practice. Furthermore, the estimator is a linear combination
of symbols’ empirical counts, and hence linear-time computable.

1

Introduction

Let ∆ denote the collection of all discrete distributions. Given an independent sample X n from an
unknown distribution p ∈ ∆, we are interested in estimating the number of unseen symbols that
appear at least µ times in an independent sample Y m from the same distribution p, where m is a
given sampling parameter. To be more specific, we study the estimation of
X
Uµ , Uµ (X n , Y m ) ,
1Nx =0 · 1Mx ≥µ ,
x

where the summation is over all symbols x in the potentially unknown alphabet, and Nx and Mx
represent the number of times symbol x appearing in X n and Y m , respectively. In addition, let
X
Φi , Φi (X n ) ,
1Nx =i
x

denote the number of symbols appearing i times in the sample X n . Due to symmetry, the collection
of Φi ’s is a sufficient statistic for learning Uµ .
For the special case of µ = 1, the quantity U1 becomes the number of newly observed symbols, and
the task reduces to the well-known unseen species problem, whose study dates back to more than
half a century ago [11]. In the early 1940s, the British chemist and naturalist Corbet had spent two
years in Malaya to trap butterflies (X n ). Every time he saw a new species, he recorded how many
individuals of that species he had trapped (Nx ).
§
Yi Hao is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of
California, San Diego. Yi Hao’s work was conducted while he was a summer intern at Baidu Research-Bellevue.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

