Statistical and Topological Properties of Sliced
Probability Divergences

Kimia Nadjahi1∗, Alain Durmus2 , Lénaïc Chizat3 ,
Soheil Kolouri4 ,
Shahin Shahrampour5 , Umut Şimşekli1,6
1: LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2: Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, France
3: Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, France
4: HRL Laboratories, LLC., Malibu, CA, USA
5: Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
6: Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK

Abstract
The idea of slicing divergences has been proven to be successful when comparing
two probability measures in various machine learning applications including generative modeling, and consists in computing the expected value of a ‘base divergence’
between one-dimensional random projections of the two measures. However, the
topological, statistical, and computational consequences of this technique have not
yet been well-established. In this paper, we aim at bridging this gap and derive
various theoretical properties of sliced probability divergences. First, we show
that slicing preserves the metric axioms and the weak continuity of the divergence,
implying that the sliced divergence will share similar topological properties. We
then precise the results in the case where the base divergence belongs to the class of
integral probability metrics. On the other hand, we establish that, under mild conditions, the sample complexity of a sliced divergence does not depend on the problem
dimension. We finally apply our general results to several base divergences, and
illustrate our theory on both synthetic and real data experiments.

1

Introduction

Most inference methods in implicit generative modeling (IGM), such as generative adversarial
networks [1] and variational auto-encoders [2], rely on the use of a particular divergence in order
to be able to discriminate probability distributions. Recent advances in this field have illustrated
that the choice of this divergence is of crucial importance and can lead to very different practical
and theoretical properties [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In this context, ‘sliced’ probability divergences, such as
Sliced-Wasserstein [8], or Sliced-Cramér [9], have become increasingly popular.
This slicing strategy has been essentially motivated by two main purposes. The first purpose is that
some probability divergences are only defined to compare measures supported on one-dimensional
spaces (e.g., Cramér distance, [10]); hence, the slicing operation allows the use of such divergences
to multivariate distributions [11, 9]. The second purpose arises when the computational complexity
of a divergence becomes excessive when comparing measures on high-dimensional spaces, but can
efficiently be computed in the univariate case (e.g., the Wasserstein distance between one-dimensional
distributions admits a closed-form analytical which can easily be approximated). The slicing operation
then leverages these advantages originally available in one dimension to define divergences achieving
computational efficiency on multivariate settings [8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16].
∗

Corresponding author: kimia.nadjahi@telecom-paris.fr

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

