GreedyFool: Distortion-Aware Sparse
Adversarial Attack
Xiaoyi Dong1∗, Dongdong Chen2†, Jianmin Bao2 , Chuan Qin1 ,
Lu Yuan2 , Weiming Zhang1 , Nenghai Yu1 , Dong Chen2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research
{dlight@mail., qc94@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@ }.ustc.edu.cn
cddlyf@gmail.com , {jianbao, luyuan, doch }@microsoft.com

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks(DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial samples. Sparse
adversarial samples are a special branch of adversarial samples that can fool
the target model by only perturbing a few pixels. The existence of the sparse
adversarial attack points out that DNNs are much more vulnerable than people
believed, which is also a new aspect for analyzing DNNs. However, current
sparse adversarial attack methods still have some shortcomings on both sparsity
and invisibility. In this paper, we propose a novel two-stage distortion-aware
greedy-based method dubbed as “GreedyFool". Specifically, it first selects the
most effective candidate positions to modify by considering both the gradient(for
adversary) and the distortion map(for invisibility), then drops some less important
points in the reduce stage. Experiments demonstrate that compared with the startof-the-art method, we only need to modify 3× fewer pixels under the same sparse
perturbation setting. For target attack, the success rate of our method is 9.96%
higher than the start-of-the-art method under the same pixel budget. Code can be
found at https://github.com/LightDXY/GreedyFool.

1

Introduction

Despite the success of current deep neural networks (DNNs), they are shown to be vulnerable to
adversarial samples [41, 17, 6, 36, 24, 31, 4, 18, 42, 13, 14, 47]. An adversarial sample is a carefully
crafted image to fool the target network by adding small perturbations onto the original clean image.
On one hand, the existence of adversarial samples raises the security threat of DNNs, especially these
DNNs used in current daily life [23]. On the other hand, adversarial samples can help us to disclose
the weakness of DNNs, and further understand the mechanism of DNNs.
To understand the weakness and mechanism of DNNs comprehensively, it is necessary to achieve
various kinds of adversarial attacks. In most cases, adversarial perturbations are constrained by a lp norm distance and can be roughly categorized into two types: dense attack and sparse attack. For dense
attack, the attack methods perturb all the pixels of the image under the l∞ or l2 constrain [10, 6, 41].
For sparse attack, the attack methods only perturb a few pixels under the l0 constrain [34, 30, 11].
Since the pioneering work [41], many dense attack methods have been proposed and achieved
impressive results [15, 35, 5, 10, 19, 43, 33, 44, 45, 8, 9]. However, different from l∞ or l2 constraint,
it is a NP-hard problem to generate adversarial noise under l0 constraint. To address this problem,
many previous works have been proposed under both white-box and black-box setting. For white-box
attack, JSMA [34] proposed to select the most effective pixels that influence the model decision based
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Dongdong Chen is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

