Effective Dimension Adaptive Sketching Methods for
Faster Regularized Least-Squares Optimization

Jonathan Lacotte
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
lacotte@stanford.edu

Mert Pilanci
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
pilanci@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a new randomized algorithm for solving L2-regularized least-squares
problems based on sketching. We consider two of the most popular random embeddings, namely, Gaussian embeddings and the Subsampled Randomized Hadamard
Transform (SRHT). While current randomized solvers for least-squares optimization prescribe an embedding dimension at least greater than the data dimension, we
show that the embedding dimension can be reduced to the effective dimension of
the optimization problem, and still preserve high-probability convergence guarantees. In this regard, we derive sharp matrix deviation inequalities over ellipsoids for
both Gaussian and SRHT embeddings. Specifically, we improve on the constant
of a classical Gaussian concentration bound whereas, for SRHT embeddings, our
deviation inequality involves a novel technical approach. Leveraging these bounds,
we are able to design a practical and adaptive algorithm which does not require
to know the effective dimension beforehand. Our method starts with an initial
embedding dimension equal to 1 and, over iterations, increases the embedding
dimension up to the effective one at most. Hence, our algorithm improves the
state-of-the-art computational complexity for solving regularized least-squares
problems. Further, we show numerically that it outperforms standard iterative
solvers such as the conjugate gradient method and its pre-conditioned version on
several standard machine learning datasets.

1

Introduction

We study the performance of a randomized method, namely, the Hessian sketch [34], in the context
of regularized least-squares problems,


1
ν2
2
2
x∗ : = argmin f (x) : = kAx − bk2 + kxk2 ,
(1)
2
2
x∈Rd
where A ∈ Rn×d is a data matrix and b ∈ Rn is a vector of observations. For clarity purposes and
without loss of generality (by considering instead the dual problem of (1)), we make the assumption
that the problem is over-determined, i.e., n ⩾ d and that rank(A) = d.
The regularized solution x∗ can be obtained using direct methods which have computational complexity O(nd2 ). In the large-scale setting n, d  1, this is prohibitively large. A linear dependence
e
O(nd)
is preferable and this can be obtained by using first-order iterative solvers [18] such as the
conjugate gradient method (CG) for which the per-iteration complexity
as O(nd). Using the
 scales

A
standard prediction (semi)-norm error 12 kA(e
x − x∗ )k22 where A : =
as the evaluation criterion
νId
for an estimator x
e, these iterative methods have time complexity which usually scales proportionally
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

