Guiding Deep Molecular Optimization
with Genetic Exploration

Sungsoo Ahn Junsu Kim Hankook Lee Jinwoo Shin
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{sungsoo.ahn, junsu.kim, hankook.lee, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
De novo molecular design attempts to search over the chemical space for molecules
with the desired property. Recently, deep learning has gained considerable attention
as a promising approach to solve the problem. In this paper, we propose genetic
expert-guided learning (GEGL), a simple yet novel framework for training a deep
neural network (DNN) to generate highly-rewarding molecules. Our main idea is
to design a “genetic expert improvement” procedure, which generates high-quality
targets for imitation learning of the DNN. Extensive experiments show that GEGL
significantly improves over state-of-the-art methods. For example, GEGL manages
to solve the penalized octanol-water partition coefficient optimization with a score
of 31.40, while the best-known score in the literature is 27.22. Besides, for the
GuacaMol benchmark with 20 tasks, our method achieves the highest score for 19
tasks, in comparison with state-of-the-art methods, and newly obtains the perfect
score for three tasks. Our training code is available at https://github.com/
sungsoo-ahn/genetic-expert-guided-learning.

1

Introduction

Discovering new molecules with the desired property is fundamental in chemistry, with critical
applications such as drug discovery [1] and material design [2]. The task is challenging since the
molecular space is vast; e.g., the number of synthesizable drug-like compounds is estimated to be
around 1060 [3]. To tackle this problem, de novo molecular design [4, 5] aims to generate a new
molecule from scratch with the desired property, rather than naïvely enumerate over the molecular
space.
Over the past few years, molecule-generating deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated
successful results for solving the de novo molecular design problem [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. For example, Gómez-Bombarelli et al. [8] perform Bayesian optimization
for maximizing the desired property, on the embedding space of molecule-generating variational
auto-encoders. On the other hand, Guimaraes et al. [6] train a molecule-generating policy using
reinforcement learning with the desired property formulated as a reward.
Intriguingly, several works [23, 24, 25, 26] have recently evidenced that the traditional frameworks
based on genetic algorithm (GA) can compete with or even outperform the recently proposed
deep learning methods. They reveal that GA is effective, thanks to the powerful domain-specific
genetic operators for exploring the chemical space. For example, Jensen [24] achieves outstanding
performance by generating new molecules as a combination of subgraphs extracted from existing
ones. Such observations also emphasize how domain knowledge can play a significant role in de
novo molecular design. On the contrary, the current DNN-based methods do not exploit such domain
knowledge explicitly; instead, they implicitly generalize the knowledge of high-rewarding molecules
by training a DNN on them. Notably, the expressive power of DNN allows itself to parameterize a
distribution over the whole molecular space flexibly.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

