Approximation Based Variance Reduction for
Reparameterization Gradients

Tomas Geffner
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
tgeffner@cs.umass.edu

Justin Domke
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
domke@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Flexible variational distributions improve variational inference but are harder to
optimize. In this work we present a control variate that is applicable for any reparameterizable distribution with known mean and covariance matrix, e.g. Gaussians
with any covariance structure. The control variate is based on a quadratic approximation of the model, and its parameters are set using a double-descent scheme
by minimizing the gradient estimator’s variance. We empirically show that this
control variate leads to large improvements in gradient variance and optimization
convergence for inference with non-factorized variational distributions.

1

Introduction

This paper concerns estimating the gradient of Eqw (z) f (z) with respect to w. This is a ubiquitous
problem in machine learning, needed to perform stochastic optimization in variational inference
(VI), reinforcement learning, and experimental design [20, 12, 30, 5]. A popular technique is the
“reparameterization trick” [24, 14, 8]. Here, one defines a mapping Tw that transforms some base
density q0 into qw . Then, the gradient is estimated by drawing  ∼ q0 and evaluating ∇w f (Tw ()).
In any application using stochastic gradients, variance is a concern. Several variance reduction
methods exist, with control variates representing a popular alternative [22]. A control variate is
a random variable with expectation zero, which can be added to an estimator to cancel noise and
decrease variance. Previous work has shown that control variates can significantly reduce the variance
of reparameterization gradients, and thereby improve optimization performance [6, 17, 27].
Miller et al. [17] proposed a Taylor-expansion based control variate for the case where qw is a
fully-factorized Gaussian parameterized by its mean and scale. Their method works well for the
gradient with respect to the mean parameters. However, for the scale parameters, computational
issues force the use of further approximations. In a new analysis (Sec. 4) we observe that this amounts
to using a constant Taylor approximation (i.e. an approximation of order zero). As a consequence,
for the scale parameters, the control variate has little effect. Still, the approach is very helpful with
fully-factorized Gaussians, because in this case most variance is contributed by gradient with respect
to the mean parameters.
The situation is different for non fully-factorized distributions: Often, most of the variance is
contributed by the gradient with respect to the scale parameters. This renders Taylor-based control
variates practically useless. Indeed, empirical results in Section 5 show that, with diagonal plus
low rank Gaussians or Gaussians with arbitrary dense covariances, Taylor-based control variates
yield almost no benefit over the no control variates baseline. (We generalize the Taylor approach to
full-rank and diagonal plus low-rank distributions in Appendix E.3.)
For VI, fully factorized variational distributions are typically much less accurate than those representing interdependence [21, 32]. Thus, we seek a control variate that can aid the use of more powerful
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

