Unfolding recurrence by Green’s functions for
optimized reservoir computing

Sandra Nestler1,2,5 , Christian Keup1,5 , David Dahmen1 ,
Matthieu Gilson1,4 , Holger Rauhut2 , Moritz Helias1,3
1
Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-6), Jülich Research Centre, Jülich, Germany
2
Mathematics of Information Processing, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
3
Department of Physics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
4
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
5
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
{s.nestler,c.keup,d.dahmen,m.gilson,m.helias}@fz-juelich.de,
rauhut@mathc.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
Cortical networks are strongly recurrent, and neurons have intrinsic temporal
dynamics. This sets them apart from deep feed-forward networks. Despite the
tremendous progress in the application of feed-forward networks and their theoretical understanding, it remains unclear how the interplay of recurrence and
non-linearities in recurrent cortical networks contributes to their function. The
purpose of this work is to present a solvable recurrent network model that links to
feed forward networks. By perturbative methods we transform the time-continuous,
recurrent dynamics into an effective feed-forward structure of linear and non-linear
temporal kernels. The resulting analytical expressions allow us to build optimal
time-series classifiers from random reservoir networks. Firstly, this allows us to
optimize not only the readout vectors, but also the input projection, demonstrating
a strong potential performance gain. Secondly, the analysis exposes how the second
order stimulus statistics is a crucial element that interacts with the non-linearity of
the dynamics and boosts performance.

1

Introduction

Trained neural networks today form an integral component of data science. Widely used approaches
comprise deep neural networks [LeCun, 2015] that typically employ time-independent mappings
by hierarchical structures with mostly feed-forward connections. In contrast, recurrent neural
networks, which follow more closely their biological counterparts in the brain, have units with
intrinsic temporal dynamics that allow natural processing of time-dependent stimuli. The interplay
of recurrence and non-linearity in such networks renders their analysis challenging. There is large
interest in understanding the basis for their computational abilities. Reservoir computing, as originally
introduced via Echo State Networks [Jaeger, 2001] and Liquid State Machines [Maass et al., 2002],
is one approach that takes recurrence of connections and temporal dynamics into account. Signals
are here mapped into a high dimensional space spanned by a large number of typically randomly
connected neurons, on which a linear readout is trained. The network thereby acts like a kernel in a
support vector machine [Vapnik, 1998, Cortes and Vapnik, 1995]. The training can be combined with
a feedback of the readout signal to effectively modify also the recurrent connections [Sussillo and
Abbott, 2009, DePasquale et al., 2018]. The gradient of an arbitrary loss function for these models
can be computed memory efficiently via ordinary differential equations [Chen et al., 2018]. Although
recurrent models lately have become more and more complex [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997,
Cho et al., 2014, Collins et al., 2016], they remain highly similar to simple reservoirs in terms of the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

