Unsupervised Translation of Programming Languages
Baptiste Roziere*
Facebook AI Research
Paris-Dauphine University
broz@fb.com

Marie-Anne Lachaux⇤
Facebook AI Research
malachaux@fb.com

Lowik Chanussot
Facebook AI Research
lowik@fb.com

Guillaume Lample
Facebook AI Research
glample@fb.com

Abstract
A transcompiler, also known as source-to-source translator, is a system that converts
source code from a high-level programming language (such as C++ or Python)
to another. Transcompilers are primarily used for interoperability, and to port
codebases written in an obsolete or deprecated language (e.g. COBOL, Python 2)
to a modern one. They typically rely on handcrafted rewrite rules, applied to the
source code abstract syntax tree. Unfortunately, the resulting translations often
lack readability, fail to respect the target language conventions, and require manual
modifications in order to work properly. The overall translation process is timeconsuming and requires expertise in both the source and target languages, making
code-translation projects expensive. Although neural models significantly outperform their rule-based counterparts in the context of natural language translation,
their applications to transcompilation have been limited due to the scarcity of parallel data in this domain. In this paper, we propose to leverage recent approaches in
unsupervised machine translation to train a fully unsupervised neural transcompiler.
We train our model on source code from open source GitHub projects, and show
that it can translate functions between C++, Java, and Python with high accuracy.
Our method relies exclusively on monolingual source code, requires no expertise in
the source or target languages, and can easily be generalized to other programming
languages. We also build and release a test set composed of 852 parallel functions,
along with unit tests to check the correctness of translations. We show that our
model outperforms rule-based commercial baselines by a significant margin.

1

Introduction

A transcompiler, transpiler, or source-to-source compiler, is a translator which converts between
programming languages that operate at a similar level of abstraction. Transcompilers differ from
traditional compilers that translate source code from a high-level to a lower-level programming
language (e.g. assembly language) to create an executable. Initially, transcompilers were developed
to port source code between different platforms (e.g. convert source code designed for the Intel
8080 processor to make it compatible with the Intel 8086). More recently, new languages have
been developed (e.g. CoffeeScript, TypeScript, Dart, Haxe) along with dedicated transcompilers that
convert them into a popular or omnipresent language (e.g. JavaScript). These new languages address
some shortcomings of the target language by providing new features such as list comprehension
(CoffeeScript), object-oriented programming and type checking (TypeScript), while detecting errors
and providing optimizations. Unlike traditional programming languages, these new languages are
⇤

Equal contribution. The order was determined randomly.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

