A Bayesian Perspective on Training Speed
and Model Selection
Clare Lyle †
Binxin Ru†

Lisa Schut†
Yarin Gal†

Mark van der Wilk‡

Abstract
We take a Bayesian perspective to illustrate a connection between training speed
and the marginal likelihood in linear models. This provides two major insights:
first, that a measure of a model’s training speed can be used to estimate its marginal
likelihood. Second, that this measure, under certain conditions, predicts the relative
weighting of models in linear model combinations trained to minimize a regression
loss. We verify our results in model selection tasks for linear models and for
the infinite-width limit of deep neural networks. We further provide encouraging
empirical evidence that the intuition developed in these settings also holds for deep
neural networks trained with stochastic gradient descent. Our results suggest a
promising new direction towards explaining why neural networks trained with
stochastic gradient descent are biased towards functions that generalize well.

1

Introduction

Choosing the right inductive bias for a machine learning model, such as convolutional structure
for an image dataset, is critical for good generalization. The problem of model selection concerns
itself with identifying good inductive biases for a given dataset. In Bayesian inference, the marginal
likelihood (ML) provides a principled tool for model selection. In contrast to cross-validation, for
which computing gradients is cumbersome, the ML can be conveniently maximised using gradients
when its computation is tractable. Unfortunately, computing the marginal likelihood for complex
models such as neural networks is typically intractable. Workarounds such as variational inference
suffer from expensive optimization of many parameters in the variational distribution and differ
significantly from standard training methods for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), which optimize a
single parameter sample from initialization. A method for estimating the ML that closely follows
standard optimization schemes would pave the way for new practical model selection procedures, yet
remains an open problem.
A separate line of work aims to perform model selection by predicting a model’s test set performance.
This has led to theoretical and empirical results connecting training speed and generalization error
[17, 21]. This connection has yet to be fully explained, as most generalization bounds in the literature
depend only on the final weights obtained by optimization, rather than on the trajectory taken during
training, and therefore are unable to capture this relationship. Understanding the link between training
speed, optimization and generalization thus presents a promising step towards developing a theory of
generalization which can explain the empirical performance of neural networks.
In this work, we show that the above two lines of inquiry are in fact deeply connected. We investigate
the connection between the log ML and the sum of predictive log likelihoods of datapoints, conditioned on preceding data in the dataset. This perspective reveals a family of estimators of the log
†
‡

OATML Group, University of Oxford. Correspondence to clare.lyle@cs.ox.ac.uk
Imperial College London

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

