Firefly Neural Architecture Descent: a General
Approach for Growing Neural Networks
Lemeng Wu⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
lmwu@cs.utexas.edu

Bo Liu⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
bliu@cs.utexas.edu

Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose firefly neural architecture descent, a general framework for progressively and dynamically growing neural networks to jointly optimize the networks’
parameters and architectures. Our method works in a steepest descent fashion,
which iteratively finds the best network within a functional neighborhood of the
original network that includes a diverse set of candidate network structures. By
using Taylor approximation, the optimal network structure in the neighborhood
can be found with a greedy selection procedure. We show that firefly descent can
flexibly grow networks both wider and deeper, and can be applied to learn accurate but resource-efficient neural architectures that avoid catastrophic forgetting in
continual learning. Empirically, firefly descent achieves promising results on both
neural architecture search and continual learning. In particular, on a challenging
continual image classification task, it learns networks that are smaller in size but
have higher average accuracy than those learned by the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Although biological brains are developed and shaped by complex progressive growing processes, most
existing artificial deep neural networks are trained under fixed network structures (or architectures).
Efficient techniques that can progressively grow neural network structures can allow us to jointly
optimize the network parameters and structures to achieve higher accuracy and computational
efficiency, especially in dynamically changing environments. For instance, it has been shown that
accurate and energy-efficient neural network can be learned by progressively growing the network
architecture starting from a relatively small network (Liu et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019). Moreover,
previous works also indicate that knowledge acquired from previous tasks can be transferred to
new and more complex tasks by expanding the network trained on previous tasks to a functionallyequivalent larger network to initialize the new tasks (Chen et al., 2016; Wei et al., 2016).
In addition, dynamically growing neural network has also been proposed as a promising approach for
preventing the challenging catastrophic forgetting problem in continual learning (Rusu et al., 2016;
Yoon et al., 2017; Rosenfeld & Tsotsos, 2018; Li et al., 2019).
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

