Towards More Practical Adversarial Attacks on
Graph Neural Networks

Jiaqi Ma ∗†
jiaqima@umich.edu

Shuangrui Ding ‡†
markding@umich.edu

Qiaozhu Mei∗‡
qmei@umich.edu

Abstract
We study the black-box attacks on graph neural networks (GNNs) under a novel
and realistic constraint: attackers have access to only a subset of nodes in the
network, and they can only attack a small number of them. A node selection step
is essential under this setup. We demonstrate that the structural inductive biases
of GNN models can be an effective source for this type of attacks. Specifically,
by exploiting the connection between the backward propagation of GNNs and
random walks, we show that the common gradient-based white-box attacks can
be generalized to the black-box setting via the connection between the gradient
and an importance score similar to PageRank. In practice, we find attacks based
on this importance score indeed increase the classification loss by a large margin,
but they fail to significantly increase the mis-classification rate. Our theoretical
and empirical analyses suggest that there is a discrepancy between the loss and
mis-classification rate, as the latter presents a diminishing-return pattern when the
number of attacked nodes increases. Therefore, we propose a greedy procedure
to correct the importance score that takes into account of the diminishing-return
pattern. Experimental results show that the proposed procedure can significantly
increase the mis-classification rate of common GNNs on real-world data without
access to model parameters nor predictions.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [22], the family of deep learning models on graphs, have shown
promising empirical performance on various applications of machine learning to graph data, such
as recommender systems [27], social network analysis [12], and drug discovery [16]. Like other
deep learning models, GNNs have also been shown to be vulnerable under adversarial attacks [30],
which has recently attracted increasing research interest [9]. Indeed, adversarial attacks have been
an efficient tool to analyze both the theoretical properties as well as the practical accountability
of graph neural networks. As graph data have more complex structures than image or text data,
researchers have come up with diverse adversarial attack setups. For example, there are different
tasks (node classification and graph classification), assumptions of attacker’s knowledge (white-box,
grey-box, and black-box), strategies (node feature modification and graph structure modification),
and corresponding budget or other constraints (norm of feature changes or number of edge changes).
Despite these research efforts, there is still a considerable gap between the existing attack setups and
the reality. It is unreasonable to assume that an attacker can alter the input of a large proportion of
nodes, and even if there is a budget limit, it is unreasonable to assume that they can attack any node
as they wish. For example, in a real-world social network, the attackers usually only have access to a
few bot accounts, and they are unlikely to be among the top nodes in the network; it is difficult for
∗

School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Equal contribution.
‡
Department of EECS, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

