Detection as Regression: Certified Object Detection
by Median Smoothing

Ping-yeh Chiang
University of Maryland
pchiang@cs.umd.edu

Michael J. Curry
University of Maryland
curry@cs.umd.edu

Ahmed Abdelkader
University of Maryland
akader@cs.umd.edu

Aounon Kumar
University of Maryland
aounon@cs.umd.edu

John Dickerson
University of Maryland
john@cs.umd.edu

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Despite the vulnerability of object detectors to adversarial attacks, very few defenses are known to date. While adversarial training can improve the empirical
robustness of image classifiers, a direct extension to object detection is very expensive. This work is motivated by recent progress on certified classification by
randomized smoothing. We start by presenting a reduction from object detection to
a regression problem. Then, to enable certified regression, where standard mean
smoothing fails, we propose median smoothing, which is of independent interest.
We obtain the first model-agnostic, training-free, and certified defense for object
detection against `2 -bounded attacks.

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples are seemingly innocuous neural network inputs that have been deliberately
modified to produce unexpected or malicious outputs. Early work on adversarial examples was highly
focused on image classifiers, which assign a single label to an entire image [13, 6, 25, 8]. A large
literature has rapidly emerged on defenses against classifier attacks, which includes both heuristic
defenses [23] and certified methods with theoretical guarantees of robustness [9, 36, 2, 24, 26].
However, most realistic vision systems crucially rely on object detectors, rather than image classifiers,
to identify and localize multiple objects within an image [29, 28, 21].
Over time, attacks on object detection have become more sophisticated, as has been successfully
demonstrated both digitally and in the physical world using a range of perturbation techniques, as
well as attacks that break both the object localization and classification parts of the detection pipeline
[22, 32, 37, 15, 19]. As of this writing, we are only aware of one recent paper on the adversarial
robustness of object detectors [39]. This lack of defenses is likely because (i) the complexity of the
multi-stage detection pipeline [29] is difficult to analyze, and (ii) detectors are far more expensive to
train than classifiers. Furthermore, (iii) object detectors output bounding-box coordinates, and are
thus regression networks to which many standard defenses for classifier networks cannot be readily
applied.
In this paper, we present, to the best of our knowledge, the first certified defense against adversarial
attacks on object detectors. To avoid the difficulties discussed above, we treat the complex detection
pipeline as a black box without requiring specialized re-training schemes. In particular, we present
a reduction from object detection to a single regression problem which envelopes the proposal,
classification, and non-maximum suppression stages of the detection pipeline. Then, we endow this
regression with certified robustness using the Gaussian smoothing approach [4], originally proposed
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

