Targeted Adversarial Perturbations
for Monocular Depth Prediction

Alex Wong
UCLA Vision Lab
alexw@cs.ucla.edu

Safa Cicek
UCLA Vision Lab
safacicek@ucla.edu

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab
soatto@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the effect of adversarial perturbations on the task of monocular depth
prediction. Specifically, we explore the ability of small, imperceptible additive
perturbations to selectively alter the perceived geometry of the scene. We show
that such perturbations can not only globally re-scale the predicted distances from
the camera, but also alter the prediction to match a different target scene. We also
show that, when given semantic or instance information, perturbations can fool the
network to alter the depth of specific categories or instances in the scene, and even
remove them while preserving the rest of the scene. To understand the effect of
targeted perturbations, we conduct experiments on state-of-the-art monocular depth
prediction methods. Our experiments reveal vulnerabilities in monocular depth
prediction networks, and shed light on the biases and context learned by them.

Figure 1: Altering the predicted scene with adversarial perturbations. Top to bottom: input
image; adversarial perturbations with upper norm of 2 × 10−2 ; predicted scene visualized as disparity.
Left to right: original image and predicted scene; overall scene altered to be 10% closer; all vehicles
altered to be 10% closer; vehicle in the center of the road is removed by perturbations.

1

Introduction

Consider the image shown in the top-left of Fig. 1, captured from a moving car. The corresponding
depth of the scene, inferred by a deep neural network and visualized as disparity, is shown underneath.
Can adding a small perturbation cause the perceived vehicle in front of us disappear? Indeed, this
is shown on the rightmost panel of the same figure: The perturbed image, shown on the top-right,
is indistinguishable from the original. Yet, the perturbation, amplified and shown in the center row,
causes the depth map to be altered in a way that makes the car in front of us disappear.
Adversarial perturbations are small signals that, when added to images, are imperceptible yet can
cause the output of a deep neural network to change catastrophically [37]. We know that they can
fool a network to mistake a tree for a peacock [27]. But, as autonomous vehicles are increasingly
employing learned perception modules, mistaking a stop sign for a speed limit [8] or causing
obstacles to disappear is not just an interesting academic exercise. We explore the possibility that
small perturbations can alter not just the class label associated to an image, but the inferred depth
map, for instance to make the entire scene appear closer or farther, or portions of the scene, like
specific objects, to become invisible or be perceived as being elsewhere in the scene.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

