Online Agnostic Boosting via Regret Minimization

Xinyi Chen
Google AI Princeton
Princeton University
Department of Computer Science
xinyic@princeton.edu

Nataly Brukhim
Google AI Princeton
Princeton University
Department of Computer Science
nbrukhim@princeton.edu
Elad Hazan
Google AI Princeton
Princeton University
Department of Computer Science
ehazan@princeton.edu

Shay Moran∗
Department of Mathematics
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
smoran@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Boosting is a widely used machine learning approach based on the idea of aggregating weak learning rules. While in statistical learning numerous boosting methods
exist both in the realizable and agnostic settings, in online learning they exist only
in the realizable case. In this work we provide the first agnostic online boosting
algorithm; that is, given a weak learner with only marginally-better-than-trivial
regret guarantees, our algorithm boosts it to a strong learner with sublinear regret.
Our algorithm is based on an abstract (and simple) reduction to online convex
optimization, which efficiently converts an arbitrary online convex optimizer to
a boosting algorithm. Moreover, this reduction extends to the statistical as well
as the online realizable settings, thus unifying the 4 cases of statistical/online and
agnostic/realizable boosting.

1

Introduction

Boosting is a fundamental methodology in machine learning that can boost the accuracy of weak
learning rules into a strong one. Boosting was first studied in the context of (realizable) PAC learning
in a line of seminal works which include the celebrated Adaboost algorithm, as well an many other
algorithms with various applications (see e.g. [29, 33, 17, 19]). It was later adapted to the agnostic
PAC setting and was extensively studied in this context as well [7, 31, 21, 27, 30, 26, 28, 16, 13, 18].
More recently, [14] and [9] studied boosting in the context of online prediction and derived boosting
algorithms in the realizable setting (a.k.a. mistake-bound model).
In this work we study agnostic boosting in the online setting: let H be a class of experts and assume
we have oracle access to a weak online learner for H with a non-trivial (yet far from desired) regret
guarantee. The goal is to convert it into a strong online learner for H that exhibits vanishing regret.
Why online agnostic boosting? The setting of online realizable boosting poses a restriction on the
possible input sequences: there must be an expert that attains near-zero mistake-bound on the input
sequence. This is a non-standard assumption in online learning. In contrast, in the online agnostic
setting we consider, there is no restriction on the input sequence and it can be chosen adversarially.
∗

The research was done while author was co-affiliated with Google AI Princeton.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

