(De)Randomized Smoothing for Certifiable Defense
against Patch Attacks

Alexander Levine and Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
{alevine0, sfeizi}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Patch adversarial attacks on images, in which the attacker can distort pixels within
a region of bounded size, are an important threat model since they provide a
quantitative model for physical adversarial attacks. In this paper, we introduce
a certifiable defense against patch attacks that guarantees for a given image and
patch attack size, no patch adversarial examples exist. Our method is related to
the broad class of randomized smoothing robustness schemes which provide highconfidence probabilistic robustness certificates. By exploiting the fact that patch
attacks are more constrained than general sparse attacks, we derive meaningfully
large robustness certificates against them. Additionally, in contrast to smoothingbased defenses against Lp and sparse attacks, our defense method against patch
attacks is de-randomized, yielding improved, deterministic certificates. Compared
to the existing patch certification method proposed by Chiang et al. (2020), which
relies on interval bound propagation, our method can be trained significantly faster,
achieves high clean and certified robust accuracy on CIFAR-10, and provides
certificates at ImageNet scale. For example, for a 5 × 5 patch attack on CIFAR-10,
our method achieves up to around 57.6% certified accuracy (with a classifier with
around 83.8% clean accuracy), compared to at most 30.3% certified accuracy for
the existing method (with a classifier with around 47.8% clean accuracy). Our
results effectively establish a new state-of-the-art of certifiable defense against
patch attacks on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet.

1

Introduction

In recent years, adversarial attacks have become a topic of great interest in machine learning [1, 2, 3].
However, in many instances the threat models considered for these attacks (e.g. small L∞ distortions
to every pixel of an image) implicitly require the attacker to be able to directly interfere with the input
to a neural network. This limits practicality of such attacks as well as defenses against them. On the
other hand, the development of physical adversarial attacks [4], in which small visible changes are
made to real world objects in order to disrupt classification of images of these objects, represents a
more concerning security threat. Unlike Lp attacks, physical adversarial attacks can be perceptible
(e.g. adding an adversarial sticker on a stop sign is a perceptible change). Nevertheless, humans
would still correctly classify the attacked image while the classification model would fail to predict
the correct label. Therefore, the attacked image is an adversarial example.
Physical adversarial attacks can often be modeled as “patch” adversarial attacks, in which the attacker
can make arbitrary changes to pixels within a region of bounded size. Indeed, there is often a direct
relationship between the two: for example, the universal patch attack proposed by [5] is an effective
physical sticker attack. The attack method proposed in [5] is universal in a sense that pixels of the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

