Evidential Sparsification of Multimodal Latent
Spaces in Conditional Variational Autoencoders

Masha Itkina, Boris Ivanovic, Ransalu Senanayake, Mykel J. Kochenderfer, Marco Pavone
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Stanford University
{mitkina, borisi, ransalu, mykel, pavone}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Discrete latent spaces in variational autoencoders have been shown to effectively
capture the data distribution for many real-world problems such as natural language
understanding, human intent prediction, and visual scene representation. However,
discrete latent spaces need to be sufficiently large to capture the complexities of
real-world data, rendering downstream tasks computationally challenging. For
instance, performing motion planning in a high-dimensional latent representation
of the environment could be intractable. We consider the problem of sparsifying the
discrete latent space of a trained conditional variational autoencoder, while preserving its learned multimodality. As a post hoc latent space reduction technique, we
use evidential theory to identify the latent classes that receive direct evidence from
a particular input condition and filter out those that do not. Experiments on diverse
tasks, such as image generation and human behavior prediction, demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed technique at reducing the discrete latent sample space
size of a model while maintaining its learned multimodality.

1

Introduction

Variational autoencoders (VAEs) with discrete latent spaces have recently shown great success
in real-world applications, such as natural language processing [1], image generation [2, 3], and
human intent prediction [4]. Discrete latent spaces naturally lend themselves to the representation of
discrete concepts such as words, semantic objects in images, and human behaviors. The choice of a
discrete latent space encoding over a continuous one has also been shown to encourage multimodal
predictions [5, 6] as well as interpretability [7, 8] since it is easier to analyze input-output relationships
on countable classes than continuous vector spaces [9]. However, prohibitively large discrete latent
spaces are required to accurately learn complex data distributions [10, 11], thereby causing difficulties
in interpretability and rendering downstream tasks computationally challenging. For instance, robotic
motion planning algorithms often plan using a uniform distribution over the state space representation,
requiring exorbitantly many samples to accurately cover a large latent space [12]. Similarly, in multiagent robotics, a high dimensional latent space encoding may be too large to transmit over limited
bandwidth between coordinating robots [13]. In an attempt to address these concerns, we propose a
methodology that effectively reduces the latent sample space size while maintaining multimodality
within the latent distribution.
Distributional multimodality arises in many real-world problems, such as video frame prediction [14]
and human behavior prediction [8, 15], from multiple possibilities for the future (e.g., a pedestrian
may turn right or left given the same trajectory history). The conditional variational autoencoder
(CVAE) was developed to address prediction multimodality [16]. The CVAE encodes input data x
and corresponding query label y into a latent space Z. At test time, the model samples from the
latent space encoding of a query label to generate diverse data. The latent space distribution p(z | y)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

