What Neural Networks Memorize and Why:
Discovering the Long Tail via Influence Estimation
Vitaly Feldman⇤†
Apple
vitaly.edu@gmail.com

Chiyuan Zhang⇤
Google Research
chiyuan@google.com

Abstract
Deep learning algorithms are well-known to have a propensity for fitting the training
data very well and often fit even outliers and mislabeled data points. Such fitting
requires memorization of training data labels, a phenomenon that has attracted
significant research interest but has not been given a compelling explanation so
far. A recent work of Feldman [13] proposes a theoretical explanation for this
phenomenon based on a combination of two insights. First, natural image and data
distributions are (informally) known to be long-tailed, that is have a significant
fraction of rare and atypical examples. Second, in a simple theoretical model such
memorization is necessary for achieving close-to-optimal generalization error when
the data distribution is long-tailed. However, no direct empirical evidence for this
explanation or even an approach for obtaining such evidence were given.
In this work we design experiments to test the key ideas in this theory. The
experiments require estimation of the influence of each training example on the
accuracy at each test example as well as memorization values of training examples.
Estimating these quantities directly is computationally prohibitive but we show that
closely-related subsampled influence and memorization values can be estimated
much more efficiently. Our experiments demonstrate the significant benefits of
memorization for generalization on several standard benchmarks. They also provide
quantitative and visually compelling evidence for the theory put forth in [13].

1

Introduction

Perhaps the most captivating aspect of deep learning algorithms is their ability to generalize to unseen
data. The models used in deep learning are typically overparameterized, making it easy to perfectly
fit the training dataset without any generalization. In fact, the standard training algorithms do fit the
training data very well, typically achieving 95-100% accuracy, even when the accuracy on the test
dataset is much more modest. In particular, they usually fit obvious outliers (such as images with no
discernible features of their class) and mislabeled examples. The only way for a training algorithm
to fit an example whose label cannot be predicted based on the rest of the dataset is to memorize3
the label. Further, it is now well-known that standard deep learning algorithms achieve high training
accuracy even on large and randomly labeled datasets [31].
This propensity for label memorization is not explained by the standard approach to understanding
of generalization. At a high level, the standard approach upper-bounds the generalization error by
the sum of an upper bound on the generalization gap controlled by a model complexity (or stability)
parameter and the empirical error. Fitting of outliers and mislabeled examples does not improve
⇤

Equal contribution
Part of the work done while the author was at Google Research.
3
This notion of label memorization is defined rigorously in eq. (1) (Sec. 1.1).

†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

