Primal Dual Interpretation of the Proximal Stochastic
Gradient Langevin Algorithm

Adil Salim
Peter Richtárik
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
We consider the task of sampling with respect to a log concave probability distribution. The potential of the target distribution is assumed to be composite, i.e., written
as the sum of a smooth convex term, and a nonsmooth convex term possibly taking
infinite values. The target distribution can be seen as a minimizer of the KullbackLeibler divergence defined on the Wasserstein space (i.e., the space of probability
measures). In the first part of this paper, we establish a strong duality result for
this minimization problem. In the second part of this paper, we use the duality
gap arising from the first part to study the complexity of the Proximal Stochastic
Gradient Langevin Algorithm (PSGLA), which can be seen as a generalization
of the Projected Langevin Algorithm. Our approach relies on viewing PSGLA
as a primal dual algorithm and covers many cases where the target distribution is
not fully supported. In particular, we show that if the potential is strongly convex,
the complexity of PSGLA is O(1/ε2 ) in terms of the 2-Wasserstein distance. In
contrast, the complexity of the Projected Langevin Algorithm is O(1/ε12 ) in terms
of total variation when the potential is convex.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a target distribution is a fundamental task in machine learning. Consider the Euclidean
space X = Rd and a convex function V : X → (−∞, +∞]. Assuming that exp(−V ) has a positive
finite integral w.r.t. the Lebesgue measure Leb, we consider the task of sampling from the distribution
µ? whose density is proportional to exp(−V (x)) (we shall write µ? ∝ exp(−V )).
If V is smooth, Langevin algorithm produces a sequence of iterates (xk ) asymptotically distributed
according to a distribution close to µ? . Langevin algorithm performs iterations of the form
p
xk+1 = xk − γ∇V (xk ) + 2γW k+1 ,
(1)
where γ > 0 and (W k )k is a sequence of i.i.d. standard Gaussian vectors in X. Each iteration of (1)
can be seen as a gradient descent step for V , where the gradient of V is perturbed by a Gaussian vector.
Hence, the iterations of Langevin algorithm look like those
√ of the stochastic gradient algorithm;
however the noise in Langevin algorithm is scaled by γ instead of γ. Nonasymptotic bounds
for Langevin algorithm have been established in [17, 20]. Moreover, Langevin algorithm can be
interpreted as an inexact gradient descent method to minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
w.r.t. µ? in the space of probability measures [1, 5, 14, 19, 23, 33].
In many applications, the function V is naturally written as the sum of a smooth and a nonsmooth
term. In Bayesian statistics for example, µ? typically represents some posterior distribution. In this
case, V is the sum of the log-likelihood (which is itself a sum over the data points) and the possibly
nonsmooth potential of the prior distribution [19, 21, 32], which plays the role of a regularizer. In
some other applications in Bayesian learning, the support of µ? is not the whole space X [9, 10] (i.e.,
V can take the value +∞). In order to cover these applications, we consider the case where V is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

