Fully Dynamic Algorithm
for Constrained Submodular Optimization

Silvio Lattanzi∗
Google Research
silviol@google.com

Slobodan Mitrović∗
MIT
slobo@mit.edu

Jakub Tarnawski∗
Microsoft Research
jatarnaw@microsoft.com

Ashkan Norouzi-Fard∗
Google Research
ashkannorouzi@google.com
Morteza Zadimoghaddam∗
Google Research
zadim@google.com

Abstract
The task of maximizing a monotone submodular function under a cardinality
constraint is at the core of many machine learning and data mining applications,
including data summarization, sparse regression and coverage problems. We study
this classic problem in the fully dynamic setting, where elements can be both
inserted and removed. Our main result is a randomized algorithm that maintains an
efficient data structure with a poly-logarithmic amortized update time and yields a
(1/2 − )-approximate solution. We complement our theoretical analysis with an
empirical study of the performance of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

Thanks to the ubiquitous nature of “diminishing returns” functions, submodular optimization has
established itself as a central topic in machine learning, with a myriad of applications ranging from
active learning [GK11] to sparse reconstruction [Bac10, DDK12, DK11], video analysis [ZJCP14]
and data summarization [BIRB15]. In this field, the problem of maximizing a monotone submodular
function under a cardinality constraint is perhaps the most central. Despite its generality, the problem
can be (approximately) solved using a simple and efficient greedy algorithm [NWF78].
However, this classic algorithm is inefficient when applied on modern large datasets. To overcome this
limitation, in recent years there has been much interest in designing efficient streaming [BMKK14,
CK14, BFS15, FKK18, NTM+ 18] and distributed algorithms [MZ15, MKBK15, BENW16, ENV19]
for submodular maximization.
Although those algorithms have found numerous applications, they are not well-suited for the common
applications where data is highly dynamic. In fact, real-world systems often need to handle evolving
datasets, where elements are added and deleted continuously. For example, in a recent study [DJR12],
Dey et al. crawled two snapshots of 1.4 million New York City Facebook users several months apart
and reported that 52% of them had changed their profile privacy settings significantly during this
period. Similarly, Snapchat processes several million picture uploads and deletions daily; Twitter
processes several million tweet uploads and deletions daily. As one must still be able to run basic
machine learning tasks, such as sparse recovery or data summarization, in such highly dynamic
settings, we need fully dynamic algorithms: ones able to efficiently handle a stream containing not
only insertions, but also an arbitrary number of deletions, with small processing time per update.
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

