High-Dimensional Contextual Policy Search with
Unknown Context Rewards using Bayesian
Optimization
Qing Feng⇤
Facebook
qingfeng@fb.com

Benjamin Letham⇤
Facebook
bletham@fb.com

Hongzi Mao
MIT
hongzi@mit.edu

Eytan Bakshy
Facebook
ebakshy@fb.com

Abstract
Contextual policies are used in many settings to customize system parameters and
actions to the specifics of a particular setting. In some real-world settings, such
as randomized controlled trials or A/B tests, it may not be possible to measure
policy outcomes at the level of context—we observe only aggregate rewards across
a distribution of contexts. This makes policy optimization much more difficult
because we must solve a high-dimensional optimization problem over the entire
space of contextual policies, for which existing optimization methods are not
suitable. We develop effective models that leverage the structure of the search space
to enable contextual policy optimization directly from the aggregate rewards using
Bayesian optimization. We use a collection of simulation studies to characterize the
performance and robustness of the models, and show that our approach of inferring
a low-dimensional context embedding performs best. Finally, we show successful
contextual policy optimization in a real-world video bitrate policy problem.

1

Introduction

Contextual policies are used in a wide range of applications, such as robotics [22, 30] and computing
platforms [9]. Here we consider contextual policies that are a map from a discrete context to a set
of continuous parameters. For example, video streaming and real-time conferencing systems use
adaptive bitrate (ABR) algorithms to balance between video quality and uninterrupted playback.
The optimal policy for a particular ABR controller may depend on the network—for instance, a
stream with large fluctuations in bandwidth will benefit from different ABR parameters than a stream
with stable bandwidth. This motivates the use of a contextual policy where ABR parameters are
personalized by context variables such as country or network type (2G, 3G, 4G, etc.). Various other
systems and infrastructure applications commonly rely on tunable parameters which can benefit from
contextualization. For example, optimal job scheduling and load balancing parameters may differ
because of workload variations [11]. Cell tower configuration or TCP configurations can benefit from
finer-grained information about environmental factors [2]. Contextual policies therefore provide an
interpretable, robust approach for personalizing system parameters and improving individual-level
outcomes under heterogeneous conditions.
Previous applications of contextual policy optimization (CPO) in the literature, such as those in
robotics, have considered the setting where with each evaluation of the policy we observe both the
reward and the context. Bayesian optimization (BO) has been successfully applied to this problem
[30], using a Gaussian process (GP) to model reward as a function of both parameters and context. If
the context is continuous-valued, it can be incorporated directly into the GP along with the parameters;
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

