Asymptotic normality and confidence intervals for
derivatives of 2-layers neural network in the random
features model
Yiwei Shen,
Department of Statistics,
Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
ys573@stat.rutgers.edu

Pierre C Bellec,
Department of Statistics,
Rutgers University,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
pierre.bellec@rutgers.edu

Abstract
This paper studies two-layers Neural Networks (NN), where the first layer contains random weights, and the second layer is trained using Ridge regularization.
This model has been the focus of numerous recent works, showing that despite its
simplicity, it captures some of the empirically observed behaviors of NN in the overparametrized regime, such as the double-descent curve where the generalization
error decreases as the number of weights increases to +∞.
This paper establishes asymptotic distribution results for this 2-layers NN model
in the regime where the ratios np and nd have finite limits, where n is the sample
size, p the ambient dimension and d is the width of the first layer. We show that
a weighted average of the derivatives of the trained NN at the observed data is
asymptotically normal, in a setting with Lipschitz activation functions in a linear
regression response with Gaussian features under possibly non-linear perturbations.
We then leverage this asymptotic normality result to construct confidence intervals
(CIs) for single components of the unknown regression vector.
The novelty of our results are threefold: (1) Despite the nonlinearity induced by
the activation function, we characterize the asymptotic distribution of a weighted
average of the gradients of the network after training; (2) It provides the first
frequentist uncertainty quantification guarantees, in the form of valid (1-α)-CIs,
based on NN estimates; (3) It shows that the double-descent phenomenon occurs
in terms of the length of the CIs, with the length increasing and then decreasing as
p
d
n % +∞ for certain fixed values of n . We also provide a toolbox to predict the
length of CIs numerically, which lets us compare activation functions and other
parameters in terms of CI length.

1

Model, contributions and related works

Random features model as a 2-layers neural network. Given n observations (x1 , y1 ), ...(xn , yn )
with xi ∈ Rp and yi ∈ R for each i = 1, ..., n, the object of study of this paper is the estimate
b = argmin
α
α∈Rd

 1 n
X
2n i=1

yi −

d
X
k=1

2 τ

αk σ(x>
+ kαk22 ,
i wk )
2

(1)

where σ : R → R is a nonlinear activation function, w1 , ..., wd ∈ Rp are vectors of random
weights sampled by the practitioner. This estimate (1) corresponds to a two-layers Neural Network
(NN), with random first layer weights w1 , ..., wd , and second layer weights b
α ∈ Rd trained using
a Ridge regularization penalty. The penalty parameter τ is chosen by τ = (d/p)λ, where λ > 0
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

