Learning Robust Decision Policies
from Observational Data
Muhammad Osama
muhammad.osama@it.uu.se

Dave Zachariah
dave.zachariah@it.uu.se

Peter Stoica
peter.stoica@it.uu.se

Division of System and Control
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden.

Abstract
We address the problem of learning a decision policy from observational data
of past decisions in contexts with features and associated outcomes. The past
policy maybe unknown and in safety-critical applications, such as medical decision
support, it is of interest to learn robust policies that reduce the risk of outcomes
with high costs. In this paper, we develop a method for learning policies that
reduce tails of the cost distribution at a specified level and, moreover, provide
a statistically valid bound on the cost of each decision. These properties are
valid under finite samples – even in scenarios with uneven or no overlap between
features for different decisions in the observed data – by building on recent results
in conformal prediction. The performance and statistical properties of the proposed
method are illustrated using both real and synthetic data.

1

Introduction

We consider data of discrete decisions x ∈ X taken in contexts with features z ∈ Z. The outcome
of each decision has an associated cost y ∈ Y (or equivalently, negative reward). For instance, we
may obtain data from a hospital in which patients with features z are given treatment x to lower
their blood pressure and y denotes the change of pressure value. The observational data is drawn
independently as follows
(xi , yi , zi ) ∼ p(x, y, z) = p(z) p(x|z) p(y|x, z),
| {z }

i = 1, . . . , n

(1)

past policy

where we have used a causal factorization of the unknown data-generating process. The distribution
of contexts is described by p(z) and p(x|z) summarizes a decision policy which is generally unknown.
We assume that there are no unobserved confounders.
Using the n training data points, our goal is to automatically improve upon the past policy. That is,
learn a new policy, which is a mapping from features to decisions
π(z) : Z → X ,
such that the outcome cost y will tend to be lower than in the past. This policy partitions the feature
space Z into |X | disjoint regions. A sample from the resulting data generating process can then be
expressed as
(x, y, z) ∼ pπ (x, y, z) = p(z)1{x = π(z)}p(y|x, z),
(2)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

