Sparse Spectrum Warped Input Measures for
Nonstationary Kernel Learning

Anthony Tompkins1,∗

Rafael Oliveira1,2,∗

Fabio Ramos1,3

1

2

School of Computer Science, the University of Sydney, Australia
ARC Centre for Data Analytics for Resources and Environments, Australia
3
NVIDIA, USA

Abstract
We establish a general form of explicit, input-dependent, measure-valued warpings
for learning nonstationary kernels. While stationary kernels are ubiquitous and
simple to use, they struggle to adapt to functions that vary in smoothness with
respect to the input. The proposed learning algorithm warps inputs as conditional
Gaussian measures that control the smoothness of a standard stationary kernel.
This construction allows us to capture non-stationary patterns in the data and
provides intuitive inductive bias. The resulting method is based on sparse spectrum
Gaussian processes, enabling closed-form solutions, and is extensible to a stacked
construction to capture more complex patterns. The method is extensively validated
alongside related algorithms on synthetic and real world datasets. We demonstrate
a remarkable efficiency in the number of parameters of the warping functions in
learning problems with both small and large data regimes.

1

Introduction

Many interesting real world phenomena exhibit varying characteristics, such as smoothness, across
their domain. Simpler phenomena that do not exhibit such variation may be called stationary.
The typical kernel based learner canonically relies on a stationary kernel function, a measure of
"similarity", to define the prior beliefs over the function space. Such a kernel, however, cannot
represent desirable nonstationary nuances, like varying spatial smoothness and sudden discontinuities.
Restrictive stationary assumptions do not generally hold and limit applicability to interesting problems,
such as robotic control and reinforcement learning [1], spatial mapping [2], genetics [3], and Bayesian
optimisation [4]. One obvious way to alleviate the problem of finding the appropriate kernel function
given one’s data is hyperparameter optimisation. However for a GP with stationary kernel, even if the
optimal set of hyperparameters were found, it would be insufficient if our underlying response were
nonstationary with respect to the observed inputs.
In this paper we propose a method for nonstationary kernel learning, based on sparse spectral kernel
representations. Our method is linear in complexity with respect to the number of data points and
is simultaneously able to extract nonstationary patterns. In our setup, we consider the problem of
learning a function f : X → R as a nonstationary Gaussian process. We decompose f as:
f (x) = E[u ◦ m(x)|u] ,

x∈X ,

(1)

where ◦ denotes function composition, u : Q → R is a function over a latent space Q, and m(x)
represents the warped input. If u has covariance function ku , the resulting f follows a GP with
covariance kf (x, x0 ) = E[ku (m(x), m(x0 ))]. The latter constitutes a nonstationary kernel.
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

