Flexible mean field variational inference using
mixtures of non-overlapping exponential families
Jeffrey P. Spence
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jspence@stanford.edu

Abstract
Sparse models are desirable for many applications across diverse domains as
they can perform automatic variable selection, aid interpretability, and provide
regularization. When fitting sparse models in a Bayesian framework, however,
analytically obtaining a posterior distribution over the parameters of interest is
intractable for all but the simplest cases. As a result practitioners must rely on either
sampling algorithms such as Markov chain Monte Carlo or variational methods to
obtain an approximate posterior. Mean field variational inference is a particularly
simple and popular framework that is often amenable to analytically deriving
closed-form parameter updates. When all distributions in the model are members
of exponential families and are conditionally conjugate, optimization schemes can
often be derived by hand. Yet, I show that using standard mean field variational
inference can fail to produce sensible results for models with sparsity-inducing
priors, such as the spike-and-slab. Fortunately, such pathological behavior can
be remedied as I show that mixtures of exponential family distributions with nonoverlapping support form an exponential family. In particular, any mixture of an
exponential family of diffuse distributions and a point mass at zero to model sparsity
forms an exponential family. Furthermore, specific choices of these distributions
maintain conditional conjugacy. I use two applications to motivate these results:
one from statistical genetics that has connections to generalized least squares
with a spike-and-slab prior on the regression coefficients; and sparse probabilistic
principal component analysis. The theoretical results presented here are broadly
applicable beyond these two examples.

1

Introduction

Bayesian graphical models [36] are widely used across vast swaths of engineering and science. Graphical models succinctly summarize modeling assumptions, and their posterior distributions naturally
quantify uncertainty and produce optimal point estimators to minimize downstream risk. Efficient,
exact posterior inference algorithms exist for special cases such as the sum-product algorithm [45] for
discrete random variables in models with low tree-width [61] or particular Gaussian graphical models
[30]. Outside of these special cases, however, alternative techniques must be used to approximate
the posterior. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), especially Gibbs sampling, can sample from
the posterior asymptotically [20, 23] but such techniques are difficult to scale to models with many
observations, can have issues with mixing [43], and their convergence can be hard to assess [56].
Variational inference (VI) [29] avoids sampling and instead fits an approximate posterior via optimizing a loss function that acts as a proxy for some measure of divergence between the approximate and
true posteriors. Usually this divergence is the “reverse” Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

