Federated Principal Component Analysis

Andreas Grammenos1,3∗ Rodrigo Mendoza-Smith2 Jon Crowcroft1,3 Cecilia Mascolo1
1

Computer Lab, University of Cambridge
2
Quine Technologies
3
Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
We present a federated, asynchronous, and (ε, δ)-differentially private algorithm
for PCA in the memory-limited setting. Our algorithm incrementally computes
local model updates using a streaming procedure and adaptively estimates its
r leading principal components when only O(dr) memory is available with d
being the dimensionality of the data. We guarantee differential privacy via an
input-perturbation scheme in which the covariance matrix of a dataset X ∈ Rd×n
is 
perturbed with
 a non-symmetric random Gaussian matrix with variance in
 2
O nd log d , thus improving upon the state-of-the-art. Furthermore, contrary
to previous federated or distributed algorithms for PCA, our algorithm is also
invariant to permutations in the incoming data, which provides robustness against
straggler or failed nodes. Numerical simulations show that, while using limitedmemory, our algorithm exhibits performance that closely matches or outperforms
traditional non-federated algorithms, and in the absence of communication latency,
it exhibits attractive horizontal scalability.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the advent of edge computing in smartphones, IoT and cryptocurrencies has induced
a paradigm shift in distributed model training and large-scale data analysis. Under this new paradigm,
data is generated by commodity devices with hardware limitations and severe restrictions on datasharing and communication, which makes the centralisation of the data extremely difﬁcult. This
has brought new computational challenges since algorithms do not only have to deal with the sheer
volume of data generated by networks of devices, but also leverage the algorithm’s voracity, accuracy,
and complexity with constraints on hardware capacity, data access, and device-device communication.
Moreover, concerns regarding data ownership and privacy have been growing in applications where
sensitive datasets are crowd-sourced and then aggregated by trusted central parties to train machine
learning models. In such situations, mathematical and computational frameworks to ensure data
ownership and guarantee that trained models will not expose private client information are highly
desirable. In light of this, the necessity of being able to privately analyse large-scale decentralised
datasets and extract useful insights out of them is becoming more prevalent than ever before. A
number of frameworks have been put forward to train machine-learning models while preserving
data ownership and privacy like Federated Learning [37, 29], Multi-party computation [41, 32, 47],
Homomorphic encryption [20], and Differential Privacy [13, 14]. In this work we pursue a combined
federated learning and differential privacy framework to compute PCA in a decentralised way and
provide precise guarantees on the privacy budget. Seminal work in federated learning has been made,
but mainly in the context of deep neural networks, see [37, 29]. Speciﬁcally, in [29] a federated
method for training of neural networks was proposed. In this setting one assumes that each of a large
∗

Correspondence to: Andreas Grammenos <ag926@cl.cam.ac.uk>

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

