Learning Deformable Tetrahedral Meshes
for 3D Reconstruction
Jun Gao1,2,3

Wenzheng Chen1,2,3

Tommy Xiang1,2

Alec Jacobson2

Morgan McGuire1

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

NVIDIA1

University of Toronto2

Vector Institute3

{jung, wenzchen, txiang, mcguire, sfidler}@nvidia.com, jacobson@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
3D shape representations that accommodate learning-based 3D reconstruction
are an open problem in machine learning and computer graphics. Previous work
on neural 3D reconstruction demonstrated benefits, but also limitations, of point
cloud, voxel, surface mesh, and implicit function representations. We introduce
Deformable Tetrahedral Meshes (D EF T ET) as a particular parameterization that
utilizes volumetric tetrahedral meshes for the reconstruction problem. Unlike
existing volumetric approaches, D EF T ET optimizes for both vertex placement
and occupancy, and is differentiable with respect to standard 3D reconstruction
loss functions. It is thus simultaneously high-precision, volumetric, and amenable
to learning-based neural architectures. We show that it can represent arbitrary,
complex topology, is both memory and computationally efficient, and can produce
high-fidelity reconstructions with a significantly smaller grid size than alternative
volumetric approaches. The predicted surfaces are also inherently defined as
tetrahedral meshes, thus do not require post-processing. We demonstrate that
D EF T ET matches or exceeds both the quality of the previous best approaches and
the performance of the fastest ones. Our approach obtains high-quality tetrahedral
meshes computed directly from noisy point clouds, and is the first to showcase
high-quality 3D tet-mesh results using only a single image as input. Our project
webpage: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/DefTet/.

1

Introduction

High-quality 3D reconstruction is crucial to many applications in robotics, simulation, and VR/AR.
The input to a reconstruction method may be one or more images, or point clouds from depth-sensing
cameras, and is often noisy or imperfectly calibrated. The output is a 3D shape in some format, which
must include reasonable reconstruction results even for areas that are unrepresented in the input due
to viewpoint or occlusion. Because this problem is naturally ambiguous if not ill-posed, data-driven
approaches that utilize deep learning have led to recent advances on solving it, including impressive
results for multiview reconstruction [35, 31], single-image reconstruction with 3D [51, 34] and 2D
supervision [5, 29, 21], point clouds [41, 26], and generative modeling [1, 52, 25].
The 3D geometric representation used by a neural network strongly influences the solution space.
Prior representations used with deep learning for 3D reconstruction fall into several categories:
points [11, 52], voxels [8, 31], surface meshes [48, 5, 40, 29], and implicit functions (e.g., signeddistance functions) [34, 51]. Each of these representations have certain advantages and disadvantages.
Voxel representations support differing topologies and enable the use of 3D convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), one of the most mature 3D neural architectures. However, for high-quality
3D reconstruction, voxels require high-resolution grids that are memory intensive, or hierarchical
structures like octtrees [42] that are cumbersome to implement in learning-based approaches because
their structure is inherently discontinuous as the tree structure changes with occupancy.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

