Hypersolvers: Toward Fast Continuous-Depth Models

Michael Poli∗
KAIST, DiffEqML

Stefano Massaroli∗
The University of Tokyo, DiffEqML

poli_m@kaist.ac.kr

massaroli@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Atsushi Yamashita
The University of Tokyo

Hajime Asama
The University of Tokyo

Jinkyoo Park
KAIST

yamashita@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

asama@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

jinkyoo.park@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The infinite–depth paradigm pioneered by Neural ODEs has launched a renaissance in the search for novel dynamical system–inspired deep learning primitives;
however, their utilization in problems of non–trivial size has often proved impossible due to poor computational scalability. This work paves the way for scalable
Neural ODEs with time–to–prediction comparable to traditional discrete networks.
We introduce hypersolvers, neural networks designed to solve ODEs with low
overhead and theoretical guarantees on accuracy. The synergistic combination
of hypersolvers and Neural ODEs allows for cheap inference and unlocks a
new frontier for practical application of continuous–depth models. Experimental
evaluations on standard benchmarks, such as sampling for continuous normalizing
flows, reveal consistent pareto efficiency over classical numerical methods.

1

Introduction

The framework of neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs) (Chen et al., 2018)
has reinvigorated research in continuous deep learning (Zhang et al., 2014), offering new
system–theoretic perspectives on neural network architecture design (Greydanus et al., 2019;
Bai et al., 2019; Poli et al., 2019; Cranmer et al., 2020) and generative modeling (Grathwohl
et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019). Despite the successes, Neural ODEs have been met with skepticism, as these models are often slow in both training and inference due to heavy numerical solver overheads. These issues are further exacerbated by applications which require extremely accurate numerical solutions to the differential equations, such as physics–inspired neural networks (Raissi et al., 2019) and continuous normalizing flows (CNFs) (Chen et al., 2018).
dopri5 (212) HyperHeun (2)
Heun (2)
Common knowledge within the field is that these
models appear too slow in their current form
for meaningful large-scale or embedded applications. Several attempts have been made to either
directly or indirectly address some of these limitations, such as redefining the forward pass as a
root finding problem (Bai et al., 2019), introducFigure 1: Hypersolvers for density estimation
ing ad hoc regularization terms (Finlay et al.,
via continuous normalizing flows: dopri5 infer2020; Massaroli et al., 2020a) and augmentence accuracy is achieved with 100x speedup.
ing the state to reduce stiffness of the solutions
(Dupont et al., 2019; Massaroli et al., 2020b).
Unfortunately, these approaches either give up on the Neural ODE formulation altogether, do not reduce computation overhead sufficiently or introduce additional memory requirements. Although there
is no shortage of works utilizing Neural ODEs in forecasting or classification tasks (Yıldız et al., 2019;
∗

Equal contribution. Author order was decided by flipping a coin.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

