Graph Cross Networks with Vertex Infomax Pooling

Siheng ChenB
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn

Maosen Li
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
maosen_li@sjtu.edu.cn
Ya ZhangB
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ya_zhang@sjtu.edu.cn

Ivor Tsang
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute
University of Technology Sydney
Ivor.Tsang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a novel graph cross network (GXN) to achieve comprehensive feature learning from multiple scales of a graph. Based on trainable hierarchical
representations of a graph, GXN enables the interchange of intermediate features
across scales to promote information flow. Two key ingredients of GXN include
a novel vertex infomax pooling (VIPool), which creates multiscale graphs in a
trainable manner, and a novel feature-crossing layer, enabling feature interchange
across scales. The proposed VIPool selects the most informative subset of vertices
based on the neural estimation of mutual information between vertex features and
neighborhood features. The intuition behind is that a vertex is informative when it
can maximally reflect its neighboring information. The proposed feature-crossing
layer fuses intermediate features between two scales for mutual enhancement by
improving information flow and enriching multiscale features at hidden layers. The
cross shape of feature-crossing layer distinguishes GXN from many other multiscale architectures. Experimental results show that the proposed GXN improves
the classification accuracy by 2.12% and 1.15% on average for graph classification
and vertex classification, respectively. Based on the same network, the proposed
VIPool consistently outperforms other graph-pooling methods.

1

Introduction

Recently, there are explosive interests in studying graph neural networks (GNNs) [32, 25, 50, 31,
12, 19, 55, 53, 9, 35, 10], which expand deep learning techniques to ubiquitous non-Euclidean
graph data, such as social networks [52], bioinformatic networks [17], human activities [35] and
motion interaction [28]. Achieving good performances on graph-related tasks, such as vertex
classification [32, 25, 50] and graph classification [19, 55, 53], GNNs learn patterns from both graph
structures and vertex information with feature extraction in spectral domain [5, 13, 32] or vertex
domain [25, 40, 50, 34, 36, 12, 3]. Nevertheless, most GNN-based methods learn features of graphs
with fixed scales, which might underestimate either local or global information. To address this
issue, multiscale feature learning on graphs enables capturing more comprehensive graph features for
downstream tasks [6, 23, 38].
Multiscale feature learning on graphs is a natural generalization from multiresolution analysis of
images, whose related techniques, such as wavelets and pyramid representations, have been well
studied in both theory and practice [26, 48, 44, 1, 56]. However, this generalization is technically
nontrivial. While hierarchical representations and pixel-to-pixel associations across scales are
* This work was done while Siheng Chen was working at Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

