Neural Controlled Differential Equations for
Irregular Time Series

Patrick Kidger
James Morrill
James Foster
Terry Lyons
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute, British Library
{kidger, morrill, foster, tlyons}@maths.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural ordinary differential equations are an attractive option for modelling
temporal dynamics. However, a fundamental issue is that the solution to an
ordinary differential equation is determined by its initial condition, and there
is no mechanism for adjusting the trajectory based on subsequent observations.
Here, we demonstrate how this may be resolved through the well-understood
mathematics of controlled differential equations. The resulting neural controlled
differential equation model is directly applicable to the general setting of partiallyobserved irregularly-sampled multivariate time series, and (unlike previous work
on this problem) it may utilise memory-efficient adjoint-based backpropagation
even across observations. We demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-the-art
performance against similar (ODE or RNN based) models in empirical studies on
a range of datasets. Finally we provide theoretical results demonstrating universal
approximation, and that our model subsumes alternative ODE models.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are a popular choice of model for sequential data, such as a time
series. The data itself is often assumed to be a sequence of observations from an underlying process,
and the RNN may be interpreted as a discrete approximation to some function of this process. Indeed
the connection between RNNs and dynamical systems is well-known [1, 2, 3, 4].
However this discretisation typically breaks down if the data is irregularly sampled or partially
observed, and the issue is often papered over by binning or imputing data [5].
A more elegant approach is to appreciate that because the underlying process develops in continuous
time, so should our models. For example [6, 7, 8, 9] incorporate exponential decay between
observations, [10, 11] hybridise a Gaussian process with traditional neural network models, [12]
approximate the underlying continuous-time process, and [13, 14] adapt recurrent neural networks
by allowing some hidden state to evolve as an ODE. It is this last one that is of most interest to us
here.
1.1

Neural ordinary differential equations

Neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs) [3, 15], seek to approximate a map x 7→ y by
learning a function fθ and linear maps `1θ , `2θ such that
Z t
1
y ≈ `θ (zT ), where zt = z0 +
fθ (zs )ds and z0 = `2θ (x).
(1)
0

Note that fθ does not depend explicitly on s; if desired this can be included as an extra dimension in
zs [15, Appendix B.2].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

