Bayesian filtering unifies adaptive and non-adaptive
neural network optimization methods

Laurence Aitchison
Department of Computer Science
University of Bristol
Bristol, UK, BS8 1UB
laurence.aitchison@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
We formulate the problem of neural network optimization as Bayesian filtering,
where the observations are backpropagated gradients. While neural network optimization has previously been studied using natural gradient methods which are
closely related to Bayesian inference, they were unable to recover standard optimizers such as Adam and RMSprop with a root-mean-square gradient normalizer,
instead getting a mean-square normalizer. To recover the root-mean-square normalizer, we find it necessary to account for the temporal dynamics of all the other
parameters as they are optimized. The resulting optimizer, AdaBayes, adaptively
transitions between SGD-like and Adam-like behaviour, automatically recovers
AdamW, a state of the art variant of Adam with decoupled weight decay, and has
generalisation performance competitive with SGD.

1

Introduction and Background

The canonical non-adaptive neural network optimization method is vanilla stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) with momentum which updates parameters by multiplying the exponential moving average
gradient, hg(t)i, by a learning rate, ηSGD ,
hg(t)i
.
(1)
minibatch size
Here, we divide by the minibatch size because we define g(t) to be the gradient of the summed
loss, whereas common practice is to use the gradient of the mean loss. Following the convention
established by Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015), hg(t)i, is a debiased exponential moving average,
∆wSGD (t) = ηSGD

m(t) = β1 m(t − 1) + (1 − β1 ) g(t)

hg(t)i =

m(t)
.
1 − β1t

(2)

where g(t) is the raw minibatch gradient, and β1 is usually chosen to be 0.9. These methods typically
give excellent generalisation performance, and as such are used to train many state-of-the-art networks
(e.g. ResNet (He et al., 2016), DenseNet (Huang et al., 2017), ResNeXt (Xie et al., 2017)).
Adaptive methods change the learning rates as a function of past gradients. These methods date
back many years (e.g. vario-eta Neuneier & Zimmermann, 1998), and many variants have recently
been developed, including AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), RMSprop (Hinton et al., 2012) and Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2015). The canonical adaptive method, Adam, normalises the exponential moving
average gradient by the root mean square of past gradients,
hg(t)i
∆wAdam (t) = ηAdam p
.
hg 2 (t)i
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(3)

