Stochastic Recursive Gradient Descent Ascent for
Stochastic Nonconvex-Strongly-Concave Minimax
Problems
Luo Luo1
Haishan Ye2
Zhichao Huang1
Tong Zhang1
Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
1

luoluo@ust.hk

hsye_cs@outlook.com

zhuangbx@connect.ust.hk

tongzhang@ust.hk

Abstract
We consider nonconvex-concave minimax optimization problems of the form
minx maxy∈Y f (x, y), where f is strongly-concave in y but possibly nonconvex
in x and Y is a convex and compact set. We focus on the stochastic setting,
where we can only access an unbiased stochastic gradient estimate of f at each
iteration. This formulation includes many machine learning applications as special
cases such as robust optimization and adversary training. We are interested in
finding an O(ε)-stationary point of the function Φ(·) = maxy∈Y f (·, y). The
most popular algorithm to solve this problem is stochastic gradient decent ascent,
which requires O(κ3 ε−4 ) stochastic gradient evaluations, where κ is the condition
number. In this paper, we propose a novel method called Stochastic Recursive
gradiEnt Descent Ascent (SREDA), which estimates gradients more efficiently
using variance reduction. This method achieves the best known stochastic gradient
complexity of O(κ3 ε−3 ), and its dependency on ε is optimal for this problem.

1

Introduction

This paper considers the following minimax optimization problem
min max f (x, y) , E [F (x, y; ξ)] ,

x∈Rd y∈Y

(1)

where the stochastic component F (x, y; ξ), indexed by some random vector ξ, is `-gradient Lipschitz
on average. This minimax optimization formulation includes many machine learning applications
such as regularized empirical risk minimization [41, 52], AUC maximization [39, 48], robust optimization [14, 46], adversarial training [16, 17, 40] and reinforcement learning [13, 43]. Many
existing work [8, 9, 12, 13, 18, 28, 33, 34, 41, 45, 48, 50, 52] focused on the convex-concave case of
problem (1), where f is convex in x and concave in y. For such problems, one can establish strong
theoretical guarantees.
In this paper, we focus on a more general case of (1), where f (x, y) is µ-strongly-concave in y but
possibly nonconvex in x. This case is referred to as stochastic nonconvex-strongly-concave minimax
problems, and it is equivalent to the following problem


min Φ(x) , max f (x, y) .
(2)
x∈Rd

y∈Y

Formulation (2) contains several interesting examples in machine learning such as robust optimization [14, 46] and adversarial training [17, 40].
Since Φ is possibly nonconvex, it is infeasible to find the global minimum in general. One important
task of the minimax problem is finding an approximate stationary point of Φ. A simple way to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

