On ranking via sorting by estimated expected utility
Clément Calauzènes
Criteo AI Lab
Paris, France
c.calauzenes@criteo.com

Nicolas Usunier
Facebook AI Research
Paris, France
usunier@fb.com

Abstract
Ranking tasks are defined through losses that measure trade-offs between different
desiderata such as the relevance and the diversity of the items at the top of the list.
This paper addresses the question of which of these tasks are asymptotically solved
by sorting by decreasing order of expected utility, for some suitable notion of utility,
or, equivalently, when is square loss regression consistent for ranking via score-andsort? We answer to this question by finding a characterization of ranking losses
for which a suitable regression is consistent. This characterization has two strong
corollaries. First, whenever there exists a consistent approach based on convex
risk minimization, there also is a consistent approach based on regression. Second,
when regression is not consistent, there are data distributions for which consistent
surrogate approaches necessarily have non-trivial local minima, and for which
optimal scoring function are necessarily discontinuous, even when the underlying
data distribution is regular. In addition to providing a better understanding of
surrogate approaches for ranking, these results illustrate the intrinsic difficulty of
solving general ranking problems with the score-and-sort approach.

1

Introduction

The usual approach in learning to rank is to score each item (e.g., a document) given the input (e.g., a
search query), and produce the ranking by sorting in decreasing order of scores. This score-and-sort
approach follows the probability ranking principle of information retrieval [29], which stipulates that
documents should be rank-ordered according to their estimated probability of relevance to the query.
In practice, the definition of a “good” ranking requires more than estimates of relevance. For instance,
in scenarios where several users issue the same query “jaguar” but with different intended meanings
(e.g., the animal or the car brand), it is desirable to produce diverse rankings where each user finds a
relevant document as early as possible. While in the probability ranking principle, items are ranked in
decreasing order of their expected utility to the users, in sophisticated ranking tasks with a trade-off
between relevance and diversity, the definition of a utility per item is not trivial, if not impossible.
In this paper, we study what ranking tasks are solved via sorting by expected utilities, in a general
supervised ranking framework that captures different types of ground-truth signal and losses. Since
utilities can serve as target values to learn the scoring function through square loss regression, the
optimality of sorting by expected utilities is equivalent to the consistency of regression. The main
question we address is thus: When is square loss regression consistent for ranking via score-and-sort?
The consistency of regression for ranking, and more generally the consistency of convex risk minimization for ranking, are still only partly understood. Existing consistency results only apply to gain-based
losses such as the Discounted Cumulative Gain and precision and recall at K [12, 28, 6, 19, 14], for
which there is an explicit utility function [see e.g., 8, Table 1]. For other losses, only impossibility
results are known. Duchi et al. [15], followed by Calauzènes et al. [7] and Ramaswamy et al. [27]
proved that convex approaches are, in general, inconsistent with the usual loss when ranking from
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

