ARMA Nets:
Expanding Receptive Field for Dense Prediction
Jiahao Su1
Shiqi Wang2
Furong Huang1
jiahaosu@umd.edu 161170041@smail.nju.edu.cn furongh@cs.umd.edu
1
University of Maryland, College Park, MD USA 2 Nanjing University, Nanjing, China

Abstract
Global information is essential for dense prediction problems, whose goal is to
compute a discrete or continuous label for each pixel in the images. Traditional
convolutional layers in neural networks, initially designed for image classification, are restrictive in these problems since the filter size limits their receptive
fields. In this work, we propose to replace any traditional convolutional layer
with an autoregressive moving-average (ARMA) layer, a novel module with an
adjustable receptive field controlled by the learnable autoregressive coefficients.
Compared with traditional convolutional layers, our ARMA layer enables explicit
interconnections of the output neurons and learns its receptive field by adapting the
autoregressive coefficients of the interconnections. ARMA layer is adjustable to
different types of tasks: for tasks where global information is crucial, it is capable of
learning relatively large autoregressive coefficients to allow for an output neuron’s
receptive field covering the entire input; for tasks where only local information
is required, it can learn small or near zero autoregressive coefficients and automatically reduces to a traditional convolutional layer. We show both theoretically
and empirically that the effective receptive field of networks with ARMA layers
(named ARMA networks) expands with larger autoregressive coefficients. We also
provably solve the instability problem of learning and prediction in the ARMA
layer through a re-parameterization mechanism. Additionally, we demonstrate
that ARMA networks substantially improve their baselines on challenging dense
prediction tasks, including video prediction and semantic segmentation. Our code
is available on https://github.com/umd-huang-lab/ARMA-Networks.

1

Introduction

Convolutional layers in neural networks have many successful applications for machine learning
tasks. Each output neuron encodes an input region of the network measured by the effective receptive
field (ERF) [25]. A large ERF that allows for sufficient global information is needed to make
accurate predictions; however, a simple stack of convolutional layers does not effectively expand ERF.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) typically encode global information by adding downsampling
(pooling) layers, which coarsely aggregate global information. A fully-connected classification layer
subsequently reduces the entire feature map to an output label. Downsampling and fully-connected
layers are suitable for image classification tasks where only a single prediction is needed. But they
are less effective, due to potential loss of information, in dense prediction tasks such as semantic
segmentation and video prediction, where each pixel requests a prediction. Therefore, it is crucial to
introduce mechanisms that enlarge ERF without too much information loss.
Naive approaches to expanding ERF, such as deepening the network or enlarging the filter size,
drastically increase the model complexity, which results in expensive computation, difficulty in
optimization, and susceptibility to overfitting. Advanced architectures have been proposed to expand
ERF, including encoder-decoder networks [30], dilated convolutional networks [40, 41], and non34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

