From Finite to Countable-Armed Bandits
Anand Kalvit1 and Assaf Zeevi2
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, USA
{1 akalvit22,2 assaf}@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider a stochastic bandit problem with countably many arms that belong
to a finite set of types, each characterized by a unique mean reward. In addition,
there is a fixed distribution over types which sets the proportion of each type
in the population of arms. The decision maker is oblivious to the type of any
arm and to the aforementioned distribution over types, but perfectly knows the
total number of types occurring in the population of arms. We propose a fully
adaptive online learning algorithm that achieves O (log n) distribution-dependent
expected cumulative regret after any number of plays n, and show that this order
of regret is best possible. The analysis of our algorithm relies on newly discovered
concentration and convergence properties of optimism-based policies like UCB in
finite-armed bandit problems with zero gap, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Background and motivation. The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a widely studied machine
learning paradigm that captures the tension between exploration and exploitation in online decision
making. The problem traces its roots to 1933 when it was first studied in the context of clinical trials
in [21]. It has since evolved and numerous variants of the MAB problem have seen an upsurge in
applications across a plethora of domains spanning dynamic pricing, online auctions, packet routing,
scheduling, e-commerce and matching markets to name a few (see [12] for a comprehensive survey).
In its simplest formulation, the decision maker must sequentially play an arm at each time instant out
of a set of K possible arms, each characterized by its own distribution of rewards. The objective is
to maximize cumulative expected payoffs over the horizon of play. Every play of an arm results in
an independent sample from its reward distribution. The decision maker, oblivious to the statistical
properties of the arms, must balance exploring new arms and exploiting the best arm played thus far.
The objective of maximizing cumulative rewards is often converted to minimizing regret relative to
an oracle with perfect ex ante knowledge of the best arm. The seminal work [20] was the first to show
that the optimal order of this regret is asymptotically logarithmic in the number of plays. Much of the
focus since has been on the design and analysis of algorithms that can achieve near-optimal regret
rates (see [5, 16, 15], etc., and references therein).
Many practical applications of the multi-armed bandit problem involve a prohibitively large number
of arms, the number in some cases is even larger than the horizon of play itself. This renders finitearmed models unsuitable vehicle for the study of such settings. The simplest prototypical example
of such a setting occurs in the context of online assignment problems arising in large marketplaces
serving a very large population of agents that each belong to one of K possible types; e.g., if K = 2,
the set of agent types could be {“high caliber”, “low caliber”}, {“patient”, “impatient”}, etc. Such
finite-typed settings are also relevant in many applications with an exponentially large choice space
and where a limited planning horizon forbids exploration-exploitation in the traditional sense (This
is common in online retail where assortments of substitutable products are selected from a very
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

