Inferring learning rules from animal decision-making

Zoe C. Ashwood1,2,∗

Nicholas A. Roy1,∗

The International Brain Laboratory

Ji Hyun Bak3,†

Jonathan W. Pillow1,4

1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University
2
Dept. of Computer Science, Princeton University
3
Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, UC Berkeley
4
Dept. of Psychology, Princeton University
{zashwood, nroy, pillow}@princeton.edu,
jihyun.bak@ucsf.edu, info@internationalbrainlab.org

Abstract
How do animals learn? This remains an elusive question in neuroscience. Whereas
reinforcement learning often focuses on the design of algorithms that enable artificial agents to efficiently learn new tasks, here we develop a modeling framework to
directly infer the empirical learning rules that animals use to acquire new behaviors.
Our method efficiently infers the trial-to-trial changes in an animal’s policy, and
decomposes those changes into a learning component and a noise component.
Specifically, this allows us to: (i) compare different learning rules and objective
functions that an animal may be using to update its policy; (ii) estimate distinct
learning rates for different parameters of an animal’s policy; (iii) identify variations
in learning across cohorts of animals; and (iv) uncover trial-to-trial changes that
are not captured by normative learning rules. After validating our framework on
simulated choice data, we applied our model to data from rats and mice learning
perceptual decision-making tasks. We found that certain learning rules were far
more capable of explaining trial-to-trial changes in an animal’s policy. Whereas the
average contribution of the conventional REINFORCE learning rule to the policy
update for mice learning the International Brain Laboratory’s task was just 30%, we
found that adding baseline parameters allowed the learning rule to explain 92% of
the animals’ policy updates under our model. Intriguingly, the best-fitting learning
rates and baseline values indicate that an animal’s policy update, at each trial, does
not occur in the direction that maximizes expected reward. Understanding how an
animal transitions from chance-level to high-accuracy performance when learning
a new task not only provides neuroscientists with insight into their animals, but
also provides concrete examples of biological learning algorithms to the machine
learning community.

1

Introduction

Learning is a fundamental aspect of animal behavior, as it enables flexible adaptation to the timevarying reward structure of an environment. The ability of animals to learn new tasks also happens to
be a fundamental component of neuroscience research: many experiments require training animals
to perform a decision-making task designed to test specific theories of brain function. A deeper
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work
Current address: University of California, San Francisco

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

