Non-Euclidean Universal Approximation
Anastasis Kratsios∗
Eugene Bilokopytov†

Abstract
Modifications to a neural network’s input and output layers are often required
to accommodate the specificities of most practical learning tasks. However, the
impact of such changes on architecture’s approximation capabilities is largely not
understood. We present general conditions describing feature and readout maps
that preserve an architecture’s ability to approximate any continuous functions
uniformly on compacts. As an application, we show that if an architecture is capable
of universal approximation, then modifying its final layer to produce binary values
creates a new architecture capable of deterministically approximating any classifier.
In particular, we obtain guarantees for deep CNNs and deep feed-forward networks.
Our results also have consequences within the scope of geometric deep learning.
Specifically, when the input and output spaces are Cartan-Hadamard manifolds, we
obtain geometrically meaningful feature and readout maps satisfying our criteria.
Consequently, commonly used non-Euclidean regression models between spaces
of symmetric positive definite matrices are extended to universal DNNs. The
same result allows us to show that the hyperbolic feed-forward networks, used
for hierarchical learning, are universal. Our result is also used to show that the
common practice of randomizing all but the last two layers of a DNN produces a
universal family of functions with probability one. We also provide conditions on
a DNN’s first (resp. last) few layer’s connections and activation function which
guarantee that these layer’s can have a width equal to the input (resp. output)
space’s dimension while not negatively effecting the architecture’s approximation
capabilities.

1

Introduction

Modifications made to a neural network’s input and output maps to extract features from a data-set or
to better suit a learning task is prevalent throughout learning theory. Typically, such changes are made
by pre-(resp. post-)composing an architecture with a fixed and untrainable feature (resp. readout) map.
Examples prevail classification by neural networks, random feature maps obtained by randomizing
all but the last few layers of a feed-forward network, and numerous illustrations throughout geometric
deep-learning theory, which we detail below. This motivates the central question of this paper: "Which
modifications to the input and output layers of a neural network architecture preserve its universal
approximation capabilities?"
Specifically, in this paper we obtain a simple sufficient condition on a pair of a feature map φ : X →
Rm and a readout map ρ : Rn → Y , where X and Y are topological spaces, guaranteeing that if F
is dense in C(Rm , Rn ) for the uniform convergence on compacts (ucc) topology then
{ f ∈ C(X , Y ) : ρ ◦ f ◦ φ , f ∈ F },

(1)

∗ Department of Mathematics, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, HG G 32.3, Rämistrasse 101,

8092 ürich, Switzerland. email: anastasis.kratsios@math.ethz.ch
† Department of Mathematics and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta, 11324 89 Ave NW, Edmonton,
AB T6G 2J5, Canada. email: bilokopy@ualberta.ca
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

