Strongly Incremental Constituency Parsing with
Graph Neural Networks

Kaiyu Yang
Princeton University
kaiyuy@cs.princeton.edu

Jia Deng
Princeton University
jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Parsing sentences into syntax trees can benefit downstream applications in NLP.
Transition-based parsers build trees by executing actions in a state transition system.
They are computationally efficient, and can leverage machine learning to predict
actions based on partial trees. However, existing transition-based parsers are
predominantly based on the shift-reduce transition system, which does not align
with how humans are known to parse sentences. Psycholinguistic research suggests
that human parsing is strongly incremental—humans grow a single parse tree
by adding exactly one token at each step. In this paper, we propose a novel
transition system called attach-juxtapose. It is strongly incremental; it represents
a partial sentence using a single tree; each action adds exactly one token into the
partial tree. Based on our transition system, we develop a strongly incremental
parser. At each step, it encodes the partial tree using a graph neural network
and predicts an action. We evaluate our parser on Penn Treebank (PTB) and
Chinese Treebank (CTB). On PTB, it outperforms existing parsers trained with
only constituency trees; and it performs on par with state-of-the-art parsers that
use dependency trees as additional training data. On CTB, our parser establishes a
new state of the art. Code is available at https://github.com/princeton-vl/
attach-juxtapose-parser.

1

Introduction

Constituency parsing is a core task in natural language processing. It recovers the syntactic structures
of sentences as trees (Fig. 1). State-of-the-art parsers are based on deep neural networks and typically
consist of an encoder and a decoder. The encoder embeds input tokens into vectors, from which the
decoder generates a parse tree. A main class of decoders builds trees by executing a sequence of
actions in a state transition system [32, 12, 22]. These transition-based parsers achieve linear runtime
in sentence length. More importantly, they construct partial trees during decoding, enabling the parser
to leverage explicit structural information for predicting the next action.
Most existing transition-based parsers adopt the shift-reduce transition system [32, 12, 22]. They
represent the partial sentence as a stack of subtrees. At each step, the parser either pushes a new
token onto the stack (shift) or combines two existing subtrees in the stack (reduce).
Despite their empirical success, shift-reduce parsers appear to differ from how humans are known to
perform parsing. Psycholinguistic research [25, 37, 35] has suggested that human parsing is strongly
incremental: at each step, humans process exactly one token—no more, no less—and integrate it into
a single parse tree for the partial sentence. In a shift-reduce system, however, only shift actions
process new tokens, and the partial sentence is represented as a stack of disconnected subtrees rather
than a single connected tree.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

