Learning to Decode: Reinforcement Learning for
Decoding of Sparse Graph-Based Channel Codes

Salman Habib†, Allison Beemer∗ , and Jörg Kliewer†
†Helen and John C. Hartmann Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102
∗
Dept. of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, Eau Claire, WI 54701
sh383@njit.edu,beemera@uwec.edu,jkliewer@njit.edu

Abstract
We show in this work that reinforcement learning can be successfully applied to
decoding short to moderate length sparse graph-based channel codes. Specifically, we focus on low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, which for example
have been standardized in the context of 5G cellular communication systems due
to their excellent error correcting performance. These codes are typically decoded
via belief propagation iterative decoding on the corresponding bipartite (Tanner)
graph of the code via flooding, i.e., all check and variable nodes in the Tanner
graph are updated at once. In contrast, in this paper we utilize a sequential update
policy which selects the optimum check node (CN) scheduling in order to improve
decoding performance. In particular, we model the CN update process as a multiarmed bandit process with dependent arms and employ a Q-learning scheme for
optimizing the CN scheduling policy. In order to reduce the learning complexity,
we propose a novel graph-induced CN clustering approach to partition the state
space in such a way that dependencies between clusters are minimized. Our results show that compared to other decoding approaches from the literature, the
proposed reinforcement learning scheme not only significantly improves the decoding performance, but also reduces the decoding complexity dramatically once
the scheduling policy is learned.

1

Introduction

Binary low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [10] are sparse graph-based channel codes that have
recently been standardized for data communication in the 5G cellular new radio standard due to their
excellent error correcting performance [5, 15]. In practice, LDPC codes are iteratively decoded via
belief propagation (BP), an algorithm that operates on the Tanner graph of the code [26]. Tanner
graphs of LDPC codes are sparse bipartite graphs whose vertex sets are partitioned into two types:
check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs). Typically, iterative decoding on a Tanner graph is
carried out via flooding, i.e., all CNs and VNs are updated simultaneously [9]. However, in [4],
a sequential CN scheduling scheme, so-called node-wise scheduling (NS), was proposed. In this
scheme, messages are sent from a single CN at a time, and successive CNs are scheduled based on
their residuals, i.e., the magnitude of the difference between subsequent messages emanating from
the CN.
NS of an iterative decoder can lead to improved performance, as was shown in [4]. The implementation relies on the intuition that in loopy BP, the higher the residual of a CN, the further away that
portion of the graph is from convergence. Hence, scheduling CNs with higher residuals is expected
to lead to faster decoder convergence. Although the NS method converges faster than the flooding scheme, the computation of provisional messages for updating the CN residuals in real-time is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

