Wisdom of the Ensemble: Improving Consistency of
Deep Learning Models

Lijing Wang
University of Virignia
lw8bn@virginia.edu

Dipanjan Ghosh
Hitachi America Ltd.
dipanjan.ghosh@hal.hitachi.com

Maria Teresa Gonzalez Diaz
Hitachi America Ltd.
teresa.gonzalezdiaz@hal.hitachi.com
Mahbubul Alam
Hitachi America Ltd.
Mahbubul.Alam@hal.hitachi.com

Ahmed Farahat
Hitachi America Ltd.
ahmed.farahat@hal.hitachi.com
Chetan Gupta
Hitachi America Ltd.
chetan.gupta@hal.hitachi.com

Jiangzhuo Chen
University of Virignia
chenj@virginia.edu

Madhav Marathe
University of Virignia
marathe@virginia.edu

Abstract
Deep learning classifiers are assisting humans in making decisions and hence
the user’s trust in these models is of paramount importance. Trust is often a
function of constant behavior. From an AI model perspective it means given
the same input the user would expect the same output, especially for correct
outputs, or in other words consistently correct outputs. This paper studies a model
behavior in the context of periodic retraining of deployed models where the outputs
from successive generations of the models might not agree on the correct labels
assigned to the same input. We formally define consistency and correct-consistency
of a learning model. We prove that consistency and correct-consistency of an
ensemble learner is not less than the average consistency and correct-consistency of
individual learners and correct-consistency can be improved with a probability by
combining learners with accuracy not less than the average accuracy of ensemble
component learners. To validate the theory using three datasets and two state-ofthe-art deep learning classifiers we also propose an efficient dynamic snapshot
ensemble method and demonstrate its value. Code for our algorithm is available at
https://github.com/christa60/dynens.

1

Introduction

As AI is increasingly supporting humans in decision making [34, 13], there is more emphasis than ever
on building trustworthy AI systems [5]. Despite the discrepancies in terminology, almost every recent
research on trustworthy AI agree on the need for building AI models that produce consistently correct
outputs for the same input [14]. Although this seems like a straightforward requirement, however
as we periodically retrain AI models in the field, there is no guarantee that different generations of
the model will be consistently correct when presented with the same input. Consider an example of
an AI-based car-safety system [11] that correctly detects distracted driving and then does not detect
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

