A Stochastic Path-Integrated Differential EstimatoR
Expectation Maximization Algorithm
Gersende Fort
Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse
Université de Toulouse; CNRS
UPS, Toulouse, France
gersende.fort@math.univ-toulouse.fr

Eric Moulines
Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées
Ecole Polytechnique, France
CS Dpt, HSE University, Russian Federation
eric.moulines@polytechnique.edu

Hoi-To Wai
Department of SEEM
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, Hong Kong
htwai@cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm is of key importance for inference
in latent variable models including mixture of regressors and experts, missing observations. This paper introduces a novel EM algorithm, called SPIDER-EM, for
inference from a training set of size n, n
1. At the core of our algorithm is
an estimator of the full conditional expectation in the E-step, adapted from the
stochastic path-integrated differential estimator (SPIDER) technique. We derive
finite-time complexity bounds for smooth non-convex likelihood: we show that
for convergence to an ✏-approximate stationary
p point, the complexity scales as
KOpt (n, ✏) = O(✏ 1 ) and KCE (n, ✏) = n + nO(✏ 1 ), where KOpt (n, ✏) and
KCE (n, ✏) are respectively the number of M-steps and the number of per-sample
conditional expectations evaluations. This improves over the state-of-the-art algorithms. Numerical results support our findings.

1

Introduction

Expectation Maximization (EM) is a key algorithm in machine-learning and statistics [20]. Applications are numerous including clustering, natural language processing, parameter estimation in
mixed models, missing data, to give just a few. The common feature of all these applications is the
introduction of latent variables: the “incomplete” likelihood p(y; ✓) where ✓ 2 ⇥ ✓ Rd is defined
by marginalizing the “complete-data” likelihood p(y, z; ✓) defined asRthe joint distribution of the
observation y and a non-observed latent variable z 2 Z, i.e. p(y; ✓) = p(y, z; ✓)µ(dz) where Z is
the latent space and µ is a measure on Z. We focus in this paper on the case where p(y, z; ✓) belongs
to a curved exponential family, given by
def

p(y, z; ✓) = ⇢(y, z) exp hs(y, z), (✓)i

(✓) ;

(1)

where s(y, z) 2 Rq is the complete data sufficient statistics,
: ⇥ ! Rq and
: ⇥ ! R,
⇢ : Y ⇥ Z ! R+ are vector/scalar functions. Given a training set of n independent observations
{yi }ni=1 , our goal is to minimize the negated penalized log-likelihood with respect to ✓ 2 ⇥:
def

min F (✓) =
✓2⇥

n

1X
def
Li (✓) + R(✓), Li (✓) =
n i=1

log p(yi ; ✓),

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(2)

