Stochastic Normalizing Flows

Hao Wu
Tongji University
Shanghai, P.R. China
wwtian@gmail.com

Jonas Köhler
FU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
jonas.koehler@fu-berlin.de

Frank Noé
FU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
frank.noe@fu-berlin.de

Abstract
The sampling of probability distributions specified up to a normalization constant
is an important problem in both machine learning and statistical mechanics. While
classical stochastic sampling methods such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
or Langevin Dynamics (LD) can suffer from slow mixing times there is a growing
interest in using normalizing flows in order to learn the transformation of a simple
prior distribution to the given target distribution. Here we propose a generalized
and combined approach to sample target densities: Stochastic Normalizing Flows
(SNF) – an arbitrary sequence of deterministic invertible functions and stochastic
sampling blocks. We show that stochasticity overcomes expressivity limitations
of normalizing flows resulting from the invertibility constraint, whereas trainable
transformations between sampling steps improve efficiency of pure MCMC/LD
along the flow. By invoking ideas from non-equilibrium statistical mechanics
we derive an efficient training procedure by which both the sampler’s and the
flow’s parameters can be optimized end-to-end, and by which we can compute
exact importance weights without having to marginalize out the randomness of the
stochastic blocks. We illustrate the representational power, sampling efficiency and
asymptotic correctness of SNFs on several benchmarks including applications to
sampling molecular systems in equilibrium.

1

Introduction

A common problem in machine learning and statistics with important applications in physics is the
generation of asymptotically unbiased samples from a target distribution defined up to a normalization
constant by means of an energy model u(x):
µX (x) ∝ exp(−u(x)).
(1)
Sampling of such unnormalized distributions is often done with Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
or other stochastic sampling methods [13]. This approach is asymptotically unbiased, but suffers
from the sampling problem: without knowing efficient moves, MCMC approaches may get stuck in
local energy minima for a long time and fail to converge in practice.
Normalizing flows (NFs) [41, 40, 5, 35, 6, 33] combined with importance sampling methods are
an alternative approach that enjoys growing interest in molecular and material sciences and nuclear
physics [28, 25, 32, 22, 1, 30]. NFs are learnable invertible functions, usually represented by a neural
network, pushing forward a probability density over a latent or “prior” space Z towards the target
space X. Utilizing the change of variable rule these models provide exact densities of generated
samples allowing them to be trained by either maximizing the likelihood on data (ML) or minimizing
the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL) towards a target distribution.
−1
Let FZX be such a map and its inverse FXZ = FZX
. We can consider it as composition of T
invertible transformation layers F0 , ..., FT with intermediate states yt given by:

yt+1 = Ft (yt )

yt = Ft−1 (yt+1 )

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(2)

