Neural FFTs for Universal Texture Image Synthesis

Morteza Mardani∗ , Guilin Liu∗, Aysegul Dundar, Shiqiu Liu,
Andrew Tao, Bryan Catanzaro
NVIDIA
{mmardani,guilinl,adundar,edliu,atao,bcatanzaro}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Synthesizing larger texture images from a smaller exemplar is an important task
in graphics and vision. The conventional CNNs, recently adopted for synthesis,
require to train and test on the same set of images and fail to generalize to unseen
images. This is mainly because those CNNs fully rely on convolutional and
upsampling layers that operate locally and not suitable for a task as global as texture
synthesis. In this work, inspired by the repetitive nature of texture patterns, we
find that texture synthesis can be viewed as (local) upsampling in the Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) domain. However, FFT of natural images exhibits high dynamic
range and lacks local correlations. Therefore, to train CNNs we design a framework
to perform FFT upsampling in feature space using deformable convolutions. Such
design allows our framework to generalize to unseen images, and synthesize
textures in a single pass. Extensive evaluations confirm that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1

Introduction

Texture synthesis is the expansion of a small texture example to an arbitrarily larger size while
preserving the structural content. It is a challenging task given the wide range of textures a synthesizer
should handle. Textures can have regular patterns such as brick walls, or, irregular patterns such as
pebbles on the beach. A good synthesizer thus must be: 1) universal to synthesize a wide variety of
textures patterns, 2) fast to synthesize in real-time for interactive tasks.
Motivated by the success of deep learning in image-to-image translation tasks, contemporary methods
for texture synthesis rely on CNNs. Earlier works employ pre-trained CNNs as feature extractors
to match the feature statistics of input and output via iterative optimization that is prohibitively
slow [18, 35, 37]. To speed up synthesis, later works train feed-forward CNNs to learn the end-to-end
synthesis map that expands textures in a single pass [37, 66, 52, 36].
Those CNNs typically require to train and test on the same set of images, that cannot generalize
to unseen textures. We hypothesize that the
poor generalization is attributed to the inherent difference in the local nature of typical
(de)convolution and upsampling layers deployed
in those networks, and the global nature of the
long-term structural dependencies required by
texture synthesis. In essence, texture synthesis
input
baseline
ours
involves distributing the input patch across the
Figure
1:
Typical
image-to-image
translation
CNNs,
entire output grid while ensuring structural consistency. However, local (de)convolution layers trained for synthesis, simply upscales the input, whereas
our architecture naturally expands the input texture.
usually operate in small scales, e.g. 3×3 or 5×5.
∗

Joint first authors, contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

