Hamiltonian Monte Carlo using an adjointdifferentiated Laplace approximation: Bayesian
inference for latent Gaussian models and beyond

Charles C. Margossian
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
charles.margossian@columbia.edu
Daniel Simpson
Department of Statistical Sciences
University of Toronto
ON M5S, Canada

Aki Vehtari
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
02150 Espoo, Finland
Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence
Raj Agrawal
CSAIL
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139

Abstract
Gaussian latent variable models are a key class of Bayesian hierarchical models
with applications in many fields. Performing Bayesian inference on such models
can be challenging as Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms struggle with the
geometry of the resulting posterior distribution and can be prohibitively slow.
An alternative is to use a Laplace approximation to marginalize out the latent
Gaussian variables and then integrate out the remaining hyperparameters using
dynamic Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, a gradient-based Markov chain Monte Carlo
sampler. To implement this scheme efficiently, we derive a novel adjoint method
that propagates the minimal information needed to construct the gradient of the
approximate marginal likelihood. This strategy yields a scalable differentiation
method that is orders of magnitude faster than state of the art differentiation
techniques when the hyperparameters are high dimensional. We prototype the
method in the probabilistic programming framework Stan and test the utility of
the embedded Laplace approximation on several models, including one where the
dimension of the hyperparameter is ∼6,000. Depending on the cases, the benefits
can include an alleviation of the geometric pathologies that frustrate Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo and a dramatic speed-up.

1

Introduction

Latent Gaussian models observe the following hierarchical structure:
φ ∼ π(φ),

θ ∼ Normal(0, K(φ)),

y ∼ π(y | θ, φ).

Typically, single observations yi are independently distributed and only depend on a linear combination of the latent variables, that is π(yi | θ, φ) = π(yi | aTi θ, φ), for some appropriately defined
vectors ai . This general framework finds a broad array of applications: Gaussian processes, spatial
models, and multilevel regression models to name a few examples. We denote θ the latent Gaussian
variable and φ the hyperparameter, although we note that in general φ may refer to any latent variable
other than θ. Note that there is no clear consensus in the literature on what constitutes a “latent
Gaussian model”; we use the definition from the seminal work by Rue et al. [34].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

