Adversarial Attacks on Linear Contextual Bandits
Evrard Garcelon?
Facebook AI Research
evrard@fb.com
Jean Tarbouriech
Facebook AI Research
jtarbouriech@fb.com

Baptiste Rozière?
Facebook AI Research
broz@fb.com
Olivier Teytaud
Facebook AI Research
oteytaud@fb.com

Laurent Meunier?
Facebook AI Research
laurentmeunier@fb.com
Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research
lazaric@fb.com

Matteo Pirotta
Facebook AI Research
pirotta@fb.com

Abstract
Contextual bandit algorithms are applied in a wide range of domains, from advertising to recommender systems, from clinical trials to education. In many of these
domains, malicious agents may have incentives to force a bandit algorithm into a
desired behavior. For instance, an unscrupulous ad publisher may try to increase
their own revenue at the expense of the advertisers; a seller may want to increase the
exposure of their products, or thwart a competitor’s advertising campaign. In this
paper, we study several attack scenarios and show that a malicious agent can force
a linear contextual bandit algorithm to pull any desired arm T o(T ) times over
a horizon of T steps, while applying adversarial modifications to either rewards
or contexts with a cumulative cost that only grow logarithmically as O(log T ).
We also investigate the case when a malicious agent is interested in affecting the
behavior of the bandit algorithm in a single context (e.g., a specific user). We
first provide sufficient conditions for the feasibility of the attack and an efficient
algorithm to perform an attack. We empirically validate the proposed approaches
in synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems are at the heart of the business model of many industries like e-commerce or
video streaming [1, 2]. The two most common approaches for this task are based either on matrix
factorization [3] or bandit algorithms [4], which both rely on a unaltered feedback loop between
the recommender system and the user. In recent years, a fair amount of work has been dedicated to
understanding how targeted perturbations in the feedback loop can fool a recommender system into
recommending low quality items.
Following the line of research on adversarial attacks in supervised learning [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], attacks on
recommender systems have been focused on filtering-based algorithms [10, 11] and offline contextual
bandits [12]. The question of adversarial attacks for online bandit algorithms has only been studied
quite recently [13, 14, 15, 16], and solely in the multi-armed stochastic setting. Although the idea of
online adversarial bandit algorithms is not new (see E XP3 algorithm in [17]), the focus is different
from what we are considering in this article. Indeed, algorithms like E XP3 or E XP4 [18] are designed
to find optimal actions in hindsight in order to adapt to any rewards stream.
?

indicates equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

