Heuristic Domain Adaptation

Shuhao Cui1,2∗ Xuan Jin3 Shuhui Wang1† Yuan He3 Qingming Huang1,2,4
1
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Alibaba Group 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{cuishuhao18s, wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn, {jinxuan.jx, heyuan.hy}@alibaba-inc.com

qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In visual domain adaptation (DA), separating the domain-specific characteristics
from the domain-invariant representations is an ill-posed problem. Existing methods apply different kinds of priors or directly minimize the domain discrepancy
to address this problem, which lack flexibility in handling real-world situations.
Another research pipeline expresses the domain-specific information as a gradual
transferring process, which tends to be suboptimal in accurately removing the
domain-specific properties. In this paper, we address the modeling of domaininvariant and domain-specific information from the heuristic search perspective.
We identify the characteristics in the existing representations that lead to larger
domain discrepancy as the heuristic representations. With the guidance of heuristic representations, we formulate a principled framework of Heuristic Domain
Adaptation (HDA) with well-founded theoretical guarantees. To perform HDA,
the cosine similarity scores and independence measurements between domaininvariant and domain-specific representations are cast into the constraints at the
initial and final states during the learning procedure. Similar to the final condition of heuristic search, we further derive a constraint enforcing the final range
of heuristic network output to be small. Accordingly, we propose Heuristic Domain Adaptation Network (HDAN), which explicitly learns the domain-invariant
and domain-specific representations with the above mentioned constraints. Extensive experiments show that HDAN has exceeded state-of-the-art on unsupervised DA, multi-source DA and semi-supervised DA. The code is available at
https://github.com/cuishuhao/HDA.

1

Introduction

In visual domain adaptation scenarios, the domain-invariant (a.k.a. transferable) representations [36],
are considered to be the information bottleneck to enhance the generalizability of a model transferred
from labeled source domain to unlabeled or weakly-labeled target domain. Nevertheless, without
sufficient knowledge, separating domain-invariant information from the domain-specific information
that is harmful for domain adaptation, is substantially an ill-posed problem with infinite solutions.
To derive feasible solutions, a major way is to impose different prior knowledge on the structure of the
mapping functions. For example, the domain-invariant feature is regarded as the information shared
among domains, and obtained by averaging the domain-specific metrics [37] or by a joint neural
network [8] for multiple learning tasks. Regularization with well-established statistical explanation,
such as F -norm [15], structured L1 -norm [3, 4] or orthogonality [2] constraints on linear or kernel
mapping functions [14], is imposed on either the domain-specific or domain-invariant part to alleviate
∗
†

Visiting student at Alibaba Group.
Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

