Simplifying Hamiltonian and Lagrangian Neural
Networks via Explicit Constraints

Marc Finzi∗
New York University

Ke Alexander Wang∗
Cornell University

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Abstract
Reasoning about the physical world requires models that are endowed with the
right inductive biases to learn the underlying dynamics. Recent works improve generalization for predicting trajectories by learning the Hamiltonian or Lagrangian of a system rather than the differential equations directly. While these
methods encode the constraints of the systems using generalized coordinates, we
show that embedding the system into Cartesian coordinates and enforcing the constraints explicitly with Lagrange multipliers dramatically simplifies the learning
problem. We introduce a series of challenging chaotic and extended-body systems, including systems with N -pendulums, spring coupling, magnetic fields,
rigid rotors, and gyroscopes, to push the limits of current approaches. Our experiments show that Cartesian coordinates with explicit constraints lead to a 100x
improvement in accuracy and data efficiency.

Gyroscope system

Data-efficiency & accuracy

Gyroscope Hamiltonian
Cartesian coordinates (easy to learn)

100x

H(X, P ) = 12 Tr(P M −1 P ) + gmX03
Mii−1 = (1 + 1/λi )/m for i = 1, 2, 3
−1
−1
M00
= Mij
= 1/m for i 6= j

260x

Angular coordinates (hard to learn)
H(q, p) = 12 pT M (q)−1 p + mg` cos q2
M11 = sin2 q2 (I1 sin2 q3 + I2 cos2 q3 ) + cos2 q2 I3
M12 = M21 = (I1 − I2 ) sin q2 sin q3 cos q3
M13 = M31 = I3 cos q2

M33 = I3

M22 = I1 cos2 q3 + I2 sin2 q3

Figure 1: By using Cartesian coordinates with explicit constraints, we simplify the Hamiltonians and Lagrangians that our models learn, resulting in better long term predictions and data-efficiency than Neural ODEs
and Hamiltonian Neural Networks (HNNs). Left: a spinning gyroscope with the ground truth trajectory and
predictions of each model. Predicted trajectories by our model (CHNN) overlaps almost exactly with the
ground truth (black). Middle: Geometric mean of the relative error over 100 timesteps as a function of number
of training trajectories. On the gyroscope system, our model can be 100 times more data efficient or 260 times
more accurate. Right: The Hamiltonian expressed in Cartesian coordinates is simpler and easier to learn than
when expressed in angular coordinates.

1

Introduction

Although the behavior of physical systems can be complex, they can be derived from more abstract
functions that succinctly summarize the underlying physics. For example, the trajectory of a physical
system can be found by solving the system’s differential equation for the state as a function of time.
∗

Equal contribution.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

