Emergent Complexity and Zero-shot Transfer via
Unsupervised Environment Design

Michael Dennis∗, Natasha Jaques∗2 , Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen,
Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch, Sergey Levine
University of California Berkeley AI Research (BAIR), Berkeley, CA, 94704
2
Google Research, Brain team, Mountain View, CA, 94043
michael_dennis@berkeley.edu, natashajaques@google.com,
<evinitsky, bayen, russell, critch, svlevine>@berkeley.edu

Abstract
A wide range of reinforcement learning (RL) problems — including robustness,
transfer learning, unsupervised RL, and emergent complexity — require specifying a distribution of tasks or environments in which a policy will be trained.
However, creating a useful distribution of environments is error prone, and takes
a significant amount of developer time and effort. We propose Unsupervised
Environment Design (UED) as an alternative paradigm, where developers provide environments with unknown parameters, and these parameters are used to
automatically produce a distribution over valid, solvable environments. Existing
approaches to automatically generating environments suffer from common failure
modes: domain randomization cannot generate structure or adapt the difficulty of
the environment to the agent’s learning progress, and minimax adversarial training
leads to worst-case environments that are often unsolvable. To generate structured, solvable environments for our protagonist agent, we introduce a second,
antagonist agent that is allied with the environment-generating adversary. The
adversary is motivated to generate environments which maximize regret, defined as
the difference between the protagonist and antagonist agent’s return. We call our
technique Protagonist Antagonist Induced Regret Environment Design (PAIRED).
Our experiments demonstrate that PAIRED produces a natural curriculum of increasingly complex environments, and PAIRED agents achieve higher zero-shot
transfer performance when tested in highly novel environments.

1

Introduction

Many reinforcement learning problems require designing a distribution of tasks and environments
that can be used to evaluate and train effective policies. This is true for a diverse array of methods
including transfer learning (e.g., [2, 48, 32, 41]), robust RL (e.g., [4, 16, 28]), unsupervised RL (e.g.,
[15]), and emergent complexity (e.g., [38, 45, 46]). For example, suppose we wish to train a robot
in simulation to pick up objects from a bin in a real-world warehouse. There are many possible
configurations of objects, including objects being stacked on top of each other. We may not know a
priori the typical arrangement of the objects, but can naturally describe the simulated environment as
having a distribution over the object positions.
However, designing an appropriate distribution of environments is challenging. The real world is
complicated, and correctly enumerating all of the edge cases relevant to an application could be
impractical or impossible. Even if the developer of the RL method knew every edge case, specifying
this distribution could take a significant amount of time and effort. We want to automate this process.
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

