RNNPool: Efficient Non-linear Pooling for RAM
Constrained Inference
Oindrila Saha† , Aditya Kusupati‡ ,
Harsha Vardhan Simhadri† , Manik Varma† and Prateek Jain†
†
Microsoft Research India, ‡ University of Washington
{t-oisaha,harshasi,manik,prajain}@microsoft.com, kusupati@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Standard Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) designed for computer vision
tasks tend to have large intermediate activation maps. These require large working
memory and are thus unsuitable for deployment on resource-constrained devices
typically used for inference on the edge. Aggressively downsampling the images
via pooling or strided convolutions can address the problem but leads to a significant decrease in accuracy due to gross aggregation of the feature map by standard
pooling operators. In this paper, we introduce RNNPool, a novel pooling operator
based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), that efficiently aggregates features
over large patches of an image and rapidly downsamples activation maps. Empirical
evaluation indicates that an RNNPool layer can effectively replace multiple blocks
in a variety of architectures such as MobileNets, DenseNet when applied to standard vision tasks like image classification and face detection. That is, RNNPool
can significantly decrease computational complexity and peak memory usage for inference while retaining comparable accuracy. We use RNNPool with the standard
S3FD [50] architecture to construct a face detection method that achieves state-ofthe-art MAP for tiny ARM Cortex-M4 class microcontrollers with under 256 KB
of RAM. Code is released at https://github.com/Microsoft/EdgeML.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become ubiquitous for computer vision tasks such
as image classification and face detection. Steady progress has led to new CNN architectures that
are increasingly accurate, but also require larger memory and more computation for inference. The
increased inference complexity renders these models unsuitable for resource-constrained processors
that are commonplace on the edge in IoT systems and battery-powered and privacy-centric devices.
To reduce inference complexity, several techniques like quantization [44], sparsification [9, 27],
cheaper CNN blocks [37, 22], or neural architecture search [41] have been proposed to train CNN
models with lower inference cost and model size while retaining accuracy. However, these models
still require large working memory for inference. Memory tends to be the most constrained resource
on low power devices as it occupies a large fraction of the device die and has high sustained power
requirement [24]. Most low power ARM Cortex-M* microcontrollers have less than 256 KB RAM.
Typical CNNs have large intermediate activation maps, as well as many convolution layers, which
put together require large amount of RAM for inference (see Proposition 1). A standard approach to
reducing working memory is to use pooling operators or strided convolution to bring down size of the
activation map. In fact, standard CNNs have multiple such layers. However, such pooling operators
aggregate the underlying activation map in a simplistic manner, which can lead to a significant loss of
accuracy. As a result, their use is limited to small receptive fields, typically no larger than 3 × 3, and
they can not be used to aggressively reduce the activation map by aggregating larger receptive fields.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

