Neural Architecture Generator Optimization

Binxin Ru
Machine Learning Research Group
University of Oxford, UK
robin@robots.ox.ac.uk

Pedro M. Esperança
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
London, UK
pedro.esperanca@huawei.com

Fabio M. Carlucci
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
London, UK
fabio.maria.carlucci@huawei.com

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) was first proposed to achieve state-of-the-art
performance through the discovery of new architecture patterns, without human
intervention. An over-reliance on expert knowledge in the search space design has
however led to increased performance (local optima) without significant architectural breakthroughs, thus preventing truly novel solutions from being reached. In
this work we 1) are the first to investigate casting NAS as a problem of finding the
optimal network generator and 2) we propose a new, hierarchical and graph-based
search space capable of representing an extremely large variety of network types,
yet only requiring few continuous hyper-parameters. This greatly reduces the
dimensionality of the problem, enabling the effective use of Bayesian Optimisation
as a search strategy. At the same time, we expand the range of valid architectures,
motivating a multi-objective learning approach. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of this strategy on six benchmark datasets and show that our search space generates
extremely lightweight yet highly competitive models. The code is available at
https://github.com/rubinxin/vega_NAGO.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has the potential to discover paradigm-changing architectures
with state-of-the-art performance, and at the same time removes the need for a human expert in the
network design process. While significant improvements have been recently achieved [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6],
this has taught us little about why a specific architecture is more suited for a given dataset. Similarly,
no conceptually new architecture structure has emerged from NAS works. We attribute this to two
main issues: (i) reliance on over-engineered search spaces and (ii) the inherent difficulty in analyzing
complex architectures.
The first point is investigated in [7]. In order to reduce search time, current NAS methods often
restrict the macro-structure and search only the micro-structure at the cell level, focusing on which
operations to choose but fixing the global wiring pattern [1, 8, 9, 10]. This leads to high accuracy
but restricts the search to local minima: indeed deep learning success stories, such as ResNet [11],
DenseNet [12] and Inception [13] all rely on specific global wiring rather than specific operations.
The second issue appears hard to solve, as analyzing the structure of complex networks is itself a
demanding task for which few tools are available. We suggest that by moving the focus towards
network generators we can obtain a much more informative solution, as the whole network can
then be represented by a small set of parameters. This idea, first introduced by [14], offers many
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

