Exact Recovery of Mangled Clusters
with Same-Cluster Queries
Marco Bressan∗
Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy
marco.bressan@unimi.it
Silvio Lattanzi
Google
silviol@google.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
DSRC & Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it
Andrea Paudice
Dept. of CS, Univ. of Milan, Italy &
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy
andrea.paudice@unimi.it

Abstract
We study the cluster recovery problem in the semi-supervised active clustering
framework. Given a finite set of input points, and an oracle revealing whether any
two points lie in the same cluster, our goal is to recover all clusters exactly using
as few queries as possible. To this end, we relax the spherical k-means cluster
assumption of Ashtiani et al. to allow for arbitrary ellipsoidal clusters with margin. This removes the assumption that the clustering is center-based (i.e., defined
through an optimization problem), and includes all those cases where spherical
clusters are individually transformed by any combination of rotations, axis scalings,
and point deletions. We show that, even in this much more general setting, it is
still possible to recover the latent clustering exactly using a number of queries
that scales only logarithmically with the number of input points. More precisely,
we design an algorithm that, given n points to be partitioned into k clusters, uses
e
O(k 3 ln k ln n) oracle queries and O(kn
+ k 3 ) time to recover the clustering with
zero misclassification error. The O(·) notation hides an exponential dependence
on the dimensionality of the clusters, which we show to be necessary thus characterizing the query complexity of the problem. Our algorithm is simple, easy to
implement, and can also learn the clusters using low-stretch separators, a class of
ellipsoids with additional theoretical guarantees. Experiments on large synthetic
datasets confirm that we can reconstruct clusterings exactly and efficiently.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a central problem of unsupervised learning with a wide range of applications in machine
learning and data science. The goal of clustering is to partition a set of points in different groups,
so that similar points are assigned to the same group and dissimilar points are assigned to different
groups. A basic formulation is the k-clustering problem, in which the input points must be partitioned
into k disjoint subsets. A typical example is center-based k-clustering, where the points lie in a metric
space and one is interested in recovering k clusters that minimize the distance between the points and
the cluster centers. Different variants of this problem, captured by the classic k-center, k-median, and
k-means problems, have been extensively studied for several decades [1, 15, 26].
In this work we investigate the problem of recovering a latent clustering in the popular semi-supervised
active clustering model of Ashtiani et al. [4]. In this model, we are given a set X of n input points in
∗

Most of this work was done while the author was at the Sapienza University of Rome.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

