Wasserstein Distances for Stereo Disparity Estimation

Divyansh Garg1 Yan Wang1 Bharath Hariharan1
Mark Campbell1 Kilian Q. Weinberger1 Wei-Lun Chao2
1
2
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
{dg595, yw763, bh497, mc288, kqw4}@cornell.edu

chao.209@osu.edu

Abstract
Existing approaches to depth or disparity estimation output a distribution over a
set of pre-defined discrete values. This leads to inaccurate results when the true
depth or disparity does not match any of these values. The fact that this distribution
is usually learned indirectly through a regression loss causes further problems in
ambiguous regions around object boundaries. We address these issues using a new
neural network architecture that is capable of outputting arbitrary depth values,
and a new loss function that is derived from the Wasserstein distance between
the true and the predicted distributions. We validate our approach on a variety
of tasks, including stereo disparity and depth estimation, and the downstream 3D
object detection. Our approach drastically reduces the error in ambiguous regions,
especially around object boundaries that greatly affect the localization of objects in
3D, achieving the state-of-the-art in 3D object detection for autonomous driving.
Our code will be available at https://github.com/Div99/W-Stereo-Disp.

1

Introduction

Depth estimation from stereo images is a longstanding task in computer vision [28, 34]. It is a
key component of many downstream problems,
ranging from 3D object detection in autonomous
vehicles [8, 19, 31, 40, 51] to graphics applications such as novel view generation [21, 52].
The importance of this task in practical applications has led to a flurry of recent research.
Convolutional networks have now superseded
more classical techniques and led to significant
improvements in accuracy [4, 25, 41, 54].
Figure 1: The effect of our continuous disparity
These techniques estimate depth by finding ac- network (CDN). We show a person (green box) in
curate pixel correspondences and estimating the front of a wall. The blue 3D points are obtained
disparity between their X-coordinates, which is using PSMNet [4]. The red points from our CDN
inversely proportional to depth. Because pixels model are much better aligned with the shape of the
have integral coordinates, so does the estimated objects: they do not suffer the streaking artifacts
disparity — causing even the resulting depth near edges. Yellow points are from the ground
estimates to be discrete. This introduces inaccu- truth LiDAR. (One floor square is 1m×1m.)
racy, as the ground truth disparity and depth are
naturally real-valued. This discrepancy is typically addressed by predicting a categorical distribution
over a fixed set of discrete values, and then computing the expected depth from this distribution,
which can in theory be any arbitrary real value (within the range of the set) [4, 12, 41, 51, 54].
In this paper, we argue that such a design choice may lead to inaccurate depth estimates, especially
around object boundaries. For example, in Figure 1 we show the pixels (back-projected into 3D
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

