Global Convergence and Variance Reduction for a
Class of Nonconvex-Nonconcave Minimax Problems
Junchi Yang
UIUC
junchiy2@illinois.edu

Negar Kiyavash
EPFL
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Niao He
UIUC & ETH Zurich
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Nonconvex minimax problems appear frequently in emerging machine learning
applications, such as generative adversarial networks and adversarial learning.
Simple algorithms such as the gradient descent ascent (GDA) are the common
practice for solving these nonconvex games and receive lots of empirical success.
Yet, it is known that these vanilla GDA algorithms with constant stepsize can
potentially diverge even in the convex-concave setting. In this work, we show that
for a subclass of nonconvex-nonconcave objectives satisfying a so-called two-sided
Polyak-Łojasiewicz inequality, the alternating gradient descent ascent (AGDA)
algorithm converges globally at a linear rate and the stochastic AGDA achieves
a sublinear rate. We further develop a variance reduced algorithm that attains a
provably faster rate than AGDA when the problem has the finite-sum structure.

1

Introduction

We consider minimax optimization problems of the forms
min max f (x, y)

x∈Rd1 y∈Rd2

(1)

where f (x, y) is a possibly nonconvex-nonconcave function. Recent emerging applications in
machine learning further stimulate a surge of interest in minimax problems. For example, generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [23] can be viewed as a two-player game between a generator that
produces synthetic data and a discriminator that differentiates between true and synthetic data. Other
applications include reinforcement learning [9, 10, 11], robust optimization [42, 43], adversarial
machine learning [54, 37], and so on. In many of these applications, f (x, y) may be stochastic,
namely, f (x, y) = E[F (x, y; ξ)], which corresponds to the expected
Pn loss of some random data ξ; or
f (x, y) may have the finite-sum structure, namely, f (x, y) = n1 i=1 fi (x, y), which corresponds to
the empirical loss over n data points.
The most frequently used methods for solving minimax problems are the gradient descent ascent
(GDA) algorithms (or their stochastic variants), with either simultaneous or alternating updates of the
primal-dual variables, referred to as SGDA and AGDA, respectively. While these algorithms have
received much empirical success especially in adversarial training, it is known that GDA algorithms
with constant stepsizes could fail to converge even for the bilinear games [22, 40]; when they do
converge, the stable limit point may not be a local Nash equilibrium [13, 38]. On the other hand,
GDA algorithms can converge linearly to the saddle point for strongly-convex-strongly-concave
functions [17]. Moreover, for many simple nonconvex-nonconcave objective functions, such as,
f (x, y) = x2 + 3 sin2 x sin2 y − 4y 2 − 10 sin2 y, we observe that GDA algorithms with constant
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

