Learning Implicit Functions for Topology-Varying
Dense 3D Shape Correspondence

Feng Liu
Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{liufeng6, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to learn dense 3D shape correspondence for topologyvarying objects in an unsupervised manner. Conventional implicit functions estimate the occupancy of a 3D point given a shape latent code. Instead, our novel
implicit function produces a part embedding vector for each 3D point, which is
assumed to be similar to its densely corresponded point in another 3D shape of the
same object category. Furthermore, we implement dense correspondence through
an inverse function mapping from the part embedding to a corresponded 3D point.
Both functions are jointly learned with several effective loss functions to realize
our assumption, together with the encoder generating the shape latent code. During
inference, if a user selects an arbitrary point on the source shape, our algorithm can
automatically generate a confidence score indicating whether there is a correspondence on the target shape, as well as the corresponding semantic point if there is
one. Such a mechanism inherently benefits man-made objects with different part
constitutions. The effectiveness of our approach is demonstrated through unsupervised 3D semantic correspondence and shape segmentation. Code is available at
https://github.com/liuf1990/Implicit_Dense_Correspondence.

1

Introduction

Finding dense correspondence between 3D shapes is a key algorithmic component in problems such as
statistical modeling [4,5,56], cross-shape texture mapping [28], and space-time 4D reconstruction [35].
Dense 3D shape correspondence can be defined as: given two 3D shapes belonging to the same
object category, one can match an arbitrary point on one shape to its semantically equivalent
point on another shape if such a correspondence exists. For instance, given two chairs, the dense
correspondence of the middle point on one chair’s arm should be the similar middle point on
another chair’s arm, despite different shapes of arms; or alternatively, declare the non-existence of
correspondence if another chair has no arm. Although prior dense correspondence methods [15,18,29–
31, 37, 42, 48] have proven to be effective on organic shapes, e.g., human bodies and mammals, they
become less suitable for generic topology-varying or man-made objects, e.g., chair or vehicles [22].
It remains a challenge to build dense 3D correspondence for a category with large variations in
geometry, structure, and even topology. First of all, the lack of annotations on dense correspondence
often leaves unsupervised learning the only option. Second, most prior works make an inadequate
assumption [50] that there is a similar topological variability between matched shapes. Man-made
objects such as chairs shown in Fig. 1 are particularly challenging to tackle, since they often differ not
only by geometric deformations, but also by part constitutions. In these cases, existing correspondence
methods for man-made objects either perform fuzzy [27, 47] or part-level [2, 44] correspondences, or
predict a constant number of semantic points [8, 19]. As a result, they cannot determine whether the
established correspondence is a “missing match” or not. As shown in Fig. 1(c), for instance, we may
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

