Counterfactual Data Augmentation
using Locally Factored Dynamics

Silviu Pitis, Elliot Creager, Animesh Garg
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{spitis, creager, garg}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Many dynamic processes, including common scenarios in robotic control and
reinforcement learning (RL), involve a set of interacting subprocesses. Though
the subprocesses are not independent, their interactions are often sparse, and the
dynamics at any given time step can often be decomposed into locally independent
causal mechanisms. Such local causal structures can be leveraged to improve the
sample efficiency of sequence prediction and off-policy reinforcement learning.
We formalize this by introducing local causal models (LCMs), which are induced
from a global causal model by conditioning on a subset of the state space. We
propose an approach to inferring these structures given an object-oriented state
representation, as well as a novel algorithm for Counterfactual Data Augmentation (CoDA). CoDA uses local structures and an experience replay to generate
counterfactual experiences that are causally valid in the global model. We find
that CoDA significantly improves the performance of RL agents in locally factored
tasks, including the batch-constrained and goal-conditioned settings.1

1

Introduction

High-dimensional dynamical systems are often composed of simple subprocesses that affect one
another through sparse interaction. If the subprocesses never interacted, an agent could realize significant gains in sample efficiency by globally factoring the dynamics and modeling each subprocess
independently [28, 29]. In most cases, however, the subprocesses do eventually interact and so the
prevailing approach is to model the entire process using a monolithic, unfactored model. In this paper,
we take advantage of the observation that locally—during the time between their interactions—the
subprocesses are causally independent. By locally factoring dynamic processes in this way, we are
able to capture the benefits of factorization even when their subprocesses interact on the global scale.
Consider a game of billiards, where each ball can be viewed as a separate physical subprocess.
Predicting the opening break is difficult because all balls are mechanically coupled by their initial
placement. Indeed, a dynamics model with dense coupling amongst balls may seem sensible when
considering the expected outcomes over the course of the game, as each ball has a non-zero chance
of colliding with the others. But at any given timestep, interactions between balls are usually sparse.
One way to take advantage of sparse interactions between otherwise disentangled entities is to use
a structured state representation together with a graph neural network or other message passing
transition model that captures the local interactions [26, 39]. When it is tractable to do so, such
architectures can be used to model the world dynamics directly, producing transferable, task-agnostic
models. In many cases, however, the underlying processes are difficult to model precisely, and
model-free [46, 87] or task-oriented model-based [18, 63] approaches are less biased and exhibit
superior performance. In this paper we argue that knowledge of whether or not local interactions
1

Code available at https://github.com/spitis/mrl

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

