Approximate Heavily-Constrained Learning with
Lagrange Multiplier Models

Harikrishna Narasimhan, Andrew Cotter, Yichen Zhou
Google Research, USA
{hnarasimhan,acotter,yichenzhou}@google.com
Serena Wang, Wenshuo Guo
University of California, Berkeley
{serenalwang,wsguo}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In machine learning applications such as ranking fairness or fairness over intersectional groups, one often encounters optimization problems with extremely large
numbers of constraints. In particular, with ranking fairness tasks, there may even
be a variable number of constraints, e.g. one for each query in the training set. In
these cases, the standard approach of optimizing a Lagrangian while maintaining
one Lagrange multiplier per constraint may no longer be practical. Our proposal is
to associate a feature vector with each constraint, and to learn a “multiplier model”
that maps each such vector to the corresponding Lagrange multiplier. We prove
optimality, approximate feasibility and generalization guarantees under assumptions on the flexibility of the multiplier model, and empirically demonstrate that
our method is effective on real-world case studies.

1

Introduction

Constrained optimization has proven to be useful for a variety of machine learning applications,
including churn reduction, Neyman-Pearson classification, and the imposition of statistical fairness
constraints [e.g. 1, 2]. In such problems, there are generally only a handful of constraints: for example,
in a fairness problem, there will typically be only one constraint per protected group. As a result,
while optimizing such a constrained ML problem is more difficult than optimizing an unconstrained
problem, the difference is usually relatively small.
In some cases, however, it may be desirable to include an extremely large number of constraints. For
example, in a fairness problem in which the data are partitioned into protected groups in multiple
distinct ways (e.g. race, gender, age buckets, etc.), enforcing a constraint independently for each
of the individual groups may not satisfy the constraint for each intersection of those groups [3].
Therefore, it may be necessary to impose a separate constraint for each such intersection. As one
tries to impose statistical fairness requirements along an increasing number of such dimensions, the
total number of constraints can quickly get out of hand.
Despite the difficulties with such a setting, the situation in such an intersectional statistical fairness
problem isn’t as bad as it could be, since there are still a known, finite number of constraints. In other
settings, even this might not be the case. In many ranking problems, for example, the workflow is that
a “query” is provided, with each query being associated with some set of “documents”, which are then
handed off to a model to be ranked. Here, we’re mainly interested in the problem of imposing fairness
constraints on a per-query basis. When statistical fairness constraints (such as ranking analogues to
demographic parity or equal opportunity [4], adapted to the ranking setting as in Narasimhan et al.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

