Pixel-Level Cycle Association: A New Perspective for
Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation

Guoliang Kang1 , Yunchao Wei2∗, Yi Yang2 , Yueting Zhuang3 , Alexander G. Hauptmann1
1
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney 3 Zhejiang University
kgl.prml@gmail.com, alex@cs.cmu.edu
{yunchao.wei, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au
yzhuang@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive semantic segmentation aims to train a model performing satisfactory pixel-level predictions on the target with only out-of-domain (source)
annotations. The conventional solution to this task is to minimize the discrepancy
between source and target to enable effective knowledge transfer. Previous domain
discrepancy minimization methods are mainly based on the adversarial training.
They tend to consider the domain discrepancy globally, which ignore the pixel-wise
relationships and are less discriminative. In this paper, we propose to build the
pixel-level cycle association between source and target pixel pairs and contrastively
strengthen their connections to diminish the domain gap and make the features
more discriminative. To the best of our knowledge, this is a new perspective for
tackling such a challenging task. Experiment results on two representative domain
adaptation benchmarks, i.e. GTAV → Cityscapes and SYNTHIA → Cityscapes,
verify the effectiveness of our proposed method and demonstrate that our method
performs favorably against previous state-of-the-arts. Our method can be trained
end-to-end in one stage and introduces no additional parameters, which is expected
to serve as a general framework and help ease future research in domain adaptive
semantic segmentation. Code is available at https://github.com/kgl-prml/PixelLevel-Cycle-Association.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a challenging task because it requires pixel-wise understandings of the
image which is highly structured. Recent years have witnessed the huge advancement in this area,
mainly due to the rising of deep neural networks. However, without massive pixel-level annotations,
to train a satisfactory segmentation network remains challenging. In this paper, we deal with the
semantic segmentation in the domain adaptation setting which aims to make accurate pixel-level
predictions on the target domain with only out-of-domain (source) annotations.
The key to the domain adaptive semantic segmentation is how to make the knowledge learned from
the distinct source domain better transferred to the target. Most previous works employ adversarial
training to minimize the domain gap existing in the image [11, 12, 47] or the representations
[41, 31, 44] or both [19, 49]. Most adversarial training based methods either focus on the discrepancy
globally or treat the pixels from both domains independently. All these methods ignore the abundant
in-domain and cross-domain pixel-wise relationships and are less discriminative. Recently, many
works resort to self-training [48, 27, 54] to boost the segmentation performance. Although selftraining leads to promising improvement, it largely relies on a good initialization, is hard to tune and
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

