The Potts-Ising model for discrete multivariate data

Zahra S. Razaee
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Research Center,
Cedars Sinai
zahra.razaee@cshs.org

Arash A. Amini
Department of Statistics
University of California, Los Angeles
aaamini@ucla.edu

Abstract
Modeling dependencies in multivariate discrete data is a challenging problem,
especially in high dimensions. The Potts model is a versatile such model, suitable
when each coordinate is a categorical variable. However, the full Potts model has
too many parameters to be accurately fit when the number of categories is large.
We introduce a variation on the Potts model that allows for general categorical
marginals and Ising-type multivariate dependence. This reduces the number of
parameters from Ω(d2 K 2 ) in the full Potts model to O(d2 + Kd), where K is
the number of categories and d is the dimension of the data. We show that the
complexity of fitting this new Potts-Ising model is the same as that of an Ising
model. In particular, adopting the neighborhood regression framework, the model
can be fit by solving d separate logistic regressions. We demonstrate the ability
of the model to capture multivariate dependencies in real data by comparing with
existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Modeling multivariate discrete data is a basic problem in statistics and machine learning, especially
in high dimensions. Discrete data are rarely independent and a fundamental modeling task is to
characterize dependencies (correlation, causation, conditional independence, etc.) among variables.
The problem is exacerbated when the data are high-dimensional. One of the most flexible tools
available for modeling multivariate distributions are graphical models. The Potts model [1] is a
versatile such model for discrete data, suitable when each coordinate is a categorical variable. The
categorical nature of the model provides much more flexibility over Poisson-type count models. The
Potts model is the natural extension of the well-known Ising model for binary data [2].
The full Potts model, however, has too many parameters to be accurately fit when the number of
categories K is large. The large number of parameters also precludes easy interpretation. We
introduce a variation on the Potts model that allows for general categorical marginals and an Isingtype multivariate dependence. This reduces the number of parameters from Ω(d2 K 2 ) in the full Potts
model to O(d2 + Kd), where d is the dimension of the data.
Our motivating example is the toxicity data collected in cancer clinical trials. Patients undergoing
treatment may experience multiple toxicity types (such as nausea, diarrhea, etc) with grades of
severity varying from 1, corresponding to a mild symptom, to 5 indicating death. The overall number
of toxicities observed in cancer clinical trial is often more than 100. Furthermore, there is a rich
dependence structure in toxicity data. For example, diarrhea can cause dehydration which leads to
hypokalemia, hence the three toxicities are likely positively correlated, while some toxicities such as
diarrhea and constipation are negatively correlated. The toxicity datasets are both high-dimensional
and with rich dependencies.
The variation on the Potts model that we propose, which we refer to as the Potts-Ising model
(POIS), has several attractive features. The marginals of the distribution are modeled after general
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

