A Single-Loop Smoothed Gradient Descent-Ascent
Algorithm for Nonconvex-Concave Min-Max
Problems
Jiawei Zhang
216019001@link.cuhk.edu.cn ⇤

Peijun Xiao
peijunx2@illinois.edu †

Ruoyu Sun
ruoyus@illinois.edu †

Zhi-Quan Luo
luozq@cuhk.edu.cn ⇤

Abstract
Nonconvex-concave min-max problem arises in many machine learning applications including minimizing a pointwise maximum of a set of nonconvex functions and robust adversarial training of neural networks. A popular approach to
solve this problem is the gradient descent-ascent (GDA) algorithm which unfortunately can exhibit oscillation in case of nonconvexity. In this paper, we introduce
a “smoothing“ scheme which can be combined with GDA to stabilize the oscillation and ensure convergence to a stationary solution. We prove that the stabilized
GDA algorithm can achieve an O(1/✏2 ) iteration complexity for minimizing the
pointwise maximum of a finite collection of nonconvex functions. Moreover, the
smoothed GDA algorithm achieves an O(1/✏4 ) iteration complexity for general
nonconvex-concave problems. Extensions of this stabilized GDA algorithm to
multi-block cases are presented. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
algorithm to achieve O(1/✏2 ) for a class of nonconvex-concave problem. We illustrate the practical efficiency of the stabilized GDA algorithm on robust training.

1

Introduction

Min-max problems have drawn considerable interest from the machine learning and other engineering communities. They appear in applications such as adversarial learning [1–3], robust optimization [4–7], empirical risk minimization [8, 9], and reinforcement learning [10, 11]. Concretely
speaking, a min-max problem is in the form:
min max f (x, y),

x2X y2Y

(1.1)

where X ✓ Rn and Y 2 Rm are convex and closed sets and f is a smooth function. In the
literature, the convex-concave min-max problem, where f is convex in x and concave in y, is wellstudied [12–19]. However, many practical applications involve nonconvexity, and this is the focus
of the current paper. Unlike the convex-concave setting where we can compute the global stationary
solution efficiently, to obtain a global optimal solution for the setting where f is nonconvex with
respect to x is difficult.
⇤

Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, School of science and engineering, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
†
Coordinated Science Laboratory, Department of ISE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
IL
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

