PRANK: motion Prediction based on RANKing

Yuriy Biktairov ∗ † Maxim Stebelev Irina Rudenko † Oleh Shliazhko Boris Yangel
Yandex Self-Driving Group
{ybiktairov, mstebelev, irina-rud, olmer, hr0nix}@yandex-team.ru

Abstract
Predicting the motion of agents such as pedestrians or human-driven vehicles is one
of the most critical problems in the autonomous driving domain. The overall safety
of driving and the comfort of a passenger directly depend on its successful solution.
The motion prediction problem also remains one of the most challenging problems
in autonomous driving engineering, mainly due to high variance of the possible
agent’s future behavior given a situation. The two phenomena responsible for the
said variance are the multimodality caused by the uncertainty of the agent’s intent
(e.g., turn right or move forward) and uncertainty in the realization of a given intent
(e.g., which lane to turn into). To be useful within a real-time autonomous driving
pipeline, a motion prediction system must provide efficient ways to describe and
quantify this uncertainty, such as computing posterior modes and their probabilities
or estimating density at the point corresponding to a given trajectory. It also should
not put substantial density on physically impossible trajectories, as they can confuse
the system processing the predictions. In this paper, we introduce the PRANK
method, which satisfies these requirements. PRANK takes rasterized bird-eye
images of agent’s surroundings as an input and extracts features of the scene with
a convolutional neural network. It then produces the conditional distribution of
agent’s trajectories plausible in the given scene. The key contribution of PRANK
is a way to represent that distribution using nearest-neighbor methods in latent
trajectory space, which allows for efficient inference in real time. We evaluate
PRANK on the in-house and Argoverse datasets, where it shows competitive
results.

1

Introduction

This paper focuses on the problem of predicting the motion of agents surrounding a self-driving
vehicle, such as pedestrians and vehicles driven by humans. As any vehicle, a self-driving vehicle
needs certain time to change its speed, and sudden changes in speed and acceleration may feel very
uncomfortable to its passengers. The motion planning module of a self-driving vehicle thus needs to
have a good idea of where nearby agents might end up in a few seconds, so that it can plan for the
vehicle to maintain safe distance. It can also greatly benefit from understanding when the situation is
inherently multimodal, and multiple distinct futures are likely, as in such situations a self-driving
vehicle might maintain extra caution until the situation becomes more clear.
One way to describe agent’s future motion, which we choose to follow in this paper, is to represent it
as a probability distribution over agent’s future trajectories conditioned on the information about the
scene up to the time the prediction was made. In order for this representation to be useful for the
motion planning subsystem, it has to satisfy several requirements:
∗
†

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, yuriy.biktairov@phystech.edu

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

