Probabilistic Inference with Algebraic Constraints:
Theoretical Limits and Practical Approximations
Zhe Zeng∗
CS Department
UCLA
zhezeng@cs.ucla.edu

Paolo Morettin∗†
DTAI
KU Leuven, Belgium
paolo.morettin@unitn.it

Antonio Vergari
CS Department
UCLA
aver@cs.ucla.edu

Fanqi Yan∗
CS Department
UT Austin
fqyan@cs.utexas.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
CS Department
UCLA
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Weighted model integration (WMI) is a framework to perform advanced probabilistic
inference in hybrid domains, i.e., on distributions over mixed continuous-discrete
random variables and in the presence of complex logical and arithmetic constraints.
In this work, we advance the WMI framework on both the theoretical and algorithmic
side. First, we trace the boundaries of tractability for WMI inference in terms of two
key properties of a WMI problem’s dependency structure: sparsity and diameter.
We prove that exact inference is only efficient if that structure is tree-shaped with
logarithmic diameter. While this result deepens our theoretical understanding of
WMI it hinders the practical applicability of exact WMI solvers to large problems.
To overcome this, we propose the first approximate WMI solver that does not resort
to sampling, but performs exact inference on an approximate model. Our solution
iteratively performs message passing in a relaxed problem structure to recover lost
dependencies. As our experiments show, it scales to problems that are out of the
reach of exact WMI solvers while delivering accurate approximations.

1

Introduction

Consider an autonomous agent operating under uncertainty in a real-world scenario, for instance a
self-driving vehicle. It has to model both continuous variables like the speed and position of other
cars and discrete ones like the color of traffic lights and the number of pedestrians. Moreover, in
order to make decisions, it needs to perform advanced probabilistic reasoning. For example, it has to
reason about physical constraints while computing the probability of a grounded scene described via
complex algebraic constraints, such as the geometry of vehicles and the roads ahead.
Performing probabilistic inference in these constrained and hybrid (mixed continuous-discrete)
scenarios goes beyond the limited inference capabilities of intractable probabilistic models such
as variational autoencoders [28] and generative adversarial networks [25]. This is also the case
for classical probabilistic graphical models for hybrid domains [27, 32] and more recent tractable
alternatives [33, 38, 40] which struggle to either perform inference over complex algebraic constraints
or make too simplistic representational or distributional assumptions.
∗ Authors contributed equally. This research was performed while F.Y. and P.M. were visiting UCLA.
† This work was partially carried out when P.M. was working at the University of Trento.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

