Learning Latent Space Energy-Based Prior Model

Bo Pang∗ 1 Tian Han∗ 2 Erik Nijkamp∗ 1 Song-Chun Zhu1 Ying Nian Wu1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Stevens Institute of Technology
{bopang, enijkamp}@ucla.edu

than6@stevens.edu

{sczhu, ywu}@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose to learn energy-based model (EBM) in the latent space of a generator
model, so that the EBM serves as a prior model that stands on the top-down
network of the generator model. Both the latent space EBM and the top-down
network can be learned jointly by maximum likelihood, which involves short-run
MCMC sampling from both the prior and posterior distributions of the latent vector.
Due to the low dimensionality of the latent space and the expressiveness of the
top-down network, a simple EBM in latent space can capture regularities in the
data effectively, and MCMC sampling in latent space is efficient and mixes well.
We show that the learned model exhibits strong performances in terms of image
and text generation and anomaly detection. The one-page code can be found in
supplementary materials.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep generative models have achieved impressive successes in image and text
generation. A particularly simple and powerful model is the generator model [35, 21], which assumes
that the observed example is generated by a low-dimensional latent vector via a top-down network, and
the latent vector follows a non-informative prior distribution, such as uniform or isotropic Gaussian
distribution. While we can learn an expressive top-down network to map the prior distribution to the
data distribution, we can also learn an informative prior model in the latent space to further improve
the expressive power of the whole model. This follows the philosophy of empirical Bayes where the
prior model is learned from the observed data. Specifically, we assume the latent vector follows an
energy-based model (EBM). We call this model the latent space energy-based prior model.
Both the latent space EBM and the top-down network can be learned jointly by maximum likelihood
estimate (MLE). Each learning iteration involves Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling of
the latent vector from both the prior and posterior distributions. Parameters of the prior model can then
be updated based on the statistical difference between samples from the two distributions. Parameters
of the top-down network can be updated based on the samples from the posterior distribution as well
as the observed data.
Due to the low-dimensionality of the latent space, the energy function can be parametrized by a
small multi-layer perceptron, yet the energy function can capture regularities in the data effectively
because the EBM stands on an expressive top-down network. Moreover, MCMC in the latent space
for both prior and posterior sampling is efficient and mixes well. Specifically, we employ short-run
MCMC [51, 50, 52, 25] which runs a fixed number of steps from a fixed initial distribution. We
formulate the resulting learning algorithm as a perturbation of MLE learning in terms of both objective
function and estimating equation, so that the learning algorithm has a solid theoretical foundation.
Within our theoretical framework, the short-run MCMC for posterior and prior sampling can also
be amortized by jointly learned inference and synthesis networks. However, in this initial paper, we
prefer keeping our model and learning method pure and self-contained, without mixing in learning
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

