Distributed Distillation for On-Device Learning

Ilai Bistritz, Ariana J. Mann, Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
{bistritz,ajmann,bambos}@stanford.edu

Abstract
On-device learning promises collaborative training of machine learning models
across edge devices without the sharing of user data. In state-of-the-art on-device
learning algorithms, devices communicate their model weights over a decentralized
communication network. Transmitting model weights requires huge communication overhead and means only devices with identical model architectures can be
included. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a distributed distillation
algorithm where devices communicate and learn from soft-decision (softmax) outputs, which are inherently architecture-agnostic and scale only with the number
of classes. The communicated soft-decisions are each model’s outputs on a public, unlabeled reference dataset, which serves as a common vocabulary between
devices. We prove that the gradients of the distillation regularized loss functions
of all devices converge to zero with probability 1. Hence, all devices distill the
entire knowledge of all other devices on the reference data, regardless of their
local connections. Our analysis assumes smooth loss functions, which can be
non-convex. Simulations support our theoretical findings and show that even a
naive implementation of our algorithm significantly reduces the communication
overhead while achieving an overall comparable accuracy to the state-of-the-art.
By requiring little communication overhead and allowing for cross-architecture
training, we remove two main obstacles to scaling on-device learning.

1

Introduction

Today, software applications and users’ personal data are located on the individual’s wireless edge
(e.g., smartphone or IoT) device, while the machine learning algorithms deployed in these applications
relegate their training to central servers. This necessitates the transfer of the users’ data to the central
server for training, which entails massive communication overhead and privacy issues, limiting the
scalability of model training. On the other hand, one device alone does not have enough data to
achieve state-of-the-art performance. The goal of on-device learning is to keep both the data and the
training on the device by coordinating collaborative training across devices. Achieving this goal will
unlock an unprecedented amount of training data that today is generated on user devices.
The first step was accomplished in Federated Learning (FL) [1–3] where each device trains its deep
neural network (DNN) with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on its personal data. The resulting
parameters of each DNN are then uploaded to a server where they are averaged and the average is
transmitted to every device involved for another round of training. This way, each device’s DNN
learns from the private data of its peers without ever seeing it. Beyond maintaining privacy, this
method has the efficiency of a learning algorithm trained over a huge amount of data without having
to ever communicate the often multi-media data itself. However, FL’s repeated communication of
large parameter vectors is infeasible for power-limited edge devices and its central parameter server
is a singular point of failure that can only handle up to a certain number of devices.
To remove the bottleneck of a single server, distributed (i.e device-to-device) SGD based DNN training
methods have been studied [4–7]. However, these schemes distribute the computation assuming all
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

