Boosting Adversarial Training with
Hypersphere Embedding

Tianyu Pang∗ , Xiao Yang∗ , Yinpeng Dong, Kun Xu, Jun Zhu, Hang Su†
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{pty17, yangxiao19, dyp17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
kunxu.thu@gmail.com, {suhangss, dcszj}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial training (AT) is one of the most effective defenses against adversarial
attacks for deep learning models. In this work, we advocate incorporating the
hypersphere embedding (HE) mechanism into the AT procedure by regularizing
the features onto compact manifolds, which constitutes a lightweight yet effective
module to blend in the strength of representation learning. Our extensive analyses
reveal that AT and HE are well coupled to benefit the robustness of the adversarially
trained models from several aspects. We validate the effectiveness and adaptability
of HE by embedding it into the popular AT frameworks including PGD-AT, ALP,
and TRADES, as well as the FreeAT and FastAT strategies. In the experiments, we
evaluate our methods under a wide range of adversarial attacks on the CIFAR-10
and ImageNet datasets, which verifies that integrating HE can consistently enhance
the model robustness for each AT framework with little extra computation.

1

Introduction

The adversarial vulnerability of deep learning models has been widely recognized in recent years [4,
22, 60]. To mitigate this potential threat, a number of defenses have been proposed, but most of them
are ultimately defeated by the attacks adapted to the specific details of the defenses [2, 8]. Among
the existing defenses, adversarial training (AT) is a general strategy achieving the state-of-the-art
robustness under different settings [53, 63, 71, 73, 74, 76, 83]. Various efforts have been devoted to
improving AT from different aspects, including accelerating the training procedure [56, 57, 70, 79]
and exploiting extra labeled and unlabeled training data [1, 10, 25, 78], which are conducive in the
cases with limited computational resources or additional data accessibility.
In the meanwhile, another research route focuses on boosting the adversarially trained models via
imposing more direct supervision to regularize the learned representations. Along this line, recent
progress shows that encoding triplet-wise metric learning or maximizing the optimal transport (OT)
distance of data batch in AT is effective to leverage the inter-sample interactions, which can promote
the learning of robust classifiers [34, 41, 45, 80]. However, optimization on the sampled triplets or
the OT distance is usually of high computational cost, while the sampling process in metric learning
could also introduce extra class biases on unbalanced data [48, 55].
In this work, we provide a lightweight yet competent module to tackle several defects in the learning
dynamics of existing AT frameworks, and facilitate the adversarially trained networks learning more
robust features. Methodologically, we augment the AT frameworks by integrating the hypersphere
embedding (HE) mechanism, which normalizes the features in the penultimate layer and the weights
in the softmax layer with an additive angular margin. Except for the generic benefits of HE on
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

