Neural encoding with visual attention

Meenakshi Khosla1,∗ , Gia H. Ngo1 , Keith Jamison3 , Amy Kuceyeski3,4 and Mert R. Sabuncu1,2,3
1

2

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
Nancy E. and Peter C. Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
3
Radiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065
4
Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065
∗
Correspondence: mk2299@cornell.edu

Abstract
Visual perception is critically influenced by the focus of attention. Due to limited resources, it is well known that neural representations are biased in favor of attended
locations. Using concurrent eye-tracking and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) recordings from a large cohort of human subjects watching movies,
we first demonstrate that leveraging gaze information, in the form of attentional
masking, can significantly improve brain response prediction accuracy in a neural
encoding model. Next, we propose a novel approach to neural encoding by including a trainable soft-attention module. Using our new approach, we demonstrate
that it is possible to learn visual attention policies by end-to-end learning merely
on fMRI response data, and without relying on any eye-tracking. Interestingly, we
find that attention locations estimated by the model on independent data agree well
with the corresponding eye fixation patterns, despite no explicit supervision to do
so. Together, these findings suggest that attention modules can be instrumental in
neural encoding models of visual stimuli. 1

1

Introduction

Developing accurate population-wide neural encoding models that predict the evoked brain response
directly from sensory stimuli has been an important goal in computational neuroscience. Modeling
neural responses to naturalistic stimuli, in particular stimuli that reflect the complexity of real-world
scenes (e.g., movies), offers significant promise to aid in understanding the human brain as it functions
in everyday life [1]. Much of the recent success in predictive modeling of neural responses is driven
by deep neural networks trained on tasks of behavioral relevance. For example, features extracted
from deep neural networks trained on image or auditory recognition tasks are currently the best
predictors of neural responses across visual and auditory brain regions, respectively [2, 3, 4]. While
this success is promising, the unexplained variance is still large enough to prompt novel efforts in
model development for this task. One aspect that is often overlooked in existing neural encoding
models in vision is visual attention.
Natural scenes are highly complex and cluttered, typically containing a myriad of objects. What we
perceive upon viewing complex, naturalistic stimuli depends significantly on where we direct our
attention. It is well known that multiple objects in natural scenes compete for neural resources and
attentional guidance helps to resolve the ensuing competition [5]. Due to the limited information
processing capacity of the visual system, neural activity is biased in favor of the attended location
[6, 7]. Hence, more salient objects tend to be more strongly and robustly represented in our brains.
Further, several theories have postulated that higher regions of the visual stream encode increasingly
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/mk2299/encoding_attention.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

