Estimation of Skill Distribution from a Tournament
Ali Jadbabaie
Department of CEE
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
jadbabai@mit.edu

Anuran Makur
Department of EECS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
a makur@mit.edu

Devavrat Shah
Department of EECS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
devavrat@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning the skill distribution of a population
of agents from observations of pairwise games in a tournament. These games
are played among randomly drawn agents from the population. The agents in our
model can be individuals, sports teams, or Wall Street fund managers. Formally, we
postulate that the likelihoods of outcomes of games are governed by the parametric
Bradley-Terry-Luce (or multinomial logit) model, where the probability of an agent
beating another is the ratio between its skill level and the pairwise sum of skill
levels, and the skill parameters are drawn from an unknown, non-parametric skill
density of interest. The problem is, in essence, to learn a distribution from noisy,
quantized observations. We propose a surprisingly simple and tractable algorithm
that learns the skill density with near-optimal minimax mean squared error scaling
as n−1+ε , for any ε > 0, so long as the density is smooth. Our approach brings
together prior work on learning skill parameters from pairwise comparisons with
kernel density estimation from non-parametric statistics. Furthermore, we prove
information theoretic lower bounds which establish minimax optimality of the
skill parameter estimation technique used in our algorithm. These bounds utilize
a continuum version of Fano’s method along with a careful covering argument.
We apply our algorithm to various soccer leagues and world cups, cricket world
cups, and mutual funds. We find that the entropy of a learnt distribution provides
a quantitative measure of skill, which in turn provides rigorous explanations for
popular beliefs about perceived qualities of sporting events, e.g., soccer league
rankings. Finally, we apply our method to assess the skill distributions of mutual
funds. Our results shed light on the abundance of low quality funds prior to the
Great Recession of 2008, and the domination of the industry by more skilled funds
after the financial crisis.

1

Introduction

It is a widely-held belief among soccer enthusiasts that English Premier League (EPL) is the most
competitive amongst professional leagues even though the likely eventual winner is often one of
a handful of usual suspects [1, 2]. Similarly, the Cricket World Cup in 2019 is believed to be the
most exciting in the modern history of the sport, and ended with one of the greatest matches of all
The author ordering is alphabetical.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

