Pipeline PSRO: A Scalable Approach for Finding
Approximate Nash Equilibria in Large Games

Stephen McAleer∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA
smcaleer@uci.edu

John Lanier∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA
jblanier@uci.edu

Roy Fox
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA
royf@uci.edu

Pierre Baldi
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA
pfbaldi@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
Finding approximate Nash equilibria in zero-sum imperfect-information games is
challenging when the number of information states is large. Policy Space Response
Oracles (PSRO) is a deep reinforcement learning algorithm grounded in game
theory that is guaranteed to converge to an approximate Nash equilibrium. However,
PSRO requires training a reinforcement learning policy at each iteration, making
it too slow for large games. We show through counterexamples and experiments
that DCH and Rectified PSRO, two existing approaches to scaling up PSRO, fail
to converge even in small games. We introduce Pipeline PSRO (P2SRO), the first
scalable PSRO-based method for finding approximate Nash equilibria in large
zero-sum imperfect-information games. P2SRO is able to parallelize PSRO with
convergence guarantees by maintaining a hierarchical pipeline of reinforcement
learning workers, each training against the policies generated by lower levels in
the hierarchy. We show that unlike existing methods, P2SRO converges to an
approximate Nash equilibrium, and does so faster as the number of parallel workers
increases, across a variety of imperfect information games. We also introduce
an open-source environment for Barrage Stratego, a variant of Stratego with an
approximate game tree complexity of 1050 . P2SRO is able to achieve state-of-theart performance on Barrage Stratego and beats all existing bots. Experiment code
is available at https://github.com/JBLanier/pipeline-psro.

1

Introduction

A long-standing goal in artificial intelligence and algorithmic game theory has been to develop
a general algorithm which is capable of finding approximate Nash equilibria in large imperfectinformation two-player zero-sum games. AlphaStar [Vinyals et al., 2019] and OpenAI Five [Berner
et al., 2019] were able to demonstrate that variants of self-play reinforcement learning are capable
of achieving expert-level performance in large imperfect-information video games. However, these
methods are not principled from a game-theoretic point of view and are not guaranteed to converge
to an approximate Nash equilibrium. Policy Space Response Oracles (PSRO) [Lanctot et al., 2017]
∗

Authors contributed equally

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

