Rethinking Learnable Tree Filter for
Generic Feature Transform
Lin Song1

Yanwei Li2 Zhengkai Jiang3 Zeming Li4 Xiangyu Zhang4
Hongbin Sun1∗ Jian Sun4 Nanning Zheng1
1
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Megvii Inc. (Face++)
stevengrove@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, ywli@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jiangzhengkai2017@ia.ac.cn,
{hsun, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {lizeming, zhangxiangyu, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
The Learnable Tree Filter presents a remarkable approach to model structurepreserving relations for semantic segmentation. Nevertheless, the intrinsic geometric constraint forces it to focus on the regions with close spatial distance, hindering
the effective long-range interactions. To relax the geometric constraint, we give the
analysis by reformulating it as a Markov Random Field and introduce a learnable
unary term. Besides, we propose a learnable spanning tree algorithm to replace the
original non-differentiable one, which further improves the flexibility and robustness. With the above improvements, our method can better capture long-range dependencies and preserve structural details with linear complexity, which is extended
to several vision tasks for more generic feature transform. Extensive experiments on
object detection/instance segmentation demonstrate the consistent improvements
over the original version. For semantic segmentation, we achieve leading performance (82.1% mIoU) on the Cityscapes benchmark without bells-and-whistles.
Code is available at https://github.com/StevenGrove/LearnableTreeFilterV2.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, the vision community has witnessed the extraordinary success of deep convolutional
networks in various vision tasks [1–8]. However, in deep convolutional layers, the distribution of
impact within an effective receptive field is found to be limited to a local region and converged to
the gaussian [9], which brings difficulties to the long-range dependencies modeling. To address this
problem, numerous local-based approaches [10–12] have been proposed to increase the receptive
region of convolutional kernels by using pooling [13] or dilated operations [14]. Meanwhile, various
global-based approaches [15–19] have been explored to aggregate features by modeling the pairwise
relations based on the visual attention mechanism. However, there is still a conflict between longrange dependencies modeling and object details preserving.
Recently, the learnable tree filter module [20] (LTF-V1 module) tries to bridge this gap by performing
feature aggregation on a minimum spanning tree. Since the minimum spanning tree is generated by
the low-level guided features, it can retain the structural details with efficiency. Nevertheless, the
geometric constraint and the construction process in the LTF-V1 module are found to be its Achilles’
heels, which impede the usage for more generic feature transform. Firstly, the interactions with
distant nodes along the spanning tree need to pass through nearby nodes, which brings the intrinsic
geometric constraint to the tree filter. As illustrated in Fig. 1, this property forces the LTF-V1 module
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

