Factorized Neural Processes for Neural Processes:
K-Shot Prediction of Neural Responses

R. James Cotton,1,a Fabian H. Sinz,2-5,b,* Andreas S. Tolias,4-5,c,*
1

Department of PM&R, Northwestern University, Shirley Ryan Ability Lab
Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University Tübingen, Germany
3
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
4
Department for Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
5
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
2

a

rcotton@sralab.org, b fabian.sinz@uni-tuebingen.de, c astolias@bcm.edu
*
equal contribution

Abstract
In recent years, artificial neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance for predicting the responses of neurons in the visual cortex to natural stimuli.
However, they require a time consuming parameter optimization process for accurately modeling the tuning function of newly observed neurons, which prohibits
many applications including real-time, closed-loop experiments. We overcome
this limitation by formulating the problem as K-shot prediction to directly infer a
neuron’s tuning function from a small set of stimulus-response pairs using a Neural
Process. This required us to developed a Factorized Neural Process, which embeds
the observed set into a latent space partitioned into the receptive field location and
the tuning function properties. We show on simulated responses that the predictions
and reconstructed receptive fields from the Factorized Neural Process approach
ground truth with increasing number of trials. Critically, the latent representation
that summarizes the tuning function of a neuron is inferred in a quick, single
forward pass through the network. Finally, we validate this approach on real neural
data from visual cortex and find that the predictive accuracy is comparable to —
and for small K even greater than — optimization based approaches, while being
substantially faster. We believe this novel deep learning systems identification
framework will facilitate better real-time integration of artificial neural network
modeling into neuroscience experiments.

1

Introduction

There is a long and rich history of modeling the response of visual cortex neurons to stimuli extending
back to the work of Hubel and Wiesel on simple and complex cells [1]. In recent years, artificial
neural networks (ANNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance predicting neural responses to
natural stimuli [2–11]. These models are accurate enough that the stimuli that maximally excite a
neuron can be computed in silico, and when tested in vivo indeed drive neurons effectively [11, 12].
However, these approaches place the computational burden of optimizing network parameters after
extensive data from a neuron has been collected, which prohibits their use in real-time closed-loop
experiments. To avoid this optimization step, we wanted a model that can predict the response
of a novel neuron to any stimulus, conditioned on a set of K observed stimulus-response pairs –
essentially performing K-Shot prediction on neural responses.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

