Reinforcement Learning with General Value Function
Approximation: Provably Efficient Approach via
Bounded Eluder Dimension
Ruosong Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Mellon University
rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

Lin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Value function approximation has demonstrated phenomenal empirical success in
reinforcement learning (RL). Nevertheless, despite a handful of recent progress on
developing theory for RL with linear function approximation, the understanding of
general function approximation schemes largely remains missing. In this paper,
we establish the first provably efficient RL algorithm with general value function
approximation. We show that if the value functions admit an approximation p
with
e
a function class F, our algorithm achieves a regret bound of O(poly(dH)
T)
where d is a complexity measure of F that depends on the eluder dimension [Russo
and Van Roy, 2013] and log-covering numbers, H is the planning horizon, and
T is the number interactions with the environment. Our theory generalizes the
linear MDP assumption to general function classes. Moreover, our algorithm is
model-free and provides a framework to justify the effectiveness of algorithms
used in practice.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), we study how an agent maximizes the cumulative reward by interacting with an unknown environment. RL finds enormous applications in a wide variety of domains,
e.g., robotics [32], education [33], gaming-AI [50], etc. The unknown environment in RL is often
modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP), in which there is a set of states S that describes all
possible status of the environment. At a state s 2 S, an agent interacts with the environment by
taking an action a from an action space A. The environment then transits to another state s0 2 S
which is drawn from some unknown transition distribution, and the agent also receives an immediate
reward. The agent interacts with the environment episodically, where each episode consists of H
steps. The goal of the agent is to interact with the environment strategically such that after a certain
number of interactions, sufficient information is collected so that the agent can act nearly optimally
afterward. The performance of an agent is measured by the regret, which is defined as the difference
between the total rewards collected by the agent and those a best possible agent would collect.
Without additional p
assumptions on the structure of the MDP, the best possible algorithm achieves a
e
regret bound of ⇥( H|S||A|T )1 [7], where T is the total number of steps the agent interacts with
the environment. In other words, the algorithm learns to interact with the environment nearly as well
1

Throughout the paper, we use e
O(·) to suppress logarithmic factors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

