A novel variational form of the Schatten-p quasi-norm

Paris Giampouras
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
parisg@jhu.edu
Athanasios Rontogiannis
IAASARS
National Observatory of Athens
tronto@noa.gr

René Vidal
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
rvidal@jhu.edu
Benjamin D. Haeffele
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
bhaeffele@jhu.edu

Abstract
The Schatten-p quasi-norm with p ∈ (0, 1) has recently gained considerable attention in various low-rank matrix estimation problems offering significant benefits
over relevant convex heuristics such as the nuclear norm. However, due to the
nonconvexity of the Schatten-p quasi-norm, minimization suffers from two major
drawbacks: 1) the lack of theoretical guarantees and 2) the high computational cost
which is demanded for the minimization task even for trivial tasks such as finding
stationary points. In an attempt to reduce the high computational cost induced by
Schatten-p quasi-norm minimization, variational forms, which are defined over
smaller-size matrix factors whose product equals the original matrix, have been
proposed. Here, we propose and analyze a novel variational form of Schatten-p
quasi-norm which, for the first time in the literature, is defined for any continuous
value of p ∈ (0, 1] and decouples along the columns of the factorized matrices. The
proposed form can be considered as the natural generalization of the well-known
variational form of the nuclear norm to the nonconvex case i.e., for p ∈ (0, 1).
Notably, low-rankness is now imposed via a group-sparsity promoting regularizer.
The resulting formulation gives way to SVD-free algorithms thus offering lower
computational complexity than the one that is induced by the original definition of
the Schatten-p quasi-norm. A local optimality analysis is provided which shows that
we can arrive at a local minimum of the original Schatten-p quasi-norm problem by
reaching a local minimum of the matrix factorization based surrogate problem. In
addition, for the case of the squared Frobenius loss with linear operators obeying
the restricted isometry property (RIP), a rank-one update scheme is proposed,
which offers a way to escape poor local minima. Finally, the efficiency of our
approach is empirically shown on a matrix completion problem.

1

Introduction

Recently, nonconvex heuristics such as `p and Sp (Schatten-p) quasi-norms1 with 0 < p < 1 have
been shown to significantly outperform their convex counterparts, i.e., `1 and nuclear norms, in
sparse/low-rank vector/matrix recovery problems, for a wide range of applications [1–4]. Indeed, for
applications such as recovering low-rank matrices from limited measurements the Sp quasi-norm
for p ∈ (0, 1) is known theoretically to perform at least as well, if not better than the nuclear norm
The Sp quasi-norm (raised to the power p) is defined as kXkpSp =
singular value of X.
1

p
i=1 σi (X), where σi (X) is the ith

P

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

