Adversarial Blocking Bandits

Nicholas Bishop
University of Southampton, UK
nb8g13@soton.ac.uk

Hau Chan
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA
hchan3@unl.edu

Debmalya Mandal
Columbia University, USA
dm3557@columbia.edu

Long Tran-Thanh
University of Warwick, UK
long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider a general adversarial multi-armed blocking bandit setting where each
played arm can be blocked (unavailable) for some time periods and the reward per
arm is given at each time period adversarially without obeying any distribution.
The setting models scenarios of allocating scarce limited supplies (e.g., arms)
where the supplies replenish and can be reused only after certain time periods. We
first show that, in the optimization setting, when the blocking durations and rewards
are known in advance, finding an optimal policy (e.g., determining which arm
per round) that maximises the cumulative reward is strongly NP-hard, eliminating
the possibility of a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme (FPTAS) for the
problem unless P = NP. To complement our result, we show that a greedy algorithm
that plays the best available arm at each round provides an approximation guarantee
that depends on the blocking durations and the path variance of the rewards. In
the bandit setting, when the blocking durations and rewards are not known, we
design two algorithms, RGA and RGA-META, for the case of bounded duration an
path variation. In particular,
when the variation budget BT is known in advance,
q
RGA can achieve O( T (2D̃ + K)BT ) dynamic approximate regret. On the other
hand, when BT is not known, we show that the dynamic approximate regret of
RGA-META is at most O((K + D̃)1/4 B̃ 1/2 T 3/4 ) where B̃ is the maximal path
variation
budget within each batch of RGA-META (which is provably in order of
√
o( T ). We also prove that if either the variation budget or the maximal blocking
duration is unbounded, the approximate regret will be at least Θ(T ). We also show
that the regret upper bound of RGA is tight if the blocking durations are bounded
above by an order of O(1).

1

Introduction

This paper investigates the blocking bandit model where pulling an arm results in having that arm
blocked for a deterministic number of rounds. For example, consider the classical problem of online
task allocation, in which new task requests arrive at each time step, waiting to be assigned to one
of many servers [Karthik et al., 2017]. Once a server is allocated to a task, it starts working on it,
and becomes unavailable for future tasks until that task is done. If there are no servers available
or none is allocated to the task at its arrival, the request will not be served and leave the system
forever. A more recent example comes from the domain of expert crowdsourcing (e.g., Upwork,
Outsourcely, etc.). In this setting, a job requester can sequentially choose from a pool of workers and
allocate a short-term job/project to the worker [Ho and Vaughan, 2012, Tran-Thanh et al., 2014]. The
stochastic version of this problem, where the rewards are randomly drawn from a distribution in an
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

