Decentralized Langevin Dynamics for
Bayesian Learning
Anjaly Parayil1 , He Bai2 , Jemin George1 , and Prudhvi Gurram1,3
1

1

CCDC Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD 20783, USA
2
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA
3
Booz Allen Hamilton, McLean, VA 22102, USA

panjaly05@gmail.com, jemin.george.civ@mail.mil, pkgurram@ieee.org
2
he.bai@okstate.edu

Abstract
Motivated by decentralized approaches to machine learning, we propose a collaborative Bayesian learning algorithm taking the form of decentralized Langevin
dynamics in a non-convex setting. Our analysis show that the initial KL-divergence
between the Markov Chain and the target posterior distribution is exponentially decreasing while the error contributions to the overall KL-divergence from the additive
noise is decreasing in polynomial time. We further show that the polynomial-term
experiences speed-up with number of agents and provide sufficient conditions
on the time-varying step-sizes to guarantee convergence to the desired distribution. The performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated on a wide variety
of machine learning tasks. The empirical results show that the performance of
individual agents with locally available data is on par with the centralized setting
with considerable improvement in the convergence rate.

1

Introduction

With the recent advances in computational infrastructure, there has been an increase in the use of
larger machine learning models with millions of parameters. Even though there is a parallel increase
in the size of training datasets for these models, there is a significant disparity between the amount of
existing data and the data required to train the large models to avoid overfitting and provide good
generalization performance. Such models trained in point estimate settings such as Maximum A
Posteriori (MAP) neglect any associated epistemic uncertainties and make overconfident predictions.
Bayesian learning framework provides a principled way to avoid over-fitting and model uncertainties
by estimating the posterior distribution of the model parameters. However, analytical solutions of
exact posterior or sampling from the exact posterior is often impossible due to the intractability of the
evidence. Therefore, one needs to resort to approximate Bayesian methods such as Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling techniques. To this effect, we focus on a specific class of MCMC
methods, called Langevin dynamics to sample from the posterior distribution and perform Bayesian
machine learning.
Langevin dynamics derives motivation from diffusion approximations and uses the information
of a target density to efficiently explore the posterior distribution over parameters of interest [1].
Langevin dynamics, in essence, is the steepest descent flow of the relative entropy functional or the
KL-divergence with respect to the Wasserstein metric [2–4]. Just as the gradient flow converges
exponentially fast under a gradient-domination condition, Langevin dynamics converges exponentially
fast to the stationary target distribution if the relative entropy functional satisfies the log-Sobolev
inequality [3–5].

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

