Online Sinkhorn: Optimal Transport
distances from sample streams

Arthur Mensch
PSL University
CNRS, ENS, DMA
Paris, France
arthur.mensch@m4x.org

Gabriel Peyré
PSL University
CNRS, ENS, DMA
Paris, France
gabriel.peyre@ens.fr

Abstract
Optimal Transport (OT) distances are now routinely used as loss functions in ML
tasks. Yet, computing OT distances between arbitrary (i.e. not necessarily discrete)
probability distributions remains an open problem. This paper introduces a new
online estimator of entropy-regularized OT distances between two such arbitrary
distributions. It uses streams of samples from both distributions to iteratively enrich
a non-parametric representation of the transportation plan. Compared to the classic
Sinkhorn algorithm, our method leverages new samples at each iteration, which
enables a consistent estimation of the true regularized OT distance. We provide a
theoretical analysis of the convergence of the online Sinkhorn algorithm, showing
a nearly-O( n1 ) asymptotic sample complexity for the iterate sequence. We validate
our method on synthetic 1-d to 10-d data and on real 3-d shape data.
Optimal transport (OT) distances are fundamental in statistical learning, both as a tool for analyzing
the convergence of various algorithms (Canas and Rosasco, 2012; Dalalyan and Karagulyan, 2019),
and as a data-dependent term for tasks as diverse as supervised learning (Frogner et al., 2015),
unsupervised generative modeling (Arjovsky et al., 2017) or domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2016).
OT lifts a distance over data points living in a space X into a distance on the space P(X ) of probability
distributions over the space X . This distance has many favorable geometrical properties. In particular
it allows one to compare distributions having disjoint supports. Computing OT distances is usually
performed by sampling once from the input distributions and solving a discrete linear program (LP),
due to Kantorovich (1942). This approach is numerically costly and statistically inefficient (Weed
and Bach, 2019). Furthermore, the optimisation problem depends on a fixed sampling of points from
the data. It is therefore not adapted to machine learning settings where data is resampled continuously
(e.g. in GANs), or accessed in an online manner. In this paper, we develop an efficient online method
able to estimate OT distances between continuous distributions. It uses a stream of data to refine an
approximate OT solution, adapting the regularized OT approach to an online setting.
To alleviate both the computational and statistical burdens of OT, it is common to regularize the
Kantorovich LP. The most successful approach in this direction is to use an entropic barrier penalty.
When dealing with discrete distributions, this yields a problem that can be solved numerically using
Sinkhorn-Knopp’s matrix balancing algorithm (Sinkhorn, 1964; Sinkhorn and Knopp, 1967). This
approach was pushed forward for ML applications by Cuturi (2013). Sinkhorn distances are smooth
and amenable to GPU computations, which make them suitable as a loss function in model training
(Frogner et al., 2015; Mensch et al., 2019). The Sinkhorn algorithm operates in two distinct phases:
draw samples from the distributions and evaluate a pairwise distance matrix in the first phase; balance
this matrix using Sinkhorn-Knopp iterations in the second phase.
This two-step approach does not estimate the true regularized OT distance, and cannot handle samples
provided as a stream, e.g. renewed at each training iteration of an outer algorithm. A cheap fix is
to use Sinkhorn over mini-batches (see for instance Genevay, Peyré, et al. (2018) for an application
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

