Neuron Shapley: Discovering the Responsible
Neurons
Amirata Ghorbani
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94025
amiratag@stanford.edu

James Zou⇤
Department of Biomedical Data Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94025
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
We develop Neuron Shapley as a new framework to quantify the contribution
of individual neurons to the prediction and performance of a deep network. By
accounting for interactions across neurons, Neuron Shapley is more effective in
identifying important filters compared to common approaches based on activation
patterns. Interestingly, removing just 30 filters with the highest Shapley scores
effectively destroys the prediction accuracy of Inception-v3 on ImageNet. Visualization of these few critical filters provides insights into how the network functions.
Neuron Shapley is a flexible framework and can be applied to identify responsible neurons in many tasks. We illustrate additional applications of identifying
filters that are responsible for biased prediction in facial recognition and filters
that are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Removing these filters is a quick way
to repair models. Computing exact Shapley values is computationally infeasible
and therefore sampling-based approximations are used in practice. We introduce a
new multi-armed bandit algorithm that is able to efficiently detect neurons with
the largest Shapley value orders of magnitude faster than existing Shapley value
approximation methods.

1

Introduction

Understanding and interpreting the behavior of a trained neural net has gained increasing attention in
the machine learning (ML) community. A popular approach is to interpret and visualize the behavior
of specific neurons (People often randomly selected neurons from different layers to visualize.[35])
in a trained network , and there are several ways of doing this. For example, showing which training
data leads to the most positive or negative activation of this neuron, or performing a deep-dream style
visualization to modify the input to greedily activate the neuron [35]. Such approaches are widely
used and can give interesting insights into the function of the network. However, because networks
typically have a large number of neurons, analysis of individual neurons is often ad-hoc and it’s
typically not clear which ones to investigate. Moreover, a neruon’s relevance to the overall function
of network or its interactions with all other neurons is not considered.
In this paper, we propose a new framework to address these limitations by systematically identifying
the neurons that are the most important contributors to the network’s function. The basis of this
framework is a new algorithm we propose—Neuron Shapley—for quantifying the importance of each
neuron in a trained network while accounting for complex interactions between neurons. In addition,
the algorithm utilizes multi armed bandit to perform this task efficiently. Interestingly, for several
standard image recognition tasks, a small number of fewer than 30 neurons (filters) are crucially
⇤

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

