Video Object Segmentation with Adaptive Feature
Bank and Uncertain-Region Refinement

Yongqing Liang, Xin Li∗, Navid Jafari
Louisiana State University
{ylian16, xinli, njafari}@lsu.edu

Qin Chen
Northeastern University
q.chen@northeastern.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a new matching-based framework for semi-supervised video
object segmentation (VOS). Recently, state-of-the-art VOS performance has been
achieved by matching-based algorithms, in which feature banks are created to
store features for region matching and classification. However, how to effectively
organize information in the continuously growing feature bank remains underexplored, and this leads to an inefficient design of the bank. We introduced an
adaptive feature bank update scheme to dynamically absorb new features and
discard obsolete features. We also designed a new confidence loss and a finegrained segmentation module to enhance the segmentation accuracy in uncertain
regions. On public benchmarks, our algorithm outperforms existing state-of-thearts.

1

Introduction

Video object segmentation (VOS) is a fundamental step in many video processing tasks, like video
editing and video inpainting. In the semi-supervised setting, the first frame annotation is given, which
depicts the objects of interest of the video sequence. The goal is to segment mask of that object in the
subsequent frames. Many deep learning based methods have been proposed to solve this problem in
recent years. When people tackle the semi-supervised VOS task, the segmentation performance is
affected by two main steps: (1) distinguish the object regions from the background, (2) segment the
object boundary clearly.
A key question in VOS is how to learn the cues of target objects. We divide recent works into
two categories, implicit learning and explicit learning. Conventional implicit approaches include
detection-based and propagation-based methods [3, 27, 10, 32, 2, 13, 23]. They often adopt the fully
convolutional network (FCN) [20] pipeline to learn object features by the network weights implicitly;
then, before segmenting a new video, these methods often need an online learning to fine-tune
their weights to learn new object cues from the video. Explicit approaches learn object appearance
explicitly. They often formulate the segmentation as pixel-wise classification in a learnt embedding
space [31, 4, 24, 11, 33, 18, 12, 25, 17]. These approaches first construct an embedding space
to memorize the object appearance, then segment the subsequent frames by computing similarity.
Therefore, they are also called matching-based methods. Recently, matching-based methods achieve
the state-of-the-art results in the VOS benchmark.
A fundamental issue in matching-based VOS segmentation is how to effectively exploit previous
frames’ information to segment the new frame. Since the memory size is limited, it is not possible and
unnecessary to memorize information from all the previous frames. Most methods [24, 33, 31, 18, 25]
only utilize the first and the latest frame or uniformly sample key frames. However, when the given
video becomes longer, these methods often either miss sampling on some key-frames or encounter
∗

Corresponding author. Codes are available at https://github.com/xmlyqing00/AFB-URR.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

