B OT ORCH: A Framework for Efficient Monte-Carlo
Bayesian Optimization

Maximilian Balandat
Facebook
balandat@fb.com
Benjamin Letham
Facebook
bletham@fb.com

Brian Karrer
Facebook
briankarrer@fb.com

Daniel R. Jiang
Facebook
drjiang@fb.com

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University
andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu

Samuel Daulton
Facebook
sdaulton@fb.com

Eytan Bakshy
Facebook
ebakshy@fb.com

Abstract
Bayesian optimization provides sample-efficient global optimization for a broad
range of applications, including automatic machine learning, engineering, physics,
and experimental design. We introduce B OT ORCH, a modern programming framework for Bayesian optimization that combines Monte-Carlo (MC) acquisition
functions, a novel sample average approximation optimization approach, autodifferentiation, and variance reduction techniques. B OT ORCH’s modular design
facilitates flexible specification and optimization of probabilistic models written
in PyTorch, simplifying implementation of new acquisition functions. Our approach is backed by novel theoretical convergence results and made practical by
a distinctive algorithmic foundation that leverages fast predictive distributions,
hardware acceleration, and deterministic optimization. We also propose a novel
“one-shot” formulation of the Knowledge Gradient, enabled by a combination of
our theoretical and software contributions. In experiments, we demonstrate the
improved sample efficiency of B OT ORCH relative to other popular libraries.

1

Introduction

Computational modeling and machine learning (ML) have led to an acceleration of scientific innovation in diverse areas, ranging from drug design to robotics to material science. These tasks
often involve solving time- and resource-intensive global optimization problems to achieve optimal
performance. Bayesian optimization (BO) [75, 46, 76], an established methodology for sampleefficient sequential optimization, has been proposed as an effective solution to such problems, and has
been applied successfully to tasks ranging from hyperparameter optimization [24, 92, 110], robotic
control [15, 5], chemical design [36, 60, 111], and tuning and policy search for internet-scale software
systems [4, 58, 57, 23]. Meanwhile, ML research has been undergoing a revolution driven largely
by new programming frameworks and hardware that reduce the time from ideation to execution
[43, 16, 1, 81]. While BO has become rich with new methodologies, today there is no coherent
framework that leverages these computational advances to simplify and accelerate BO research in
the same way that modern frameworks have for deep learning. In this paper, we address this gap by
introducing B OT ORCH, a modular and scalable Monte Carlo (MC) framework for BO that is built
around modern paradigms of computation, and theoretically grounded in novel convergence results.
Our contributions include:
• A novel approach to optimizing MC acquisition functions that effectively combines with deterministic higher-order optimization algorithms and variance reduction techniques.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

