First-Order Methods for Large-Scale Market
Equilibrium Computation
Yuan Gao
Department of IEOR, Columbia University
New York, NY, 10027
gao.yuan@columbia.edu

Christian Kroer
Department of IEOR, Columbia University
New York, NY, 10027
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Abstract
Market equilibrium is a solution concept with many applications such as digital ad
markets, fair division, and resource sharing. For many classes of utility functions,
equilibria can be captured by convex programs. We develop simple first-order
methods suitable for solving these convex programs for large-scale markets. We
focus on three practically-relevant utility classes: linear, quasilinear, and Leontief
utilities. Using structural properties of market equilibria under each utility class, we
show that the corresponding convex programs can be reformulated as optimization
of a structured smooth convex function over a polyhedral set, for which projected
gradient achieves linear convergence. To do so, we utilize recent linear convergence
results under weakened strong-convexity conditions, and further refine the relevant
constants in existing convergence results. Then, we show that proximal gradient (a
generalization of projected gradient) with a practical linesearch scheme achieves
linear convergence under the Proximal-PŁ condition, a recently developed error
bound condition for convex composite problems. For quasilinear utilities, we show
that Mirror Descent applied to a new convex program achieves sublinear last-iterate
convergence and yields a form of Proportional Response dynamics, an elegant,
interpretable algorithm for computing market equilibria originally developed for
linear utilities. Numerical experiments show that Proportional Response dynamics
is highly efficient for computing approximate market equilibria, while projected
gradient with linesearch can be much faster when higher-accuracy solutions are
needed.

1

Introduction

Market equilibrium is a classical model from economics, where the decision of who gets what
and why is based on finding a set of market-clearing prices such that every market participant gets
allocated an optimal bundle given the prices and their budgets. In this paper, we study the Fisher
market model, where a set of n buyers compete for m items. In the competitive equilibrium from
equal incomes (CEEI) mechanism for fair division, a set of m divisible items are to be fairly divided
among n agents. The mechanism works by giving every agent a budget of one unit of fake money.
Then, a market equilibrium is computed, and the allocation from the equilibrium is used as the
fair division of the items, while the prices are discarded since they are for fake money [62]. An
allocation given by CEEI can be shown to satisfy various fairness desiderata, e.g., the allocation
makes all agents envy-free, Pareto optimal and get at least their proportional share of utility [14, 52].
CEEI has recently been suggested for fair recommender systems [42, 43]. Divisible Fisher market
equilibrium has also been shown equivalent to the pacing equilibrium solution concept for budget
smoothing in Internet ad auctions [25, 24]. When items are indivisible, (approximate) CEEI has been
used for allocating courses to students [14, 15], and the related max Nash welfare solution for fairly
dividing estates and other goods (see, e.g., [17] and also the online fair division service platform
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

