Modeling and Optimization Trade-off in
Meta-learning
Katelyn Gao
Intel Labs

Ozan Sener
Intel Labs

Abstract
By searching for shared inductive biases across tasks, meta-learning promises to
accelerate learning on novel tasks, but with the cost of solving a complex bilevel
optimization problem. We introduce and rigorously define the trade-off between
accurate modeling and optimization ease in meta-learning. At one end, classic
meta-learning algorithms account for the structure of meta-learning but solve a
complex optimization problem, while at the other end domain randomized search
(otherwise known as joint training) ignores the structure of meta-learning and
solves a single level optimization problem. Taking MAML as the representative
meta-learning algorithm, we theoretically characterize the trade-off for general nonconvex risk functions as well as linear regression, for which we are able to provide
explicit bounds on the errors associated with modeling and optimization. We also
empirically study this trade-off for meta-reinforcement learning benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Arguably, the major bottleneck of applying machine learning to many practical problems is the cost
associated with data and/or labeling. While the cost of labeling and data makes supervised learning
problems expensive, the high sample complexity of reinforcement learning makes it downright
inapplicable for many practical settings. Meta-learning (or in general multi-task learning) is designed
to ease the sample complexity of these methods. It has had success stories on a wide range of
problems including image recognition and reinforcement learning [14].
In the classical risk minimization setting, for a task , the learner solves the problem
h
i
min R(✓; ) , E⇠ R̂(✓, ⇠; )
✓

(1)

where R(✓; ) is the risk function which the learner can only access via noisy evaluations R̂(✓, ⇠; ).
Meta-learning, or ‘learning to learn’ [24], makes the observation that if the learner has access to
a collection of tasks sampled from a distribution p( ), it can utilize an offline meta-training stage
to search for shared inductive biases that assist in learning future tasks from p( ). Under the PAC
framework, Baxter [2] shows that given sufficiently many tasks and data per task during meta-training,
there are guarantees on the generalization of learned biases to novel tasks.
Specifically, consider an optimization algorithm OPT( , ✓meta ) which solves the problem of metatest task using the meta solution ✓meta . This meta solution is typically a policy initialization for
reinforcement learning or shared features for supervised learning. However, it can be any useful
knowledge which can be learned in the meta-training stage. The family of meta-learning methods
ˆ that uses N calls to an oracle 1 ;
solve, where in practice OPT is approximated by OPT
h
i
min Rmeta (✓meta ) , E ⇠p( ),⇠ R̂(OPT( , ✓meta ), ⇠; )
(2)
✓

1

For example, if OPT( , ✓meta ) is gradient descent on the task risk function R(✓; ), ˆ
OPT( , ✓meta , N )
would be SGD on the usual empirical risk minimization function (4).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

