AttendLight: Universal Attention-Based
Reinforcement Learning Model for Traffic Signal
Control
Afshin Oroojlooy
SAS Institute Inc.
Cary, NC 27513
afshin.oroojlooy@sas.com

Mohammadreza Nazari
SAS Institute Inc.
Cary, NC 27513
reza.nazari@sas.com

Davood Hajinezhad
SAS Institute Inc.
Cary, NC 27513
davood.hajinezhad@sas.com

Jorge Silva
SAS Institute Inc.
Cary, NC 27513
jorge.silva@sas.com

Abstract
We propose AttendLight, an end-to-end Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm
for the problem of traffic signal control. Previous approaches for this problem have
the shortcoming that they require training for each new intersection with a different
structure or traffic flow distribution. AttendLight solves this issue by training a
single, universal model for intersections with any number of roads, lanes, phases
(possible signals), and traffic flow. To this end, we propose a deep RL model
which incorporates two attention models. The first attention model is introduced
to handle different numbers of roads-lanes; and the second attention model is
intended for enabling decision-making with any number of phases in an intersection. As a result, our proposed model works for any intersection configuration,
as long as a similar configuration is represented in the training set. Experiments
were conducted with both synthetic and real-world standard benchmark data-sets.
Our numerical experiment covers intersections with three or four approaching
roads; one-directional/bi-directional roads with one, two, and three lanes; different number of phases; and different traffic flows. We consider two regimes: (i)
single-environment training, single-deployment, and (ii) multi-environment training, multi-deployment. AttendLight outperforms both classical and other RL-based
approaches on all cases in both regimes.

1

Introduction

With the emergence of urbanization and the increase in household car ownership, traffic congestion
has been one of the major challenges in many highly-populated cities. Traffic congestion can be
mitigated by road expansion/correction, sophisticated road allowance rules, or improved traffic
signal controlling. Although either of these solutions could decrease the travel times and fuel costs,
optimizing the traffic signals is more convenient due to the limited funding resources and opportunity
of finding more effective strategies. This paper introduces a framework for learning a general traffic
control policy that can be deployed in an intersection of interest and ease the traffic flow.
Approaches for controlling signalized intersections could be categorized into two main classes,
namely conventional methods and adaptive methods. In the former, customarily rule-based fixed
cycles and phase times are determined a priori and offline based on historical measurements as well
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

