Higher-Order Certification for
Randomized Smoothing
Jeet Mohapatra1

Ching-Yun Ko1

Tsui-Wei Weng1,2

Pin-Yu Chen2

Sijia Liu2

Luca Daniel1

2

1
MIT
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research

Abstract
Randomized smoothing is a recently proposed defense against adversarial attacks
that has achieved state-of-the-art provable robustness against `2 perturbations. A
number of publications have extended the guarantees to other metrics, such as `1
or `∞ , by using different smoothing measures. Although the current framework
has been shown to yield near-optimal `p radii, the total safety region certified by
the current framework can be arbitrarily small compared to the optimal.
In this work, we propose a framework to improve the certified safety region for
these smoothed classifiers without changing the underlying smoothing scheme.
The theoretical contributions are as follows: 1) We generalize the certification for
randomized smoothing by reformulating certified radius calculation as a nested
optimization problem over a class of functions. 2) We provide a method to calculate the certified safety region using zeroth-order and first-order information for
Gaussian-smoothed classifiers. We also provide a framework that generalizes the
calculation for certification using higher-order information. 3) We design efficient,
high-confidence estimators for the relevant statistics of the first-order information.
Combining the theoretical contribution 2) and 3) allows us to certify safety region
that are significantly larger than the ones provided by the current methods. On
CIFAR10 and Imagenet datasets, the new regions certified by our approach achieve
significant improvements on general `1 certified radii and on the `2 certified radii
for color-space attacks (`2 perturbation restricted to only one color/channel) while
also achieving smaller improvements on the general `2 certified radii.
As discussed in the future works section, our framework can also provide a way
to circumvent the current impossibility results on achieving higher magnitudes of
certified radii without requiring the use of data-dependent smoothing techniques.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) can be highly sensitive, i.e., small imperceptible input perturbations
can lead to mis-classification [1, 2]. This poses a big problem for the deployment of DNNs in safety
critical applications including aircraft control systems, video surveillance and self-driving cars, which
require near-zero tolerance to lack of robustness. Thus, it is important to provide guarantees for the
robustness of deep neural network models against multiple worst-case perturbations. Popular threat
models are the `p -norm-based attacks, where possible perturbations are constrained in an `p -ball
with respect to a given input x. To that end recent research efforts have focused on attack-agnostic
robustness certification which, given an input x, provides a safety region within which the model is
guaranteed not to change its prediction.
Randomized smoothing is a recently-proposed defense [3, 4, 5] that has achieved state-of-the-art
robustness guarantees. Given any classifier f , denoted as a base classifier, randomized smoothing
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

