Calibration of Shared Equilibria in General Sum
Partially Observable Markov Games

Nelson Vadori, Sumitra Ganesh, Prashant Reddy, Manuela Veloso
J.P. Morgan AI Research
{nelson.n.vadori, sumitra.ganesh, prashant.reddy, manuela.veloso}@jpmorgan.com

Abstract
Training multi-agent systems (MAS) to achieve realistic equilibria gives us a useful
tool to understand and model real-world systems. We consider a general sum
partially observable Markov game where agents of different types share a single
policy network, conditioned on agent-specific information. This paper aims at
i) formally understanding equilibria reached by such agents, and ii) matching
emergent phenomena of such equilibria to real-world targets. Parameter sharing
with decentralized execution has been introduced as an efficient way to train
multiple agents using a single policy network. However, the nature of resulting
equilibria reached by such agents has not been yet studied: we introduce the novel
concept of Shared equilibrium as a symmetric pure Nash equilibrium of a certain
Functional Form Game (FFG) and prove convergence to the latter for a certain
class of games using self-play. In addition, it is important that such equilibria
satisfy certain constraints so that MAS are calibrated to real world data for practical
use: we solve this problem by introducing a novel dual-Reinforcement Learning
based approach that fits emergent behaviors of agents in a Shared equilibrium to
externally-specified targets, and apply our methods to a n-player market example.
We do so by calibrating parameters governing distributions of agent types rather
than individual agents, which allows both behavior differentiation among agents
and coherent scaling of the shared policy network to multiple agents.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent learning in partially observable settings is a challenging task. When all agents have
the same action and observation spaces, the work of [9, 11] has shown that using a single shared
policy network across all agents represents an efficient training mechanism. This network takes as
input the individual agent observations and outputs individual agent actions, hence the terminology
decentralized execution. The network is trained by collecting all n agent experiences simultaneously
and treating them as distinct sequences of local observations, actions and rewards experienced by
the shared policy. Since agents may have different observations at a given point in time, sharing a
network still allows different actions across agents. It has also been observed in these works or in
[15] that one can include in the agents’ individual observations some agent-specific information such
as the agent index to further differentiate agents when using the shared policy, thus allowing a certain
form of heterogeneity among agents.
This brings the natural question: from a game theoretic standpoint, what is the nature of potential
equilibria learnt by agents using such a shared policy? We show here that such equilibria are
symmetric pure Nash equilibria of a higher level game on the set of stochastic policies, which we call
Shared equilibria.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

