Reservoir Computing meets Recurrent Kernels and
Structured Transforms
Jonathan Dong∗1,2
Ruben Ohana∗1,3
Mushegh Rafayelyan2
Florent Krzakala1,3,4
1
Laboratoire de Physique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS, Université PSL, CNRS,
Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, F-75005 Paris, France
2
Laboratoire Kastler Brossel, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Université PSL, CNRS,
Sorbonne Université, Collège de France, F-75005 Paris, France
3
LightOn, F-75002 Paris, France
4
IdePHICS lab, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
Reservoir Computing is a class of simple yet efficient Recurrent Neural Networks
where internal weights are fixed at random and only a linear output layer is trained.
In the large size limit, such random neural networks have a deep connection with
kernel methods. Our contributions are threefold: a) We rigorously establish the
recurrent kernel limit of Reservoir Computing and prove its convergence. b) We test
our models on chaotic time series prediction, a classic but challenging benchmark
in Reservoir Computing, and show how the Recurrent Kernel is competitive and
computationally efficient when the number of data points remains moderate. c)
When the number of samples is too large, we leverage the success of structured
Random Features for kernel approximation by introducing Structured Reservoir
Computing. The two proposed methods, Recurrent Kernel and Structured Reservoir
Computing, turn out to be much faster and more memory-efficient than conventional
Reservoir Computing.

1

Introduction

Understanding Neural networks in general, and how to train Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
in particular, remains a central question in modern machine learning. Indeed, backpropagation in
recurrent architectures faces the problem of exploding or vanishing gradients [1, 2], reducing the
effectiveness of gradient-based optimization algorithms. While there exist very powerful and complex
RNNs for modern machine learning tasks, interesting questions still remain regarding simpler ones.
In particular, Reservoir Computing (RC) is a class of simple but efficient Recurrent Neural Networks
introduced in [3] with the Echo-State Network, where internal weights are fixed randomly and only
a last linear layer is trained [4]. As the training reduces to a well-understood linear regression,
Reservoir Computing enables us to investigate separately the complexity of neuron activations in
RNNs. With a few hyperparameters, we can tune the dynamics of the reservoir from stable to chaotic
and performances are increased when RC operates close to the chaotic regime [5].
Despite its simplicity, Reservoir Computing is not fully efficient: computational and memory costs
grow quadratically with the number of neurons. To tackle this issue, efficient computation schemes
have been proposed based on sparse weight matrices [5]. Moreover, there is an active community
developing novel hardware solutions for energy-efficient, low-latency RC [6]. Based on dedicated
electronics [7–10], optical computing [11–15], or other original physical designs [16], they leverage
the robustness and flexibility of RC. Reservoir Computing has already been used in a variety of
tasks, such as speech recognition and robotics [17] but also combined with Random Convolutional
Neural Networks for image recognition [18] and Reinforcement Learning [19]. A very promising
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding authors {jonathan.dong, ruben.ohana}@ens.fr

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

