A Dynamical Central Limit Theorem
for Shallow Neural Networks
Zhengdao Chen†

Grant M. Rotskoff⇤

Joan Bruna†‡

Eric Vanden-Eijnden†

Abstract
Recent theoretical works have characterized the dynamics of wide shallow neural
networks trained via gradient descent in an asymptotic mean-field limit when the
width tends towards infinity. At initialization, the random sampling of the parameters leads to deviations from the mean-field limit dictated by the classical Central
Limit Theorem (CLT). However, since gradient descent induces correlations among
the parameters, it is of interest to analyze how these fluctuations evolve. In this
work, we derive a dynamical CLT to prove that the asymptotic fluctuations around
the mean limit remain bounded in mean square throughout training. The upper
bound is given by a Monte-Carlo resampling error, with a variance that depends
on the 2-norm of the underlying measure, which also controls the generalization
error. This motivates the use of this 2-norm as a regularization term during training.
Furthermore, if the mean-field dynamics converges to a measure that interpolates
the training data, we prove that the asymptotic deviation eventually vanishes in the
CLT scaling. We also complement these results with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Theoretical analyses of neural networks aim to understand their computational and statistical advantages seen in practice. On the computation side, the training of neural networks often succeed
despite being a non-convex optimization problem known to be hard in certain settings [41, 31, 20].
On the statistics side, neural networks often generalize well despite having large numbers of parameters [70, 8]. In this context, the notion of over-parametrization has been useful, by providing
insights into the optimization and generalization properties as the network widths tend to infinity
[36, 21, 2, 4, 63, 67, 38]. In particular, under appropriate scaling, one can view shallow (a.k.a. singlehidden-layer or two-layer) networks as interacting particle systems that admit a mean-field limit.
Their training dynamics can then be studied as Wasserstein Gradient Flows [47, 51, 12, 58], leading
to global convergence guarantees in the mean-field limit under certain assumptions. On the statistics
side, such an approach lead to powerful generalization guarantees for learning high-dimensional
functions with hidden low-dimensional structures, as compared to learning in Reproducing Kernel
Hilbert Spaces (RKHS) [5, 30]. However, since ultimately we are concerned with neural networks of
finite width, it is key to study the deviation of finite-width networks from their infinite-width limits,
and how it scales with the width m. At the random initial state, neurons do not interact and therefore a standard Monte-Carlo (MC) argument shows that the fluctuations in the underlying measure
scale as m 1/2 , which we refer to as the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) scaling. As optimization
introduces complex dependencies among the parameters, the key question is to understand how the
fluctuation evolves during training. To make this investigation tractable, we aim to obtain insight
on an asymptotic scale as the width grows, and focus on the evolution in time. An application of
⇤: Department of Chemistry, Stanford University
†: Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
‡: Center for Data Science, New York University
Correspondence to: zc1216@nyu.edu, rotskoff@stanford.edu, bruna@nyu.edu and eve2@nyu.edu.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

