Unsupervised Semantic Aggregation and Deformable
Template Matching for Semi-Supervised Learning

Tao Han†, Junyu Gao†, Yuan Yuan and Qi Wang∗
School of Computer Science and Center for OPTical IMagery Analysis and Learning
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi’an, Shaanxi, P.R. China.
hantao10200@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {gjy3035, y.yuan1.ieee, crabwq}@gmail.com

Abstract
Unlabeled data learning has attracted considerable attention recently. However, it
is still elusive to extract the expected high-level semantic feature with mere unsupervised learning. In the meantime, semi-supervised learning (SSL) demonstrates
a promising future in leveraging few samples. In this paper, we combine both to
propose an Unsupervised Semantic Aggregation and Deformable Template Matching (USADTM) framework for SSL, which strives to improve the classification
performance with few labeled data and then reduce the cost in data annotating.
Specifically, unsupervised semantic aggregation based on Triplet Mutual Information (T-MI) loss is explored to generate semantic labels for unlabeled data. Then
the semantic labels are aligned to the actual class by the supervision of labeled data.
Furthermore, a feature pool that stores the labeled samples is dynamically updated
to assign proxy labels for unlabeled data, which are used as targets for cross-entropy
minimization. Extensive experiments and analysis across four standard semisupervised learning benchmarks validate that USADTM achieves top performance
(e.g., 90.46% accuracy on CIFAR-10 with 40 labels and 95.20% accuracy with 250
labels). The code is released at https://github.com/taohan10200/USADTM.

1

Introduction

Deep learning is booming driven by massive labeled data over the past few years, such as image
classification [1, 2], semantic segmentation [3, 4], object detection [5, 6], natural language processing
[7, 8]. Besides, learning with unlabeled data also makes much progress in reducing the labeling costs
[9–11]. The two most important branches are unsupervised and semi-supervised learning. For the
image classification task, semi-supervised learning has shown that it can achieve a performance close
to supervised results under certain conditions, while unsupervised learning remains a huge challenge
for machine learning. A new perspective is to combine unsupervised learning with supervised learning
to achieve better performance.
In this paper, we are working on the following problems. 1) Most of the unsupervised methods
cannot directly output the classification results of the object [12–14]. Some end-to-end unsupervised
learning methods [9] also output a semantic label that does not correspond to the actual category. The
specific category to which the object belongs still depends on the clustering [15, 16]. 2) Due to the
lack of manually injected supervised information, unsupervised learning split the data on their own.
To verify, as shown in Fig. 1, we create a classification task of circles, triangles, and pentagons. The
left samples are given color to the border, while the right samples are filled in the entire graph. We
expect the unsupervised classification in these two different datasets to yield circles, triangles, and
†
∗

T. Han and J. Gao are co-first authors of the paper.
Q. Wang is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

