Dual T: Reducing Estimation Error for Transition
Matrix in Label-noise Learning

3

Mingming Gong
1

Yu Yao1 Tongliang Liu1† Bo Han2
Jiankang Deng4 Gang Niu5 Masashi Sugiyama5,6

University of Sydney; 2 Hong Kong Baptist University; 3 University of Melbourne;
4
Imperial College London; 5 RIKEN; 6 University of Tokyo

Abstract
The transition matrix, denoting the transition relationship from clean labels to
noisy labels, is essential to build statistically consistent classifiers in label-noise
learning. Existing methods for estimating the transition matrix rely heavily on
estimating the noisy class posterior. However, the estimation error for noisy class
posterior could be large due to the randomness of label noise, which would lead
the transition matrix to be poorly estimated. Therefore, in this paper, we aim to
solve this problem by exploiting the divide-and-conquer paradigm. Specifically,
we introduce an intermediate class to avoid directly estimating the noisy class
posterior. By this intermediate class, the original transition matrix can then be
factorized into the product of two easy-to-estimate transition matrices. We term the
proposed method the dual-T estimator. Both theoretical analyses and empirical
results illustrate the effectiveness of the dual-T estimator for estimating transition
matrices, leading to better classification performances.

1

Introduction

Deep learning algorithms rely heavily on large annotated training samples [6]. However, it is often
expensive and sometimes infeasible to annotate large datasets accurately [11]. Therefore, cheap
datasets with label noise have been widely employed to train deep learning models [40]. Recent
results show that label noise significantly degenerates the performance of deep learning models, as
deep neural networks can easily memorize and eventually fit label noise [46, 1].
Existing methods for learning with noisy labels can be divided into two categories: algorithms
with statistically inconsistent or consistent classifiers. Methods in the first category usually employ
heuristics to reduce the side-effects of label noise, such as extracting reliable examples [12, 42, 43,
11, 23, 29, 13], correcting labels [22, 14, 32, 28], and adding regularization [10, 9, 35, 34, 18, 17, 36].
Although those methods empirically work well, the classifiers learned from noisy data are not
guaranteed to be statistically consistent. To address this limitation, algorithms in the second category
have been proposed. They aim to design classifier-consistent algorithms [44, 48, 14, 19, 25, 30,
24, 8, 26, 33, 45, 20, 41, 38], where classifiers learned by exploiting noisy data will asymptotically
converge to the optimal classifiers defined on the clean domain. Intuitively, when facing large-scale
noisy data, models trained via classifier-consistent algorithms will approximate to the optimal models
trained with clean data.
The transition matrix T (x) plays an essential role in designing statistically consistent algorithms,
where Tij (x) = P (Ȳ = j|Y = i, X = x) and we set P (A) as the probability of the event A, X
as the random variable of instances/features, Ȳ as the variable for the noisy label, and Y as the
†

Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

