Learning to Extrapolate Knowledge:
Transductive Few-shot Out-of-Graph Link Prediction

Jinheon Baek1 , Dong Bok Lee1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , AITRICS2 , South Korea
{jinheon.baek, markhi, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Many practical graph problems, such as knowledge graph construction and drugdrug interaction prediction, require to handle multi-relational graphs. However,
handling real-world multi-relational graphs with Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
is often challenging due to their evolving nature, as new entities (nodes) can emerge
over time. Moreover, newly emerged entities often have few links, which makes the
learning even more difficult. Motivated by this challenge, we introduce a realistic
problem of few-shot out-of-graph link prediction, where we not only predict the
links between the seen and unseen nodes as in a conventional out-of-knowledge
link prediction task but also between the unseen nodes, with only few edges per
node. We tackle this problem with a novel transductive meta-learning framework
which we refer to as Graph Extrapolation Networks (GEN). GEN meta-learns
both the node embedding network for inductive inference (seen-to-unseen) and
the link prediction network for transductive inference (unseen-to-unseen). For
transductive link prediction, we further propose a stochastic embedding layer to
model uncertainty in the link prediction between unseen entities. We validate
our model on multiple benchmark datasets for knowledge graph completion and
drug-drug interaction prediction. The results show that our model significantly
outperforms relevant baselines for out-of-graph link prediction tasks.1

1

Introduction

Graphs have a strong expressive power to represent structured data, as they can model data into a
set of nodes (objects) and edges (relations). To exploit the graph-structured data which works on a
non-Euclidean domain, several recent works propose graph-based neural architectures, referred to
as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [8, 19]. While early works mostly deal with simple graphs with
unlabeled edges, recently proposed relation-aware GNNs [34, 35] consider multi-relational graphs
with labels and directions on the edges. These multi-relational graphs expand the application of
GNNs to more real-world domains such as natural language understanding [23], modeling protein
structure [12], drug-drug interaction prediction [62], retrosynthesis planning [37], to name a few.
Among multi-relational graphs, Knowledge Graphs (KGs), which represent knowledge bases (KBs)
such as Freebase [2] and WordNet [24], receive the most attention. They represent entities as nodes
and relations among the entities as edges, in the form of a triplet: (head entity, relation, tail entity) (e.g.
(Louvre museum, is located in, Paris)). Although knowledge graphs in general contain a huge amount
of triplets, they are well known to be highly incomplete [25]. Therefore, automatically completing
knowledge graphs, which is known as the link prediction task, is a practically important problem
for KGs. Prior works tackle this problem, i.e. inferring missing triplets, by learning embeddings of
entities and relations from existing triplets, and achieve impressive performances [4, 57, 9, 28, 27].
1

Code is available at https://github.com/JinheonBaek/GEN

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

