PLANS: Neuro-Symbolic Program Learning from
Videos
Raphaël Dang-Nhu
ETH Zürich
dangnhur@ethz.ch

Abstract
Recent years have seen the rise of statistical program learning based on neural
models as an alternative to traditional rule-based systems for programming by
example. Rule-based approaches offer correctness guarantees in an unsupervised
way as they inherently capture logical rules, while neural models are more realistically scalable to raw, high-dimensional input, and provide resistance to noisy I/O
specifications. We introduce PLANS (Program LeArning from Neurally inferred
Specifications), a hybrid model for program synthesis from visual observations that
gets the best of both worlds, relying on (i) a neural architecture trained to extract
abstract, high-level information from each raw individual input (ii) a rule-based
system using the extracted information as I/O specifications to synthesize a program capturing the different observations. In order to address the key challenge of
making PLANS resistant to noise in the network’s output, we introduce a dynamic
filtering algorithm for I/O specifications based on selective classification techniques. We obtain state-of-the-art performance at program synthesis from diverse
demonstration videos in the Karel and ViZDoom environments, while requiring no
ground-truth program for training.

1

Introduction

The problem of automatically generating a program satisfying given specifications is a long-standing
challenge of artificial intelligence (Waldinger, Lee, 1969). The sub-area of inductive program
synthesis, also known as programming by example (Gulwani, 2011), focuses on specifications formed
of examples of desired I/O program behavior. In existing systems, I/O examples typically are instances
of simple programming data types such as booleans, integers, floats or strings, or elementary data
structures such as lists. Extending programming by example to more complex input domains is
a very useful task, as it opens the range of possible real-world applications. Sun et al. (2018)
made an important step in this direction by introducing the task of program synthesis from diverse
demonstrations videos. This is a supervised learning problem in which the input is a set of videos of
an agent’s behavior provided as raw visual input, and the desired output is a program summarizing
the decision making logic (or policy) of this agent. From the point of view of imitation learning, this
task is important because policies represented as programs might generalize more strongly outside
the training distribution, require less data to learn, and allow formal verification of safety properties.
Inductive synthesis techniques can be divided in two categories. The traditional symbolic or rulebased approaches (Jha et al., 2010; Alur et al., 2013) typically rely on efficient search through a
user-defined domain specific language, leveraging constraint solvers based on SAT and SMT solving
for search-space pruning. Alternatively, recent efforts aim at leveraging statistical learning methods,
by phrasing inductive synthesis as a supervised learning task (Gaunt et al., 2016; Parisotto et al.,
2017). Rule-based approaches have several advantages: they offer guarantees that the generated
program is correct (i.e., satisfies the provided specifications). Additionally, they demonstrate better
generalization to unseen inputs. The latter was experimentally shown by Gaunt et al. (2016) in the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

