Efficient Distance Approximation for Structured
High-Dimensional Distributions via Learning∗

Arnab Bhattacharyya
National University of Singapore
arnabb@nus.edu.sg

Sutanu Gayen
National University of Singapore
sutanugayen@gmail.com

Kuldeep S. Meel
National University of Singapore
meel@comp.nus.edu.sg

N. V. Vinodchandran
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
vinod@cse.unl.edu

Abstract
We design efficient distance approximation algorithms for several classes of wellstudied structured high-dimensional distributions. Specifically, we present algorithms for the following problems (where dTV is the total variation distance):
– Given sample access to two Bayesian networks P1 and P2 over known directed
acyclic graphs G1 and G2 having n nodes and bounded in-degree, approximate
dTV (P1 , P2 ) to within additive error ε using poly(n, ε−1 ) samples and time.
– Given sample access to two ferromagnetic Ising models P1 and P2 on n variables
with bounded width, approximate dTV (P1 , P2 ) to within additive error ε using
poly(n, ε−1 ) samples and time.
– Given sample access to two n-dimensional Gaussians P1 and P2 , approximate
dTV (P1 , P2 ) to within additive error ε using poly(n, ε−1 ) samples and time.
– Given access to observations from two causal models P and Q on n variables
that are defined over known causal graphs, approximate dTV (Pa , Qa ) to within
additive error ε using poly(n, ε−1 ) samples and time, where Pa and Qa are the
interventional distributions obtained by the intervention do(A = a) on P and Q
respectively for a particular variable A.
The distance approximation algorithms immediately imply new tolerant closeness
testers for the corresponding classes of distributions. Prior to our work, only nontolerant testers were known for both Bayes net distributions and Ising models, and
no testers with quantitative guarantees were known for interventional distributions.
To the best of our knowledge, efficient distance approximation algorithms for
Gaussian distributions were not present in the literature. Our algorithms are
designed using a conceptually simple but general framework that is applicable to a
variety of scenarios.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is primarily concerned with the design of techniques to enable the learning of a
generative model M given access to data D arising from another distribution, say P [Mur12]. While
P is typically an unknown distribution, the design of a new ML technique is often accompanied by
empirical and theoretical studies under certain assumptions on P . Let Q be the distribution generated
by M; then ideally, one would learn M such P and Q are as close as possible. Given the widespread
∗

Authors are in the alphabetical order.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

