Training Generative Adversarial Networks
by Solving Ordinary Differential Equations

Chongli Qin*, Yan Wu*, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue,
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Pushmeet Kohli
DeepMind
chongliqin, yanwu@google.com

Abstract
The instability of Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) training has frequently
been attributed to gradient descent. Consequently, recent methods have aimed
to tailor the models and training procedures to stabilise the discrete updates. In
contrast, we study the continuous-time dynamics induced by GAN training. Both
theory and toy experiments suggest that these dynamics are in fact surprisingly
stable. From this perspective, we hypothesise that instabilities in training GANs
arise from the integration error in discretising the continuous dynamics. We experimentally verify that well-known ODE solvers (such as Runge-Kutta) can stabilise
training – when combined with a regulariser that controls the integration error. Our
approach represents a radical departure from previous methods which typically
use adaptive optimisation and stabilisation techniques that constrain the functional
space (e.g. Spectral Normalisation). Evaluation on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet shows
that our method outperforms several strong baselines, demonstrating its efficacy.

1

Introduction

The training of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11] has seen significant advances over the
past several years. Most recently, GAN based methods have, for example, demonstrated the ability
to generate images with high fidelity and realism such as the work of Brock et al. [3] and Karras
et al. [15]. Despite this remarkable progress, there remain many questions regarding the instability of
training GANs and their convergence properties.
In this work, we attempt to extend the understanding of GANs by offering a different perspective. We study the continuous-time dynamics induced by gradient descent on the GAN objective for commonly used losses. We find that
under mild assumptions, the dynamics should
converge in the vicinity of a differential Nash
equilibrium, and that the rate of convergence is
independent of the rotational part of the dynamics if we can follow the dynamics exactly. We
thus hypothesise that the instability in training
GANs arises from discretisation of the continuous dynamics, and we should focus on accurate
integration to impart stability.

Figure 1: Left: divergence of integration with Euler’s method – for a strong rotational field, stepsize 0.01. Right: convergence with a second-order
ODE solver (Heun’s method) under the same step
size and vector field. For details see Section 3.2.2.

Consistent with this hypothesis, we demonstrate that we can use standard methods for solving ordinary
differential equations (ODEs) – such as Runge-Kutta – to solve for GAN parameters. In particular,
we observe that more accurate time integration of the ODE yields better convergence as well as better
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

