f -Divergence Variational Inference

Neng Wan1∗
nengwan2@illinois.edu
1

Dapeng Li 2 ∗
dapeng.ustc@gmail.com

Naira Hovakimyan1
nhovakim@illinois.edu

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801
2
Anker Innovations, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
This paper introduces the f -divergence variational inference (f -VI) that generalizes variational inference to all f -divergences. Initiated from minimizing a crafty
surrogate f -divergence that shares the statistical consistency with the f -divergence,
the f -VI framework not only unifies a number of existing VI methods, e.g. Kullback–Leibler VI [1], Rényi’s α-VI [2], and χ-VI [3], but offers a standardized
toolkit for VI subject to arbitrary divergences from f -divergence family. A general f -variational bound is derived and provides a sandwich estimate of marginal
likelihood (or evidence). The development of the f -VI unfolds with a stochastic
optimization scheme that utilizes the reparameterization trick, importance weighting and Monte Carlo approximation; a mean-field approximation scheme that
generalizes the well-known coordinate ascent variational inference (CAVI) is also
proposed for f -VI. Empirical examples, including variational autoencoders and
Bayesian neural networks, are provided to demonstrate the effectiveness and the
wide applicability of f -VI.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) is a machine learning method that makes Bayesian inference computationally efficient and scalable to large datasets. For decades, the dominant paradigm for approximate
Bayesian inference p(z|x) = p(z, x)/p(x) has
R been Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) algorithms, which estimate the evidence p(x) = p(z, x)dz via sampling. However, since sampling
tends to be a slow and computationally intensive process, these sampling-based approximate inference methods fade when dealing with the modern probabilistic machine learning problems that
usually involve very complex models, high-dimensional feature spaces and large datasets. In these
instances, VI becomes a good alternative to perform Bayesian inference. The foundation of VI is
primarily optimization rather than sampling. To perform VI, we posit as a family of approximate (or
recognition) densities Q and find the member q ∗ (z) ∈ Q that minimizes the statistical divergence
to the true posterior D(q(z)kp(z|x)). Meanwhile, since VI also has many elegant and favorable
theoretical properties, e.g. variational bounds of the true evidence, it has become the foundation of
many popular generative and machine learning models.
Recent advances in VI can be roughly categorized into three groups, improvements over traditional VI
algorithms [4, 5], developments of scalable VI methods [6–8], and explorations for tighter variational
bounds [9, 10]. Comprehensive reviews on VI’s background and progression can be found in [11, 12].
While most of these advancements were built on the classical VI associated with the Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence, some recent efforts tried to extend the VI framework to other statistical divergences
and showed promising results. Among these efforts, Rényi’s α-divergence and χ-divergence as the
root divergences (or generators) of the KL divergence were employed for VI in [2, 3, 13], which
∗

Authors contributed equally to this paper.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

