Statistical-Query Lower Bounds via Functional
Gradients
Surbhi Goel
Microsoft Research
New York, NY, USA
goel.surbhi@microsoft.com

Aravind Gollakota
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
aravindg@cs.utexas.edu

Adam Klivans
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
klivans@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We give the first statistical-query lower bounds for agnostically learning any nonpolynomial activation with respect to Gaussian marginals (e.g., ReLU, sigmoid,
sign). For the specific problem of ReLU regression (equivalently, agnostically
learning a ReLU), we show that any statistical-query algorithm with tolerance
b
c
n−(1/) must use at least 2n  queries for some constants b, c > 0, where n is
the dimension and  is the accuracy parameter. Our results rule out general (as
opposed to correlational) SQ learning algorithms, which is unusual for real-valued
learning problems. Our techniques involve a gradient boosting procedure for
“amplifying” recent lower bounds due to Diakonikolas et al. (COLT 2020) and Goel
et al. (ICML 2020) on the SQ dimension of functions computed by two-layer neural
networks. The crucial new ingredient is the use of a nonstandard convex functional
during the boosting procedure. This also yields a best-possible reduction between
two commonly studied models of learning: agnostic learning and probabilistic
concepts.

1

Introduction

In this paper we continue a recent line of research exploring the computational complexity of
fundamental primitives from the theory of deep learning [GKK19, YS19, DKKZ20, YS20, DGK+ 20,
FCG20]. In particular, we consider the problem of fitting a single nonlinear activation to a joint
distribution on Rn × R. When the nonlinear activation is ReLU, this problem is referred to as ReLU
regression or agnostically learning a ReLU. When the nonlinear activation is sign and the labels are
Boolean, this problem is equivalent to the well-studied challenge of agnostically learning a halfspace
[KKMS08].
We consider arguably the simplest possible setting—when the marginal distribution is Gaussian—
and give the first statistical-query lower bounds for learning broad classes of nonlinear activations.
The statistical-query model is a well-studied framework for analyzing the sample complexity of
learning problems and captures most known learning algorithms. For common activations such as
ReLU, sigmoid, and sign, we give complementary upper bounds, showing that our results cannot be
significantly improved.
Let H be a function class on Rn , and let D be a labeled distribution on Rn × R such that the marginal
on Rn is D = N (0, In ). We say that a learner learns H under D with error  if it outputs a function
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

