Simple and Fast Algorithm for Binary Integer and
Online Linear Programming

Xiaocheng Li†
Chunlin Sun‡
Yinyu Ye†
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
‡
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University
{chengli1, chunlin, yinyu-ye}@stanford.edu
†

Abstract
In this paper, we develop a simple and fast online algorithm for solving a class of
binary integer linear programs (LPs) arisen in general resource allocation problem.
The algorithm requires only one single pass through the input data and is free of
doing any matrix inversion. It can be viewed as both an approximate algorithm for
solving binary integer LPs and a fast algorithm for solving online LP problems.
The algorithm is inspired by an equivalent form of the dual problem of the relaxed
LP and it essentially performs (one-pass) projected stochastic subgradient descent
in the dual space. We analyze the algorithm under two different models, stochastic
input and random permutation, with
√ minimal technical assumptions on the input
data. The algorithm achieves√O (m n) expected regret under the stochastic input
model and O ((m + log n) √n) expected regret under the random permutation
model, and it achieves O(m n) expected constraint violation under both models,
where n is the number of decision variables and m is the number of constraints. In
addition, we employ the notion of permutational Rademacher complexity and derive
regret bounds for two earlier online LP algorithms
for comparison. Both algorithms
√
improve the regret bound with a factor of m by paying more computational cost.
Furthermore, we demonstrate how to convert the possibly infeasible solution to a
feasible one through a randomized procedure. Numerical experiments illustrate the
general applicability and effectiveness of the algorithms.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we present a simple and fast online algorithm to approximately solve a general class
of binary (integer) linear programs (LP). Different specifications of the considered LP problem
cover a wide range of classic problems and modern applications: secretary problem [13], knapsack
problem [17], resource allocation problem [29], generalized assignment problem [8], network routing
problem [5], matching problem [23], etc. From the perspective of integer LP, our algorithm is
an efficient approximate algorithm that features for provable performance guarantee. In general,
integer LP is NP-complete and the LP relaxation technique is widely used in designing integer LP
algorithm. Our algorithm is inspired by the relaxed LP, and it outputs an integer solution to the
relaxed LP (so that there is no need for a rounding procedure). The solution can thus be viewed as
an approximate solution to both the integer LP and the relaxed LP. From the perspective of online
LP, to the best of our knowledge, our algorithm is the most simple and efficient online LP algorithm
so far. Furthermore, the algorithm analysis is conducted under the two prevalent models: stochastic
input model and random permutation model. The stochastic input model assumes that the columns of
the LP together with the corresponding coefficients in the objective function are drawn i.i.d. from an
unknown distribution.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized in the following three aspects:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

