On the Error Resistance of Hinge Loss Minimization

Kunal Talwar
Apple∗
Cupertino, CA 95014
ktalwar@apple.com

Abstract
Commonly used classification algorithms in machine learning, such as support
vector machines, minimize a convex surrogate loss on training examples. In
practice, these algorithms are surprisingly robust to errors in the training data. In
this work, we identify a set of conditions on the data under which such surrogate
loss minimization algorithms provably learn the correct classifier. This allows
us to establish, in a unified framework, the robustness of these algorithms under
various models on data as well as error. In particular, we show that if the data
√is
linearly classifiable with a slightly non-trivial margin (i.e. a margin at least C d
for d-dimensional unit vectors), and the class-conditional distributions are near
isotropic and logconcave, then surrogate loss minimization has negligible error on
the uncorrupted data even when a constant fraction of examples are adversarially
mislabeled.

1

Introduction

A commonly used paradigm in supervised learning is to minimize a surrogate loss over available
training examples. In other words,
P to learn the parameters w of a classification model, we optimize
a loss function of the form i `(w, zi ) over available labeled training examples {zi }. Often the
parameters w are themselves constrained to be in a certain set, or regularized. This paradigm has
been extremely successful and underlies most applications of supervised learning.
The training examples can come from varying sources. Often, several of the training examples are
mislabeled. This could be due to some inherent noise in the process, or due to adversarial mislabeling.
For example, when learning a spam filter, one may use training examples labeled by users and some
of these users may be spammers that insert training examples to make the system behave a certain
way. These issues of noisy data, or data poisoning attacks are not new to machine learning. They
have been explored in statistics under the name robust statistics [Huber, 1964, Huber and Ronchetti,
2009, Hampel et al., 2011], and in learning theory under various models of corruption [Valiant, 1985,
Kearns and Li, 1988, Angluin and Laird, 1988]. In this work, we will largely be interested in the
adversarial label corruption model, where the adversary can flip the labels of an arbitrary η fraction
of the examples.
There are at least two possible ways in which label corruptions might occur. The first is model
misspecification: the true data distribution may not be linearly classifiable given the features. In this
case, we should aim to minimize the error rate on the whole distribution. A different reason, and
the focus of this work, is where the primary source of corruption is noisy, or adversarially corrupted
labels. We find this to be a natural model in many training settings, where some of the data comes
from users, e.g. labels coming from CAPTCHAs or from “Report Spam”/“Report Inappropriate
Content” buttons, where some of these labels will come from bots or spammers. Recent works have
studied this model in the stochastic bandit setting [Lykouris et al., 2018, Gupta et al., 2019]. In
∗

Work performed while at Google Brain.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

