Robust Deep Reinforcement Learning against
Adversarial Perturbations on State Observations
Huan Zhang*,1 Hongge Chen*,2 Chaowei Xiao3
Bo Li4 Mingyan Liu5 Duane Boning2 Cho-Jui Hsieh1
1
UCLA 2 MIT 3 NVIDIA 4 UIUC 5 University of Michigan
huan@huan-zhang.com, chenhg@mit.edu, chaoweix@nvidia.com,
lbo@illinois.edu,mingyan@umich.edu,boning@mtl.mit.edu,chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu
*
Huan Zhang and Hongge Chen contributed equally.

Abstract
A deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agent observes its states through observations, which may contain natural measurement errors or adversarial noises. Since
the observations deviate from the true states, they can mislead the agent into making
suboptimal actions. Several works have shown this vulnerability via adversarial
attacks, but existing approaches on improving the robustness of DRL under this
setting have limited success and lack for theoretical principles. We show that
naively applying existing techniques on improving robustness for classification
tasks, like adversarial training, are ineffective for many RL tasks. We propose the
state-adversarial Markov decision process (SA-MDP) to study the fundamental
properties of this problem, and develop a theoretically principled policy regularization which can be applied to a large family of DRL algorithms, including proximal
policy optimization (PPO), deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) and deep Q
networks (DQN), for both discrete and continuous action control problems. We
significantly improve the robustness of PPO, DDPG and DQN agents under a
suite of strong white box adversarial attacks, including new attacks of our own.
Additionally, we find that a robust policy noticeably improves DRL performance
even without an adversary in a number of environments. Our code is available at
https://github.com/chenhongge/StateAdvDRL.

1

Introduction

With deep neural networks (DNNs) as powerful function approximators, deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) has achieved great success on many complex tasks [46, 35, 33, 64, 20] and even on some
safety-critical applications (e.g., autonomous driving [74, 56, 49]). Despite achieving super-human
level performance on many tasks, the existence of adversarial examples [69] in DNNs and many
successful attacks to DRL [27, 4, 36, 50, 81] motivates us to study robust DRL algorithms.
When an RL agent obtains its current state via observations, the observations may contain uncertainty
that naturally originates from unavoidable sensor errors or equipment inaccuracy. A policy not robust
to such uncertainty can lead to catastrophic failures (e.g., the navigation setting in Figure 1). To
ensure safety under the worst case uncertainty, we consider the adversarial setting where the state
observation is adversarially perturbed from s to ν(s), yet the underlying true environment state
s is unchanged. This setting is aligned with many adversarial attacks on state observations (e.g.,
[27, 36]) and cannot be characterized by existing tools such as partially observable Markov decision
process (POMDP), because the conditional observation probabilities in POMDP cannot capture the
adversarial (worst case) scenario. Studying the fundamental principles in this setting is crucial.
Before basic principles were developed, several early approaches [5, 40, 50] extended existing adversarial defenses for supervised learning, e.g., adversarial training [32, 39, 87] to improve robustness
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

