Interpretable and Personalized Apprenticeship
Scheduling: Learning Interpretable Scheduling
Policies from Heterogeneous User Demonstrations

Rohan Paleja, Andrew Silva, Letian Chen, and Matthew Gombolay
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
{rohan.paleja, andrew.silva, letian.chen, matthew.gombolay}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Resource scheduling and coordination is an NP-hard optimization requiring an
efficient allocation of agents to a set of tasks with upper- and lower bound temporal
and resource constraints. Due to the large-scale and dynamic nature of resource
coordination in hospitals and factories, human domain experts manually plan
and adjust schedules on the fly. To perform this job, domain experts leverage
heterogeneous strategies and rules-of-thumb honed over years of apprenticeship.
What is critically needed is the ability to extract this domain knowledge in a
heterogeneous and interpretable apprenticeship learning framework to scale beyond
the power of a single human expert, a necessity in safety-critical domains. We
propose a personalized and interpretable apprenticeship scheduling algorithm that
infers an interpretable representation of all human task demonstrators by extracting
decision-making criteria via an inferred, personalized embedding non-parametric
in the number of demonstrator types. We achieve near-perfect LfD accuracy in
synthetic domains and 88.22% accuracy on a planning domain with real-world data,
outperforming baselines. Finally, our user study showed our methodology produces
more interpretable and easier-to-use models than neural networks (p < 0.05).

1

Introduction

Coordinating resources in time and space is a challenging and costly problem worldwide, affecting
everything from the medical supplies we need to fight pandemics to the food on our tables. The
manufacturing and healthcare industries account for a total of $35 trillion [18] and $8.1 trillion [28]
USD, respectively. In manufacturing, scheduling workers – whether they be humans or robots
– to complete a set of tasks in a shared space with upper- and lower-bound temporal constraints
(i.e., deadline and wait constraints) is an NP-hard optimization problem [5], typically approaching
computational intractability for real-world problems of interest.
Human domain experts efficiently, if sub-optimally, solve these NP-hard problems to coordinate
resources using heterogeneous rules-of-thumb and strategies honed over decades of apprenticeship,
creating unique heuristics depending on experts’ varied experiences and personal preferences [23, 41].
Each expert has her own strategies, and it is common for factories and hospital wards to be run
completely differently – yet effectively – across different shifts based upon the person in charge
of coordinating the workers’ activities [27, 33, 38]. The challenge we pose is to develop new
apprenticeship learning techniques for capturing these heterogeneous rules-of-thumb in order to
scale beyond the power of a single expert. However, such heterogeneity is not readily handled by
traditional apprenticeship learning approaches that assume demonstrator homogeneity. A canonical
example of this limitation is of human drivers teaching an autonomous car to pass a slower-moving
car, where some drivers prefer to pass on the left and others on the right. Apprenticeship learning
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

