Emergent Reciprocity and Team Formation from
Randomized Uncertain Social Preferences
Bowen Baker
OpenAI
bowen@openai.com

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has shown recent success in increasingly complex fixed-team zero-sum environments. However, the real world is not
zero-sum nor does it have fixed teams; humans face numerous social dilemmas
and must learn when to cooperate and when to compete. To successfully deploy
agents into the human world, it may be important that they be able to understand
and help in our conflicts. Unfortunately, selfish MARL agents typically fail when
faced with social dilemmas. In this work, we show evidence of emergent direct
reciprocity, indirect reciprocity and reputation, and team formation when training
agents with randomized uncertain social preferences (RUSP), a novel environment
augmentation that expands the distribution of environments agents play in. RUSP
is generic and scalable; it can be applied to any multi-agent environment without
changing the original underlying game dynamics or objectives. In particular, we
show that with RUSP these behaviors can emerge and lead to higher social welfare
equilibria in both classic abstract social dilemmas like Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma
as well in more complex intertemporal environments.

1

Introduction

Many real world problems require complex coordination between multiple agents, and multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently shown great success in impressive two-team zero-sum
settings such as Go, (1) DoTA, (2) Starcraft, (3) hide-and-seek, (4) and capture the flag. (5) Zero-sum
two-player (or two-team) settings are convenient yardsticks for progress in complex control, for there
exists a Nash equilibrium which coincides with the minimax solution. (6) However, the human world
is far messier. We constantly face social dilemmas at multiple scales, from the interpersonal to the
international, and we must decide not only how to cooperate but when to cooperate.
Can we not simply train purely prosocial agents that are always cooperative with humans? We argue
we cannot, for the agents we deploy must be robust to a world in which there will be uncooperative
humans and uncooperative agents trained by either malicious or careless actors. If agents only ever
see cooperation during training, any defection will be out of distribution, and therefore we will likely
have no guarantees on their behavior. Transfer to the human world aside, the social intelligence
hypothesis posits that the additional cognitive tasks organisms must perform due to social dilemmas,
norms, and structures created additional pressure for intelligence past that of base survival, (7,8) and
so training in mixed cooperative-competitive settings are of further independent interest in that they
could be key to creating increasingly intelligent agents.
Unfortunately, the MARL methods that have been so successful in zero-sum two-team settings have
historically failed in social dilemma environments (9,10,11,12) despite the existence of more cooperative
equilibria with higher social welfare. There has been much work in augmenting learning agents to
arrive at more cooperative equilibria in social dilemma matrix games (9,13,14,15) and more complex
environments; (12,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23) however, few among these have led to robust cooperation such
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

