Bias no more: high-probability data-dependent regret
bounds for adversarial bandits and MDPs
Chung-Wei Lee
University of Southern California
leechung@usc.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Chen-Yu Wei
University of Southern California
chenyu.wei@usc.edu

Mengxiao Zhang
University of Southern California
mengxiao.zhang@usc.edu

Abstract
We develop a new approach to obtaining high probability regret bounds for online
learning with bandit feedback against an adaptive adversary. While existing approaches all require carefully constructing optimistic and biased loss estimators,
our approach uses standard unbiased estimators and relies on a simple increasing
learning rate schedule, together with the help of logarithmically homogeneous
self-concordant barriers and a strengthened Freedman’s inequality.
Besides its simplicity, our approach enjoys several advantages. First, the obtained
high-probability regret bounds are data-dependent and could be much smaller
than the worst-case bounds, which resolves an open problem asked by Neu [31].
Second, resolving another open problem of Bartlett et al. [12] and Abernethy and
Rakhlin [1], our approach leads to the first general and efficient algorithm with a
high-probability regret bound for adversarial linear bandits, while previous methods
are either inefficient or only applicable to specific action sets. Finally, our approach
can also be applied to learning adversarial Markov Decision Processes and provides
the first algorithm with a high-probability small-loss bound for this problem.

1

Introduction

Online learning with partial information in an adversarial environment, such as the non-stochastic
Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) problem [10], is by now a well-studied topic. However, the majority of
work in this area has been focusing on obtaining algorithms with sublinear expected regret bounds,
and these algorithms can in fact be highly instable and suffer a huge variance. For example, it is
known that the classic E XP 3 algorithm [10] for MAB suffers linear regret with a constant probability
(over its internal randomness), despite having nearly optimal expected regret (see [26, Section 11.5,
Note 1]), making it a clearly undesirable choice in practice.
To address this issue, a few works develop algorithms with regret bounds that hold with high
probability, including those for MAB [10, 8, 31], linear bandits [12, 1], and even adversarial Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs) [25]. Getting high-probability regret bounds is also the standard way of
deriving guarantees against an adaptive adversary whose decisions can depend on learner’s previous
actions. This is especially important for problems such as routing in wireless networks (modeled as
linear bandits in [11]) where adversarial attacks can indeed adapt to algorithm’s decisions on the fly.
As far as we know, all existing high-probability methods (listed above) are based on carefully
constructing biased loss estimators that enjoy smaller variance compared to standard unbiased ones.
While this principle is widely applicable, the actual execution can be cumbersome; for example, the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

