Continual Learning with Node-Importance based
Adaptive Group Sparse Regularization

1

Sangwon Jung1∗, Hongjoon Ahn2∗, Sungmin Cha1 and Taesup Moon1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Department of Artificial Intelligence,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea 16419
{s.jung, hong0805, csm9493, tsmoon}@skku.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel regularization-based continual learning method, dubbed as
Adaptive Group Sparsity based Continual Learning (AGS-CL), using two group
sparsity-based penalties. Our method selectively employs the two penalties when
learning each neural network node based on its the importance, which is adaptively
updated after learning each task. By utilizing the proximal gradient descent method,
the exact sparsity and freezing of the model is guaranteed during the learning
process, and thus, the learner explicitly controls the model capacity. Furthermore,
as a critical detail, we re-initialize the weights associated with unimportant nodes
after learning each task in order to facilitate efficient learning and prevent the
negative transfer. Throughout the extensive experimental results, we show that our
AGS-CL uses orders of magnitude less memory space for storing the regularization
parameters, and it significantly outperforms several state-of-the-art baselines on
representative benchmarks for both supervised and reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Continual learning, also referred to as lifelong learning, is a long standing open problem in machine
learning, in which the training data is given sequentially in a form divided into the groups of tasks. The
goal of continual learning is to overcome the fundamental trade-off: the stability-plasticity dilemma
[7, 21], i.e., if the model focuses too much on the stability, it suffers from poor forward transfer to the
new task, and if it focuses too much on the plasticity, it suffers from the catastrophic forgetting of past
tasks. To address this dilemma, a comprehensive study for neural network-based continual learning
was conducted broadly under the following categories: regularization-based [18, 13, 41, 22, 1, 3],
dynamic architecture-based [27, 39, 10], and replay memory-based [26, 20, 34, 11] methods.
In this paper, we focus on the regularization-based methods, since they pursue to use the fixed-capacity
neural network model as efficiently as possible, which may potentially allow them to be combined
with other approaches. These methods typically identify important learned weights for previous tasks
and heavily penalize their deviations while learning new tasks. They have a natural connection with a
separate line of research, the model compression of neural networks [17, 19, 42]. Namely, in order to
obtain a compact model, typical model compression methods measure the importance of each node or
weight in a given neural network and prune the unimportant ones, hence, share the similar principle
with the regularization-based continual learning schemes. Several representative model compression
methods [37, 4, 38, 29] used the group Lasso-like penalties, which define the incoming or outgoing
weights to a node as groups and achieve structured sparsity within a neural network. Such focus on
the node-level importance could lead to a more efficient representation of the model and achieved
better compression than focusing on the weight-wise importance.
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

