Autofocused oracles for model-based design

Clara Fannjiang and Jennifer Listgarten
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
{clarafy,jennl}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Data-driven design is making headway into a number of application areas, including
protein, small-molecule, and materials engineering. The design goal is to construct
an object with desired properties, such as a protein that binds to a therapeutic target,
or a superconducting material with a higher critical temperature than previously
observed. To that end, costly experimental measurements are being replaced with
calls to high-capacity regression models trained on labeled data, which can be
leveraged in an in silico search for design candidates. However, the design goal
necessitates moving into regions of the design space beyond where such models
were trained. Therefore, one can ask: should the regression model be altered
as the design algorithm explores the design space, in the absence of new data?
Herein, we answer this question in the affirmative. In particular, we (i) formalize
the data-driven design problem as a non-zero-sum game, (ii) develop a principled
strategy for retraining the regression model as the design algorithm proceeds—
what we refer to as autofocusing, and (iii) demonstrate the promise of autofocusing
empirically.

1

Oracle-based design

The design of objects with desired properties, such as novel proteins, molecules, or materials, has
a rich history in bioengineering, chemistry, and materials science. In these domains, design has
historically been performed through iterative, labor-intensive experimentation [1] (e.g., measuring
protein binding affinity) or compute-intensive physics simulations [2] (e.g., computing low-energy
structures for nanomaterials). Increasingly, however, attempts are being made to replace these costly
and time-consuming steps with cheap and fast calls to a proxy regression model, trained on labeled
data [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Herein, we refer to such a proxy model as an oracle, and assume that acquisition
of training data for the oracle is complete, as in [5, 6, 7, 8, 9].1 The key issue addressed by our work
is how best to train an oracle for use in design, given fixed training data.
In contrast to the traditional use of predictive models, oracle-based design is distinguished by the fact
that it seeks solutions—and therefore, will query the oracle—in regions of the design space that are
not well-represented by the oracle training data. If this is not the case, the design problem is easy in
that the solution is within the region of the training data. Furthermore, one does not know beforehand
which parts of the design space a design procedure will navigate through. As such, a major challenge
arises when an oracle is employed for design: its outputs, including its uncertainty estimates, become
unreliable beyond the training data [10, 11]. Successful oracle-based design thus involves an inherent
trade-off between the need to stay “near” the training data in order to trust the oracle, and the need to
depart from it in order to make improvements. While trust region approaches have been developed
1
For many applications in protein, molecule, and material design, even if one performs iterative rounds of
data acquisition, at some point, the acquisition phase concludes due to finite resources.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

