Strongly local p-norm-cut algorithms for
semi-supervised learning and local graph clustering

Meng Liu
Computer Science Department
Purdue University
liu1740@purdue.edu

David F. Gleich
Computer Science Department
Purdue University
dgleich@purdue.edu

Abstract
Graph based semi-supervised learning is the problem of learning a labeling function
for the graph nodes given a few example nodes, often called seeds, usually under
the assumption that the graph’s edges indicate similarity of labels. This is closely
related to the local graph clustering or community detection problem of finding
a cluster or community of nodes around a given seed. For this problem, we
propose a novel generalization of random walk, diffusion, or smooth function
methods in the literature to a convex p-norm cut function. The need for our pnorm methods is that, in our study of existing methods, we find those principled
methods based on eigenvector, spectral, random walk, or linear system often have
difficulty capturing the correct boundary of a target label or target cluster. In
contrast, 1-norm or maxflow-mincut based methods capture the boundary, but
cannot grow from small seed set; hybrid procedures that use both have many
hard to set parameters. In this paper, we propose a generalization of the objective
function behind these methods involving p-norms. To solve the p-norm cut problem
we give a strongly local algorithm – one whose runtime depends on the size of the
output rather than the size of the graph. Our method can be thought as a nonlinear
generalization of the Anderson-Chung-Lang push procedure to approximate a
personalized PageRank vector efficiently. Our procedure is general and can solve
other types of nonlinear objective functions, such as p-norm variants of Huber
losses. We provide a theoretical analysis of finding planted target clusters with our
method and show that the p-norm cut functions improve on the standard Cheeger
inequalities for random walk and spectral methods. Finally, we demonstrate the
speed and accuracy of our new method in synthetic and real world datasets.

1

Introduction

Many datasets important to machine learning either start as a graph or have a simple translation into
graph data. For instance, relational network data naturally starts as a graph. Arbitrary data vectors
become graphs via nearest-neighbor constructions, among other choices. Consequently, understanding
graph-based learning algorithms – those that learn from graphs – is a recurring problem. This field
has a rich history with methods based on linear systems [61, 62], eigenvectors [27, 24], graph cuts [8],
and network flows [35, 4, 54], although recent work in graph-based learning has often focused on
embeddings [50, 22] and graph neural networks [58, 29, 39]. Our research seeks to understand the
possibilities enabled by a certain p-norm generalization of the standard techniques.
Perhaps the two prototypical graph-based learning problems are semi-supervised learning and local
clustering. Other graph-based learning problems include role discovery and alignments. Semisupervised learning involves learning a labeling function for the nodes of a graph based on a few
examples, often called seeds. The most interesting scenarios are when most of the graph has unknown
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

