Unfolding the Alternating Optimization for Blind
Super Resolution
Zhengxiong Luo1,2,3 , ∗Yan Huang1,2 , Shang Li2,3 , Liang Wang1,4,5 , and Tieniu Tan1,4
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC)
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology (CEBSIT)
5
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Artificial Intelligence Research (CAS-AIR)

Abstract
Previous methods decompose blind super resolution (SR) problem into two sequential steps: i) estimating blur kernel from given low-resolution (LR) image and ii)
restoring SR image based on estimated kernel. This two-step solution involves
two independently trained models, which may not be well compatible with each
other. Small estimation error of the first step could cause severe performance drop
of the second one. While on the other hand, the first step can only utilize limited
information from LR image, which makes it difficult to predict highly accurate blur
kernel. Towards these issues, instead of considering these two steps separately, we
adopt an alternating optimization algorithm, which can estimate blur kernel and restore SR image in a single model. Specifically, we design two convolutional neural
modules, namely Restorer and Estimator. Restorer restores SR image based on
predicted kernel, and Estimator estimates blur kernel with the help of restored SR
image. We alternate these two modules repeatedly and unfold this process to form
an end-to-end trainable network. In this way, Estimator utilizes information from
both LR and SR images, which makes the estimation of blur kernel easier. More
importantly, Restorer is trained with the kernel estimated by Estimator, instead of
ground-truth kernel, thus Restorer could be more tolerant to the estimation error
of Estimator. Extensive experiments on synthetic datasets and real-world images
show that our model can largely outperform state-of-the-art methods and produce
more visually favorable results at much higher speed. The source code is available
at https://github.com/greatlog/DAN.git.

1

Introduction

Single image super resolution (SISR) aims to recover the high-resolution (HR) version of a given
degraded low-resolution (LR) image. It has wide applications in video enhancement, medical
imaging, as well as security and surveillance imaging. Mathematically, the degradation process can
be expressed as
y = (x ⊗ k) ↓s +n
(1)
where x is the original HR image, y is the degraded LR image, ⊗ denotes the two-dimensional
convolution of x with blur kernel k, n denotes Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN), and ↓s
denotes the standard s-fold downsampler, which means keeping only the upper-left pixel for each
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

