Forethought and Hindsight in Credit Assignment
Veronica Chelu
Mila, McGill University

Doina Precup
Mila, McGill University, DeepMind

Hado van Hasselt
DeepMind

Abstract
We address the problem of credit assignment in reinforcement learning and explore
fundamental questions regarding the way in which an agent can best use additional
computation to propagate new information, by planning with internal models of
the world to improve its predictions. Particularly, we work to understand the
gains and peculiarities of planning employed as forethought via forward models
or as hindsight operating with backward models. We establish the relative merits,
limitations and complementary properties of both planning mechanisms in carefully
constructed scenarios. Further, we investigate the best use of models in planning,
primarily focusing on the selection of states in which predictions should be (re)evaluated. Lastly, we discuss the issue of model estimation and highlight a spectrum
of methods that stretch from explicit environment-dynamics predictors to more
abstract planner-aware models.

1

Introduction

Credit assignment, i.e. determining how to correctly associate delayed rewards with states or stateaction pairs, is a crucial problem for reinforcement learning (RL) agents (Sutton and Barto, 2018).
Model-based RL (MBRL) agents gradually learn a model of the rewards and transition dynamics
through interaction with their environments and use the estimated model to find better policies or
predictions (e.g., Sutton, 1990a; Peng and Williams, 1993; Moore and Atkeson, 1993; McMahan and
Gordon, 2005; Sutton et al., 2012; Farahmand et al., 2017; Farahmand, 2018; Abachi et al., 2020;
Wan et al., 2019; Silver et al., 2017; Schrittwieser et al., 2019; Deisenroth et al., 2015; Hester and
Stone, 2013; Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Oh et al., 2017). However, the efficiency of MBRL depends
on learning a useful model for its purpose. In this paper, we focus specifically on the use of models
for value credit assignment.
Broadly, we refer to planning as any internal processing that an agent can perform without additional
experience to improve prediction and/or performance. Within this nomenclature, we define models as
knowledge about the internal workings of the environment, which can be routinely re-used through
planning. One way of using models is by forethought or trying things in your head (Sutton and Barto,
1981), which requires learning to predict aspects of the future and planning forward, or in anticipation
to achieve goals. Dyna-style planning (Sutton, 1990a) chooses a (possibly hypothetical) state and
action and predicts the resulting reward and next state, which are then used for credit assignment.
The origins of the chosen state and action are referred to as search control strategies. Lin (1992)
proposed to use states actually experienced, and introduced the idea of replaying prior experience
(Lin, 1992; Mnih et al., 2015). Combinations of these two approaches result in prioritized sweeping
variants (Moore and Atkeson, 1993; Peng and Williams, 1993; McMahan and Gordon, 2005), which
generalize the idea of replaying experience in backward order (Lin, 1992) by prioritizing states
based on the potential improvement in the value function estimate upon re-evaluation. From high
priority states, forward models are used to perform additional value function updates, increasing
computational efficiency (e.g., van Seijen and Sutton, 2013). An investigation into source-control
strategies (Pan et al., 2018) reveals the utility of additional prioritization for guiding learning towards
relevant, causal or interesting states.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

