How Robust are the Estimated Effects of
Nonpharmaceutical Interventions against COVID-19?
Mrinank Sharma,1,2⇤ Sören Mindermann,3⇤ Jan M. Brauner,3⇤
Gavin Leech,4 Anna B. Stephenson,5 Tomáš Gavenčiak,
Jan Kulveit,6 Yee Whye Teh,1 Leonid Chindelevitch,7 Yarin Gal3
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK.
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK.
3
OATML Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK.
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, UK.
5
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, USA.
6
Future of Humanity Institute, University of Oxford, UK.
7
MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis;
and the Abdul Latif Jameel Institute for Disease and Emergency Analytics (J-IDEA),
School of Public Health, Imperial College London.
1

2

Abstract
To what extent are effectiveness estimates of nonpharmaceutical interventions
(NPIs) against COVID-19 influenced by the assumptions our models make? To
answer this question, we investigate 2 state-of-the-art NPI effectiveness models
and propose 6 variants that make different structural assumptions. In particular, we
investigate how well NPI effectiveness estimates generalise to unseen countries,
and their sensitivity to unobserved factors. Models that account for noise in disease
transmission compare favourably. We further evaluate how robust estimates are to
different choices of epidemiological parameters and data. Focusing on models that
assume transmission noise, we find that previously published results are remarkably
robust across these variables. Finally, we mathematically ground the interpretation
of NPI effectiveness estimates when certain common assumptions do not hold.

1

Introduction

Nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), such as business closures, gathering bans, and stay-at-home
orders, are a central part of the fight against COVID-19. Yet it is largely unknown how effective
different NPIs are at reducing transmission [2, 7]. With a global rise of COVID-19 cases and an
unknown number of waves to come, better understanding is urgently needed to guide policy. Indeed,
knowing the effectiveness of different NPIs would enable countries to efficiently suppress the disease
without imposing unnecessary burden on the population.
Data-driven NPI modelling is one of the best approaches for inferring NPI effect sizes. These models
assume that the implementation of an NPI affects the course of a country’s epidemic in a particular
way. Then, using publicly available incidence and fatality data, as well as a list of NPIs with their
implementation dates, the NPI model can be inverted, yielding NPI effectiveness estimates.
⇤

Equal contribution.

Correspondence to <mrinank@robots.ox.ac.uk>, <soren.mindermann@cs.ox.ac.uk>,
<jan.brauner@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

