Relative gradient optimization of the Jacobian term
in unsupervised deep learning

Luigi Gresele∗1,2

Giancarlo Fissore∗3,4

Bernhard Schölkopf 1

Adrián Javaloy 1

Aapo Hyvärinen 3,5

1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
3
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, Inria Saclay-Île-de-France, 91120, Palaiseau, France
4
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de recherche en informatique, 91405, Orsay, France
5
Dept of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
luigi.gresele@tuebingen.mpg.de; giancarlo.fissore@inria.fr
2

Abstract
Learning expressive probabilistic models correctly describing the data is a ubiquitous problem in machine learning. A popular approach for solving it is mapping
the observations into a representation space with a simple joint distribution, which
can typically be written as a product of its marginals — thus drawing a connection
with the field of nonlinear independent component analysis. Deep density models
have been widely used for this task, but their maximum likelihood based training
requires estimating the log-determinant of the Jacobian and is computationally
expensive, thus imposing a trade-off between computation and expressive power.
In this work, we propose a new approach for exact training of such neural networks.
Based on relative gradients, we exploit the matrix structure of neural network
parameters to compute updates efficiently even in high-dimensional spaces; the
computational cost of the training is quadratic in the input size, in contrast with the
cubic scaling of naive approaches. This allows fast training with objective functions
involving the log-determinant of the Jacobian, without imposing constraints on its
structure, in stark contrast to autoregressive normalizing flows.

1

Introduction

Many problems of machine learning and statistics involve learning invertible transformations of
complex, multimodal probability distributions into simple ones. One example is density estimation
through latent variable models under a specified base distribution [51], which can also have applications in data generation [14, 33, 19] and variational inference [44]. Another example is nonlinear
independent component analysis (nonlinear ICA), where we want to extract simple, disentangled
features out of the observed data [27, 30].
One approach to learn such transformations, introduced in [50] in the context of density estimation, is
to represent them as a composition of simple maps, the sequential application of which enables high
expressivity and a large class of representable transformations. Deep neural networks parameterize
functions of multivariate variables as modular sequences of linear transformations and componentwise activation functions, thus providing a natural framework for implementing that idea, as already
proposed in [45].
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

