Learning Semantic-aware Normalization for
Generative Adversarial Networks
Heliang Zheng1∗, Jianlong Fu2 , Yanhong Zeng3 * , Jiebo Luo4 , Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
4
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY
1
zhenghl@mail.ustc.edu.cn, 2 jianf@microsoft.com,3 zengyh7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
4

jluo@cs.rochester.edu, 1 zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The recent advances in image generation have been achieved by style-based image
generators. Such approaches learn to disentangle latent factors in different image
scales and encode latent factors as “style” to control image synthesis. However,
existing approaches cannot further disentangle fine-grained semantics from each
other, which are often conveyed from feature channels. In this paper, we propose a
novel image synthesis approach by learning Semantic-aware relative importance
for feature channels in Generative Adversarial Networks (SariGAN). Such a model
disentangles latent factors according to the semantic of feature channels by channel/group- wise fusion of latent codes and feature channels. Particularly, we learn
to cluster feature channels by semantics and propose an adaptive group-wise
Normalization (AdaGN) to independently control the styles of different channel
groups. For example, we can adjust the statistics of channel groups for a human
face to control the open and close of the mouth, while keeping other facial features
unchanged. We propose to use adversarial training, a channel grouping loss, and
a mutual information loss for joint optimization, which not only enables highfidelity image synthesis but leads to superior interpretable properties. Extensive
experiments show that our approach outperforms the SOTA style-based approaches
in both unconditional image generation and conditional image inpainting tasks.

1

Introduction

Image generation has achieved significant progress in recent years as generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [1] attract a lot of attention and develop rapidly [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Notably, the
recent success of GANs takes advantage of progressive growing for the generator. Such architectures
make it possible to learn disentangled image styles from different spatial resolutions in the generator
[2, 4, 11, 12], e.g., styles for global structures in low-resolution layers and styles for local details in
high-resolution layers. Particularly, StyleGAN embeds latent codes into different spatial resolutions
to control the scale-aware image styles during synthesizing [2, 12]. For example, StyleGAN is able
to change the color schema of a generated human face by adjusting the style codes in high-resolution
layers, while keeping the style of the global structure synthesized in low-resolution layers unchanged.
Through such a scale-aware disentangled representation learning, StyleGAN yields state-of-the-art
results for high-resolution image generation.
∗
This work was performed when Heliang Zheng and Yanhong Zeng were visiting Microsoft Research as
research interns.
†
corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

