Personalized Federated Learning with Theoretical
Guarantees: A Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
Approach

Alireza Fallah
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
afallah@mit.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Asuman Ozdaglar
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
asuman@mit.edu

Abstract
In Federated Learning, we aim to train models across multiple computing units
(users), while users can only communicate with a common central server, without
exchanging their data samples. This mechanism exploits the computational power
of all users and allows users to obtain a richer model as their models are trained over
a larger set of data points. However, this scheme only develops a common output
for all the users, and, therefore, it does not adapt the model to each user. This is
an important missing feature, especially given the heterogeneity of the underlying
data distribution for various users. In this paper, we study a personalized variant
of the federated learning in which our goal is to find an initial shared model that
current or new users can easily adapt to their local dataset by performing one or a
few steps of gradient descent with respect to their own data. This approach keeps
all the benefits of the federated learning architecture, and, by structure, leads to
a more personalized model for each user. We show this problem can be studied
within the Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) framework. Inspired by this
connection, we study a personalized variant of the well-known Federated Averaging
algorithm and evaluate its performance in terms of gradient norm for non-convex
loss functions. Further, we characterize how this performance is affected by the
closeness of underlying distributions of user data, measured in terms of distribution
distances such as Total Variation and 1-Wasserstein metric.

1

Introduction

In Federated Learning (FL), we consider a set of n users that are all connected to a central node
(server), where each user has access only to its local data [1]. In this setting, the users aim to come up
with a model that is trained over all the data points in the network without exchanging their local
data with other users or the central node due to privacy issues or communication limitations. More

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

