Discovering conflicting groups in signed networks

Ruo-Chun Tzeng
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
rctzeng@kth.se

Bruno Ordozgoiti
Aalto University
bruno.ordozgoiti@aalto.fi

Aristides Gionis
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
argioni@kth.se

Abstract
Signed networks are graphs where edges are annotated with a positive or negative
sign, indicating whether an edge interaction is friendly or antagonistic. Signed networks can be used to study a variety of social phenomena, such as mining polarized
discussions in social media, or modeling relations of trust and distrust in online
review platforms. In this paper we study the problem of detecting k conflicting
groups in a signed network. Our premise is that each group is positively connected
internally and negatively connected with the other k − 1 groups. A distinguishing
aspect of our formulation is that we are not searching for a complete partition of the
signed network; instead, we allow a subset of nodes to be neutral with respect to the
conflict structure we are searching. As a result, the problem we tackle differs from
previously-studied problems, such as correlation clustering and k-way partitioning.
To solve the conflicting-group discovery problem, we derive a novel formulation
in which each conflicting group is naturally characterized by the solution to the
maximum discrete Rayleigh’s quotient (M AX -DRQ) problem. We present two spectral methods for finding approximate solutions to the M AX -DRQ problem, which
we analyze theoretically. Our experimental evaluation shows that, compared to
state-of-the-art baselines, our methods find solutions of higher quality, are faster,
and recover ground-truth conflicting groups with higher accuracy.

1

Introduction

Signed networks are graphs where each edge is labeled either positive or negative. The introduction
of edge signs, which goes back to the 50’s, was motivated by the study of friendly and antagonistic
social relationships [22]. The representation power of signed networks comes at the cost of significant
differences in fundamental graph properties, and thus, algorithmic techniques employed to analyze
unsigned networks are usually not directly applicable to their signed counterparts. These differences
have spurred significant interest in a variety of analysis tasks in signed networks [20, 36] such
as signed network embeddings [7, 24, 25, 39], signed clustering [8, 14, 27, 32], and signed link
prediction [9, 28, 38, 41] in recent years.
In this paper we study the problem of detecting k conflicting groups in signed networks. In more
detail, we are interested in finding a collection of k vertex subsets, each of which is positively connected internally, and negatively connected to the other k − 1 subsets. In social networks where edge
signs indicate positive or negative interactions, identifying conflicting groups may help in the study of
polarization [1, 31, 40, 43], echo chambers [17, 19] and the spread of fake news [12, 35, 42].
Detecting k conflicting groups is challenging due to various reasons. First, conflicting groups are not
simply dense subgraphs, so community-detection techniques for unsigned graphs are not effective.
Second, in real applications we can expect a majority of the network nodes to be neutral with respect
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

