Rotated Binary Neural Network

Mingbao Lin 1 Rongrong Ji 1,2,3∗ Zihan Xu 1 Baochang Zhang 4
Yan Wang 5 Yongjian Wu 6 Feiyue Huang 6 Chia-Wen Lin 7
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
3
4
5
Peng Cheng Lab
Beihang University
Pinterest
6
7
Tencent Youtu Lab
National Tsing Hua University

Abstract
Binary Neural Network (BNN) shows its predominance in reducing the complexity
of deep neural networks. However, it suffers severe performance degradation. One
of the major impediments is the large quantization error between the full-precision
weight vector and its binary vector. Previous works focus on compensating for
the norm gap while leaving the angular bias hardly touched. In this paper, for
the first time, we explore the influence of angular bias on the quantization error
and then introduce a Rotated Binary Neural Network (RBNN), which considers
the angle alignment between the full-precision weight vector and its binarized
version. At the beginning of each training epoch, we propose to rotate the fullprecision weight vector to its binary vector to reduce the angular bias. To avoid
the high complexity of learning a large rotation matrix, we further introduce a
bi-rotation formulation that learns two smaller rotation matrices. In the training
stage, we devise an adjustable rotated weight vector for binarization to escape the
potential local optimum. Our rotation leads to around 50% weight flips which
maximize the information gain. Finally, we propose a training-aware approximation
of the sign function for the gradient backward. Experiments on CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet demonstrate the superiorities of RBNN over many state-of-the-arts. Our
source code, experimental settings, training logs and binary models are available at
https://github.com/lmbxmu/RBNN.

1

Introduction

The community has witnessed the remarkable performance improvements of deep neural networks
(DNNs) in computer vision tasks, such as image classification [26, 19], object detection [39, 20]
and semantic segmentation [35, 33]. However, the cost of massive parameters and computational
complexity makes DNNs hard to be deployed on resource-constrained and low-power devices.
To solve this problem, many compression techniques have been proposed including network pruning
[30, 14, 29], low-rank decomposition [12, 43, 18], efficient architecture design [24, 42, 7] and network
quantization [28, 2, 21], etc. In particular, network quantization resorts to converting the weights and
activations of a full-precision network to low-bit representations. In the extreme case, a binary neural
network (BNN) restricts its weights and activations to only two possible values (−1 and +1) such
that: 1) the network size is 32× less than its full-precision counterpart; 2) the multiply-accumulation
convolution can be replaced with the efficient xnor and bitcount logics.
Though BNN has attracted great interest, it remains a challenge to close the accuracy gap between a
full-precision network and its binarized version [38, 6]. One of the major obstacles comes at the large
∗

Corresponding Author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

