Learning from Aggregate Observations

Yivan Zhang
The University of Tokyo / RIKEN
yivanzhang@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Nontawat Charoenphakdee
The University of Tokyo / RIKEN
nontawat@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Zhenguo Wu
The University of Tokyo
zhenguo@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Masashi Sugiyama
RIKEN / The University of Tokyo
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We study the problem of learning from aggregate observations where supervision
signals are given to sets of instances instead of individual instances, while the
goal is still to predict labels of unseen individuals. A well-known example is
multiple instance learning (MIL). In this paper, we extend MIL beyond binary
classification to other problems such as multiclass classification and regression. We
present a general probabilistic framework that accommodates a variety of aggregate
observations, e.g., pairwise similarity/triplet comparison for classification and
mean/difference/rank observation for regression. Simple maximum likelihood
solutions can be applied to various differentiable models such as deep neural
networks and gradient boosting machines. Moreover, we develop the concept of
consistency up to an equivalence relation to characterize our estimator and show
that it has nice convergence properties under mild assumptions. Experiments on
three problem settings — classification via triplet comparison and regression via
mean/rank observation indicate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning techniques usually require a large number of high-quality labels for
individual instances [Jordan and Mitchell, 2015]. However, in the real world, it could be prohibited to
obtain individual information while we can still obtain some forms of supervision for sets of instances.
We give three following motivating use cases. The first scenario is when individual information
cannot be released to the public due to privacy concerns [Horvitz and Mulligan, 2015]. One way to
avoid releasing individual information is to only disclose some summary statistics of small groups to
the public so that individual information can be protected. The second scenario is when individual
annotations are intrinsically unavailable but group annotations are provided, which arises in problems
such as drug activity prediction problem [Dietterich et al., 1997]. The third scenario is when the
labeling cost for an individual instance is expensive [Zhou, 2017].
In classification, one of the most well-known examples of learning from aggregate observations is
multiple instance learning (MIL) for binary classification [Zhou, 2004], where training instances are
arranged in sets and the aggregate information is whether the positive instances exist in a set. MIL has
found applications in many areas [Yang, 2005, Carbonneau et al., 2018], including aforementioned
drug activity prediction [Dietterich et al., 1997]. Learning from label proportions (LLP) [Kück and
de Freitas, 2005, Quadrianto et al., 2009, Yu et al., 2013, Patrini et al., 2014] is another well-studied
example where the proportion of positive instances in each set is observed. However, most earlier
studies as well as recent work in MIL and LLP only focus on binary classification and the type of
aggregation is limited. Recently, classification from comparison has gained more attention. Bao
et al. [2018] considered learning from pairwise similarities, where one can obtain a binary value
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

