Non-Stochastic Control with Bandit Feedback
Paula Gradu1,3
John Hallman1,3
Elad Hazan2,3
1
Department of Mathematics, Princeton University
2
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
3
Google AI Princeton
{pgradu,hallman,ehazan}@princeton.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of controlling a linear dynamical system with adversarial
perturbations where the only feedback available to the controller is the scalar loss,
and the loss function itself is unknown. For this problem, with either a known
or unknown system, we give an efficient sublinear regret algorithm. The main
algorithmic difficulty is the dependence of the loss on past controls. To overcome
this issue, we propose an efficient algorithm for the general setting of bandit
convex optimization for loss functions with memory, which may be of independent
interest.

1

Introduction

The fields of Reinforcement Learning (RL), as well as its differentiable counterpart of Control,
formally model the setting of learning through interaction in a reactive environment. The crucial
component in RL/control that allows learning is the feedback, or reward/penalty, which the agent
iteratively observes and reacts to.
While some signal is necessary for learning, different applications have different feedback to the
learning agent. In many reinforcement learning and control problems it is unrealistic to assume that
the learner has feedback for actions other than their own. One example is in game-playing, such as
the game of Chess, where a player can observe the adversary’s move for their own choice of play,
but it is unrealistic to expect knowledge of the adversary’s play for any possible move. This type of
feedback is commonly known in the learning literature as “bandit feedback”.
Learning in Markov Decision Processes (MDP) is a general and difficult problem for which there are
no known algorithms that have sublinear dependence on the number of states. For this reason we
look at structured MDPs, and in particular the model of control in Linear Dynamical Systems (LDS),
a highly structured special case that is known to admit more efficient methods as compared to general
RL.
In this paper we study learning in linear dynamical systems with bandit feedback. This generalizes
the well-known Linear Quadratic Regulator to systems with only bandit feedback over any convex
loss function. Further, our results apply to the non-stochastic control problem which allows for
adversarial perturbations and adversarially chosen loss functions, even when the underlying linear
system is unknown.
1.1

Our Results

We give the first sublinear regret algorithm for controlling a linear dynamical system with bandit
feedback in the non-stochastic control model. Specifically, we consider the case in which the
underlying system is linear, but has potentially adversarial perturbations (that can model deviations
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

