An Analysis of SVD for Deep Rotation Estimation
Jake Levinson1
Carlos Esteves2 Kefan Chen3
3
Angjoo Kanazawa
Afshin Rostamizadeh3
1
2
Simon Fraser University
University of Pennsylvania

Noah Snavely3
Ameesh Makadia3
3
Google Research

Abstract
Symmetric orthogonalization via SVD, and closely related procedures, are wellknown techniques for projecting matrices onto O(n) or SO(n). These tools have
long been used for applications in computer vision, for example optimal 3D alignment problems solved by orthogonal Procrustes, rotation averaging, or Essential
matrix decomposition. Despite its utility in different settings, SVD orthogonalization as a procedure for producing rotation matrices is typically overlooked in
deep learning models, where the preferences tend toward classic representations
like unit quaternions, Euler angles, and axis-angle, or more recently-introduced
methods. Despite the importance of 3D rotations in computer vision and robotics,
a single universally effective representation is still missing. Here, we explore the
viability of SVD orthogonalization for 3D rotations in neural networks. We present
a theoretical analysis of SVD as used for projection onto the rotation group. Our
extensive quantitative analysis shows simply replacing existing representations
with the SVD orthogonalization procedure obtains state of the art performance
in many deep learning applications covering both supervised and unsupervised
training.

1

Introduction

There are many ways to represent a 3D rotation matrix. But what is the ideal representation to predict
3D rotations in a deep learning framework? The goal of this paper is to explore this seemingly
low-level but practically impactful question, as currently the answer appears to be ambiguous.
In this paper we present a systematic study on estimating rotations in neural networks. We identify
that the classic technique of SVD orthogonalization, widely used in other contexts but rarely in the
estimation of 3D rotations in deep networks, is ideally suited for this task with strong empirical and
theoretical support.
3D rotations are important quantities appearing in countless applications across different fields of
study, and are now especially ubiquitous in learning problems in 3D computer vision and robotics.
The task of predicting 3D rotations is common to estimating object pose [53, 27, 32, 44, 49, 24, 45],
relative camera pose [30, 36, 7], ego-motion and depth from video [55, 29], and human pose [56, 21].
A design choice common to all of these models is selecting a representation for 3D rotations. The
most frequent choices are classic representations including unit quaternion, Euler angles, and axisangle. Despite being such a well-studied problem, there is no universally effective representation or
regression architecture due to performance variations across different applications.
A natural alternative to these classic representations is symmetric orthogonalization, a long-known
technique which projects matrices onto the orthogonal group O(3) [26, 40]. Simple variations
can restrict the projections onto the special orthogonal (rotation) group SO(3) [15, 20, 50]. This
procedure, when executed by Singular Value Decomposition (SVD [11]), has found many applications
contact: jake_levinson@sfu.ca, makadia@google.com
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

