Tree! I am no Tree! I am a Low Dimensional
Hyperbolic Embedding
Rishi Sonthalia⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, 48104
rsonthal@umich.edu

Anna C. Gilbert
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT, 06510
anna.gilbert@yale.edu

Abstract
Given data, finding a faithful low-dimensional hyperbolic embedding of the data
is a key method by which we can extract hierarchical information or learn representative geometric features of the data. In this paper, we explore a new method
for learning hyperbolic representations by taking a metric-first approach. Rather
than determining the low-dimensional hyperbolic embedding directly, we learn a
tree structure on the data. This tree structure can then be used directly to extract
hierarchical information, embedded into a hyperbolic manifold using Sarkar’s
construction [38], or used as a tree approximation of the original metric. To this
end, we present a novel fast algorithm T REE R EP such that, given a -hyperbolic
metric (for any
0), the algorithm learns a tree structure that approximates
the original metric. In the case when = 0, we show analytically that T REE R EP
exactly recovers the original tree structure. We show empirically that T REE R EP is
not only many orders of magnitude faster than previously known algorithms, but
also produces metrics with lower average distortion and higher mean average precision than most previous algorithms for learning hyperbolic embeddings, extracting
hierarchical information, and approximating metrics via tree metrics.

1

Introduction

Extracting hierarchical information from data is a key step in understanding and analyzing the
structure of the data in a wide range of areas from the analysis of single cell genomic data [26], to
linguistics [13], computer vision [25] and social network analysis [41]. In single cell genomics, for
example, researchers want to understand the developmental trajectory of cellular differentiation. To do
so, they seek techniques to visualize, to cluster, and to infer temporal properties of the developmental
trajectory of individual cells.
One way to capture the hierarchical structure is to represent the data as a tree. Even simple trees,
however, cannot be faithfully represented in low dimensional Euclidean space [29]. As a result, a
variety of remarkably effective hyperbolic representation learning methods, including Nickel and
Kiela [30, 31], Sala et al. [36], have been developed. These methods learn an embedding of the data
points in hyperbolic space by first solving a non-convex optimization problem and then extracting the
hyperbolic metric that corresponds to the distances between the embedded points. These methods are
successful because of the inherent connections between hyperbolic spaces and trees. They do not,
however, come with rigorous geometric guarantees about the quality of the solution. Also, they are
slow.
⇤

Corresponding Author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

