Sense and Sensitivity Analysis: Simple Post-Hoc
Analysis of Bias Due to Unobserved Confounding
Victor Veitch1 and Anisha Zaveri2
2

1
Google Research
Weill Cornell Medicine

Abstract
It is a truth universally acknowledged that an observed association without known
mechanism must be in want of a causal estimate. However, Causal estimates
from observational data will be biased in the presence of ‘unobserved confounding’. Nevertheless, we might hope that the influence of unobserved confounders is
weak relative to a ‘large’ estimated effect. The purpose of this paper is to develop
Austen plots, a sensitivity analysis tool to aid such judgments by making it easier
to reason about potential bias induced by unobserved confounding. We formalize
confounding strength in terms of how strongly the unobserved confounding influences treatment assignment and outcome. For a target level of bias, an Austen
plot shows the minimum values of treatment and outcome influence required to
induce that level of bias. Austen plots generalize the classic sensitivity analysis approach of Imbens [Imb03]. Critically, Austen plots allow any approach for
modeling the observed data. We illustrate the tool by assessing biases for several
real causal inference problems, using a variety of machine learning approaches
for the initial data analysis. Code, demo data, and a tutorial are available at at
github.com/anishazaveri/austen plots.

1

Introduction

The high costs of randomized controlled trials coupled with the relative availability of (large scale)
observational data motivate attempts to infer causal relationships from observational data. For example, we may wish to use a database of electronic health records to estimate the effect of a treatment. Causal inference from observational data must account for possible confounders that influence both treatment assignment and the outcome; e.g., wealth may be a common cause influencing whether a patient takes an expensive drug and whether they recover. Often, causal inference is
based on the assumption of ‘no unobserved confounding’; i.e., the assumption that the observed covariates include all common causes of the treatment assignment and outcome. This assumption is
fundamentally untestable from observed data, but its violation can induce bias in the estimation of
the treatment effect—the unobserved confounding may completely or in part explain the observed
association. Our aim in this paper is to develop a sensitivity analysis tool to aid in reasoning about
potential bias induced by unobserved confounding.
Intuitively, if we estimate a large positive effect then we might expect the real effect is also positive, even in the presence of mild unobserved confounding. For example, consider the association
between smoking and lung cancer. One could argue that this association arises from a genetic mutation that predisposes carriers to both an increased desire to smoke and to a greater risk of lung
cancer. However, the association between smoking and lung cancer is large—is it plausible that
some unknown genetic association could have a strong enough influence to explain the association?
Answering such questions requires a domain expert to make a judgment about whether plausible
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

