Sub-linear Regret Bounds for Bayesian Optimisation
in Unknown Search Spaces

Hung Tran-The∗, Sunil Gupta, Santu Rana, Huong Ha, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute
Deakin University, Australia

Abstract
Bayesian optimisation is a popular method for efficient optimisation of expensive
black-box functions. Traditionally, BO assumes that the search space is known.
However, in many problems, this assumption does not hold. To this end, we
propose a novel BO algorithm which expands (and shifts) the search space over
iterations based on controlling the expansion rate thought a hyperharmonic series.
Further, we propose another variant of our algorithm that scales to high dimensions.
We show theoretically that for both our algorithms, the cumulative regret grows
at sub-linear rates. Our experiments with synthetic and real-world optimisation
tasks demonstrate the superiority of our algorithms over the current state-of-the-art
methods for Bayesian optimisation in unknown search space.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimisation (BO) is a powerful and flexible tool for efficient global optimisation of
expensive black-box functions. An underlying limitation of existing approaches is that the search
is restricted to a pre-defined and fixed search space, thus implicitly assuming that this search space
will contain the global optimum. To set suitable bounds of the search space, prior knowledge is
required. When exploring entirely new problems (e.g a new machine learning model), such prior
knowledge is often poor, and thus the specification of the search space can be erroneous leading to
suboptimal solutions. For example, in many machine learning algorithms we have hyperparameters
or parameters that can take values in an unbounded space e.g. L1/L2 penalty hyperparameters in
elastic-net can take any nonnegative value. Similarly, the weights of a neural network can take any
real values. No matter how large a finite search space is set, one cannot be sure if this search space
contains the global optimum.
This problem is considered in [23, 17, 18, 8, 2], and UBO [8] is the first to provide global convergence
analysis. However, they consider a weak version of the global convergence, i.e., instead of seeking
the exact global optimum, they find a solution wherein the function value is within  > 0 of the global
optimum. Further, there is no analysis on the convergence rate of this algorithm which is important
for understanding the efficiency of the optimisation.
Another complication arises when high dimensional problems are considered (e.g. hyperparameter
tuning [24], reinforcement learning [1]), as BO scales poorly in practice. With unknown search
spaces, we need to consider evolving/growing search spaces. This growth in search spaces makes
high dimensional BO further challenging as the search space is already exponentially large with
respect to dimensions. Both these challenges compound the difficulty in maximising the acquisition
functions. With limited budgets, the accuracy of points suggested by the acquisition step is often
poor and this adversely affects both the convergence and the efficiency of the BO algorithm. Thus
solutions to BO in unknown high-dimensional search spaces need to be found.
∗

Correspondence to: Hung Tran-The <hung.tranthe@deakin.edu.au>.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

