The Smoothed Possibility of Social Choice

Lirong Xia, RPI, xialirong@gmail.com

Abstract
We develop a framework that leverages the smoothed complexity analysis
by Spielman and Teng [60] to circumvent paradoxes and impossibility theorems
in social choice, motivated by modern applications of social choice powered by
AI and ML. For Condrocet’s paradox, we prove that the smoothed likelihood of
the paradox either vanishes at an exponential rate as the number of agents increases, or does not vanish at all. For the ANR impossibility on the non-existence
of voting rules that simultaneously satisfy anonymity, neutrality, and resolvability,
we characterize the rate for the impossibility to vanish, to be either polynomially
fast or exponentially fast. We also propose a novel easy-to-compute tie-breaking
mechanism that optimally preserves anonymity and neutrality for even number of
alternatives in natural settings. Our results illustrate the smoothed possibility of
social choice—even though the paradox and the impossibility theorem hold in the
worst case, they may not be a big concern in practice.

1

Introduction

Dealing with paradoxes and impossibility theorems is a major challenge in social choice theory,
because “the force and widespread presence of impossibility results generated a consolidated sense
of pessimism, and this became a dominant theme in welfare economics and social choice theory in
general”, as the eminent economist Amartya Sen commented in his Nobel prize lecture [57].
Many paradoxes and impossibility theorems in social choice are based on worst-case analysis. Take
perhaps the earliest one, namely Condorcet’s (voting) paradox [15], for example. Condorcet’s paradox states that, when there are at least three alternatives, it is impossible for pairwise majority
aggregation to be transitive. The proof is done by explicitly constructing a worst-case scenario—a
profile P that contains a Condorcet cycle. For example, in P = {a  b  c, b  c  a, c  a  b},
there is a cycle a  b, b  c, and c  a of pairwise majority. Condorcet’s paradox is closely related
to the celebrated Arrow’s impossibility theorem: if Condorcet’s paradox can be avoided, then the
pairwise majority rule can avoid Arrow’s impossibility theorem.
As another example, the ANR impossibility theorem (e.g. [49, Problem 1] and [53, 22, 12]) states that
no voting rule r can simultaneously satisfy anonymity (r is insensitive to the identities of agents)
and neutrality (r is insensitive to the identities of alternatives), and resolvability (r always chooses a
single winner). The proof is done by analyzing a worst-case scenario P = {a  b, b  a}. Suppose
for the sake of contradiction that a resolvable r satisfies anonymity and neutrality, and without loss
of generality let r(P ) = a. After exchanging a and b, the winner ought to be b due to neutrality. But
since the permuted profile still contains one vote for a  b and one vote for b  a, the winner ought
to be a due to anonymity, which is a contradiction.
There is an enormous literature in social choice on circumventing the impossibilities, most of
which belongs to the following two approaches. (1) Domain restrictions, namely, agents’ reported
preferences are assumed to come from a subset of all linear orders such as single-peaked preferences [6, 2, 58, 48, 16, 8, 24]; and (2) likelihood analysis, where impossibility theorems are evaluated by the likelihood of their occurrence in profiles randomly generated from a distribution such
as the i.i.d. uniform distribution, a.k.a. Impartial Culture (IC) [28, 32]. Both approaches have been
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

