Implicit Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Yuguang Yue∗ , Zhendong Wang∗, and Mingyuan Zhou†
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712

Abstract
To improve the sample efficiency of policy-gradient based reinforcement learning
algorithms, we propose implicit distributional actor-critic (IDAC) that consists
of a distributional critic, built on two deep generator networks (DGNs), and a
semi-implicit actor (SIA), powered by a flexible policy distribution. We adopt a
distributional perspective on the discounted cumulative return and model it with a
state-action-dependent implicit distribution, which is approximated by the DGNs
that take state-action pairs and random noises as their input. Moreover, we use
the SIA to provide a semi-implicit policy distribution, which mixes the policy
parameters with a reparameterizable distribution that is not constrained by an
analytic density function. In this way, the policy’s marginal distribution is implicit,
providing the potential to model complex properties such as covariance structure
and skewness, but its parameter and entropy can still be estimated. We incorporate
these features with an off-policy algorithm framework to solve problems with
continuous action space and compare IDAC with state-of-the-art algorithms on
representative OpenAI Gym environments. We observe that IDAC outperforms
these baselines in most tasks. Python code is provided1 .

1

Introduction

Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) plays an important role in addressing complex real-world
sequential decision making tasks (MacAlpine and Stone, 2017; Silver et al., 2018; OpenAI, 2018).
With the help of deep neural networks, model-free deep RL algorithms have been successfully
implemented in a variety of tasks, including game playing (Silver et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2013) and
robotic control (Levine et al., 2016). Deep Q-network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015) enables RL agent
with human level performance on Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013), motivating many follow-up
works with further improvements (Wang et al., 2016; Andrychowicz et al., 2017). A novel idea,
proposed by Bellemare et al. (2017a), is to take a distributional perspective for deep RL problems,
which models the full distribution of the discounted cumulative return of a chosen action at a state
rather than just the expectation of it, so that the model can capture its intrinsic randomness instead of
just first-order moment. Specifically, the distributional Bellman operator can help capture skewness
and multimodality in state-action value distributions, which could lead to a more stable learning
process, and approximating the full distribution may also mitigate the challenges of learning from
a non-stationary policy. Under this distributional framework, Bellemare et al. (2017a) propose the
C51 algorithm that outperforms previous state-of-the-art classical Q-learning based algorithms on a
range of Atari games. However, some discrepancies exist between the theory and implementation in
C51, motivating Dabney et al. (2018b) to introduce QR-DQN that borrows Wasserstein distance and
quantile regression related techniques to diminish the theory-practice gap. Later on, the distributional
view is also incorporated into the framework of deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) (Lillicrap
et al., 2015) for continuous control tasks, yielding efficient algorithms such as distributed distributional
∗
1

The first two authors contributed equally. † Corresponding to mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu
https://github.com/zhougroup/IDAC

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

