Stationary Activations for Uncertainty
Calibration in Deep Learning

Lassi Meronen

Christabella Irwanto

Aalto University / Saab Finland Oy
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
Espoo, Finland
lassi.meronen@aalto.fi
christabella.irwanto@aalto.fi

Arno Solin
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
arno.solin@aalto.fi

Abstract
We introduce a new family of non-linear neural network activation functions that
mimic the properties induced by the widely-used Matérn family of kernels in
Gaussian process (GP) models. This class spans a range of locally stationary
models of various degrees of mean-square differentiability. We show an explicit
link to the corresponding GP models in the case that the network consists of one
infinitely wide hidden layer. In the limit of infinite smoothness the Matérn family
results in the RBF kernel, and in this case we recover RBF activations. Matérn
activation functions result in similar appealing properties to their counterparts in
GP models, and we demonstrate that the local stationarity property together with
limited mean-square differentiability shows both good performance and uncertainty
calibration in Bayesian deep learning tasks. In particular, local stationarity helps
calibrate out-of-distribution (OOD) uncertainty. We demonstrate these properties
on classification and regression benchmarks and a radar emitter classification task.

1

Introduction

Deep feedforward neural networks (see, e.g., [26, 28]) have become an essential component of
modern machine learning. Their black box nature results in a lack of interpretability, an issue that
has been tackled recently from many directions, one of which is the study of random (untrained)
networks in order to examine what prior assumptions they impose over functions. By assuming a
probability distribution on the network parameters, a distribution is induced from the inputs to the
outputs of the network. While we typically want networks to have high modelling capability (or
flexibility), large networks can be hard to analyse directly. This difficulty motivates instead the study
of the limiting behaviour of the networks, which can provide new insight and better interpretation.
This is also of interest for Bayesian deep learning, where the concept of assigning priors on neural
networks only makes sense if the effects of prior assumptions can be understood.
Along the line of studying random networks, Neal [47] showed that under certain assumptions,
random neural networks with one hidden layer converge to a Gaussian process (GP, [53]) in the limit
of infinite width. Since then, explicit links between common neural network activation functions and
GP covariance (kernel) functions have been shown (e.g., ERF and RBF activations by [68] and ReLU
and step activations by [8], see Fig. 1). Recently, this equivalence was extended to deep networks
[14, 39]. Gal and Ghahramani [21] leveraged the connection for approximate variational inference
in neural networks. The call for more work on deep net priors (e.g., [19, 49, 62]) is also motivated
by empirical findings [67], and we recognize two separate problems in deep learning: (i) designing
network architectures that support our domain knowledge of the modelling task (prior assumptions),
and (ii) performing inference and learning with the model. Recent interest in Bayesian deep learning
has been in (ii) (see, e.g., [4, 35, 41, 55]), while we tackle (i), and choose to apply a simple and
conservative inference method—we resort to Monte Carlo (MC) dropout in our experiments.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

