Do Adversarially Robust ImageNet
Models Transfer Better?
Hadi Salman⇤
hadi.salman@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research

Andrew Ilyas⇤
ailyas@mit.edu
MIT

Ashish Kapoor
akapoor@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research

Logan Engstrom
engstrom@mit.edu
MIT

Aleksander M ˛
adry
madry@mit.edu
MIT

Abstract
Transfer learning is a widely-used paradigm in which models pre-trained on standard datasets can efficiently adapt to downstream tasks. Typically, better pretrained models yield better transfer results, suggesting that initial accuracy is a
key aspect of transfer learning performance. In this work, we identify another
such aspect: we find that adversarially robust models, while less accurate, often perform better than their standard-trained counterparts when used for transfer learning. Specifically, we focus on adversarially robust ImageNet classifiers, and show that they yield improved accuracy on a standard suite of downstream classification tasks. Further analysis uncovers more differences between
robust and standard models in the context of transfer learning. Our results are
consistent with (and in fact, add to) recent hypotheses stating that robustness
leads to improved feature representations. Our code and models are available
at https://github.com/Microsoft/robust-models-transfer.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks currently define state-of-the-art performance across many computer vision
tasks. When large quantities of labeled data and computing resources are available, models perform
well when trained from scratch. However, in many practical settings there is insufficient data or
compute for this approach to be viable. In these cases, transfer learning [Don+14; Sha+14] has
emerged as a simple and efficient way to obtain performant models. Broadly, transfer learning refers
to any machine learning algorithm that leverages information from one (“source”) task to better solve
another (“target”) task. A prototypical transfer learning pipeline in computer vision (and the focus
of our work) starts with a model trained on the ImageNet-1K dataset [Den+09; Rus+15], and then
refines this model for the target task.
Though the exact underpinnings of transfer learning are not fully understood, recent work has
identified factors that make pre-trained ImageNet models amenable to transfer learning. For example, [HAE16; Kol+19] investigate the effect of the source dataset; Kornblith, Shlens, and Le
[KSL19] find that pre-trained models with higher ImageNet accuracy also tend to transfer better; Azizpour et al. [Azi+15] observe that increasing depth improves transfer more than increasing width.
Our contributions. In this work, we identify another factor that affects transfer learning performance: adversarial robustness [Big+13; Sze+14]. We find that despite being less accurate on ImageNet, adversarially robust neural networks match or improve on the transfer performance of their
standard counterparts. We first establish this trend in the “fixed-feature” setting, in which one trains
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

