Deep Variational Instance Segmentation

Jialin Yuan
CoRIS Institute
Oregon State University
yuanjial@oregonstate.edu

Chao Chen
Stony Brook University
chao.chen.1@stonybrook.edu

Li Fuxin
CoRIS Institute
Oregon State University
lif@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Instance segmentation, which seeks to obtain both class and instance labels for
each pixel in the input image, is a challenging task in computer vision. State-ofthe-art algorithms often employ a search-based strategy, which first divides the
output image with a regular grid and generate proposals at each grid cell, then
the proposals are classified and boundaries refined. In this paper, we propose
a novel algorithm that directly utilizes a fully convolutional network (FCN) to
predict instance labels. Specifically, we propose a variational relaxation of instance
segmentation as minimizing an optimization functional for a piecewise-constant
segmentation problem, which can be used to train an FCN end-to-end. It extends
the classical Mumford-Shah variational segmentation algorithm to be able to handle
the permutation-invariant ground truth in instance segmentation. Experiments on
PASCAL VOC 2012 and the MSCOCO 2017 dataset show that the proposed
approach efficiently tackles the instance segmentation task. The source code and
trained models are released at https://github.com/jia2lin3yuan1/2020-instanceSeg.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed rapid development in semantic segmentation [30; 33; 10; 20], i.e.,
classifying pixels into different object categories such as car or person. However, in order to fully
understand a scene, we need to identify individual object instances, along with their semantic labels.
This task, called semantic instance segmentation [13; 16; 26], is much more challenging, because (1)
different instances may have similar appearances if they belong to the same category; (2) the number
of instances is often unknown during prediction; and (3) labels of the instances are permutationinvariant, i.e., randomly permuting instance labels in the training ground truth should not change the
learning outcome (Fig. 1).
For such permutation-invariant instance labels, one cannot directly train the model using conventional
objectives such as the cross-entropy (CE) loss. One popular strategy is to combine detection and
segmentation into a two-stage approach. One network generates object proposals, while another one
classifies and refines each proposal [17; 24; 39; 11; 18; 28; 9; 42; 1]. To ensure all instances are
segmented, these methods often need to generate a significant amount of proposals (1, 000 − 3, 000
per image), and many are based on a sliding window approach that is similar to a complete search
on a low-resolution image with anchor boxes. These proposals are verified with an object classifier
and a smaller but still significant amount (200 − 2, 000) are sent to the second stage for classification
and refinement. To improve the efficiency, some recent works remove the anchor boxes by directly
dividing the output image into a regular grid cell and segmenting the object that is centered in each
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

