The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis for
Pre-trained BERT Networks
Tianlong Chen1 , Jonathan Frankle2 , Shiyu Chang3 , Sijia Liu3 , Yang Zhang3 ,
Zhangyang Wang1 , Michael Carbin2
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 MIT CSAIL, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
{tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu,{jfrankle,mcarbin}@csail.mit.edu,
{shiyu.chang,sijia.liu,yang.zhang2}@ibm.com

Abstract
In natural language processing (NLP), enormous pre-trained models like BERT
have become the standard starting point for training on a range of downstream
tasks, and similar trends are emerging in other areas of deep learning. In parallel,
work on the lottery ticket hypothesis has shown that models for NLP and computer
vision contain smaller matching subnetworks capable of training in isolation to
full accuracy and transferring to other tasks. In this work, we combine these
observations to assess whether such trainable, transferrable subnetworks exist
in pre-trained BERT models. For a range of downstream tasks, we indeed find
matching subnetworks at 40% to 90% sparsity. We find these subnetworks at
(pre-trained) initialization, a deviation from prior NLP research where they emerge
only after some amount of training. Subnetworks found on the masked language
modeling task (the same task used to pre-train the model) transfer universally;
those found on other tasks transfer in a limited fashion if at all. As large-scale
pre-training becomes an increasingly central paradigm in deep learning, our results
demonstrate that the main lottery ticket observations remain relevant in this context.
Codes available at https://github.com/VITA-Group/BERT-Tickets.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the machine learning research community has devoted substantial energy to scaling
neural networks to enormous sizes. Parameter-counts are frequently measured in billions rather than
millions [1–3], with the time and financial outlay necessary to train these models growing in concert
[4]. These trends have been especially pronounced in natural language processing (NLP), where
massive BERT models—built on the Transformer architecture [5] and pre-trained in a self-supervised
fashion—have become the standard starting point for a variety of downstream tasks [6, 7]. Selfsupervised pre-training is also growing in popularity in computer vision [8, 9], suggesting it may
again become a standard practice across deep learning as it was in the past [10].
In parallel to this race for ever-larger models, an emerging subfield has explored the prospect of
training smaller subnetworks in place of the full models without sacrificing performance [11–16]. For
example, work on the lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) [16] demonstrated that small-scale networks
for computer vision contain sparse, matching subnetworks [17] capable of training in isolation from
initialization to full accuracy. In other words, we could have trained smaller networks from the start
if only we had known which subnetworks to choose. Within the growing body of work on the lottery
ticket hypothesis, two key themes have emerged:
Initialization via pre-training. In larger-scale settings for computer vision and natural language
processing [17–19], the lottery ticket methodology can only find matching subnetworks at an early
point in training rather than at random initialization. Prior to this point, these subnetworks perform
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

