Neural Message Passing for Multi-Relational Ordered
and Recursive Hypergraphs

Naganand Yadati
naganand@iisc.ac.in
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, Karnataka, 560012

Abstract
Message passing neural network (MPNN) has recently emerged as a successful
framework by achieving state-of-the-art performances on many graph-based learning tasks. MPNN has also recently been extended to multi-relational graphs (each
edge is labelled), and hypergraphs (each edge can connect any number of vertices).
However, in real-world datasets involving text and knowledge, relationships are
much more complex in which hyperedges can be multi-relational, recursive, and
ordered. Such structures present several unique challenges because it is not clear
how to adapt MPNN to variable-sized hyperedges in them. In this work, we first
unify exisiting MPNNs on different structures into G-MPNN (Generalised-MPNN)
framework. Motivated by real-world datasets, we then propose a novel extension
of the framework, MPNN-R (MPNN-Recursive) to handle recursively-structured
data. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed instances of
G-MPNN and MPNN-R. The code is available. 1

1

Introduction

Message passing neural network (MPNN) has recently emerged as a successful framework by
achieving state-of-the-art performances on many graph-based learning tasks [25]. The messagepassing operation in the MPNN framework can be viewed as recursive neighbourhood aggregation,
where local neighbourhood messages are aggregated and passed on to neighbouring vertices. MPNN
has also recently been extended to multi-relational graphs in which each edge is labelled (and possibly
directed), and separately to hypergraphs in which each edge can connect any number of vertices.
However, in real-world datasets involving text and knowledge, relationships are much more complex
in which hyperedges can act as vertices recursively in other hyperedges. Hyperedges can also be
multi-relational with vertices appearing in a fixed order. We illustrate such structures with a toy
example in Figure 1. Multi-relational ordered hypergraphs have been shown to provide more flexible
organisation of multi-ary relational facts than multi-relational directed edges and have been a recent
research topic of interest [74, 19]. Recursive hypergraphs [55] have been shown to flexibly represent
a few sentence types such as claims about claims in natural language (e.g. A claimed that B claimed
C). Recursivesly structured hypergraphs are also seen in academic network datasets. Such structures
present several unique challenges because it is not clear how to adapt MPNN to variable-sized
hyperedges in them. Our contributions can be summarised as follows.
• We provide a unified MPNN-style framework, which we call G-MPNN (GeneralisedMPNN), for multi-relational ordered hypergraphs. Several notable examples of models can
be described using the unified framework
1

https://github.com/naganandy/G-MPNN-R

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

