3D Multi-bodies: Fitting Sets of Plausible 3D Human
Models to Ambiguous Image Data

Benjamin Biggs∗
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge

Sébastien Ehrhardt∗
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford

Hanbyul Joo
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park

bjb56@cam.ac.uk

hyenal@robots.ox.ac.uk

hjoo@fb.com

Benjamin Graham
Facebook AI Research
London

Andrea Vedaldi
Facebook AI Research
London

David Novotny
Facebook AI Research
London

benjamingraham@fb.com

vedaldi@fb.com

dnovotny@fb.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of obtaining dense 3D reconstructions of humans from
single and partially occluded views. In such cases, the visual evidence is usually insufficient to identify a 3D reconstruction uniquely, so we aim at recovering
several plausible reconstructions compatible with the input data. We suggest that
ambiguities can be modelled more effectively by parametrizing the possible body
shapes and poses via a suitable 3D model, such as SMPL for humans. We propose
to learn a multi-hypothesis neural network regressor using a best-of-M loss, where
each of the M hypotheses is constrained to lie on a manifold of plausible human
poses by means of a generative model. We show that our method outperforms
alternative approaches in ambiguous pose recovery on standard benchmarks for
3D humans, and in heavily occluded versions of these benchmarks.

1

Introduction

We are interested in reconstructing 3D human pose from the observation of single 2D images. As
humans, we have no problem in predicting, at least approximately, the 3D structure of most scenes,
including the pose and shape of other people, even from a single view. However, 2D images notoriously [9] do not contain sufficient geometric information to allow recovery of the third dimension.
Hence, single-view reconstruction is only possible in a probabilistic sense and the goal is to make
the posterior distribution as sharp as possible, by learning a strong prior on the space of possible
solutions.
Recent progress in single-view 3D pose reconstruction has been impressive. Methods such as
HMR [17], GraphCMR [20] and SPIN [19] formulate this task as learning a deep neural network
that maps 2D images to the parameters of a 3D model of the human body, usually SMPL [26]. These
methods work well in general, but not always (fig. 2). Their main weakness is processing heavily
occluded images of the object. When a large part of the object is missing, say the lower body of a
sitting human, they output reconstructions that are often implausible. Since they can produce only
one hypothesis as output, they very likely learn to approximate the mean of the posterior distribution, which may not correspond to any plausible pose. Unfortunately, this failure modality is rather
common in applications due to scene clutter and crowds.
In this paper, we propose a solution to this issue. Specifically, we consider the challenge of recovering 3D mesh reconstructions of complex articulated objects such as humans from highly ambiguous
∗

work completed during internship at Facebook AI Research

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

