Neural Networks Fail to Learn Periodic Functions
and How to Fix It
Liu Ziyin1 , Tilman Hartwig1,2,3 , Masahito Ueda1,2,4
Department of Physics, School of Science, The University of Tokyo
2
Institute for Physics of Intelligence, School of Science, The University of Tokyo
3
Kavli IPMU (WPI), UTIAS, The University of Tokyo
4
RIKEN CEMS
1

Abstract
Previous literature offers limited clues on how to learn a periodic function using
modern neural networks. We start with a study of the extrapolation properties
of neural networks; we prove and demonstrate experimentally that the standard
activations functions, such as ReLU, tanh, sigmoid, along with their variants, all fail
to learn to extrapolate simple periodic functions. We hypothesize that this is due to
their lack of a “periodic” inductive bias. As a fix of this problem, we propose a new
activation, namely, x + sin2 (x), which achieves the desired periodic inductive bias
to learn a periodic function while maintaining a favorable optimization property
of the ReLU-based activations. Experimentally, we apply the proposed method to
temperature and financial data prediction.

1

Introduction

In general, periodic functions are one of the most basic functions of importance to human society
and natural science: the world’s daily and yearly cycles are dictated by periodic motions in the Solar
System [26]; the human body has an intrinsic biological clock that is periodic in nature [20, 35],
the number of passengers on the metro follows daily and weekly modulations, and the stock market
experiences (semi-)periodic fluctuations [28, 43]. Global economy also follows complicated and
superimposed cycles of different periods, including but not limited to the Kitchin and Juglar cycle
[10, 22]. In many scientific scenarios, we want to model a periodic system in order to be able to
predict the future evolution, based on current and past observations. While deep neural networks are
excellent tools in interpolating between existing data, their fiducial version is not suited to extrapolate
beyond the training range, especially not for periodic functions.
If we know beforehand that the problem is periodic, we can easily solve it, e.g., in Fourier space,
or after an appropriate transformation. However, in many situations we do not know a priori if the
problem is periodic or contains a periodic component. In such cases it is important to have a model
that is flexible enough to model both periodic and non-periodic functions, in order to overcome
the bias of choosing a certain modelling approach. In fact, despite the importance of being able to
model periodic functions, no satisfactory neural network-based method seems to solve this problem.
Some previous methods that propose to use periodic activation functions exist [38, 45, 30]. This
line of works propose using standard periodic functions such as sin(x) and cos(x) or their linear
combinations as activation functions. However, such activation functions are very hard to optimize
due to large degeneracy in local minima [30], and the experimental results suggest that using sin as
the activation function does not work well except for some very simple model, and that it can not
compete against ReLU-based activation functions [34, 7, 25, 42] on standard tasks.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

