IDEAL: Inexact DEcentralized Accelerated
Augmented Lagrangian Method

Yossi Arjevani
NYU
yossia@nyu.edu

Joan Bruna
NYU
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Mert Gürbüzbalaban
Rutgers University
mg1366@rutgers.edu

Bugra Can
Rutgers University
bc600@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT
stefje@csail.mit.edu

Hongzhou Lin
MIT
hongzhou@mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce a framework for designing primal methods under the decentralized
optimization setting where local functions are smooth and strongly convex. Our
approach consists of approximately solving a sequence of sub-problems induced by
the accelerated augmented Lagrangian method, thereby providing a systematic way
for deriving several well-known decentralized algorithms including EXTRA [47]
and SSDA [43]. When coupled with accelerated gradient descent, our framework
yields a novel primal algorithm whose convergence rate is optimal and matched by
recently derived lower bounds. We provide experimental results that demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm on highly ill-conditioned problems.

1

Introduction

Due to their rapidly increasing size, modern datasets are typically collected, stored and manipulated
in a distributed manner. This, together with strict privacy requirements, has created a large demand
for efficient solvers for the decentralized setting in which models are trained locally at each agent,
and only local parameter vectors are shared. This approach has become particularly appealing for
applications such as edge computing [30, 48], cooperative multi-agent learning [8, 38] and federated
learning [31, 49]. Clearly, the nature of the decentralized setting prevents a global synchronization,
as only communication within the neighboring machines is allowed. The goal is then to arrive at a
consensus on all local agents with a model that performs as well as in the centralized setting.
Arguably, the simplest approach for addressing decentralized settings is to adapt the vanilla gradient
descent method to the underlying network architecture [11, 18, 34, 53]. To this end, the connections
between the agents are modeled through a mixing matrix which dictates how agents average over
their neighbors’ parameter vectors. Perhaps surprisingly, when the stepsizes are constant, simply
averaging over the local iterates via the mixing matrix only converges to a neighborhood of the
optimum [47, 58]. A recent line of works [17, 35, 36, 39, 46, 47] proposed a number of alternative
methods that linearly converge to the global minimum. Extensions to the composite setting are also
studied [1, 2, 27, 55].
The overall complexity of solving decentralized optimization problems is typically determined by
two factors: (i) the condition number of the objective function κf , which measures the hardness of
solving the underlying optimization problem, and (ii) the condition number of the mixing matrix κW ,
which quantifies the severity of ‘information bottlenecks’ present in the network. Lower complexity
bounds recently derived for distributed settings [3, 5, 43, 52] show
√ that one cannot expect to have
√
a better dependence on the condition numbers than κf and κW . Notably, despite the recent
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

