Training Linear Finite-State Machines

Arash Ardakani, Amir Ardakani, and Warren J. Gross
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
{arash.ardakani, amir.ardakani}@mail.mcgill.ca
warren.gross@mcgill.ca

Abstract
A finite-state machine (FSM) is a computation model to process binary strings
in sequential circuits. Hence, a single-input linear FSM is conventionally used
to implement complex single-input functions , such as tanh and exponentiation
functions, in stochastic computing (SC) domain where continuous values are
represented by sequences of random bits. In this paper, we introduce a method that
can train a multi-layer FSM-based network where FSMs are connected to every
FSM in the previous and the next layer. We show that the proposed FSM-based
network can synthesize multi-input complex functions such as 2D Gabor filters
and can perform non-sequential tasks such as image classifications on stochastic
streams with no multiplication since FSMs are implemented by look-up tables
only. Inspired by the capability of FSMs in processing binary streams, we then
propose an FSM-based model that can process time series data when performing
temporal tasks such as character-level language modeling. Unlike long shortterm memories (LSTMs) that unroll the network for each input time step and
perform back-propagation on the unrolled network, our FSM-based model requires
to backpropagate gradients only for the current input time step while it is still
capable of learning long-term dependencies. Therefore, our FSM-based model can
learn extremely long-term dependencies as it requires 1/l memory storage during
training compared to LSTMs, where l is the number of time steps. Moreover, our
FSM-based model reduces the power consumption of training on a GPU by 33%
compared to an LSTM model of the same size.

1

Introduction

In the paradigm of deep learning, deep neural networks (DNNs) and recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) deliver state-of-the-art accuracy across various non-sequential and temporal tasks, respectively. However, they require considerable amount of storage and computational resources for their
efficient deployment on different hardware platforms during both training and inference. In recent
years, several techniques have been introduced in literature to address these limitations. To reduce the
computational complexity of deep learning models, replacing expensive multiplications with simple
operations is a common approach as multiplications dominate neural computations. In XNOR networks [1–6], weights and activations are constrained to only two possible values of −1 or 1, replacing
multiplications with XNOR operations. Similar to XNOR networks, stochastic computing (SC)-based
networks perform neural computations using bitwise operations by representing continuous values as
bit streams [6–11]. Even though the aforementioned approaches managed to significantly reduce the
complexity of DNNs and RNNs, they fail to completely remove multiplications.
On the other hand, model compression techniques [12–15] and designing compact networks [16–19]
are commonly used to reduce the memory requirement of deep learning models. However, even using
these techniques cannot solve the memory requirement issue imposed by the nature of RNNs that
unroll the network for each time step and store all the intermediate values for backpropagation. For
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

