Distribution-free binary classification:
prediction sets, confidence intervals and calibration

Chirag Gupta˚1 , Aleksandr Podkopaev˚1,2 , Aaditya Ramdas1,2
Machine Learning Department1
Department of Statistics and Data Science2
Carnegie Mellon University
{chiragg,podkopaev,aramdas}@cmu.edu

Abstract
We study three notions of uncertainty quantification—calibration, confidence intervals and prediction sets—for binary classification in the distribution-free setting, that is without making any distributional assumptions on the data. With a
focus towards calibration, we establish a ‘tripod’ of theorems that connect these
three notions for score-based classifiers. A direct implication is that distributionfree calibration is only possible, even asymptotically, using a scoring function
whose level sets partition the feature space into at most countably many sets.
Parametric calibration schemes such as variants of Platt scaling do not satisfy
this requirement, while nonparametric schemes based on binning do. To close
the loop, we derive distribution-free confidence intervals for binned probabilities
for both fixed-width and uniform-mass binning. As a consequence of our ‘tripod’
theorems, these confidence intervals for binned probabilities lead to distributionfree calibration. We also derive extensions to settings with streaming data and
covariate shift.

1

Introduction

Let X and Y “ t0, 1u denote the feature and label spaces for binary classification. Consider a
predictor f : X Ñ Z that produces a prediction in some space Z. If Z “ t0, 1u, f corresponds to
a point prediction for the class label, but often class predictions are based on a ‘scoring function’.
Examples are, Z “ R for SVMs, and Z “ r0, 1s for logistic regression, random forests with class
probabilities, or deep models with a softmax top layer. In such cases, a higher value of f pXq is often
interpreted as higher belief that Y “ 1. In particular, if Z “ r0, 1s, it is tempting to interpret f pXq
as a probability, and hope that
f pXq « PpY “ 1 | Xq.
(1)
However, such hope is unfounded, and in general (1) will be far from true without strong distributional assumptions, which may not hold in practice. Valid uncertainty estimates that are related to
(1) can be provided, but ML models do not satisfy these out of the box. This paper discusses three
notions of uncertainty quantification: calibration, prediction sets (PS) and confidence intervals (CI),
defined next. A function f : X Ñ r0, 1s is said to be (perfectly) calibrated if
E rY | f pXq “ as “ a

a.s. for all a in the range of f .

(2)

Define L ” tt0u, t1u, t0, 1u, Hu and fix α P p0, 1q. A function S : X Ñ L is a p1 ´ αq-PS if
PpY P SpXqq ě 1 ´ α.

(3)

Finally, let I denote the set of all subintervals of r0, 1s. A function C : X Ñ I is a p1 ´ αq-CI if
PpE rY | Xs P CpXqq ě 1 ´ α.
˚

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(4)

