Task-Agnostic Online Reinforcement Learning with
an Infinite Mixture of Gaussian Processes
Mengdi Xu, Wenhao Ding, Jiacheng Zhu, Zuxin Liu, Baiming Chen, Ding Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University
{mengdixu, wenhaod, jzhu4, zuxinl, baimingc, dingzhao}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Continuously learning to solve unseen tasks with limited experience has been
extensively pursued in meta-learning and continual learning, but with restricted
assumptions such as accessible task distributions, independently and identically
distributed tasks, and clear task delineations. However, real-world physical tasks
frequently violate these assumptions, resulting in performance degradation. This
paper proposes a continual online model-based reinforcement learning approach
that does not require pre-training to solve task-agnostic problems with unknown
task boundaries. We maintain a mixture of experts to handle nonstationarity, and
represent each different type of dynamics with a Gaussian Process to efficiently
leverage collected data and expressively model uncertainty. We propose a transition
prior to account for the temporal dependencies in streaming data and update the
mixture online via sequential variational inference. Our approach reliably handles
the task distribution shift by generating new models for never-before-seen dynamics
and reusing old models for previously seen dynamics. In experiments, our approach
outperforms alternative methods in non-stationary tasks, including classic control
with changing dynamics and decision making in different driving scenarios. Codes
available at: https://github.com/mxu34/mbrl-gpmm.

1

Introduction

Humans can quickly learn new tasks from just a handful of examples by preserving rich representations of experience [1]. Intelligent agents deployed in the real world require the same continual and
quick learning ability to safely handle unknown tasks, such as navigation in new terrains and planning
in dynamic traffic scenarios. Such desiderata have been previously explored in meta-learning and
continual learning. Meta-learning [2, 3] achieves quick adaptation and good generalization with
learned inductive bias. It assumes that the tasks for training and testing are independently sampled
from the same accessible distribution. Continual learning [4, 5] aims to solve a sequence of tasks
with clear task delineations while avoiding catastrophic forgetting. Both communities favor Deep
neural networks (DNNs) due to their strong function approximation capability but at the expense of
data efficiency. These two communities are complementary, and their integration is explored in [6].
However, real-world physical tasks frequently violate essential assumptions of the methods as
mentioned above. One example is the autonomous agent navigation problem requiring interactions
with surrounding agents. The autonomous agent sequentially encounters other agents that have
substantially different behaviors (e.g., aggressive and conservative ones). In this case, the mutual
knowledge transfer in meta-learning algorithms may degrade the generalization performance [7].
The task distribution modeling these interactions is prohibitively complex to determine, which casts
difficulties on the meta-training process with DNNs [8, 9]. Additionally, the boundaries of tasks
required in most continual learning algorithms cannot feasibly be determined beforehand in an online
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

