Model Selection for Production System via
Automated Online Experiments

Zhenwen Dai
Spotify
zhenwend@spotify.com
Ghazal Fazelnia
Spotify
ghazalf@spotify.com

Praveen Ravichandran
Spotify
praveenr@spotify.com

Ben Carterette
Spotify
benjaminc@spotify.com

Mounia Lalmas-Roelleke
Spotify
mounial@spotify.com

Abstract
A challenge that machine learning practitioners in the industry face is the task of
selecting the best model to deploy in production. As a model is often an intermediate component of a production system, online controlled experiments such as A/B
tests yield the most reliable estimation of the effectiveness of the whole system, but
can only compare two or a few models due to budget constraints. We propose an
automated online experimentation mechanism that can efficiently perform model selection from a large pool of models with a small number of online experiments. We
derive the probability distribution of the metric of interest that contains the model
uncertainty from our Bayesian surrogate model trained using historical logs. Our
method efficiently identifies the best model by sequentially selecting and deploying
a list of models from the candidate set that balance exploration-exploitation. Using
simulations based on real data, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on
two different tasks.

1

Introduction

Evaluating the effect of individual changes to machine learning (ML) systems such as choice of
algorithms, features, etc., is the key to growth in many internet services and industrial applications.
Practitioners are faced with the decision of choosing one model from several candidates to deploy in
production. This can be viewed as a model selection problem. Classical model selection paradigms
such as cross-validation consider ML models in isolation and focus on selecting the model with
the best predictive power on unseen data. This approach does not work well for modern industrial
ML systems, as such a system usually consists of many individual components and a ML model
is only one of them. The metric of interest often depends on uncontrollable factors such as users’
responses. Only optimizing the predictive power of the ML model would not lead to a better metric
of the overall system. Instead, randomized experiments (also known as "A/B tests") are considered
as the gold-standard for evaluating system changes [1] as they provide a more direct measure of the
metric. However, only a few variants of the ML model can be tested using randomized experiments
as they are time-consuming to conduct and have resource constraints (such as the number of active
users, etc.). Furthermore, deploying bad systems can lead to catastrophic consequences.
An alternative approach is to exploit log data collected under the production system to estimate the
metric of interest if a different ML model is deployed. Typical methods include developing offline
measures or simulators that model users’ behavior [2, 3], and replaying the recorded decisions with a
probability ratio correction between the new and previous model, which is referred to as off-policy
evaluation (OPE) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. A big challenge faced by these methods is the selection bias of the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

