Avoiding Side Effects in Complex Environments

Alexander Matt Turner∗
Neale Ratzlaff∗
Prasad Tadepalli
Oregon State University
{turneale@, ratzlafn@, tadepall@eecs.}oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Reward function specification can be difficult. Rewarding the agent for making a
widget may be easy, but penalizing the multitude of possible negative side effects
is hard. In toy environments, Attainable Utility Preservation (AUP) avoided side
effects by penalizing shifts in the ability to achieve randomly generated goals
[22]. We scale this approach to large, randomly generated environments based
on Conway’s Game of Life. By preserving optimal value for a single randomly
generated reward function, AUP incurs modest overhead while leading the agent
to complete the specified task and avoid many side effects. Videos and code are
available at https://avoiding-side-effects.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Reward function specification can be difficult, even when the desired behavior seems clear-cut. For
example, rewarding progress in a race led a reinforcement learning (RL) agent to collect checkpoint
reward, instead of completing the race [10]. We want to minimize the negative side effects of
misspecification: from a robot which breaks equipment, to content recommenders which radicalize
their users, to potential future AI systems which negatively transform the world [4, 18].
Side effect avoidance poses a version of the “frame problem”: each action can have many effects,
and it is impractical to explicitly penalize all of the bad ones [5]. For example, a housekeeping
agent should clean a dining room without radically rearranging furniture, and a manufacturing agent
should assemble widgets without breaking equipment. A general, transferable solution to side effect
avoidance would ease reward specification: the agent’s designers could just positively specify what
should be done, as opposed to negatively specifying what should not be done.
Breaking equipment is bad because it hampers future optimization of the intended “true” objective
(which includes our preferences about the factory). That is, there often exists a reward function Rtrue
which fully specifies the agent’s task within its deployment context. In the factory setting, Rtrue might
encode “assemble widgets, but don’t spill the paint, break the conveyor belt, injure workers, etc.”
We want the agent to preserve optimal value for this true reward function. While we can accept
suboptimal actions (e.g. pacing the factory floor), we cannot accept the destruction of value for the
true task. By avoiding negative side effects which decrease value for the true task, the designers can
correct any misspecification and eventually achieve low regret for Rtrue .
Contributions. Despite being unable to directly specify Rtrue , we demonstrate a method for preserving its optimal value anyways. Turner et al. [22] introduced AUP; in their toy environments,
preserving optimal value for many randomly generated reward functions often preserves the optimal
value for Rtrue . In this paper, we generalize AUP to combinatorially complex environments and
evaluate it on four tasks from the chaotic and challenging SafeLife test suite [23]. We show the rather
surprising result that by preserving optimal value for a single randomly generated reward function,
AUP preserves optimal value for Rtrue and thereby avoids negative side effects.
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

