Few-shot Visual Reasoning with
Meta-analogical Contrastive Learning

Youngsung Kim1 Jinwoo Shin2 Eunho Yang2 Sung Ju Hwang2
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Electronics,
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
1
yskim.ee@gmail.com, 2 {jinwoos,eunhoy,sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
While humans can solve a visual puzzle that requires logical reasoning by observing
only few samples, it would require training over a large number of samples for
state-of-the-art deep reasoning models to obtain similar performance on the same
task. In this work, we propose to solve such a few-shot (or low-shot) abstract visual
reasoning problem by resorting to analogical reasoning, which is a unique human
ability to identify structural or relational similarity between two sets. Specifically,
we construct analogical and non-analogical training pairs of two different problem
instances, e.g., the latter is created by perturbing or shuffling the original (former)
problem. Then, we extract the structural relations among elements in both domains
in a pair by enforcing analogical ones to be as similar as possible, while minimizing
similarities between non-analogical ones. This analogical contrastive learning
allows to effectively learn the relational representations of given abstract reasoning
tasks. We validate our method on RAVEN dataset, on which it outperforms
state-of-the-art method, with larger gains when the training data is scarce. We
further meta-learn our analogical contrastive learning model over the same tasks
with diverse attributes, and show that it generalizes to the same visual reasoning
problem with unseen attributes.

1

Introduction

The visual reasoning task proposed in recent works [1, 2] often involves visual puzzles such as Raven
Progressive Matrices (RPM), whose goal is to find an implicit rule among the given image panels,
and predict the correct image panel that will complete the puzzle (see Figure 1b). Since one should
identify a common relational similarity among the visual instances with diverse attributes (shape,
size, and color), solving such a visual reasoning problem requires reasoning skills which might help
take a step further toward general artificial intelligence.
Recently, researchers in the machine learning community have proposed specific models for visual
reasoning using deep learning [1, 3, 4, 5]. Deep neural networks are powerful and effective predictors
for a wide spectrum of tasks such as classification and language modelling, and has yielded impressive
performance on them. However, while humans can solve these logical and abstract reasoning problems
by observing only few samples, the state-of-the-art deep reasoning models still require large number
of training samples to achieve similar performance on the same task (see Figure 1c).
We hypothesize that such sample-efficiency comes from the flexibility of human intelligence, which
can generalize well across different problems by identifying the same pattern in the two problem-pairs
with analogical reasoning. For instance, given any two pairs of relationships, “A is to B” and “C is
to D”, one can form an analogy from the morphological parallelism between the two, e.g., as “A is to
B as C is to D” or “A : B :: C : D” (Figure 1a). With such an analogical relationship established
between the pairs, one will be able to predict any single entity given the rest of the entities. For visual
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

