Meta-Learning Stationary Stochastic Process
Prediction with Convolutional Neural Processes
Andrew Y. K. Foong∗
University of Cambridge
ykf21@cam.ac.uk

Yann Dubois
University of Cambridge
yanndubois96@gmail.com

Wessel P. Bruinsma∗
University of Cambridge
Invenia Labs
wpb23@cam.ac.uk
James Requeima
University of Cambridge
Invenia Labs
jrr41@cam.ac.uk

Jonathan Gordon∗
University of Cambridge
jg801@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Microsoft Research
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Stationary stochastic processes (SPs) are a key component of many probabilistic
models, such as those for off-the-grid spatio-temporal data. They enable the statistical symmetry of underlying physical phenomena to be leveraged, thereby aiding
generalization. Prediction in such models can be viewed as a translation equivariant map from observed data sets to predictive SPs, emphasizing the intimate
relationship between stationarity and equivariance. Building on this, we propose
the Convolutional Neural Process (ConvNP), which endows Neural Processes (NPs)
with translation equivariance and extends convolutional conditional NPs to allow
for dependencies in the predictive distribution. The latter enables ConvNPs to be deployed in settings which require coherent samples, such as Thompson sampling or
conditional image completion. Moreover, we propose a new maximum-likelihood
objective to replace the standard ELBO objective in NPs, which conceptually simplifies the framework and empirically improves performance. We demonstrate the
strong performance and generalization capabilities of ConvNPs on 1D regression,
image completion, and various tasks with real-world spatio-temporal data.

1

Introduction

Incorporating appropriate inductive biases into machine learning models is key to achieving good
generalization performance. Consider, for example, predicting rainfall at an unseen test location from
rainfall measurements nearby. A powerful inductive bias for this task is stationarity: the assumption
that the generative process governing rainfall is spatially homogeneous. Given only observations in
a limited part of the space, stationarity allows the model to extrapolate to yet unobserved regions.
Closely related to stationarity is translation equivariance (TE). TE formalizes the intuitive idea that
if observations are shifted in time or space, then the resulting predictions should be shifted by the
same amount. When stationarity or TE is appropriate, e.g. in time-series [31], images [22], and
spatio-temporal modelling [8, 7], incorporating them into our models yields significant benefits.
A general framework for these tasks is to view them as prediction of a stochastic process (SP;
[32]). This principled approach has inspired a new set of deep learning architectures that bring
the expressivity and fast test-time inference of deep learning to SP modelling. Conditional Neural
Processes (CNPs; [10]) use neural networks to directly parameterize a map from data sets to predictive
∗

Authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

