On Second Order Behaviour
in Augmented Neural ODEs

Alexander Norcliffe
Department of Physics
University of Cambridge
alex.norcliffe98@gmail.com
Cristian Bodnar∗, Ben Day∗, Nikola Simidjievski, Pietro Liò
Department of Computer Science and Technology
University of Cambridge
{cb2015, bjd39, ns779, pl219}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NODEs) are a new class of models that
transform data continuously through infinite-depth architectures. The continuous
nature of NODEs has made them particularly suitable for learning the dynamics
of complex physical systems. While previous work has mostly been focused on
first order ODEs, the dynamics of many systems, especially in classical physics,
are governed by second order laws. In this work, we consider Second Order
Neural ODEs (SONODEs). We show how the adjoint sensitivity method can be
extended to SONODEs and prove that the optimisation of a first order coupled
ODE is equivalent and computationally more efficient. Furthermore, we extend the
theoretical understanding of the broader class of Augmented NODEs (ANODEs)
by showing they can also learn higher order dynamics with a minimal number
of augmented dimensions, but at the cost of interpretability. This indicates that
the advantages of ANODEs go beyond the extra space offered by the augmented
dimensions, as originally thought. Finally, we compare SONODEs and ANODEs
on synthetic and real dynamical systems and demonstrate that the inductive biases
of the former generally result in faster training and better performance.

1

Introduction

Residual Networks (ResNets) [8] have been an essential tool for scaling the capabilities of neural
networks to extreme depths. It has been observed that the skip layers that these networks employ
can be seen as an Euler discretisation of a continuous transformation [7, 12, 19]. Neural Ordinary
Differential Equations (NODEs) [3] are a new class of models that consider the limit of this discretisation step, naturally giving rise to an ODE that can be optimised via black-box ODE solvers. Their
continuous depth makes them particularly suitable for learning and modelling the unknown dynamics
of complex systems, which often cannot be described analytically.
Since the introduction of NODEs, many variants have been proposed [4, 10, 14, 17, 20, 22, 24]. While
a few of these models use second order dynamics [14, 17, 24], no in-depth study on second order
behaviour in Neural ODEs exists even though most dynamical systems that arise in science, such as
Newton’s equations of motion and oscillators, are governed by second order laws. To fill this void, we
consider Second Order Neural ODEs (SONODEs) and second order dynamics for the broader class of
∗

corresponding authors

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

