Beta R-CNN: Looking into Pedestrian Detection from
Another Perspective

Zixuan Xu∗
Peking University
zixuanxu@pku.edu.cn

Banghuai Li ∗
Megvii Research
libanghuai@megvii.com

Ye Yuan
Megvii Research
yuanye@megvii.com

Anhong Dang
Peking University
ahdang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently significant progress has been made in pedestrian detection, but it remains
challenging to achieve high performance in occluded and crowded scenes. It could
be attributed mostly to the widely used representation of pedestrians, i.e., 2D
axis-aligned bounding box, which just describes the approximate location and size
of the object. Bounding box models the object as a uniform distribution within the
boundary, making pedestrians indistinguishable in occluded and crowded scenes
due to much noise. To eliminate the problem, we propose a novel representation
based on 2D beta distribution, named Beta Representation. It pictures a pedestrian
by explicitly constructing the relationship between full-body and visible boxes,
and emphasizes the center of visual mass by assigning different probability values
to pixels. As a result, Beta Representation is much better for distinguishing
highly-overlapped instances in crowded scenes with a new NMS strategy named
BetaNMS. What’s more, to fully exploit Beta Representation, a novel pipeline
Beta R-CNN equipped with BetaHead and BetaMask is proposed, leading to high
detection performance in occluded and crowded scenes. Code will be released at
github.com/Guardian44x/Beta-R-CNN.

1

Introduction

Pedestrian detection is a critical research topic in computer vision field with various real-world
applications such as autonomous vehicles, intelligent video surveillance, robotics, and so on. During
the last decade, with the rise of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), great progress has
been achieved in pedestrian detection. However, it remains challenging to accurately distinguish
pedestrians in occluded and crowded scenes.
Although extensive methods have been attempted for occlusion and crowd issues, the performance
is still limited by pedestrian representation, i.e., 2D bounding box representation. The axis-aligned
minimum bounding box is widely utilized to explicitly define a distinct object, with its approximate
location and size. Although box representation has advantages such as parameterization- and
annotation-friendly as the identity of an object, some nonnegligible drawbacks are limiting the
performance of pedestrian detection especially in occluded and crowded scenes. Firstly, the bounding
box can be regarded as modeling the object as a uniform distribution in the box, but it actually goes
against our intuitive perception. Given an occluded pedestrian, what attracts our attention should be
the visible part rather than the occluded noise. Secondly, based on box representation, intersection
∗

These authors contributed equally

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

