Model-based Adversarial
Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Zichuan Lin
Tsinghua University
lzcthu12@gmail.com

Garrett Thomas
Stanford University
gwthomas@stanford.edu

Guangwen Yang
Tsinghua University
ygw@tsinghua.edu.cn

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) aims to learn from multiple training tasks
the ability to adapt efficiently to unseen test tasks. Despite the success, existing
meta-RL algorithms are known to be sensitive to the task distribution shift. When
the test task distribution is different from the training task distribution, the performance may degrade significantly. To address this issue, this paper proposes
Model-based Adversarial Meta-Reinforcement Learning (AdMRL), where we aim
to minimize the worst-case sub-optimality gap – the difference between the optimal
return and the return that the algorithm achieves after adaptation – across all tasks
in a family of tasks, with a model-based approach. We propose a minimax objective
and optimize it by alternating between learning the dynamics model on a fixed
task and finding the adversarial task for the current model – the task for which the
policy induced by the model is maximally suboptimal. Assuming the family of
tasks is parameterized, we derive a formula for the gradient of the suboptimality
with respect to the task parameters via the implicit function theorem, and show how
the gradient estimator can be efficiently implemented by the conjugate gradient
method and a novel use of the REINFORCE estimator. We evaluate our approach
on several continuous control benchmarks and demonstrate its efficacy in the worstcase performance over all tasks, the generalization power to out-of-distribution
tasks, and in training and test time sample efficiency, over existing state-of-the-art
meta-RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (Deep RL) methods can solve difficult tasks such as Go [45], Atari
games [30], robotic control [23] successfully, but often require sampling a large amount interactions
with the environment. Meta-reinforcement learning and multi-task reinforcement learning aim to
improve the sample efficiency by leveraging the shared structure within a family of tasks. For
example, Model Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML) [13] learns in the training time a shared policy
initialization across tasks, from which in the test time it can adapt to the new tasks quickly with a
small amount of samples. The more recent work PEARL [38] learns latent representations of the
tasks in the training time, and then infers the representations of test tasks and adapts to them.
The existing meta-RL formulation and methods are largely distributional. The training tasks and the
testing tasks are assumed to be drawn from the same distribution of tasks. Consequently, the existing
methods are prone to the distribution shift issue, as shown in [27] — when the tasks in the test time
are not drawn from the same distribution as in the training, the performance degrades significantly.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

