Learning Some Popular Gaussian Graphical Models
without Condition Number Bounds
Jonathan Kelner∗
MIT

Frederic Koehler†
MIT

Raghu Meka‡
UCLA

Ankur Moitra§
MIT

Abstract
Gaussian Graphical Models (GGMs) have wide-ranging applications in machine
learning and the natural and social sciences. In most of the settings in which they
are applied, the number of observed samples is much smaller than the dimension
and they are assumed to be sparse. While there are a variety of algorithms (e.g.
Graphical Lasso, CLIME) that provably recover the graph structure with a logarithmic number of samples, to do so they require various assumptions on the
well-conditioning of the precision matrix which preclude long-range dependencies, present in many settings of interest.
Here we give the first fixed polynomial-time algorithms for learning attractive
GGMs and walk-summable GGMs with a logarithmic number of samples and
without any such assumptions. In particular, our algorithms can tolerate strong
dependencies among the variables. Our result for structure recovery in walksummable GGMs is derived from a more general result for efficient sparse linear regression in walk-summable models without any norm dependencies. We
complement our results with experiments showing that many existing algorithms
fail even in some simple settings where there are long dependency chains. Our
algorithms do not.

1

Introduction

A Gaussian Graphical Model (GGM) in n dimensions is a probability distribution with density

1
pX (x) = p
exp − (x − µ)T Σ−1 (x − µ)/2
(2π)n det Σ
where µ is the mean and Σ is the covariance matrix. In other words, it is just a multivariate Gaussian.
What makes the multivariate Gaussian so interesting as a graphical model is that its conditional
independence structure is completely encoded in the precision matrix, Θ = Σ−1 . For a given
Θ, if we let G be the graph with vertex set [n] and an edge between vertices i, j iff Θij 6= 0,
then X ∼ N (µ, Σ) exhibits the following remarkable Markov property with respect to G: for any
set S ⊂ [n], if removing the nodes S from G disconnects nodes i and j, then Xi and Xj are
conditionally independent given XS . This is a very special and useful algebraic property, because
∗
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Email: kelner@mit.edu. This
work was partially supported by NSF Award CCF-1565235
†
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Email: fkoehler@mit.edu. This
work was supported in part by Ankur Moitra’s ONR Young Investigator Award.
‡
Department of Computer Science, UCLA. Email: raghum@cs.ucla.edu. This work was supported
by NSF CAREER Award CCF-1553605.
§
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Email: moitra@mit.edu. This
work was supported in part by NSF CAREER Award CCF-1453261, NSF Large CCF-1565235, a David and
Lucile Packard Fellowship and an ONR Young Investigator Award.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

