Canonical 3D Deformer Maps:
Unifying parametric and non-parametric methods for
dense weakly-supervised category reconstruction

David Novotny∗

Roman Shapovalov∗
Facebook AI Research

Andrea Vedaldi

{dnovotny, romansh, vedaldi}@fb.com
http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~david/c3dm/

Abstract
We propose the Canonical 3D Deformer Map, a new representation of the 3D
shape of common object categories that can be learned from a collection of 2D
images of independent objects. Our method builds in a novel way on concepts from
parametric deformation models, non-parametric 3D reconstruction, and canonical
embeddings, combining their individual advantages. In particular, it learns to
associate each image pixel with a deformation model of the corresponding 3D
object point which is canonical, i.e. intrinsic to the identity of the point and shared
across objects of the category. The result is a method that, given only sparse 2D
supervision at training time, can, at test time, reconstruct the 3D shape and texture
of objects from single views, while establishing meaningful dense correspondences
between object instances. It also achieves state-of-the-art results in dense 3D
reconstruction on public in-the-wild datasets of faces, cars, and birds.

1

Introduction

We address the problem of learning to reconstruct 3D objects from individual 2D images. While
3D reconstruction has been studied extensively since the beginning of computer vision research [49],
and despite exciting progress in monocular reconstruction for objects such as humans, a solution to
the general problem is still elusive. A key challenge is to develop a representation that can learn the
3D shapes of common objects such as cars, birds and humans from 2D images, without access to
3D ground truth, which is difficult to obtain in general. In order to do so, it is not enough to model
individual 3D shapes; instead, the representation must also relate the different shapes obtained when
the object deforms (e.g. due to articulation) or when different objects of the same type are considered
(e.g. different birds). This requires establishing dense correspondences between different shapes, thus
identifying equivalent points (e.g. the left eye in two birds). Only by doing so, in fact, the problem
of reconstructing independent 3D shapes from 2D images, which is ill-posed, reduces to learning a
single deformable shape, which is difficult but approachable.
In this paper, we introduce the Canonical 3D Deformer Map (C3DM), a representation that meets
these requirements (Figure 1). C3DM combines the benefits of parametric and non-parametric
representations of 3D objects. Conceptually, C3DM starts from a parametric 3D shape model of the
object, as often used in Non-Rigid Structure From Motion (NR-SFM [11]). It usually takes the form
of a mesh with 3D vertices X1 , . . . , XK ∈ R3 expressed as a linear function of global deformation
parameters α, such that Xk = Bk α for a fixed operator Bk . Correspondences between shapes
are captured by the identities k of the vertices, which are invariant to deformations. Recent works
such as Category-specific Mesh Reconstruction (CMR) [31] put this approach on deep-learning rails,
∗

Authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

