Online Convex Optimization Over Erdős-Rényi
Random Networks
Jinlong Lei
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
leijinlong@tongji.edu.cn

Peng Yi∗
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
yipeng@tongji.edu.cn

Jie Chen
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
chenjie@bit.edu.cn

Yiguang Hong
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
yghong@iss.ac.cn

Guodong Shi,
The University of Sydney
NSW, Australia
guodong.shi@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
The work studies how node-to-node communications over an Erdős-Rényi random
network influence distributed online convex optimization, which is vital in solving
large-scale machine learning in antagonistic or changing environments. At per step,
each node (computing unit) makes a local decision, experiences a loss evaluated
with a convex function, and communicates the decision with other nodes over a
network. The node-to-node communications are described by the Erdős-Rényi rule,
where independently each link takes place with a probability p over a prescribed
connected graph. The objective is to minimize the system-wide loss accumulated
over a finite time horizon. We consider standard distributed gradient descents with
full gradients, one-point bandits and two-points bandits for convex and strongly
convex losses, respectively. We establish how the regret bounds scale with respect
to time horizon T , network size N , decision dimension d, and an algebraic network
connectivity. The regret bounds scaling with respect to T match those obtained by
state-of-the-art algorithms and fundamental
√ limits in the corresponding centralized
online optimization problems, e.g., O( T ) and O(ln(T )) regrets are established
for convex and strongly convex losses with full gradient feedback and two-points
information, respectively. For classical Erdős-Rényi networks over all-to-all possible node communications, the regret scalings with respect to the probability p are
analytically established, based on which the tradeoff between the communication
overhead and computation accuracy is clearly demonstrated. Numerical studies
have validated the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

The online convex optimization paradigm has become a central and canonical solution for machine
learning where data is generated sequentially over time, e.g., online routing, ad. selection for search
engines, and spam filtering ([1–4]). Instead of attempting to model the dynamical data, which is often
not possible due to fundamental complexity and efficiency challenges, an online convex optimization
framework adapts decisions along with the arrival of unforeseen data. After committing to a decision,
a convex loss is incurred that is unknown beforehand and may vary over time. There are two basic
types of online convex optimization settings in terms of the knowledge that the learner possesses
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to the work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

