MetaPoison: Practical General-purpose Clean-label
Data Poisoning

W. Ronny Huang∗
University of Maryland
wronnyhuang@gmail.com

Jonas Geiping∗
University of Siegen
jonas.geiping@uni-siegen.de

Gavin Taylor
United States Naval Academy
taylor@usna.edu

Liam Fowl
University of Maryland
lfowl@math.umd.edu

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Data poisoning—the process by which an attacker takes control of a model by
making imperceptible changes to a subset of the training data—is an emerging
threat in the context of neural networks. Existing attacks for data poisoning neural
networks have relied on hand-crafted heuristics, because solving the poisoning
problem directly via bilevel optimization is generally thought of as intractable for
deep models. We propose MetaPoison, a first-order method that approximates the
bilevel problem via meta-learning and crafts poisons that fool neural networks.
MetaPoison is effective: it outperforms previous clean-label poisoning methods by
a large margin. MetaPoison is robust: poisoned data made for one model transfer
to a variety of victim models with unknown training settings and architectures.
MetaPoison is general-purpose, it works not only in fine-tuning scenarios, but
also for end-to-end training from scratch, which till now hasn’t been feasible for
clean-label attacks with deep nets. MetaPoison can achieve arbitrary adversary
goals—like using poisons of one class to make a target image don the label of
another arbitrarily chosen class. Finally, MetaPoison works in the real-world. We
demonstrate for the first time successful data poisoning of models trained on the
black-box Google Cloud AutoML API.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are susceptible to a range of security vulnerabilities that compromise their real-world
reliability. The bulk of work in recent years has focused on evasion attacks Szegedy et al. [2013],
Athalye et al. [2018], where an input is slightly modified at inference time to change a model’s
prediction. These methods rely on access to the inputs during inference, which is not always available
in practice. Another type of attack is that of backdoor attacks [Turner et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2017,
Saha et al., 2019]. Like evasion attacks, backdoor attacks require adversary access to model inputs
during inference; notably backdoor “triggers” need to be inserted into the training data and then later
into the input at inference time. Unlike evasion and backdoor attacks, data poisoning does not require
attacker control of model inputs at inference time. Here the attacker controls the model by adding
manipulated images to the training set. These malicious images can be inserted into the training set
by placing them on the web (social media, multimedia posting services, collaborative-editing forums,
Wikipedia) and waiting for them to be scraped by dataset harvesting bots. They can also be added to
the training set by a malicious insider who is trying to avoid detection. A data corpus can also be
compromised when arbitrary users may contribute data, such as face images for a recognition and
re-identification system.
∗

Authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

