Make One-Shot Video Object Segmentation
Efficient Again

Tim Meinhardt
Technical University of Munich
tim.meinhardt@tum.de

Laura Leal-Taixé
Technical University of Munich
leal.taixe@tum.de

Abstract
Video object segmentation (VOS) describes the task of segmenting a set of objects
in each frame of a video. In the semi-supervised setting, the first mask of each object
is provided at test time. Following the one-shot principle, fine-tuning VOS methods
train a segmentation model separately on each given object mask. However,
recently the VOS community has deemed such a test time optimization and its
impact on the test runtime as unfeasible. To mitigate the inefficiencies of previous
fine-tuning approaches, we present efficient One-Shot Video Object Segmentation
(e-OSVOS). In contrast to most VOS approaches, e-OSVOS decouples the object
detection task and predicts only local segmentation masks by applying a modified
version of Mask R-CNN. The one-shot test runtime and performance are optimized
without a laborious and handcrafted hyperparameter search. To this end, we meta
learn the model initialization and learning rates for the test time optimization. To
achieve an optimal learning behavior, we predict individual learning rates at a
neuron level. Furthermore, we apply an online adaptation to address the common
performance degradation throughout a sequence by continuously fine-tuning the
model on previous mask predictions supported by a frame-to-frame bounding box
propagation. e-OSVOS provides state-of-the-art results on DAVIS 2016, DAVIS
2017 and YouTube-VOS for one-shot fine-tuning methods while reducing the test
runtime substantially.
Code is available at https://github.com/dvl-tum/e-osvos.

1

Introduction

Video object segmentation (VOS) describes a two class (foreground-background) pixel-level classification task on each frame of a given video sequence. Multiple objects are discriminated by predicting
individual foreground-background pixel masks. In this work, we address a variant of VOS which is
semi-supervised at test time. To this end, the ground truth foreground-background segmentation mask
of the first frame is provided for each object. Machine learning methods that tackle semi-supervised
VOS are categorized by their utilization of the provided object ground truth masks.
We focus on fine-tuning methods [6, 22, 39, 20, 34], which exploit the transfer learning capabilities
of neural networks and follow a multi-step training procedure: (i) pre-training steps: learn general
image and segmentation features from training the model on images and video sequences , and (ii)
fine-tuning: one-shot test time optimization which enables the model to learn foreground-background
characteristics specific to each object and video sequence. While elegant through their simplicity,
fine-tuning methods face important shortcomings: (i) pre-training is fixed and not optimized for the
subsequent fine-tuning, (ii) the hyperparameters of the test time optimization are often excessively
handcrafted and fail to generalize between datasets. The common existing fine-tuning setups [6, 20]
are inefficient and suffer from high test runtimes with as many as 1000 training iterations per
segmented object. As a consequence, recent methods refrain from such an optimization at test time and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

