Incorporating Pragmatic Reasoning Communication
into Emergent Language

Yipeng Kang, Tonghan Wang
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
{kyp13, wangth18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Gerard de Melo
Hasso Plattner Institute
University of Potsdam
Potsdam, Germany
gdm@demelo.org

Abstract
Emergentism and pragmatics are two research fields that study the dynamics of
linguistic communication along substantially different timescales and intelligence
levels. From the perspective of multi-agent reinforcement learning, they correspond
to stochastic games with reinforcement training and stage games with opponent
awareness. Given that their combination has been explored in linguistics, we
propose computational models that combine short-term mutual reasoning-based
pragmatics with long-term language emergentism. We explore this for agent communication referential games as well as in Starcraft II, assessing the relative merits
of different kinds of mutual reasoning pragmatics models both empirically and
theoretically. Our results shed light on their importance for making inroads towards
getting more natural, accurate, robust, fine-grained, and succinct utterances.

1

Introduction

In many linguistic theories (Zipf, 1935; Lewis, 1969; Grice, 1975), language is viewed as a special
kind of social coordination system, in which multiple agents make interdependent decisions of how
to express and comprehend messages in order to successfully communicate real-world information.
Drawing on advances in artificial intelligence, recent work considers referential games (Lazaridou
et al., 2018) to model language learning from raw sensory input, adopting techniques from computer
vision, language processing, and multi-agent reinforcement learning. Considering agent communication issues in multi-agent learning not only benefits the coordination of agents for tasks with common
objectives, but also manifests properties of human linguistics and suggests a potential path towards
more intelligent natural language processing techniques (Lazaridou et al., 2018).
However, in traditional linguistics, language is studied along different timescales and different levels
of deliberation, while recent work on referential games only focuses on long-term language evolution,
i.e., modeling how long-term habits develop. In this work, we propose integrated models that consider
not only long-term evolution but also short-term equilibrium finding. On the one hand, agents are
expected to conform to evolved language habits; on the other hand, in a separate pragmatic stage
after the long-term evolution, they are expected to make rational decisions within a particular context
so as to communicate more successfully. Our models achieve both of these goals, drawing on
psychological game theory (Battigalli et al., 2019), where the payoffs reflect prior beliefs about the
strategies, instead of just the final outcome.
Contributions. Our key contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a new computational framework that more comprehensively models language dynamics
at different timescales. While previous work on referential games considers long-term language
evolution (also known as emergentism in linguistics), our model additionally incorporates a
subsequent procedure of opponent-aware pragmatic reasoning.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

