Semi-Supervised Partial Label Learning via
Confidence-Rated Margin Maximization

Wei Wang Min-Ling Zhang∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration
(Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{wang_w, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Partial label learning assumes inaccurate supervision where each training example
is associated with a set of candidate labels, among which only one is valid. In
many real-world scenarios, however, it is costly and time-consuming to assign
candidate label sets to all the training examples. To circumvent this difficulty, the
problem of semi-supervised partial label learning is investigated in this paper,
where unlabeled data is utilized to facilitate model induction along with partial
label training examples. Specifically, label propagation is adopted to instantiate
the labeling confidence of partial label examples. After that, maximum margin
formulation is introduced to jointly enable the induction of predictive model and
the estimation of labeling confidence over unlabeled data. The derived formulation
enforces confidence-rated margin maximization and confidence manifold preservation over partial label examples and unlabeled data. We show that the predictive
model and labeling confidence can be solved via alternating optimization which
admits QP solutions in either alternating step. Extensive experiments on synthetic
as well as real-world data sets clearly validate the effectiveness of the proposed
semi-supervised partial label learning approach.

1

Introduction

In partial label (PL) learning, each training example is represented by a single instance while
associated with multiple candidate labels. It is assumed that the ground-truth label of PL training
example resides in its candidate label set, which is not directly accessible to the training algorithm
[8, 17, 32]. The need to learn from these inaccurate supervision information widely exists in various
applications, such as image classification [6, 9, 30], ecoinformatics [4, 17, 33], web mining [18],
natural language processing [23, 24, 35], etc.
Most partial label learning approaches work under supervised setting where the candidate labeling
information is available for all training examples. In many real-world scenarios, however, the process
of acquiring training examples with candidate labels might be demanding while abundant unlabeled
data are readily available to facilitate model training. For instance, in crowdsourced image tagging,
acquiring candidate annotations from web users for a large number of images would be costly and
time-consuming while abundant unlabeled images can be easily collected from the web. Therefore, it
is a natural remedy to consider semi-supervised partial label learning which exploits unlabeled data
in conjunction with PL training examples to help induce predictive model with strong generalization
performance.
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

