POMO: Policy Optimization with Multiple Optima
for Reinforcement Learning

Yeong-Dae Kwon, Jinho Choo, Byoungjip Kim, Iljoo Yoon, Youngjune Gwon, Seungjai Min
Samsung SDS
{y.d.kwon, jinho12.choo, bjip.kim, iljoo.yoon, gyj.gwon, seungjai.min}@samsung.com

Abstract
In neural combinatorial optimization (CO), reinforcement learning (RL) can turn a
deep neural net into a fast, powerful heuristic solver of NP-hard problems. This
approach has a great potential in practical applications because it allows nearoptimal solutions to be found without expert guides armed with substantial domain
knowledge. We introduce Policy Optimization with Multiple Optima (POMO),
an end-to-end approach for building such a heuristic solver. POMO is applicable
to a wide range of CO problems. It is designed to exploit the symmetries in the
representation of a CO solution. POMO uses a modified REINFORCE algorithm
that forces diverse rollouts towards all optimal solutions. Empirically, the lowvariance baseline of POMO makes RL training fast and stable, and it is more
resistant to local minima compared to previous approaches. We also introduce
a new augmentation-based inference method, which accompanies POMO nicely.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of POMO by solving three popular NP-hard
problems, namely, traveling salesman (TSP), capacitated vehicle routing (CVRP),
and 0-1 knapsack (KP). For all three, our solver based on POMO shows a significant
improvement in performance over all recent learned heuristics. In particular, we
achieve the optimality gap of 0.14% with TSP100 while reducing inference time
by more than an order of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization (CO) is an important problem in logistics, manufacturing and distribution
supply chain, and sequential resource allocation. The problem is studied extensively by Operations
Research (OR) community, but the real-world CO problems are ubiquitous, and each problem is
different from one another with its unique constrains. Moreover, these constrains tend to vary rapidly
with a changing work environment. Devising a powerful and efficient algorithm that can be applied
uniformly under various conditions is tricky, if not impossible. Therefore, many CO problems
faced in industries have been commonly dealt with hand-crafted heuristics, despite their drawbacks,
engineered by local experts.
In the field of computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP), classical methods
based on manual feature engineering by experts have now been superseded by automated end-to-end
deep learning algorithms [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Tremendous progresses in supervised learning, where a
mapping from training inputs to their labels is learned, has made this remarkable transition possible.
Unfortunately, supervised learning is largely unfit for most CO problems because one cannot have an
instant access to optimal labels. Rather, one should make use of the scores, that are easily calculable
for most CO solutions, to train a model. Reinforcement learning paradigm suits combinatorial
optimization problems very well.
Recent approaches in deep reinforcement learning (RL) have been promising [6], finding close-tooptimal solutions to the abstracted NP-hard CO problems such as traveling salesman (TSP) [7, 8, 9, 10,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

