Improved Guarantees for k-means++
and k-means++ Parallel
Konstantin Makarychev⇤
Aravind Reddy
Liren Shan
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL, USA

Abstract
In this paper, we study k-means++ and k-meansk, the two most popular algorithms
for the classic k-means clustering problem. We provide novel analyses and show
improved approximation and bi-criteria approximation guarantees for k-means++
and k-meansk. Our results give a better theoretical justification for why these
algorithms perform extremely well in practice.

1

Introduction

k-means clustering is one of the most commonly encountered unsupervised learning problems.
Given a set of n data points in Euclidean space, our goal is to partition them into k clusters (each
characterized by a center), such that the sum of squares of distances of data points to their nearest
centers is minimized. The most popular heuristic for solving this problem is Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd,
1982), often referred to simply as “the k-means algorithm".
Lloyd’s algorithm uses iterative improvements to find a locally optimal k-means clustering. The
performance of Lloyd’s algorithm crucially depends on the quality of the initial clustering, which
is defined by the initial set of centers, called a seed. Arthur and Vassilvitskii (2007) and Ostrovsky,
Rabani, Schulman, and Swamy (2006) developed an elegant randomized seeding algorithm, known as
the k-means++ algorithm. It works by choosing the first center uniformly at random from the data set
and then choosing the subsequent k 1 centers by randomly sampling a single point in each round
with the sampling probability of every point proportional to its current cost. That is, the probability of
choosing any data point x is proportional to the squared distance to its closest already chosen center.
This squared distance is often denoted by D2 (x). Arthur and Vassilvitskii (2007) proved that the
expected cost of the initial clustering obtained by k-means++ is at most 8 (ln k + 2) times the cost of
the optimal clustering i.e., k-means++ gives an 8 (ln k + 2)-approximation for the k-means problem.
They also provided a family of k-means instances for which the approximation factor of k-means++
is 2 ln k and thus showed that their analysis of k-means++ is almost tight.
Due to its speed, simplicity, and good empirical performance, k-means++ is the most widely used
algorithm for k-means clustering. It is employed by such machine learning libraries as Apache
Spark MLlib, Google BigQuery, IBM SPSS, Intel DAAL, and Microsoft ML.NET. In addition to
k-means++, these libraries implement a scalable variant of k-means++ called k-meansk (read “kmeans parallel”) designed by Bahmani, Moseley, Vattani, Kumar, and Vassilvitskii (2012). Somewhat
surprisingly, k-meansk not only works better in parallel than k-means++ but also slightly outperforms
k-means++ in practice in the single machine setting (see Bahmani et al. (2012) and Figure 1 below).
However, theoretical guarantees for k-meansk are substantially weaker than for k-means++.
The k-meansk algorithm makes T passes over the data set (usually T = 5). In every round, it
independently draws approximately ` = ⇥(k) random centers according to the D2 distribution. After
each round it recomputes the distances to the closest chosen centers and updates D2 (x) for all x in
⇤

Author order is alphabetical.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

