Online Linear Optimization with Many Hints
Aditya Bhaskara
Department of Computer Science
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT
bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com

Ashok Cutkosky
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA
ashok@cutkosky.com

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Manish Purohit
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
mpurohit@google.com

Abstract
We study an online linear optimization (OLO) problem in which the learner is
provided access to K “hint” vectors in each round prior to making a decision. In
this setting, we devise an algorithm that obtains logarithmic regret whenever there
exists a convex combination of the K hints that has positive correlation with the
cost vectors. This significantly extends prior work that considered only the case
K = 1. To accomplish this, we develop a way to combine many arbitrary OLO
algorithms to obtain regret only a logarithmically worse factor than the minimum
regret of the original algorithms in hindsight; this result is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

In this paper we consider a variant of the classic online linear optimization (OLO) problem [28]. In
OLO, at each time step, an algorithm must play a point xt in some convex set X ✓ Rd , and then
it is presented with a cost vector ct and incurs loss hct , xt i. This process repeats for T time steps.
The algorithm’s performance is measured via the regret relative to some comparison point u 2 X,
PT
defined as t=1 hct , xt ui.
This problem is of fundamental interest in a variety of fields. OLO algorithms are directly applicable
for solving the learning with expert advice problem as well as online convex optimization [4]. Further,
in machine learning, one frequently encounters stochastic convex optimization problems, which
may be solved via online convex optimization through the online-to-batch conversion [3]. Many
of the popular optimization algorithms used in machine learning practice today (e.g., [10, 18]) can
be analyzed within the OLO framework. For more details and further applications, we refer the
interested reader to the excellent texts [4, 12, 24].

OLO is well-understood p
from an algorithmic viewpoint. For the vanilla version of the problem,
algorithms with regret O( T ) are known [28, 16] and this bound is tight [4]. An interesting line of
research
p has been to identify situations and conditions where the regret can be substantially smaller
than T . Towards this, Dekel et al. [9] proposed the study of OLO augmented with hints; their work
was motivated by an earlier work of Hazan and Megiddo [14]. In their setup, the algorithm has access
to a hint at each time step before it responds and this hint is guaranteed to be more than ↵-correlated
with the cost vector. They obtained an algorithm with a regret of O(d/↵ · log T ), where d is the
dimension of the space. Very recently, Bhaskara et al. [2] generalized their results to the case when
the hints can be arbitrary, i.e., not necessarily weakly positively correlated at each time step. They
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

