Efficient estimation of neural tuning during
naturalistic behavior
Edoardo Balzani
Center for Neural Science
New York University
New York, NY, 10003
eb162@nyu.edu

Kaushik Lakshminarasimhan
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Columbia University
New York, NY, 10027
jl5649@columbia.edu

Dora E. Angelaki
Center for Neural Science
New York University
New York, NY, 10003
da93@nyu.edu

Cristina Savin
Center for Neural Science
Center for Data Science
New York University
New York, NY, 10003
cs5360@nyu.edu

Abstract
Recent technological advances in systems neuroscience have led to a shift away
from using simple tasks with low-dimensional, well-controlled stimuli towards
trying to understand neural activity during naturalistic behavior. However, with
the increase in number and complexity of task-relevant features, standard analyses
such as estimating tuning functions become challenging. Here, we use a Poisson
generalized additive model (P-GAM) with spline nonlinearities and an exponential
link function to map a large number of task variables (input stimuli, behavioral
outputs, and activity of other neurons, modeled as discrete events or continuous
variables) into spike counts. We develop efficient procedures for parameter learning
by optimizing a generalized cross-validation score and infer marginal confidence
bounds for the contribution of each feature to neural responses. This allows us
to robustly identify a minimal set of task features that each neuron is responsive
to, circumventing computationally demanding model comparison. We show that
our estimation procedure outperforms traditional regularized GLMs in terms of
both fit quality and computing time. When applied to neural recordings from
monkeys performing a virtual reality spatial navigation task, P-GAM reveals mixed
selectivity and preferential coupling between neurons with similar tuning.

1

Introduction

From rodent decision-making in dynamic environments [1, 2] to complex virtual reality setups for
freely behaving animals [3, 4], there is a growing interest in studying neural activity in the context
of naturalistic behavior [5]. This not only increases the number and complexity of the task-relevant
variables, but also sacrifices precise experimental control of their statistical properties, making even
the most basic analyses such as estimating tuning functions increasingly challenging.
During complex behavior, it is often unclear which features the neurons may be tuned to, especially
in higher cortical regions. There is a natural temptation to use very flexible models that consider all
possible task features and let the estimation procedure determine which input dimensions actually
drive the neural responses. While regularized GLMs are the model of choice for this estimation, they
require careful design of basis functions [6, 7]; they are also nontrivial to regularize well [8] or to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

