Rethinking pooling in graph neural networks
Diego Mesquita1∗, Amauri H. Souza2 ∗ , Samuel Kaski1,3
Aalto University 2 Federal Institute of Ceará 3 University of Manchester
{diego.mesquita, samuel.kaski}@aalto.fi, amauriholanda@ifce.edu.br
1

Abstract
Graph pooling is a central component of a myriad of graph neural network (GNN)
architectures. As an inheritance from traditional CNNs, most approaches formulate
graph pooling as a cluster assignment problem, extending the idea of local patches
in regular grids to graphs. Despite the wide adherence to this design choice, no
work has rigorously evaluated its influence on the success of GNNs. In this paper,
we build upon representative GNNs and introduce variants that challenge the need
for locality-preserving representations, either using randomization or clustering
on the complement graph. Strikingly, our experiments demonstrate that using
these variants does not result in any decrease in performance. To understand
this phenomenon, we study the interplay between convolutional layers and the
subsequent pooling ones. We show that the convolutions play a leading role in
the learned representations. In contrast to the common belief, local pooling is not
responsible for the success of GNNs on relevant and widely-used benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The success of graph neural networks (GNNs) [3, 36] in many domains [9, 15, 25, 41, 46, 50] is
due to their ability to extract meaningful representations from graph-structured data. Similarly to
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), a typical GNN sequentially combines local filtering, nonlinearity, and (possibly) pooling operations to obtain refined graph representations at each layer.
Whereas the convolutional filters capture local regularities in the input graph, the interleaved pooling
operations reduce the graph representation while ideally preserving important structural information.
Although strategies for graph pooling come in many flavors [26, 30, 47, 49], most GNNs follow
a hierarchical scheme in which the pooling regions correspond to graph clusters that, in turn, are
combined to produce a coarser graph [4, 7, 13, 21, 47, 48]. Intuitively, these clusters generalize the
notion of local neighborhood exploited in traditional CNNs and allow for pooling graphs of varying
sizes. The cluster assignments can be obtained via deterministic clustering algorithms [4, 7] or be
learned in an end-to-end fashion [21, 47]. Also, one can leverage node embeddings [21], graph
topology [8], or both [47, 48], to pool graphs. We refer to these approaches as local pooling.
Together with attention-based mechanisms [24, 26], the notion that clustering is a must-have property
of graph pooling has been tremendously influential, resulting in an ever-increasing number of pooling
schemes [14, 18, 21, 27, 48]. Implicit in any pooling approach is the belief that the quality of the
cluster assignments is crucial for GNNs performance. Nonetheless, to the best of our knowledge, this
belief has not been rigorously evaluated.
Misconceptions not only hinder new advances but also may lead to unnecessary complexity and
obfuscate interpretability. This is particularly critical in graph representation learning, as we have
seen a clear trend towards simplified GNNs [5, 6, 11, 31, 43].
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

