A Theoretical Framework for Target Propagation
Alexander Meulemans1 , Francesco S. Carzaniga1 , Johan A.K. Suykens2 ,
João Sacramento1 , Benjamin F. Grewe1
1

Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich
2
ESAT-STADIUS, KU Leuven
ameulema@ethz.ch

Abstract
The success of deep learning, a brain-inspired form of AI, has sparked interest
in understanding how the brain could similarly learn across multiple layers of
neurons. However, the majority of biologically-plausible learning algorithms
have not yet reached the performance of backpropagation (BP), nor are they built
on strong theoretical foundations. Here, we analyze target propagation (TP),
a popular but not yet fully understood alternative to BP, from the standpoint
of mathematical optimization. Our theory shows that TP is closely related to
Gauss-Newton optimization and thus substantially differs from BP. Furthermore,
our analysis reveals a fundamental limitation of difference target propagation
(DTP), a well-known variant of TP, in the realistic scenario of non-invertible
neural networks. We provide a first solution to this problem through a novel
reconstruction loss that improves feedback weight training, while simultaneously
introducing architectural flexibility by allowing for direct feedback connections
from the output to each hidden layer. Our theory is corroborated by experimental
results that show significant improvements in performance and in the alignment of
forward weight updates with loss gradients, compared to DTP.

1

Introduction

Backpropagation (BP) (Rumelhart et al., 1986; Linnainmaa, 1970; Werbos, 1982) has emerged as the
gold standard for training deep neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015) but long-standing criticism on
whether it can be used to explain learning in the brain across multiple layers of neurons has prevailed
(Crick, 1989). First, BP requires exact weight symmetry of forward and backward pathways, also
known as the weight transport problem, which is not compatible with the current evidence from
experimental neuroscience studies (Grossberg, 1987). Second, it requires the transmission of signed
error signals (Lillicrap et al., 2020). This raises the question whether (i) weight transport and (ii)
signed error transmission are necessary for training multilayered neural networks.
Recent work (Lillicrap et al., 2016; Nøkland, 2016) showed that random feedback connections are
sufficient to propagate errors and that feedback does not need to adhere to the layer-wise structure of
the forward pathway, thereby indicating that weight transport is not strictly necessary for training
multilayered neural networks. However, follow-up work (Bartunov et al., 2018; Launay et al., 2019;
Moskovitz et al., 2018; Crafton et al., 2019) indicated that random feedback weights are not sufficient
for more complex problems and require adjustments to better approximate the symmetric layer-wise
connectivity of BP (Akrout et al., 2019; Kunin et al., 2020; Liao et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2018;
Guerguiev et al., 2020), although encouraging recent results suggest that the symmetric connectivity
constraint from BP might be surmountable (Lansdell et al., 2020).
Target propagation (TP) represents a fundamentally different stream of research into alternatives
for BP, as it propagates target activations (not errors) to the hidden layers of the network and then
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

