Unsupervised Learning of Object Landmarks via
Self-Training Correspondence

Dimitrios Mallis
University of Nottingham
dimitrios.mallis@nottingham.ac.uk
Matt Bell
University of Nottingham
matt.bell@nottingham.ac.uk

Enrique Sanchez
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
e.lozano@samsung.com

Georgios Tzimiropoulos
Queen Mary University of London, UK
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
g.tzimiropoulos@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of unsupervised discovery of object landmarks.
We take a different path compared to existing works, based on 2 novel perspectives: (1) Self-training: starting from generic keypoints, we propose a self-training
approach where the goal is to learn a detector that improves itself, becoming
more and more tuned to object landmarks. (2) Correspondence: we identify correspondence as a key objective for unsupervised landmark discovery and propose
an optimization scheme which alternates between recovering object landmark
correspondence across different images via clustering and learning an object landmark descriptor without labels. Compared to previous works, our approach can
learn landmarks that are more flexible in terms of capturing large changes in
viewpoint. We show the favourable properties of our method on a variety of difficult datasets including LS3D, BBCPose and Human3.6M. Code is available at
https://github.com/malldimi1/UnsupervisedLandmarks.

1

Introduction

Object parts, also known as keypoints or landmarks, convey information about the shape and spatial
configuration of an object in 3D space, especially for deformable objects like the human face, body
and hand. Prior research has focused on learning landmark detectors in a supervised manner for a
few object categories only, for example facial [49, 5, 11] or human body keypoints [25, 2, 44], where
thousands of annotated images with landmarks are available. As annotating landmarks for all objects
is impractical, this paper focuses on learning landmark detectors in an unsupervised manner.
Unsupervised learning of object landmarks from a first glance seems an impossible task. A human
annotator has understanding of the notion of objects and their parts, viewpoint invariance, occlusion
and self-occlusion as well as examples of which landmarks to annotate in their disposal. Hence,
it is completely unclear what machine learning task should be chosen for unsupervised landmark
discovery with neural networks. Recent methods have focused on two principles/tasks: equivariance
to 2D image transformations [40, 38, 37] and image generation [15, 51, 33]. These methods,
despite presenting consistent results for various object categories, have their own limitations such
as discovering landmarks with no clear semantic meaning (i.e. landmarks quite different to those
annotated by humans)1 and not generalizing well to large viewpoint changes (i.e. 3D rotations).
1
We note that our method cannot guarantee to discover semantic landmarks either, but tends to discover
landmarks which are more semantically meaningful.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

