Gradient-EM Bayesian Meta-learning

Yayi Zou
Didi AI Labs @Silicon Valley
yz725@cornell.edu

Xiaoqi Lu
Columbia University
lx2170@columbia.edu

Abstract
Bayesian meta-learning enables robust and fast adaptation to new tasks with uncertainty assessment. The key idea behind Bayesian meta-learning is empirical
Bayes inference of hierarchical model. In this work, we extend this framework
to include a variety of existing methods, before proposing our variant based on
gradient-EM algorithm. Our method improves computational efficiency by avoiding back-propagation computation in the meta-update step, which is exhausting for
deep neural networks. Furthermore, it provides flexibility to the inner-update optimization procedure by decoupling it from meta-update. Experiments on sinusoidal
regression, few-shot image classification, and policy-based reinforcement learning
show that our method not only achieves better accuracy with less computation cost,
but is also more robust to uncertainty.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning, also known as learning to learn, has gained tremendous attention in both academia
and industry, especially with applications to few-shot learning[3]. These methods utilize the similar
nature of multi-task setting, such that learning from previous tasks helps mastering new tasks faster.
The early fast meta-learning algorithm was gradient-based and deterministic, which may cause
overfitting on both inner-level and meta-level [15]. With growing interests in prediction uncertainty
evaluation and overfitting control, later studies explored probabilistic meta-learning methods [6, 27, 4].
It has been agreed that Bayesian inference is one of the most convenient choices because of its
Occam’s Razor property [14] that automatically prevents overfitting, which happens in deep neural
network (DNN) very often. It also provides reliable predictive uncertainty because of its probabilistic
nature. This makes Bayesian methods important to DNN, which as [8] shows, unlike shallow neural
networks, are usually poorly calibrated on predictive uncertainty.
The theoretical foundation of Bayesian meta-learning is hierarchical Bayes (HB) [5] or empirical
Bayes (EB) [22], where the former can be seen as adding a hyper-prior over the latter [20]. For
simplicity, in this paper we focus on EB to restrict the learning of meta-parameters to point estimates.
A common solution of EB is a bi-level iterative optimization procedure [20, 13], where the “innerupdate” refers to adaptation to a given task, and the “meta-update” is the meta-training objective.
Starting with a generalized meta learning setting, we propose our general Bayesian framework
and claim its optimality under certain metrics. This framework extends the original optimization
framework for train/val split in the inner-update procedure to mitigate in-task overfitting which is
important for NN based ML. We also hypothesize a mechanism of how EB framework achieves fastadaptation (few inner-update gradient steps) under Gaussian parameterization, along with empirical
evidences. What’s more, we successfully adapt this EB framework to RL both theoretically and
empirically which has not been done before.
We show that many important previous works in (Bayesian) meta-learning [20, 4, 27, 3, 17] can be
included to this extended framework. However in these previous works, the meta-update step requires
backpropagation through the inner optimization process [18] which imposes large computation
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

