BAIL: Best-Action Imitation Learning for
Batch Deep Reinforcement Learning

Xinyue Chen1

Zijian Zhou1

Zheng Wang1

Che Wang1,2

Yanqiu Wu1,2

Keith Ross1,2∗

1

New York University Shanghai
2
New York University

Abstract
There has recently been a surge in research in batch Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL), which aims for learning a high-performing policy from a given dataset
without additional interactions with the environment. We propose a new algorithm,
Best-Action Imitation Learning (BAIL), which strives for both simplicity and
performance. BAIL learns a V function, uses the V function to select actions it
believes to be high-performing, and then uses those actions to train a policy network
using imitation learning. For the MuJoCo benchmark, we provide a comprehensive
experimental study of BAIL, comparing its performance to four other batch Qlearning and imitation-learning schemes for a large variety of batch datasets. Our
experiments show that BAIL’s performance is much higher than the other schemes,
and is also computationally much faster than the batch Q-learning schemes.

1

Introduction

The field of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has recently seen a surge in research in batch
reinforcement learning, which is the problem of sample-efficient learning from a given dataset
without additional interactions with the environment. Batch RL enables reusing the data collected
by a policy to possibly improve the policy without further interactions with the environment, it has
the potential to leverage existing large datasets to obtain much better sample efficiency. A batch RL
algorithm can also be deployed as part of a growing-batch algorithm, where the batch algorithm seeks
a high-performing exploitation policy using the data in an experience replay buffer [18], combines
this policy with exploration to add fresh data to the buffer, and then repeats the whole process [15, 3].
Batch RL may also be necessary for learning a policy in safety-critical systems where a partially
trained policy cannot be deployed online to collect data.
Fujimoto et al. [8] made the critical observation that when conventional Q-function based algorithms,
such as Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG), are directly applied to batch reinforcement
learning, they learn very poorly, or even entirely diverge due to extrapolation error. Therefore, in
order to obtain high-performing policies from batch data, new algorithms are required. Recent batch
DRL algorithms roughly fall into two categories: Q-function-based algorithms such as BCQ [8] and
BEAR [14]; and Imitation Learning (IL)-based algorithms such as MARWIL [27] and AWR [20].
We propose a new algorithm, Best-Action Imitation Learning (BAIL), which strives for both simplicity
and performance. BAIL is an advanced IL method and its value estimates are updated only with data
in the batch, giving stable estimates. BAIL not only provides state-of-the-art performance, it is also
∗

Correspondence to: Keith Ross <keithwross@nyu.edu>.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

