GPS-Net: Graph-based Photometric Stereo Network

Zhuokun Yao1 , Kun Li1∗ , Ying Fu2 , Haofeng Hu3 , Boxin Shi4,5∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
3
School of Precision Instrument and Opto-Electronics Engineering,
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
{yaozk,lik,haofeng_hu}@tju.edu.cn, fuying@bit.edu.cn, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Learning-based photometric stereo methods predict the surface normal either in
a per-pixel or an all-pixel manner. Per-pixel methods explore the inter-image
intensity variation of each pixel but ignore features from the intra-image spatial
domain. All-pixel methods explore the intra-image intensity variation of each input
image but pay less attention to the inter-image lighting variation. In this paper,
we present a Graph-based Photometric Stereo Network, which unifies per-pixel
and all-pixel processings to explore both inter-image and intra-image information.
For per-pixel operation, we propose the Unstructured Feature Extraction Layer to
connect an arbitrary number of input image-light pairs into graph structures, and
introduce Structure-aware Graph Convolution filters to balance the input data by
appropriately weighting shadows and specular highlights. For all-pixel operation,
we propose the Normal Regression Network to make efficient use of the intraimage spatial information for predicting a surface normal map with rich details.
Experimental results on the real-world benchmark show that our method achieves
excellent performance under both sparse and dense lighting distributions.

1

Introduction

Photometric stereo aims at estimating surface normals of a static object from a set of images acquired
under various illumination conditions from a fixed camera [1]. The pixel-wise estimation of surface
orientation makes photometric stereo outstanding in acquiring high-resolution 3D information. Recent
progress in deep learning has been verified to be effective in photometric stereo for general complex
reflectance, showing superior accuracy over conventional methods on a benchmark dataset [2]. To
design effective deep learning frameworks in the context of photometric stereo, the core problem
is how to deal with a sequence of unordered and arbitrary numbers of input images under various
illumination conditions. The first deep photometric stereo network [3] fixes the order and number
of input images during training and testing. Following works focus on relaxing this unpractical
assumption in dealing with unordered, arbitrary numbers of images, either in a per-pixel [4]–[6] or an
all-pixel [7]–[9] manner, i.e., whether the observations of a single pixel or the whole image are fed to
the network, according to a recent survey about data-driven photometric stereo [10].
As illustrated in the top row of Fig. 1, per-pixel methods explore the inter-image intensity1 variation
by projecting the observations of each pixel into a fixed-size observation map, according to the first
∗

Corresponding authors
Throughout this paper, we assume the camera is radiometrically calibrated and the images are linearized, so
we use “intensity" to refer to image irradiance for simplicity.
1

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

