Building powerful and equivariant graph neural
networks with structural message-passing

Clément Vignac, Andreas Loukas, and Pascal Frossard
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
{clement.vignac,andreas.loukas,pascal.frossard}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Message-passing has proved to be an effective way to design graph neural networks,
as it is able to leverage both permutation equivariance and an inductive bias towards
learning local structures in order to achieve good generalization. However, current
message-passing architectures have a limited representation power and fail to learn
basic topological properties of graphs. We address this problem and propose a
powerful and equivariant message-passing framework based on two ideas: first,
we propagate a one-hot encoding of the nodes, in addition to the features, in order
to learn a local context matrix around each node. This matrix contains rich local
information about both features and topology and can eventually be pooled to build
node representations. Second, we propose methods for the parametrization of the
message and update functions that ensure permutation equivariance. Having a
representation that is independent of the specific choice of the one-hot encoding
permits inductive reasoning and leads to better generalization properties. Experimentally, our model can predict various graph topological properties on synthetic
data more accurately than previous methods and achieves state-of-the-art results on
molecular graph regression on the ZINC dataset.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks have recently emerged as a popular way to process and analyze graphstructured data. Among the numerous architectures that have been proposed, the class of messagepassing neural networks (MPNNs) [1–3] has been by far the most widely adopted. In addition to
being able to efficiently exploit the sparsity of graphs, MPNNs exhibit an inherent tendency to learn
relationships between nearby nodes. This inductive bias is generally considered as a good fit for
problems that require relational reasoning [4], such as tractable relational inference [5, 6], problems in
combinatorial optimization [7–10] or the simulation of physical interactions between objects [11, 12].
A second key factor to the success of MPNNs is their equivariance properties. Since neural networks
can ultimately only process tensors, in order to use a graph as input, it is necessary to order its nodes
and build an adjacency list or matrix. Non-equivariant networks tend to exhibit poor sample efficiency
as they need to explicitly learn that all representations of a graph in the (enormous) symmetry group
of possible orderings actually correspond to the same object. On the contrary, permutation equivariant
networks, such as MPNNs, are better equipped to generalize as they already implement the prior
knowledge that any ordering is arbitrary.
Despite their success, equivariant MPNNs possess limited expressive power [13, 14]. For example,
they cannot learn whether a graph is connected, what is the local clustering coefficient of a node, or
if a given pattern such as a cycle is present in a graph [15]. For tasks where the graph structure is
important, such as the prediction of chemical properties of molecules [16, 17] and the solution to
combinatorial optimization problems, more powerful graph neural networks are necessary.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

