Fair Regression with Wasserstein Barycenters

Evgenii Chzhen∗
LMO, Université Paris-Saclay
CNRS, Inria

Christophe Denis
LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel
MIA-Paris, AgroParisTech
INRAE, Université Paris-Saclay

Mohamed Hebiri
LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris

Luca Oneto
DIBRIS, University of Genoa

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University College London

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a real-valued function that satisfies the Demographic Parity constraint. It demands the distribution of the predicted output to
be independent of the sensitive attribute. We consider the case that the sensitive
attribute is available for prediction. We establish a connection between fair regression and optimal transport theory, based on which we derive a close form
expression for the optimal fair predictor. Specifically, we show that the distribution
of this optimum is the Wasserstein barycenter of the distributions induced by the
standard regression function on the sensitive groups. This result offers an intuitive
interpretation of the optimal fair prediction and suggests a simple post-processing
algorithm to achieve fairness. We establish risk and distribution-free fairness guarantees for this procedure. Numerical experiments indicate that our method is very
effective in learning fair models, with a relative increase in error rate that is inferior
to the relative gain in fairness.

1

Introduction

A central goal of algorithmic fairness is to ensure that sensitive information does not “unfairly”
influence the outcomes of learning algorithms. For example, if we wish to predict the salary of
an applicant or the grade of a university student, we would like the algorithm to not unfairly use
additional sensitive information such as gender or race. Since today’s real-life datasets often contain
discriminatory bias, standard machine learning methods behave unfairly. Therefore, a substantial
effort is being devoted in the field to designing methods that satisfy “fairness” requirements, while
still optimizing prediction performance, see for example [5, 10, 13, 16, 18, 21, 23, 25, 26, 28, 32, 45–
47, 49] and references therein.
In this paper we study the problem of learning a real-valued regression function which among
those complying with the Demographic Parity fairness constraint, minimizes the mean squared error.
Demographic Parity requires the probability distribution of the predicted output to be independent
of the sensitive attribute and has been used extensively in the literature, both in the context of
classification and regression [1, 12, 20, 24, 34]. In this paper we consider the case that the sensitive
∗

evgenii.chzhen@universite-paris-saclay.fr

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

