Improving Neural Network Training in Low
Dimensional Random Bases
Zach Eaton-Rosen
Graphcore Research
London, UK
zacher@graphcore.ai

Frithjof Gressmann
Graphcore Research
Bristol, UK
frithjof@graphcore.ai

Carlo Luschi
Graphcore Research
Bristol, UK
carlo@graphcore.ai

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) has proven to be remarkably effective in
optimizing deep neural networks that employ ever-larger numbers of parameters.
Yet, improving the efficiency of large-scale optimization remains a vital and highly
active area of research. Recent work has shown that deep neural networks can be
optimized in randomly-projected subspaces of much smaller dimensionality than
their native parameter space. While such training is promising for more efficient
and scalable optimization schemes, its practical application is limited by inferior
optimization performance.
Here, we improve on recent random subspace approaches as follows: Firstly, we
show that keeping the random projection fixed throughout training is detrimental to optimization. We propose re-drawing the random subspace at each step,
which yields significantly better performance. We realize further improvements
by applying independent projections to different parts of the network, making the
approximation more efficient as network dimensionality grows. To implement these
experiments, we leverage hardware-accelerated pseudo-random number generation
to construct the random projections on-demand at every optimization step, allowing
us to distribute the computation of independent random directions across multiple
workers with shared random seeds. This yields significant reductions in memory
and is up to 10× faster for the workloads in question.

1

Introduction

Despite significant growth in the number of parameters used in deep learning networks, Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) continues to be remarkably effective at finding minima of the highly overparameterized weight space [9]. However, empirical evidence suggests that not all of the gradient
directions are required to sustain effective optimization and that the descent may happen in much
smaller subspaces [14]. Many methods are able to greatly reduce model redundancy while achieving
high task performance at a lower computational cost [34, 29, 5, 36, 17, 15, 32, 21].
Notably, Li et al. [26] proposed a simple approach to both quantify and drastically reduce parameter
redundancy by constraining the optimization to a (fixed) randomly-projected subspace of much
smaller dimensionality than the native parameter space. While the work demonstrated successful lowdimensional optimization, its inferior performance compared with standard SGD limits its practical
application.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

