See, Hear, Explore: Curiosity via Audio-Visual
Association
Victoria Dean
Carnegie Mellon University
vdean@cs.cmu.edu

Shubham Tulsiani
Facebook AI Research
shubhtuls@fb.com

Abhinav Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University
Facebook AI Research
abhinavg@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Exploration is one of the core challenges in reinforcement learning. A common
formulation of curiosity-driven exploration uses the difference between the real
future and the future predicted by a learned model [1]. However, predicting the
future is an inherently difficult task which can be ill-posed in the face of stochasticity. In this paper, we introduce an alternative form of curiosity that rewards novel
associations between different senses. Our approach exploits multiple modalities
to provide a stronger signal for more efficient exploration. Our method is inspired
by the fact that, for humans, both sight and sound play a critical role in exploration.
We present results on several Atari environments and Habitat (a photorealistic navigation simulator), showing the benefits of using an audio-visual association model
for intrinsically guiding learning agents in the absence of external rewards. For
videos and code, see https://vdean.github.io/audio-curiosity.html.

1

Introduction

Many successes in reinforcement learning (RL)
have come from agents maximizing a provided
extrinsic reward such as a game score. However,
in real-world settings, reward functions are hard
to formulate and require significant human engineering. On the other hand, humans explore the
world driven by intrinsic motivation, such as curiosity, often in the absence of rewards. But what
is curiosity and how would one formulate it?
Recent work in RL [1–3] has focused on curiosity using future prediction. In this formulation,
an exploration policy receives rewards for actions that lead to differences between the real Figure 1: See, Hear, Explore: We propose a forfuture and the future predicted by a forward dy- mulation of curiosity that encourages the agent
namics model. In turn, the dynamics model to explore novel associations between modalities,
improves as it learns from novel states. While such as audio and vision. In Habitat, shown above,
the core idea behind this curiosity formulation is our method allows for more efficient exploration
simple, putting it into practice is quite challeng- than baselines.
ing. Learning and modeling forward dynamics
is still an open research problem; it is unclear how to handle multiple possible futures, whether
to explicitly incorporate physics, or even what the right prediction space is (pixel space or some
latent space).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

