From Predictions to Decisions:
Using L kahead Regularization

Nir Rosenfeld
Faculty of Computer Science
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
nirr@cs.technion.ac.il

Sophie Hilgard
School of Engineering and Applied Science
Harvard University
ash798@g.harvard.edu

Sai S. Ravindranath
School of Engineering and Applied Science
Harvard University
saisr@g.harvard.edu

David C. Parkes
School of Engineering and Applied Science
Harvard University
parkes@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract
Machine learning is a powerful tool for predicting human-related outcomes, from
creditworthiness to heart attack risks. But when deployed transparently, learned
models also affect how users act in order to improve outcomes. The standard
approach to learning predictive models is agnostic to induced user actions and
provides no guarantees as to the effect of actions. We provide a framework for
learning predictors that are accurate, while also considering interactions between
the learned model and user decisions. For this, we introduce look-ahead regularization which, by anticipating user actions, encourages predictive models to also
induce actions that improve outcomes. This regularization carefully tailors the
uncertainty estimates that govern confidence in this improvement to the distribution of model-induced actions. We report the results of experiments on real and
synthetic data that show the effectiveness of this approach.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is increasingly being used in domains that have considerable impact on people,
ranging from healthcare [7], to banking [45], to manufacturing [52]. In many of these domains,
fairness and safety concerns promote the deployment of fully transparent predictive models. An
unavoidable consequence of this transparency is that end-users are prone to use models prescriptively:
if a user (wrongly) views a predictive model as a description of the real world phenomena it models
(e.g., heart attack risk), then she may look to the model for how to adapt her features in order to
improve future outcomes (e.g., reduce her risk). But predictive models optimized for accuracy cannot
in general be assumed to faithfully reflect post-modification outcomes, and model-guided actions can
prove to be detrimental. Our goal in this paper is to present a learning framework for organizations
seeking to deploy learned models in a way that is transparent and responsible, a setting we believe
applies widely. Consider a medical center who would like to publish an online tool to allow users
to estimate their heart attack risk, while keeping in mind that users may also infer how lifestyle
changes will affect future risk.1 Consider a lender who would like to be transparent about their
first-time mortgage approval process, while knowing that this will suggest to applicants how they
may alter their credit profiles. Consider a wine reseller, who would like to provide demand guidance
1
For example, the Mayo Clinic, a leading medical center in the U.S., provides such a calculator [8].
MDCalc.com is an example of a site that provides medical many risk assessment calculators to the public.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

