Belief Propagation Neural Networks
Jonathan Kuck1 , Shuvam Chakraborty1 , Hao Tang2 , Rachel Luo1 , Jiaming Song1 ,
Ashish Sabharwal3 , and Stefano Ermon1
1
2
Stanford University Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
{kuck,shuvamc,rsluo,tsong,ermon}@stanford.edu,
silent56@sjtu.edu.cn, ashishs@allenai.org

Abstract
Learned neural solvers have successfully been used to solve combinatorial optimization and decision problems. More general counting variants of these problems,
however, are still largely solved with hand-crafted solvers. To bridge this gap, we
introduce belief propagation neural networks (BPNNs), a class of parameterized
operators that operate on factor graphs and generalize Belief Propagation (BP).
In its strictest form, a BPNN layer (BPNN-D) is a learned iterative operator that
provably maintains many of the desirable properties of BP for any choice of the
parameters. Empirically, we show that by training BPNN-D learns to perform the
task better than the original BP: it converges 1.7x faster on Ising models while providing tighter bounds. On challenging model counting problems, BPNNs compute
estimates 100’s of times faster than state-of-the-art handcrafted methods, while
returning an estimate of comparable quality.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic inference problems arise in many domains, from statistical physics to machine learning.
There is little hope that efficient, exact solutions to these problems exist as they are at least as hard as
NP-complete decision problems. Significant research has been devoted across the fields of machine
learning, statistics, and statistical physics to develop variational and sampling based methods to
approximate these challenging problems [13, 34, 48, 6, 38]. Variational methods such as Belief
Propagation (BP) [31] are computationally efficient and have been particularly successful at providing
principled approximations due to extensive theoretical analysis.
While BP provably lower bounds the partition function for classes of factor graphs, these bounds
are not reliably tight. Handcrafting alternative algorithms that are specialized to problem domains
and that provide bounds is laborious. We introduce belief propagation neural networks (BPNNs), a
flexible neural architecture designed to estimate the partition function of a factor graph that leverage
the theoretical analysis behind BP. BPNNs generalize BP and can thus provide more accurate
estimates than BP when trained on a small number of factor graphs with known partition functions.
During training BPNNs learn a modification to the standard BP message passing operations so
that the final output is closer to the ground truth partition function. At the same time, BPNNs
retain many of BP’s properties, which results in more accurate estimates compared to general neural
architectures. BPNNs are composed of iterative layers (BPNN-D) and an optional Bethe free energy
layer (BPNN-B), both of which maintain the symmetries of BP under factor graph isomorphisms.
BPNN-D is a parametrized iterative operator that strictly generalizes BP while preserving many of
BP’s guarantees. Like BP, BPNN-D is guaranteed to converge on tree structured factor graphs and
return the exact partition function. For factor graphs with loops, BPNN-D computes a lower bound
whenever the Bethe approximation obtained from fixed points of BP is a provable lower bound (with
mild restrictions on BPNN-D). BPNN-B performs regression from the trajectory of beliefs (over a
fixed number of iterations) to the partition function of the input factor graph. While this sacrifices
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

