Truncated Linear Regression in High Dimensions

Constantinos Daskalakis
MIT
costis@mit.edu

Dhruv Rohatgi
MIT
drohatgi@mit.edu

Manolis Zampetakis
MIT
mzampet@mit.edu

Abstract
As in standard linear regression, in truncated linear regression, we are given ac∗
cess to observations (Ai , yi )i whose dependent variable equals yi = AT
i · x + ηi ,
∗
where x is some fixed unknown vector of interest and ηi is independent noise;
except we are only given an observation if its dependent variable yi lies in some
“truncation set” S ⊂ R. The goal is to recover x∗ under some favorable conditions
on the Ai ’s and the noise distribution. We prove that there exists a computationally
and statistically efficient method for recovering k-sparse n-dimensional vectors
x∗ from
p m truncated samples, which attains an optimal `2 reconstruction error
of O( (k log n)/m). As a corollary, our guarantees imply a computationally
efficient and information-theoretically optimal algorithm for compressed sensing
with truncation, which may arise from measurement saturation effects. Our result
follows from a statistical and computational analysis of the Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) algorithm for solving a natural adaptation of the LASSO optimization problem that accommodates truncation. This generalizes the works of
both: (1) Daskalakis et al. [9], where no regularization is needed due to the lowdimensionality of the data, and (2) Wainright [27], where the objective function is
simple due to the absence of truncation. In order to deal with both truncation and
high-dimensionality at the same time, we develop new techniques that not only
generalize the existing ones but we believe are of independent interest.

1

Introduction

In the vanilla linear regression setting, we are given m ≥ n observations of the form (Ai , yi ), where
∗
∗
A i ∈ Rn , y i = A T
i x + ηi , x is some unknown coefficient vector that we wish to recover, and
ηi is independent and identically distributed across different observations i random noise. Under
favorable conditions about the Ai ’s and the p
distribution of the noise, it is well-known that x∗ can be
recovered to within `2 -reconstruction error O( n/m).
The classical model and its associated guarantees might, however, be inadequate to address many
situations which frequently arise in both theory and practice. We focus on two common and widely
studied deviations from the standard model. First, it is often the case that m  n, i.e. the number
of observations is much smaller than the dimension of the unknown vector x∗ . In this “underdetermined” regime, it is fairly clear that it is impossible to expect a non-trivial reconstruction of the
T ∗
underlying x∗ , since there are infinitely many x ∈ Rn such that AT
i x = Ai x for all i = 1, . . . , m.
To sidestep this impossibility, we must exploit additional structural properties that we might know
x∗ satisfies. One such property might be sparsity, i.e. that x∗ has k  n non-zero coordinates.
Linear regression under sparsity assumptions has been widely studied, motivated by applications
such as model selection and compressed sensing; see e.g. the celebrated works of [24, 6, 11, 27]
on p
this topic. It is known, in particular, that a k-sparse x∗ can be recovered to within `2 error
O( k log n/m), when the Ai ’s are drawn from the standard multivariate Normal, or satisfy other
favorable conditions [27]. The recovery algorithm solves a least squares optimization problem with
`1 regularization, i.e. what is called LASSO optimization in Statistics, in order to reward sparsity.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

