Program Synthesis with Pragmatic Communication

Yewen Pu
MIT

Kevin Ellis∗
MIT

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

Marta Kryven∗
MIT
Armando Solar-Lezama
MIT

Abstract
Program synthesis techniques construct or infer programs from user-provided
specifications, such as input-output examples. Yet most specifications, especially
those given by end-users, leave the synthesis problem radically ill-posed, because
many programs may simultaneously satisfy the specification. Prior work resolves
this ambiguity by using various inductive biases, such as a preference for simpler
programs. This work introduces a new inductive bias derived by modeling the
program synthesis task as rational communication, drawing insights from recursive
reasoning models of pragmatics. Given a specification, we score a candidate
program both on its consistency with the specification, and also whether a rational
speaker would chose this particular specification to communicate that program. We
develop efficient algorithms for such an approach when learning from input-output
examples, and build a pragmatic program synthesizer over a simple grid-like layout
domain. A user study finds that end-user participants communicate more effectively
with the pragmatic program synthesizer over a non-pragmatic one.

1

Introduction

Programming is a frustrating process: as the computer executes your code literally, any error in
communicating how the computer should run would result in a bug. Program synthesis [1] aims
to address this problem by allowing the user to specify what the program should do; provided this
specification, a program synthesizer infers a program that satisfies it. One of the most well-known
program synthesizers is FlashFill [2], which synthesizes string transformations from input/output examples. For instance, “Gordon Freeman” → “G”, the FlashFill system infers the program:
“first_letter(first_word(input))”. FlashFill works inside Microsoft Excel, and this program can then
run on the rest of the spreadsheet, saving time for end-users. However, most specifications, especially
those provided by a naive end-user, leave the synthesis problem ill-posed as there may be many programs that satisfy the specification. Here we introduce a new paradigm for resolving this ambiguity.
We think of program synthesis as a kind of communication between the user and the synthesizer.
Framed as communication we can deploy ideas from computational linguistics, namely pragmatics,
the study of how informative speakers select their utterances, and how astute listeners infer intent
from these “pragmatic” utterances [3]. Intuitively, a pragmatic program synthesizer goes beyond the
literal meaning of the specification, and asks why an informative user would select that specification.
Resolving the ambiguity inherent in program synthesis has received much attention. Broadly, prior
work imposes some form of inductive bias over the space of programs. In a program synthesizer
without any built-in inductive bias [1], given a specification D, the synthesizer might return any
program consistent with D. Interacting with such a synthesizer runs the risk of getting an unintuitive
program that is only “technically correct”. For instance, given an example “Richard Feynman” →
∗

equal contributions

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

