Elastic-InfoGAN: Unsupervised Disentangled
Representation Learning in Class-Imbalanced Data

Utkarsh Ojha1
1

Krishna Kumar Singh1,2
UC Davis

2

Cho-Jui Hsieh3

Adobe Research

3

Yong Jae Lee1

UCLA

utkarshojha.github.io/elastic-infogan/

Abstract
We propose a novel unsupervised generative model that learns to disentangle object
identity from other low-level aspects in class-imbalanced data. We first investigate
the issues surrounding the assumptions about uniformity made by InfoGAN [10],
and demonstrate its ineffectiveness to properly disentangle object identity in imbalanced data. Our key idea is to make the discovery of the discrete latent factor
of variation invariant to identity-preserving transformations in real images, and
use that as a signal to learn the appropriate latent distribution representing object
identity. Experiments on both artificial (MNIST, 3D cars, 3D chairs, ShapeNet)
and real-world (YouTube-Faces) imbalanced datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method in disentangling object identity as a latent factor of variation.

1

Introduction

Generative models aim to model the true data distribution, so that fake samples that seemingly belong
to the modeled distribution can be generated [1, 42, 6]. Recent deep neural network based models
such as Generative Adversarial Networks [19, 44, 43] and Variational Autoencoders [33, 24] have
led to promising results in generating realistic samples for high-dimensional and complex data such
as images. More advanced models show how to discover disentangled (factorized) representations
[57, 10, 49, 26, 47], in which different latent dimensions can be made to represent independent factors
of variation (e.g., pose, identity) in the data (e.g., human faces).
InfoGAN [10] in particular, learns an unsupervised disentangled representation by maximizing
the mutual information between the discrete or continuous latent variables and the corresponding
generated samples. For discrete latent factors (e.g., digit identities), it assumes that they are uniformly distributed in the data, and approximates them accordingly using a fixed uniform categorical
distribution. Although this assumption holds true for many benchmark datasets (e.g., MNIST [34]),
real-word data often follows a long-tailed distribution and rarely exhibits perfect balance between the
categories. Indeed, applying InfoGAN on imbalanced data can result in incoherent groupings, since
it is forced to discover potentially non-existent factors that are uniformly distributed in the data; see
Fig. 1.
In this work, we augment InfoGAN to discover disentangled categorical representations from imbalanced data. Our model, Elastic-InfoGAN, makes two improvements to InfoGAN which are simple
and intuitive. First, we remodel the way the latent distribution is used to fetch the latent variables;
we lift the assumption of any knowledge about the underlying class distribution, where instead of
deciding and fixing them beforehand, we treat the class probabilities as learnable parameters of
the optimization process. To enable the flow of gradients back to the class probabilities, we employ
the Gumbel-Softmax distribution [30, 36], which acts as a proxy for the categorical distribution,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

