Regression with reject option and application to kNN

Ahmed Zaoui∗
LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel
ahmed.zaoui@univ-eiffel.fr
Christophe Denis
LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel
MIA-Paris, AgroParisTech, INRAE, Université Paris-Saclay
christophe.denis@univ-eiffel.fr
Mohamed Hebiri
LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel
CREST, ENSAE, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
mohamed.hebiri@univ-eiffel.fr

Abstract
We investigate the problem of regression where one is allowed to abstain from predicting. We refer to this framework as regression with reject option as an extension
of classification with reject option. In this context, we focus on the case where
the rejection rate is fixed and derive the optimal rule which relies on thresholding
the conditional variance function. We provide a semi-supervised estimation procedure of the optimal rule involving two datasets: a first labeled dataset is used
to estimate both regression function and conditional variance function while a
second unlabeled dataset is exploited to calibrate the desired rejection rate. The
resulting predictor with reject option is shown to be almost as good as the optimal
predictor with reject option both in terms of risk and rejection rate. We additionally
apply our methodology with kNN algorithm and establish rates of convergence for
the resulting kNN predictor under mild conditions. Finally, a numerical study is
performed to illustrate the benefit of using the proposed procedure.
Keywords: Regression; Regression with reject option; kNN; Predictor with reject
option.

1

Introduction

Confident prediction is a fundamental problem in statistical learning for which numerous efficient
algorithms have been designed, e.g., neural-networks, kernel methods, or k-Nearest-Neighbors (kNN)
to name a few. However, even state-of-art methods may fail in some situations, leading to bad
decision-making. Obvious damageable incidences of an erroneous decision may occur in several
fields such as medical diagnosis, where a wrong estimation can be fatal. In this work, we provide a
novel statistical procedure designed to handle these cases. In the specific context of regression, we
build a prediction algorithm that allows to abstain from predicting when the doubt is too important. As
a generalization of the classification with reject option setting [4, 5, 6, 11, 13, 16, 22], this framework
is naturally referred to as regression with reject option. In the spirit of [6], we opt here for a strategy
where the predictor can abstain up to a fraction ε ∈ (0, 1) of the data. The merit of this approach is
that it allows human action on the proportion of the data where the prediction is too difficult while
∗

ahmed.zaoui@univ-eiffel.fr

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

