Breaking Reversibility Accelerates Langevin
Dynamics for Non-Convex Optimization

Xuefeng Gao∗
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, N.T. Hong Kong
xfgao@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Mert Gürbüzbalaban∗
Department of Management Science and Information Systems
Rutgers Business School
Piscataway, NJ-08854, United States of America
mg1366@rutgers.edu
Lingjiong Zhu∗
Department of Mathematics
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL-32306, United States of America
zhu@math.fsu.edu

Abstract
Langevin dynamics (LD) has been proven to be a powerful technique for optimizing a non-convex objective as an efficient algorithm to find local minima while
eventually visiting a global minimum on longer time-scales. LD is based on the
first-order Langevin diffusion which is reversible in time. We study two variants
that are based on non-reversible Langevin diffusions: the underdamped Langevin
dynamics (ULD) and the Langevin dynamics with a non-symmetric drift (NLD).
Adopting the techniques of Tzen et al. (2018) for LD to non-reversible diffusions,
we show that for a given local minimum that is within an arbitrary distance from the
initialization, with high probability, either the ULD trajectory ends up somewhere
outside a small neighborhood of this local minimum within a recurrence time
which depends on the smallest eigenvalue of the Hessian at the local minimum or
they enter this neighborhood by the recurrence time and stay there for a potentially
exponentially long escape time. The ULD algorithm improves upon the recurrence
time obtained for LD in Tzen et al. (2018) with respect to the dependency on the
smallest eigenvalue of the Hessian at the local minimum. Similar results and improvements are obtained for the NLD algorithm. We also show that non-reversible
variants can exit the basin of attraction of a local minimum faster in discrete time
when the objective has two local minima separated by a saddle point and quantify
the amount of improvement. Our analysis suggests that non-reversible Langevin
algorithms are more efficient to locate a local minimum as well as exploring the
state space.

∗

The authors are in alphabetical order.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

