Discriminative Sounding Objects Localization via
Self-supervised Audiovisual Matching

Di Hu1,2∗, Rui Qian3 , Minyue Jiang2 , Xiao Tan2 , Shilei Wen2 , Errui Ding2 ,
Weiyao Lin3 , Dejing Dou2
1
Renmin University of China, 2 Baidu Inc., 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
dihu@ruc.edu.cn,{qrui9911,wylin}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{jiangminyue,wenshilei,dingerrui,doudejing}@baidu.com,tanxchong@gmail.com

Abstract
Discriminatively localizing sounding objects in cocktail-party, i.e., mixed sound
scenes, is commonplace for humans, but still challenging for machines. In this
paper, we propose a two-stage learning framework to perform self-supervised
class-aware sounding object localization. First, we propose to learn robust
object representations by aggregating the candidate sound localization results
in the single source scenes. Then, class-aware object localization maps are
generated in the cocktail-party scenarios by referring the pre-learned object
knowledge, and the sounding objects are accordingly selected by matching audio and visual object category distributions, where the audiovisual consistency
is viewed as the self-supervised signal. Experimental results in both realistic and synthesized cocktail-party videos demonstrate that our model is superior in filtering out silent objects and pointing out the location of sounding objects of different classes. Code is available at https://github.com/DTaoo/
Discriminative-Sounding-Objects-Localization.

1

Introduction

Audio and visual messages are pervasive in our daily-life. Their natural correspondence provides
humans with rich semantic information to achieve effective multi-modal perception and learning [28,
24, 15], e.g., when in the street, we instinctively associate the talking sound with people nearby, and
the roaring sound with vehicles passing by. In view of this, we want to question that can they also
facilitate machine intelligence?
To pursue the human-like audiovisual perception, the typical and challenging problem of visually
sound localization is highly expected to be addressed, which aims to associate sounds with specific
visual regions and rewards the visual perception ability in the absence of semantic annotations [14,
18, 3, 27, 10]. A straightforward strategy is to encourage the visual features of sound source to take
higher similarity with the sound embeddings, which has shown considerable performance in the
simple scenarios with single sound [21, 22, 27]. However, there are simultaneously multiple sounding
objects as well as silent ones (i.e. The silent objects are considered capable of producing sound.).
in our daily scenario, i.e., the cocktail-party, this simple strategy mostly fails to discriminatively
localize different sound sources from mixed sound [16]. Recently, audiovisual content modeling
is proposed to excavate concrete audio and visual components in the scenario for localization. Yet,
due to lack of sufficient semantic annotation, existing works have to resort to extra scene prior
knowledge [16, 17, 25] or construct pretext task [31, 30]. Even so, these methods cannot well deal
∗
Corresponding Author, Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Gaoling
School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China. The research reported in
this paper was mainly conducted when the corresponding author worked at Baidu Research.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

