Can Q-Learning with Graph Networks Learn a
Generalizable Branching Heuristic for a SAT Solver?

Vitaly Kurin∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
vitaly.kurin@cs.ox.ac.uk

Saad Godil
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California
United States
sgodil@nvidia.com

Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

Bryan Catanzaro
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California
United States
bcatanzaro@nvidia.com

Abstract
We present Graph-Q-SAT, a branching heuristic for a Boolean SAT solver trained
with value-based reinforcement learning (RL) using Graph Neural Networks for
function approximation. Solvers using Graph-Q-SAT are complete SAT solvers
that either provide a satisfying assignment or proof of unsatisfiability, which is
required for many SAT applications. The branching heuristics commonly used in
SAT solvers make poor decisions during their warm-up period, whereas GraphQ-SAT is trained to examine the structure of the particular problem instance to
make better decisions early in the search. Training Graph-Q-SAT is data efficient
and does not require elaborate dataset preparation or feature engineering. We train
Graph-Q-SAT using RL interfacing with MiniSat solver and show that GraphQ-SAT can reduce the number of iterations required to solve SAT problems by
2-3X. Furthermore, it generalizes to unsatisfiable SAT instances, as well as to
problems with 5X more variables than it was trained on. We show that for larger
problems, reductions in the number of iterations lead to wall clock time reductions,
the ultimate goal when designing heuristics. We also show positive zero-shot
transfer behavior when testing Graph-Q-SAT on a task family different from that
used for training. While more work is needed to apply Graph-Q-SAT to reduce
wall clock time in modern SAT solving settings, it is a compelling proof-of-concept
showing that RL equipped with Graph Neural Networks can learn a generalizable
branching heuristic for SAT search.

1

Introduction

Boolean satisfiability (SAT) is an important problem for both industry and academia that impacts
various fields, including circuit design, computer security, artificial intelligence and automatic theorem
proving. As a result, modern SAT solvers are well crafted, sophisticated, reliable pieces of software
that can scale to problems with hundreds of thousands of variables [33].
∗

The work was done when the author was a research intern at NVIDIA.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

