EcoLight: Intersection Control in Developing Regions
Under Extreme Budget and Network Constraints

Sachin Kumar Chauhan, Kashish Bansal and Rijurekha Sen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
{csz188012,cs5150285,riju}@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Effective intersection control can play an important role in reducing traffic congestion and associated vehicular emissions. This is vitally needed in developing
countries, where air pollution is reaching life threatening levels. This paper presents
EcoLight intersection control for developing regions, where budget is constrained
and network connectivity is very poor. EcoLight learns effective control offline
using state-of-the-art Deep Reinforcement Learning methods, but deploys highly
efficient runtime control algorithms on low cost embedded devices that work standalone on road without server connectivity. EcoLight optimizes both average case
and worst case values of throughput, travel time and other metrics, as evaluated on
open-source datasets from New York and on a custom developing region dataset.

1

Introduction

Developing countries are overwhelmed with the problems of traffic congestion (TimesOfIndia [2018],
IndiaTimes [2018], FinancialExpress [2018]) and air pollution (DW [2019a], Amnesty [2019], DW
[2019b]). Intersection control to better manage traffic congestion and reduce vehicular emissions is
vitally needed, in addition to policies for curbing traffic (Ecotech [2016]). State-of-the-art intelligent
intersection control like Presslight (Wei et al. [2019a]) and CoLight (Wei et al. [2019b]) are showing
impressive results on lane-based orderly traffic of the developed countries. This paper explores
whether the benefits of these Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based real time video analysis
from traffic cameras, and Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) based adaptive intersection control,
can be translated to the developing world, where the need for these technologies is paramount.
The challenges of directly importing the afore-mentioned technologies are three fold – (a) extreme
budget constraints, which allows for only very low cost, compute and RAM constrained, embedded
platforms to be deployed (b) poor network connectivity between the road and the servers, forcing
all analysis to happen in-situ on the road and (c) chaotic non-laned driving behavior in developing
regions, which makes accurate video analysis for exact counting and classification of vehicles harder.
This paper presents EcoLight, the first practical step towards intelligent intersection control in
developing countries. Through close collaboration with traffic authorities and cameras deployed in
real intersections, we explore how low computation intensive video processing and control algorithms
can be trained to run on low cost embedded devices without network connectivity. EcoLight exploits
state-of-the-art CNN and DRL methods on high-end GPUs in the pre-deployment stage – (a) CNN for
training more efficient traffic density estimation using background subtraction and optical flow, and
(b) DRL for learning efficient Look-Up Table (LUT) based or threshold based intersection control.
This enables EcoLight to perform at par with these compute intensive methods, at a mere fraction of
runtime overhead.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

