Submodular Meta-Learning

Arman Adibi
ESE Department
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
aadibi@seas.upenn.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Hamed Hassani
ESE Department
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a discrete variant of the Meta-learning framework.
Meta-learning aims at exploiting prior experience and data to improve performance
on future tasks. By now, there exist numerous formulations for Meta-learning in
the continuous domain. Notably, the Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML)
formulation views each task as a continuous optimization problem and based
on prior data learns a suitable initialization that can be adapted to new, unseen
tasks after a few simple gradient updates. Motivated by this terminology, we
propose a novel Meta-learning framework in the discrete domain where each task
is equivalent to maximizing a set function under a cardinality constraint. Our
approach aims at using prior data, i.e., previously visited tasks, to train a proper
initial solution set that can be quickly adapted to a new task at a relatively low
computational cost. This approach leads to (i) a personalized solution for each
task, and (ii) significantly reduced computational cost at test time compared to
the case where the solution is fully optimized once the new task is revealed. The
training procedure is performed by solving a challenging discrete optimization
problem for which we present deterministic and randomized algorithms. In the
case where the tasks are monotone and submodular, we show strong theoretical
guarantees for our proposed methods even though the training objective may not be
submodular. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework on two realworld problem instances where we observe that our methods lead to a significant
reduction in computational complexity in solving the new tasks while incurring a
small performance loss compared to when the tasks are fully optimized.

1

Introduction

Many applications in artificial intelligence necessitate exploiting prior data and experience to enhance
quality and efficiency on new tasks. This is often manifested through a set of tasks given in the
training phase from which we can learn a model or representation that can be used for new unseen
tasks in the test phase. In this regard, Meta-learning aims at exploiting the data from the available
tasks to learn model parameters or representation that can be later used to perform well on new
unseen tasks, in particular, when we have access to limited data and computational power at the test
time [1–4]. By now, there are several formulations for Meta-learning, but perhaps one of the most
successful ones is the Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) [5]. In MAML, we aim to train the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

