A Dictionary Approach to Domain-Invariant
Learning in Deep Networks

Ze Wang1 , Xiuyuan Cheng2 , Guillermo Sapiro2 , Qiang Qiu1
Purdue University1 Duke University2
{zewang, qqiu}@purdue.edu {xiuyuan.cheng, guillermo.sapiro}@duke.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we consider domain-invariant deep learning by explicitly modeling
domain shifts with only a small amount of domain-specific parameters in a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). By exploiting the observation that a convolutional
filter can be well approximated as a linear combination of a small set of dictionary atoms, we show for the first time, both empirically and theoretically, that
domain shifts can be effectively handled by decomposing a convolutional layer
into a domain-specific atom layer and a domain-shared coefficient layer, while both
remain convolutional. An input channel will now first convolve spatially only with
each respective domain-specific dictionary atom to “absorb" domain variations,
and then output channels are linearly combined using common decomposition coefficients trained to promote shared semantics across domains. We use toy examples,
rigorous analysis, and real-world examples with diverse datasets and architectures,
to show the proposed plug-in framework’s effectiveness in cross and joint domain
performance and domain adaptation. With the proposed architecture, we need only
a small set of dictionary atoms to model each additional domain, which brings a
negligible amount of additional parameters, typically a few hundred.

1

Introduction

Training supervised deep networks requires large amount of labeled training data; however, welltrained deep networks often degrade dramatically on testing data from a significantly different
domain. In real-world scenarios, such domain shifts are introduced by many factors, such as different
illumination, viewing angles, and resolutions. Research topics such as transfer learning and domain
adaptation are studied to promote invariant representations across domains with different levels of
availabilities of annotated data.
Recent efforts on learning cross-domain invariant representations using deep networks generally
fall into two categories. The first one is to learn a common network with constraints encouraging
invariant feature representations across different domains [17, 19, 34]. The feature invariance is
usually measured by feature statistics like maximum mean discrepancy, or feature discriminators
using adversarial training [6]. While these methods introduce no additional model parameters, the
effectiveness largely depends on the degree of domain shifts. The other direction is to explicitly
model domain specific characteristics with a multi-stream network structure where different domains
are modeled by corresponding sub-networks at the cost of extra parameters and computations [26].
In this paper, we model domain shifts through domain-adaptive filter decomposition (DAFD) with
layer branching. At a branched layer, we decompose each filter over a small set of domain-specific
dictionary atoms to model intrinsic domain characteristics, while enforcing shared cross-domain
decomposition coefficients to align invariant semantics. A regular convolution is now decomposed
into two steps. First, a domain-specific dictionary atom convolves spatially only each individual input
channel for shift “correction.” Second, the “corrected" output channels are weighted summed using
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

