A Variational Approach for Learning from Positive
and Unlabeled Data
Hui Chen∗
School of Mathematical Science
Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China
hui.chen96@outlook.com

Fangqing Liu∗
School of Mathematical Science
Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China
fangqingliu0@gmail.com

Yin Wang
School of Electronics and Information Engineering
Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China
yinw@tongji.edu.cn

Liyue Zhao
Cloudwalk Inc.
Shanghai, P. R. China
zhaoliyue@cloudwalk.cn

Hao Wu†
School of Mathematical Science
Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China
hwu@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning binary classifiers only from positive and unlabeled (PU) data is an important and challenging task in many real-world applications, including web text
classification, disease gene identification and fraud detection, where negative samples are difficult to verify experimentally. Most recent PU learning methods are
developed based on the misclassification risk of the supervised learning type, and
they may suffer from inaccurate estimates of class prior probabilities. In this paper,
we introduce a variational principle for PU learning that allows us to quantitatively
evaluate the modeling error of the Bayesian classifier directly from given data. This
leads to a loss function which can be efficiently calculated without involving class
prior estimation or any other intermediate estimation problems, and the variational
learning method can then be employed to optimize the classifier under general
conditions. We illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed variational method on a
number of benchmark examples.

1

Introduction

In many real-life applications, we are confronted with the task of building a binary classification
model from a number of positive data and plenty of unlabeled data without extra information on the
negative data. For example, it is common in disease gene identification [1] that only known disease
genes and unknown genes are available, because the reliable non-disease genes are difficult to obtain.
Similar scenarios occur in deceptive review detection [2], web data mining [3], inlier-based outlier
detection [4], etc. Such a task is certainly beyond the scope of the standard supervised machine
learning, and where positive-unlabeled (PU) learning comes in handy. A lot of heuristic approaches
[5–8] were proposed by identifying reliable negative data from the unlabeled data, which heavily
rely on the choice of the heuristic strategies and the assumption of data separability (i.e., positive
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

