Consistent Structural Relation Learning for
Zero-Shot Segmentation

Peike Li1,2 ∗, Yunchao Wei1 , Yi Yang1
ReLER Lab, Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute
University of Technology Sydney
2
Baidu Research
peike.li@student.uts.edu.au, {yunchao.wei, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au
1

Abstract
Zero-shot semantic segmentation aims to recognize the semantics of pixels from
unseen categories with zero training samples. Previous practice [1] proposed to
train the classifiers for unseen categories using the visual features generated from
semantic word embeddings. However, the generator is merely learned on the seen
categories while no constraint is applied to the unseen categories, leading to poor
generalization ability. In this work, we propose a Consistent Structural Relation
Learning (CSRL) approach to constrain the generating of unseen visual features by
exploiting the structural relations between seen and unseen categories. We observe
that different categories are usually with similar relations in either semantic word
embedding space or visual feature space. This observation motivates us to harness
the similarity of category-level relations on the semantic word embedding space
to learn a better visual feature generator. Concretely, by exploring the pair-wise
and list-wise structures, we impose the relations of generated visual features to
be consistent with their counterparts in the semantic word embedding space. In
this way, the relations between seen and unseen categories will be transferred
to implicitly constrain the generator to produce relation-consistent unseen visual
features. We conduct extensive experiments on Pascal-VOC and Pascal-Context
benchmarks. The proposed CSRL outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods by
a large margin, resulting in ~7-12% on Pascal-VOC and ~2-5% on Pascal-Context.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation [2, 3] is a fundamental computer vision task that aims to assign a semantic
label to each pixel in the given image. Although the development of FCN-based models [4, 5, 6]
has significantly advanced semantic segmentation, the success of these approaches highly relies on
cost-intensive and time-consuming dense mask annotations to train the network. To relieve the human
effort in annotating accurate pixel-wise masks, there is an increasing interest in weakly-supervised
segmentation and few-shot segmentation methods. Weakly supervised segmentation [7, 8] targets
on learning segmentation models using lower-quality annotations such as image-level labels [9, 10],
bounding boxes [11, 12] and scribbles [13, 14], which can be obtained more efficiently compared
to pixel-wise masks. Meanwhile, few-shot segmentation [15, 16, 17, 18, 19] tackles the semantic
segmentation from a meta-learning perspective and aims to perform segmentation with only a few
annotated samples. Even significant progress has been made, these works are hard to completely
liberate the request for mask annotations.
Most recently, Bucher et al. [1] took a step further to investigate how to effortlessly recognize
those never-seen categories with zero training examples, and proposed a new learning paradigm,
∗

Part of this work is done when Peike Li is an intern at Baidu Research

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

