Overfitting Can Be Harmless for Basis Pursuit,
But Only to a Degree

Peizhong Ju
School of ECE
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
jup@purdue.edu

Xiaojun Lin
School of ECE
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
linx@purdue.edu

Jia Liu
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
liu@ece.osu.edu

Abstract
Recently, there have been significant interests in studying the so-called “doubledescent” of the generalization error of linear regression models under the overparameterized and overfitting regime, with the hope that such analysis may provide
the first step towards understanding why overparameterized deep neural networks
(DNN) still generalize well. However, to date most of these studies focused on the
min `2 -norm solution that overfits the data. In contrast, in this paper we study the
overfitting solution that minimizes the `1 -norm, which is known as Basis Pursuit
(BP) in the compressed sensing literature. Under a sparse true linear regression
model with p i.i.d. Gaussian features, we show that for a large range of p up to a
limit that grows exponentially with the number of samples n, with high probability
the model error of BP is upper bounded by a value that decreases with p. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first analytical result in the literature establishing
the double-descent of overfitting BP for finite n and p. Further, our results reveal
significant differences between the double-descent of BP and min `2 -norm solutions. Specifically, the double-descent upper-bound of BP is independent of the
signal strength, and for high SNR and sparse models the descent-floor of BP can
be much lower and wider than that of min `2 -norm solutions.

1

Introduction

One of the mysteries of deep neural networks (DNN) is that they are not only heavily overparameterized so that they can fit the training data (even perturbed with noise) nearly perfectly
[3, 4, 14, 32], but still produce models that generalize well to new test data [2, 36]. This combination
of overfitting and good generalization challenges the classical wisdom in statistical learning (e.g.,
the well-known bias-variance tradeoff) [10, 20, 21, 23, 31, 34]. As a first step towards understanding
why overparameterization and overfitting may be harmless, a line of recent work has focused on
linear regression models [6, 7, 8, 19, 25, 29]. Indeed, such results have demonstrated an interesting
“double descent” phenomenon for linear models. Roughly speaking, let n be the number of training
samples, and p be the number of parameters of a linear regression model. As p approaches n from
below, the test error of the model (that tries to best fit the training data) first decreases and then
increases to infinity, which is consistent with the well-understood bias-variance trade-off. As p further
increases beyond n, overfitting starts to occur (i.e., the training error will always be zero). However,
if one chooses the overfitting solution that minimizes the `2 -norm, the test error decreases again as p
increases further. Such observations, although for models very different from DNN, provide some
hint why overfitting solutions may still generalize well.
To date most studies along this direction have focused on the minimum `2 -norm overfitting solutions
[7, 19, 25, 28, 29]. One possible motivation is that, at least for linear regression problems, Stochastic
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

