Neural Complexity Measures

Yoonho Lee1 , Juho Lee1,2 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2 , Eunho Yang1,2 , Seungjin Choi3
AITRICS1 , Seoul, South Korea, KAIST2 , Daejeon, South Korea, BARO AI3 , Seoul, South Korea
eddy@aitrics.com

Abstract
While various complexity measures for deep neural networks exist, specifying
an appropriate measure capable of predicting and explaining generalization in
deep networks has proven challenging. We propose Neural Complexity (NC), a
meta-learning framework for predicting generalization. Our model learns a scalar
complexity measure through interactions with many heterogeneous tasks in a datadriven way. The trained NC model can be added to the standard training loss to
regularize any task learner in a standard supervised learning scenario. We contrast
NC’s approach against existing manually-designed complexity measures and other
meta-learning models, and we validate NC’s performance on multiple regression
and classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved excellent performance on numerous tasks, including image
classification [15] and board games [27]. Although they achieve superior empirical performance, why
and how these models generalize remains a mystery. Thus, understanding which properties of deep
networks allow them to generalize an important problem with far-reaching potential benefits such
as principled model design and safety-aware models. To explain why deep networks generalize in
practice, recent works have proposed novel complexity measures for deep networks [11, 12, 20, 22].
Such measures quantify the complexity of the function that a neural network represents. Ideally,
such complexity measures should be good predictors of the degree of generalization of a network.
However, in practice, such manually-designed complexity measures have failed to capture essential
properties of generalization in deep networks, such as improving with network size and worsening
with label noise.
To overcome such limitations, we propose an alternative data-driven approach for constructing a
complexity measure. Our model, Neural Complexity (NC), meta-learns a neural network that takes a
predictor as input and outputs a scalar. Similarly to previous complexity-based generalization bounds,
we provide a probabilistic bound of the true loss using NC. Our bound has very different characteristics
from previous generalization bounds: it depends on both data distribution and architecture, and more
importantly, becomes tighter as the NC model improves.
Experimentally, we show that a learned NC model consistently accelerates training in addition to
preventing overfitting. We also show the degree to which the measure learned by NC transfers
to different hypothesis classes, such as using a different network architecture, learning rate, or
nonlinearity for the task learner. Compared to other recent meta-learning methods [34], the metalearned knowledge in NC is much more stable across long learning trajectories. Finally, while most
meta-learning works focus on improving performance on small tasks such as few-shot classification,
we show that NC is also capable of regularizing learning in single large tasks.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

