Reliable Graph Neural Networks via
Robust Aggregation
Simon Geisler

Daniel Zügner
Stephan Günnemann
Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
{geisler, zuegnerd, guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
Perturbations targeting the graph structure have proven to be extremely effective
in reducing the performance of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), and traditional
defenses such as adversarial training do not seem to be able to improve robustness.
This work is motivated by the observation that adversarially injected edges effectively can be viewed as additional samples to a node’s neighborhood aggregation
function, which results in distorted aggregations accumulating over the layers.
Conventional GNN aggregation functions, such as a sum or mean, can be distorted
arbitrarily by a single outlier. We propose a robust aggregation function motivated
by the field of robust statistics. Our approach exhibits the largest possible breakdown point of 0.5, which means that the bias of the aggregation is bounded as
long as the fraction of adversarial edges of a node is less than 50%. Our novel
aggregation function, Soft Medoid, is a fully differentiable generalization of the
Medoid and therefore lends itself well for end-to-end deep learning. Equipping
a GNN with our aggregation improves the robustness with respect to structure
perturbations on Cora ML by a factor of 3 (and 5.5 on Citeseer) and by a factor of
8 for low-degree nodes.

1

Introduction

Learning on graph data has gained strong attention in recent years, specifically powered by the
success of graph neural networks [29, 34]. Like for classic neural networks, (non-)robustness to
adversarial perturbations has shown to be a critical issue for GNNs as well [18, 61]. In contrast to
other application domains of deep learning, adversaries on graphs are especially challenging because
not only the attributes might be perturbed, but also the discrete structure. Recently, many effective
attacks on graph neural networks have been proposed [5, 18, 50, 54, 59, 61], and there is strong
evidence that attacking the graph structure is more effective than attacking the attributes [52, 61].
While recent research suggests that effective defenses against attribute attacks can be found, e.g. robust
training [59], defenses against structure attacks remain an unsolved topic [18, 54, 60]. Moreover,
approaches such as [24, 52], solely focus on defending against specific attack characteristics. On
the contrary, Carlini and Wagner [10] show that heuristic defenses often can be bypassed. Thus, we
design our model without attack-specific assumptions.
Message passing is the core operation powering modern GNNs [27]. In the message passing steps,
a node’s embedding is updated by aggregating over its neighbors’ embeddings. In this regard,
adversarially inserted edges add additional data points to the aggregation and therefore perturb the
output of the message passing step. Standard aggregation functions like a sum can be arbitrarily
distorted by only a single outlier. Thus, we reason that on top of the usual (potentially non-robust)
neural network components, GNNs introduce additional (typically non-robust) aggregations. Note
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

