Learning Feature Sparse Principal Subspace

Lai Tian
School of Computer Science &
Center for OPTIMAL,
Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an 710072, China.
tianlai.cs@gmail.com

Feiping Nie∗
School of Computer Science &
Center for OPTIMAL,
Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an 710072, China.
feipingnie@gmail.com

Rong Wang
School of Cybersecurity &
Center for OPTIMAL,
Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an 710072, China.
wangrong07@tsinghua.org.cn

Xuelong Li
School of Computer Science &
Center for OPTIMAL,
Northwestern Polytechnical University,
Xi’an 710072, China.
li@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents new algorithms to solve the feature-sparsity constrained PCA
problem (FSPCA), which performs feature selection and PCA simultaneously.
Existing optimization methods for FSPCA require data distribution assumptions
and lack of global convergence guarantee. Though the general FSPCA problem is
NP-hard, we show that, for a low-rank covariance, FSPCA can be solved globally
(Algorithm 1). Then, we propose another strategy (Algorithm 2) to solve FSPCA for
the general covariance by iteratively building a carefully designed proxy. We prove
(data-dependent) approximation bound and convergence guarantees for the new
algorithms. For the spectrum of covariance with exponential/Zipf’s distribution,
we provide exponential/posynomial approximation bound. Experimental results
show the promising performance and efficiency of the new algorithms compared
with the state-of-the-arts on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Consider n data points in Rd . When d  n, PCA has inconsistence issue in estimating the m leading
eigenvectors W ∈ Rd×m of population covariance matrix A ∈ Rd×d [18], which can be addressed
by assuming the sparsity in the principal components. Prior work has been done in methodology
design [51, 38, 11, 41, 36, 47, 34, 33, 22] and theoretical understanding [42, 23, 46, 50].
The principal subspace estimation [6, 20, 28, 16, 45] is directly connected to dimension reduction
and is important when there are more than one principal component of interest. Indeed, typical
applications of PCA use the projection onto the principal subspace to facilitate exploration and
inference of important features of the data. As Vu et al. [42] point out, dimension reduction by PCA
should emphasize subspaces rather than eigenvectors. The sparsity level in sparse principal subspace
estimation is defined as follows [42, 43, 47].
Definition 1.1 (Subspace sparsity, [42]). For the m-dimensional principal subspace span(W) of the
covariance A, the subspace sparsity level k is defined by
k = card(supp[diag(Π)]) = kWk2,0 ,
∗

Corresponding author: Feiping Nie

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

