Interpolation Technique to Speed Up Gradients
Propagation in Neural ODEs

Talgat Daulbaev, Alexandr Katrutsa, Larisa Markeeva, Julia Gusak,
Andrzej Cichocki, Ivan Oseledets
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
talgat.daulbaev@skoltech.ru
aleksandr.katrutsa@phystech.edu
{l.markeeva,y.gusak,a.cichocki,i.oseledets}@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We propose a simple interpolation-based method for the efficient approximation of
gradients in neural ODE models. We compare it with the reverse dynamic method
(known in the literature as “adjoint method”) to train neural ODEs on classification,
density estimation, and inference approximation tasks. We also propose a theoretical justification of our approach using logarithmic norm formalism. As a result,
our method allows faster model training than the reverse dynamic method that was
confirmed and validated by extensive numerical experiments for several standard
benchmarks.

1

Introduction

We propose a novel method to train neural ordinary differential equations (neural ODEs) [1]. This
method performs stable and memory-efficient backpropagation through the solution of initial value
problems (IVP). Throughout the study, we use the term neural ODEs for all neural networks with
so-called ODE blocks. An ODE block is a continuous analog of a residual neural network [2] that can
be considered as Euler discretization of ordinary differential equations. Neural ODEs have already
been successfully applied to various machine learning problems, including classification, generative
modeling, and time series prediction [1, 3, 4].
ODE block is a neural network layer that takes the activations z0 from the previous layer as input,
solves the initial value problem (IVP) described as
 dz
t ∈ [t0 , t1 ]
dt = f (z(t), t, θ),
(1)
z(t0 ) = z0 ,
and solved by any ODE solver. Note, the right-hand side in IVP (1) depends on set of parameters θ
which is gradually updated during training. Therefore, during the backward pass in neural ODEs, the
loss function L, which depends on the solution of the IVP, should be differentiated with respect to
parameter θ. A direct application of backpropagation to ODE solvers require a huge memory, since
for every time step τk , the output z(τk ) must be stored as a part of the computational graph.
However, the approach based on the adjoint method [5, 6] helps to propagate gradients through the
initial value problem with a relatively small memory footprint. Originally adjoint method has been
actively used in mathematical modeling, for example, in seismograph and climate studies [7, 8].
It was used to investigate the sensitivity of the model output with respect to the input. In the
context of training neural ODEs, the adjoint method is modified to combine it with the standard
backpropagation [1]. We refer to this modified adjoint method as reverse dynamic method (RDM).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

