Debiasing Averaged Stochastic Gradient Descent to
handle missing values

Claire Boyer
Sorbonne University
Paris, France

Aymeric Dieuleveut
Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France

Julie Josse
INRIA
Montpellier, France

aude.sportisse

claire.boyer

aymeric.dieuleveut

julie.josse@inria.fr

@sorbonne-universite.fr

@sorbonne-universite.fr

@polytechnique.edu

Aude Sportisse
Sorbonne University
Paris, France

Abstract
Stochastic gradient algorithm is a key ingredient of many machine learning methods,
particularly appropriate for large-scale learning. However, a major caveat of large
data is their incompleteness. We propose an averaged stochastic gradient algorithm
handling missing values in linear models. This approach has the merit to be free
from the need of any data distribution modeling and to account for heterogeneous
missing proportion. In both streaming and finite-sample settings, we prove that
this algorithm achieves convergence rate of O( n1 ) at the iteration n, the same as
without missing values. We show the convergence behavior and the relevance of
the algorithm not only on synthetic data but also on real data sets, including those
collected from medical register.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient algorithms (SGD) [20] play a central role in machine learning problems, due to
their cheap computational cost and memory per iteration. There is a vast literature on its variants,
for example using averaging of the iterates [19], some robust versions of SGD [18, 11] or adaptive
gradient algorithms like Adagrad [6]; and on theoretical guarantees of those methods [16, 1, 4, 23,
8, 17]. More globally, averaging strategies have been used to stabilize the algorithm behaviour and
reduce the impact of the noise, giving better convergence rates without requiring strong convexity.
The problem of missing values is ubiquitous in large scale data analysis. One of the key challenges in
the presence of missing data is to deal with the half-discrete nature of the data which can be seen as a
mixed of continuous data (observed values) and categorical data (the missing values). In particular
for gradient-based methods, the risk minimization with incomplete data becomes intractable and the
usual results cannot be directly applied.
Context. In this paper, we consider a linear regression model, for i ≥ 1,
yi = Xi:T β ? + i ,

(1)

parametrized by β ? ∈ Rd , where yi ∈ R, i ∈ R is a real-valued centered noise and Xi: ∈ Rd stands
for the real covariates of the i-th observation. The (Xi: )’s are assumed to be only partially known,
since some covariates may be missing: our objective is to derive stochastic algorithms for estimating
the parameters of the linear model, which handle missing data, and come with strong theoretical
guarantees on excess risk.
Related works. There is a rich literature on handling missing values [13] and yet there are still
some challenges even for linear regression models. This is all the more true as we consider such
models for large sample size or in high dimension. There are very few regularized versions of
regression that can deal with missing values. A classical approach to estimating parameters with
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

