Phase retrieval in high dimensions:
Statistical and computational phase transitions

Antoine Maillard1
Bruno Loureiro2,3
Florent Krzakala1,3
Lenka Zdeborová2,4
1
Lab. de Physique de l’École Normale Supérieure, PSL, CNRS & Sorbonne Universités, Paris.
2
Institut de Physique Théorique, CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, France.
3
IdePHICS laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland.
4
SPOC laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland.
antoine.maillard@ens.fr

Abstract
We consider the phase retrieval problem of reconstructing a n-dimensional
?
real
Pn or complex
√ signal X from m (possibly noisy) observations Yµ =
?
| i=1 Φµi Xi / n|, for a large class of correlated real and complex random
sensing matrices Φ, in a high-dimensional setting where m, n → ∞ while
α = m/n = Θ(1). First, we derive sharp asymptotics for the lowest possible estimation error achievable statistically and we unveil the existence of sharp
phase transitions for the weak- and full-recovery thresholds as a function of the
singular values of the matrix Φ. This is achieved by providing a rigorous proof of
a result first obtained by the replica method from statistical mechanics. In particular, the information-theoretic transition to perfect recovery for full-rank matrices
appears at α = 1 (real case) and α = 2 (complex case). Secondly, we analyze
the performance of the best-known polynomial time algorithm for this problem
— approximate message-passing— establishing the existence of a statistical-toalgorithmic gap depending, again, on the spectral properties of Φ. Our work
provides an extensive classification of the statistical and algorithmic thresholds in
high-dimensional phase retrieval for a broad class of random matrices.

1

Introduction

Consider the reconstruction problem of a real or complex signal from m observations of its modulus
n

1 X
Yµ = √
Φµi Xi? ,
n i=1

µ = 1, · · · , m,

(1)

where the m × n sensing matrix Φ ∈ Km×n is known, with X? ∈ Kn (K ∈ {R, C}). More generally,
measurements can be a noisy function of the modulus, for example by an additive Gaussian noise.
This inverse problem, known in the literature under the umbrella of phase retrieval, is relevant to a
series of signal processing [1–3] and statistical estimation [4–7] tasks. It appears in setups in optics
and crystallography where detectors can often only measure information about the amplitude of
signals, thus losing the information about its phase. It is also a challenging example of a non-convex
problem and non-convex optimization with a complex loss landscape [8–10]. Here we are interested
in understanding the fundamental limitations of phase retrieval. We focus on the following questions:
i) What is the lowest possible error one can get in estimating the signal X? ?
ii) What is the minimal number of measurements needed to produce an estimator positively
correlated with the signal (that is with non-trivial error in the n, m → ∞ limit)?
iii) How to efficiently reconstruct X∗ in practice with a polynomial time algorithm?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

