DisCor: Corrective Feedback in Reinforcement
Learning via Distribution Correction

Aviral Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
aviralk@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning can learn effective policies for a wide range of tasks,
but is notoriously difficult to use due to instability and sensitivity to hyperparameters. The reasons for this remain unclear. In this paper, we study how RL methods
based on bootstrapping-based Q-learning can suffer from a pathological interaction between function approximation and the data distribution used to train the
Q-function: with standard supervised learning, online data collection should induce
corrective feedback, where new data corrects mistakes in old predictions. With dynamic programming methods like Q-learning, such feedback may be absent. This
can lead to potential instability, sub-optimal convergence, and poor results when
learning from noisy, sparse or delayed rewards. Based on these observations, we
propose a new algorithm, DisCor, which explicitly optimizes for data distributions
that can correct for accumulated errors in the value function. DisCor computes
a tractable approximation to the distribution that optimally induces corrective
feedback, which we show results in reweighting samples based on the estimated
accuracy of their target values. Using this distribution for training, DisCor results in
substantial improvements in a range of challenging RL settings, such as multi-task
learning and learning from noisy reward signals.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, when combined with high-capacity deep neural net function approximators, have shown promise in domains ranging from robotic manipulation [22] to
recommender systems [44]. However, current deep RL methods can be difficult to use: they require
delicate hyperparameter tuning, and exhibit inconsistent performance. While a number of hypotheses
have been proposed to understand these issues [15, 52, 11, 10], and gradual improvements have
led to more stable algorithms in recent years [14, 18], an effective solution has proven elusive. We
hypothesize that one source of instability in reinforcement learning with function approximation and
value function estimation, such as Q-learning [53, 38, 33] and actor-critic algorithms [13, 23], is a
pathological interaction between the data distribution induced by the latest policy, and the errors
induced in the learned approximate value function as a consequence of training on this distribution.
While a number of prior works [1, 10, 29] have provided theoretical examinations of various approximate dynamic programming (ADP) methods, which include Q-learning and actor-critic algorithms,
prior work has not extensively studied the relationship between the data distribution induced by the
latest value function and the errors in the future value functions obtained by training on this data.
When using supervised learning style procedures to train contextual bandits or dynamics models,
online data collection results in a kind of “hard negative” mining: the model collects transitions that
lead to good outcomes according to the model (potentially erroneously). This results in collecting
precisely the data needed to correct errors and improve. On the contrary, ADP algorithms that use
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

