Online Planning with Lookahead Policies

Yonathan Efroni ∗ † ‡

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh §

Shie Mannor ‡ ¶

Abstract
Real Time Dynamic Programming (RTDP) is an online algorithm based on
Dynamic Programming (DP) that acts by 1-step greedy planning. Unlike DP,
RTDP does not require access to the entire state space, i.e., it explicitly handles the
exploration. This fact makes RTDP particularly appealing when the state space is
large and it is not possible to update all states simultaneously. In this we devise
a multi-step greedy RTDP algorithm, which we call h-RTDP, that replaces the
1-step greedy policy with a h-step lookahead policy. We analyze h-RTDP in its
exact form and establish that increasing the lookahead horizon, h, results in an
improved sample complexity, with the cost of additional computations. This is
the first work that proves improved sample complexity as a result of increasing
the lookahead horizon in online planning. We then analyze the performance of
h-RTDP in three approximate settings: approximate model, approximate value
updates, and approximate state representation. For these cases, we prove that the
asymptotic performance of h-RTDP remains the same as that of a corresponding
approximate DP algorithm, the best one can hope for without further assumptions
on the approximation errors.

1

Introduction

Dynamic Programming (DP) algorithms return an optimal policy, given a model of the environment.
Their convergence in the presence of lookahead policies [4, 13] and their performance in different
approximate settings [4, 25, 27, 17, 1, 14] have been well-studied. Standard DP algorithms require
simultaneous access to the entire state space at run time, and as such, cannot be used in practice when
the number of states is too large. Real Time Dynamic Programming (RTDP) [3, 29] is a DP-based
algorithm that mitigates the need to access all states simultaneously. Similarly to DP, RTDP updates
are based on the Bellman operator, calculated by accessing the model of the environment. However,
unlike DP, RTDP learns how to act by interacting with the environment. In each episode, RTDP
interacts with the environment, acts according to the greedy action w.r.t. the Bellman operator, and
samples a trajectory. RTDP is, therefore, an online planning algorithm.
Despite the popularity and simplicity of RTDP and its extensions [5, 6, 24, 8, 29, 22], precise
characterization of its convergence was only recently established for finite-horizon MDPs [15].
While lookahead policies in RTDP are expected to improve the convergence in some of these
scenarios, as they do for DP [4, 13], to the best of our knowledge, these questions have not been
addressed in previous literature. Moreover, previous research haven’t addressed the questions of how
lookahead policies should be used in RTDP, nor studied RTDP’s sensitivity to possible approximation
errors. Such errors can arise due to a misspecified model, or exist in value function updates, when
e.g., function approximation is used.
∗

Part of this work was done during an internship in Facebook AI Research
Microsoft Research, New York, NY
‡
Technion, Israel
§
Google Research
¶
Nvidia Research
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

