Domain Adaptation as a Problem of Inference
on Graphical Models

Kun Zhang1∗ , Mingming Gong2∗ , Petar Stojanov3
Biwei Huang1 , Qingsong Liu4 , Clark Glymour1
1
Department of philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne
3
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 4 Unisound AI Lab
kunz1@cmu.edu, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au, liuqingsong@unisound.com
{pstojano, biweih, cg09}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper is concerned with data-driven unsupervised domain adaptation, where
it is unknown in advance how the joint distribution changes across domains, i.e.,
what factors or modules of the data distribution remain invariant or change across
domains. To develop an automated way of domain adaptation with multiple source
domains, we propose to use a graphical model as a compact way to encode the
change property of the joint distribution, which can be learned from data, and
then view domain adaptation as a problem of Bayesian inference on the graphical
models. Such a graphical model distinguishes between constant and varied modules
of the distribution and specifies the properties of the changes across domains, which
serves as prior knowledge of the changing modules for the purpose of deriving the
posterior of the target variable Y in the target domain. This provides an end-to-end
framework of domain adaptation, in which additional knowledge about how the
joint distribution changes, if available, can be directly incorporated to improve the
graphical representation. We discuss how causality-based domain adaptation can
be put under this umbrella. Experimental results on both synthetic and real data
demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed framework for domain adaptation. The
code is available at https://github.com/mgong2/DA_Infer.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, various approaches to unsupervised domain adaptation (DA) have been pursued
to leverage the source-domain data to make prediction in the new, target domain. In particular, we
consider the situation with n source domains in which both the d-dimensional feature vector X, whose
(i) (i)
i
jth dimension is denoted by Xj , and label Y are given, i.e., we are given (x(i) , y(i) ) = (xk , yk )m
k=1 ,
(i)
where i = 1, ..., n, and mi is the sample size of the ith source domain. We denote by xjk the value of
the jth feature of the kth data point (example) in the ith domain. Our goal is to find the classifier for
the target domain, in which only the features xτ = (xτk )m
k=1 are available. Because the distribution
may change across domains, clearly the optimal way of adaptation or transfer depends on what
information is shared across domains and how to do the transfer.
In the covariate shift scenario, the distribution of the features, P (X), changes, while the conditional
distribution P (Y |X) remains fixed. A common strategy is to reweight examples from the source
domain to match the feature distribution in the target domain–an approach extensively studied in
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

