Learning Graph Structure With A Finite-State
Automaton Layer

Daniel D. Johnson, Hugo Larochelle, Daniel Tarlow
Google Research
{ddjohnson, hugolarochelle, dtarlow}@google.com

Abstract
Graph-based neural network models are producing strong results in a number of
domains, in part because graphs provide flexibility to encode domain knowledge
in the form of relational structure (edges) between nodes in the graph. In practice,
edges are used both to represent intrinsic structure (e.g., abstract syntax trees of
programs) and more abstract relations that aid reasoning for a downstream task
(e.g., results of relevant program analyses). In this work, we study the problem of
learning to derive abstract relations from the intrinsic graph structure. Motivated by
their power in program analyses, we consider relations defined by paths on the base
graph accepted by a finite-state automaton. We show how to learn these relations
end-to-end by relaxing the problem into learning finite-state automata policies on a
graph-based POMDP and then training these policies using implicit differentiation.
The result is a differentiable Graph Finite-State Automaton (GFSA) layer that adds
a new edge type (expressed as a weighted adjacency matrix) to a base graph. We
demonstrate that this layer can find shortcuts in grid-world graphs and reproduce
simple static analyses on Python programs. Additionally, we combine the GFSA
layer with a larger graph-based model trained end-to-end on the variable misuse
program understanding task, and find that using the GFSA layer leads to better
performance than using hand-engineered semantic edges or other baseline methods
for adding learned edge types.

1

Introduction

Determining exactly which relationships to include when representing an object as a graph is not
always straightforward. As a motivating example, consider a dataset of source code samples. One
natural way to represent these as graphs is to use the abstract syntax tree (AST), a parsed version of
the code where each node represents a logical component.1 But one can also add additional edges to
each graph in order to better capture program behaviors. Indeed, adding additional edges to represent
control flow or data dependence has been shown to improve performance on code-understanding
tasks when compared to a AST-only or token-sequence representation [1, 19].
An interesting observation is that these additional edges are fully determined by the AST, generally
by using hand-coded static analysis algorithms. This kind of program abstraction is reminiscent
of temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning (e.g., action repeats or options [30, 38]). In both
cases, derived higher-level relationships allow reasoning more abstractly and over longer distances
(in program locations or time).
In this work, we construct a differentiable neural network layer by combining two ideas: program
analyses expressed as reachability problems on graphs [34], and mathematical tools for analyzing
temporal behaviors of reinforcement learning policies [13]. This layer, which we call a Graph
1

For instance, the AST for print(x + y) contains nodes for print, x, y, x + y, and the call as a whole.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

