Interferobot: aligning an optical interferometer
by a reinforcement learning agent

Dmitry Sorokin1,4
dmitrii.sorokin@phystech.edu

Alexander Ulanov1
a.e.ulanov@gmail.com

Ekaterina Sazhina1,4
sazhinaekaterina@gmail.com
Alexander Lvovsky1,2,3
alex.lvovsky@physics.ox.ac.uk
3

1
Russian Quantum Center, Moscow, Russia 2 University of Oxford, United Kingdom
P. N. Lebedev Physics Institute, Moscow, Russia 4 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology

Abstract
Limitations in acquiring training data restrict potential applications of deep reinforcement learning (RL) methods to the training of real-world robots. Here we train
an RL agent to align a Mach-Zehnder interferometer, which is an essential part of
many optical experiments, based on images of interference fringes acquired by a
monocular camera. The agent is trained in a simulated environment, without any
hand-coded features or a priori information about the physics, and subsequently
transferred to a physical interferometer. Thanks to a set of domain randomizations
simulating uncertainties in physical measurements, the agent successfully aligns
this interferometer without any fine tuning, achieving a performance level of a
human expert.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning is developing explosively nowadays, demonstrating breakthrough results
both in computed environments and physical robotics. It achieved above-human performance in Atari
video games [1, 2], defeated the world champion in the game of Go [3], and beat the best computer
programs in chess and shogi [4]. In robotics, RL has been successful in various manipulation and
locomotion tasks [5, 6] such as solving Rubik’s cube [7] and throwing various objects to the goal [8].
Most of the works considering applications of RL to robotics deal with commercial robotic hands
[9, 10] or legged robots [11, 12] in well-defined (sometimes changing [13]) environments. Many
of these applications have been demonstrated in “toy” environments of little practical value. In this
paper, we train an RL agent, which we dub Interferobot, to solve a commonly occurring practical
task in experimental optics: alignment of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI).
The main bottleneck in the application of RL methods to robotic training is data acquisition. Since
RL is heavily based on trial and error, it requires millions of agent-environment interactions to
achieve a stable policy. As a result, the training becomes data inefficient and sometimes even
dangerous (for example, for autopilots). One way to overcome this problem is to (pre-)train an
agent policy in a simulated environment [14]. Training in simulation lets an agent interact with the
environment much faster but introduces a domain gap: bias between simulated and real environment.
Domain randomization can be used to overcome the domain gap and achieve a stable generic
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

