Position-based Scaled Gradient for Model
Quantization and Pruning

Jangho Kim
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
kjh91@snu.ac.kr

KiYoon Yoo
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
961230@snu.ac.kr

Nojun Kwak∗
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
nojunk@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose the position-based scaled gradient (PSG) that scales the gradient depending on the position of a weight vector to make it more compression-friendly.
First, we theoretically show that applying PSG to the standard gradient descent
(GD), which is called PSGD, is equivalent to the GD in the warped weight space, a
space made by warping the original weight space via an appropriately designed
invertible function. Second, we empirically show that PSG acting as a regularizer
to the weight vectors is favorable for model compression domains such as quantization and pruning. PSG reduces the gap between the weight distributions of a
full-precision model and its compressed counterpart. This enables the versatile
deployment of a model either as an uncompressed mode or as a compressed mode
depending on the availability of resources. The experimental results on CIFAR10/100 and ImageNet datasets show the effectiveness of the proposed PSG in both
domains of pruning and quantization even for extremely low bits. The code is
released in Github2 .

1

Introduction

Many regularization strategies have been proposed to induce a prior to neural networks [20, 38, 19, 23].
Inspired by such regularization methods which induce a prior for a specific purpose, in this paper we
propose a novel regularization method that non-uniformly scales gradient for model compression
problems. The scaled gradient, whose scale depends on the position of the weight, constrains the
weight to a set of compression-friendly grid points. We replace the conventional gradient in the
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with the proposed position-based scaled gradient (PSG) and call it
as PSGD. We show that applying PSGD in the original weight space is equivalent to optimizing the
weights by the standard SGD in a warped space, to which weights from the original space are warped
by an invertible function. The invertible warping function is designed such that the weights of the
original space are forced to merge to the desired target positions by scaling the gradients.
We are not the first to scale the gradient elements. The scaled gradient method which is also known as
the variable metric method [9] multiplies a positive definite matrix to the gradient vector to scale the
gradient. It includes a wide variety of methods such as the Newton method, Quasi-Newton methods
and the natural gradient method [11, 34, 4]. Generally, they rely on Hessian estimation or Fisher
information matrix for their scaling. However, our method is different from them in that our scaling
does not depend on the loss function but it depends solely on the current position of the weight.
We apply the proposed PSG method to the model compression problems such as quantization and
pruning. In recent years, deploying a deep neural network (DNN) on restricted edge devices such
∗
2

Corresponding Author
https://github.com/Jangho-Kim/PSG-pytorch

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

