Fair Multiple Decision Making
Through Soft Interventions

Yaowei Hu
University of Arkansas
yaoweihu@uark.edu

Yongkai Wu
Clemson University
yongkaw@clemson.edu

Lu Zhang
University of Arkansas
lz006@uark.edu

Xintao Wu
University of Arkansas
xintaowu@uark.edu

Abstract
Previous research in fair classification mostly focuses on a single decision model. In
reality, there usually exist multiple decision models within a system and all of which
may contain a certain amount of discrimination. Such realistic scenarios introduce
new challenges to fair classification: since discrimination may be transmitted
from upstream models to downstream models, building decision models separately
without taking upstream models into consideration cannot guarantee to achieve
fairness. In this paper, we propose an approach that learns multiple classifiers and
achieves fairness for all of them simultaneously, by treating each decision model
as a soft intervention and inferring the post-intervention distributions to formulate
the loss function as well as the fairness constraints. We adopt surrogate functions
to smooth the loss function and constraints, and theoretically show that the excess
risk of the proposed loss function can be bounded in a form that is the same as
that for traditional surrogated loss functions. Experiments using both synthetic and
real-world datasets show the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

How to ensure fairness in algorithmic decision making models is an important task in machine
learning [12, 15]. Over the past years, many researchers have been devoted to the design of fair
classification algorithms with respect to a pre-defined protected attribute, such as race or sex, and a
decision task/model, such as hiring [1, 11, 24]. In particular, one line of the work is to incorporate
fairness constraints into classic learning algorithms to build fair classifiers from potentially biased
data [4, 13, 29, 31–33]. Most of previous research generally focuses on a single decision model.
However, in reality there usually exist multiple decision models within a system and all of which
may contain a certain amount of discrimination, either introduced by themselves or transmitted from
upstream models. As a motivating example, consider two decision tasks Y1 , Y2 where Y1 is used by
the city government to allocate policing resources to different locations and Y2 is used by a local
bank to make personal loan decisions. Due to historically segregated housing, neighborhood racial
composition differs based on geographic locations, and there can exist direct racial discrimination in
Y1 as well. Thus, certain locations will be allocated more police resources than others, resulting in
larger numbers of criminal arrest records. As a result, when the criminal arrest record is used in Y2 ,
certain racial group will receive unfair disadvantage in getting loans.
Ideally we would like to build fair models for all decision making tasks. However, if decision
models influence one another, it is not a straightforward problem even if we know how to build a fair
model for each task. This is because the data distribution can change as a consequence of deploying
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

