Lamina-specific neuronal properties promote robust,
stable signal propagation in feedforward networks

Dongqi Han
Cognitive Neurorobotics Research Unit
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
Okinawa, Japan
dongqi.han@oist.jp

Erik De Schutter
Computational Neuroscience Unit
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
Okinawa, Japan
erik@oist.jp

Sungho Hong∗
Computational Neuroscience Unit
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
Okinawa, Japan
shhong@oist.jp

Abstract
Feedforward networks (FFN) are ubiquitous structures in neural systems and have
been studied to understand mechanisms of reliable signal and information transmission. In many FFNs, neurons in one layer have intrinsic properties that are distinct
from those in their pre-/postsynaptic layers, but how this affects network-level
information processing remains unexplored. Here we show that layer-to-layer
heterogeneity arising from lamina-specific cellular properties facilitates signal and
information transmission in FFNs. Specifically, we found that signal transformations, made by each layer of neurons on an input-driven spike signal, demodulate
signal distortions introduced by preceding layers. This mechanism boosts information transfer carried by a propagating spike signal and thereby supports reliable
spike signal and information transmission in a deep FFN. Our study suggests that
distinct cell types in neural circuits, performing different computational functions,
facilitate information processing on the whole.

1

Introduction

How different cell types in a neural system contribute to signal processing by the entire circuit is
a prime question in neuroscience. Experimental investigations of this question are increasingly
common, primarily due to advances in observing and manipulating neurons based on their genetic
signature. Feedforward circuits are notable targets of those studies, since, in many systems, they have
been observed to comprise cell groups or “layers” with properties distinct from those of other layers,
in size, morphology, expression of membrane/intracellular mechanisms, etc. For example, in the
Drosophila antennal lobe (AL), projection neurons (PN) tend to show noisy firing, slow responses to
the onset of olfactory receptor neuron (ORN) firing, and static voltage thresholds for spike generation
whereas postsynaptic neurons of PNs in lateral horns (LHN) are less noisy, fire early, and have
dynamical firing thresholds (Jeanne and Wilson, 2015). In the cerebellum, the granule cells are
tiny neurons with simple morphology, but their postsynaptic targets, Purkinje cells, are large, with
complex dendritic trees. Pre- and postsynaptic neurons having distinct intrinsic properties can be
ubiquitously found in a wide variety of neural systems. These observations raise questions about the
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

