Batch Normalization Provably Avoids Rank Collapse
for Randomly Initialised Deep Networks

Hadi Daneshmand∗
INRIA Paris, ETH Zurich
seyed.daneshmand@inria.fr

Jonas Kohler∗
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
jonas.kohler@inf.ethz.ch

Francis Bach
INRIA-ENS-PSL, Paris
francis.bach@inria.fr

Thomas Hofmann
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch

Aurelien Lucchi
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
aurelien.lucchi@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Randomly initialized neural networks are known to become harder to train with
increasing depth, unless architectural enhancements like residual connections and
batch normalization are used. We here investigate this phenomenon by revisiting the
connection between random initialization in deep networks and spectral instabilities
in products of random matrices. Given the rich literature on random matrices,
it is not surprising to find that the rank of the intermediate representations in
unnormalized networks collapses quickly with depth. In this work we highlight
the fact that batch normalization is an effective strategy to avoid rank collapse for
both linear and ReLU networks. Leveraging tools from Markov chain theory, we
derive a meaningful lower rank bound in deep linear networks. Empirically, we
also demonstrate that this rank robustness generalizes to ReLU nets. Finally, we
conduct an extensive set of experiments on real-world data sets, which confirm that
rank stability is indeed a crucial condition for training modern-day deep neural
architectures.

1

Introduction and related work

Depth is known to play an important role in the expressive power of neural networks [28]. Yet,
increased depth typically leads to a drastic slow down of learning with gradient-based methods, which
is commonly attributed to unstable gradient norms in deep networks [15]. One key aspect of the
training process concerns the way the layer weights are initialized. When training contemporary
neural networks, both practitioners and theoreticians advocate the use of randomly initialized layer
weights with i.i.d. entries from a zero mean (Gaussian or uniform) distribution. This initialization
strategy is commonly scaled such that the variance of the layer activation stays constant across layers
[13, 14]. However, this approach can not avoid spectral instabilities as the depth of the network
increases. For example, [26] observes that for linear neural networks, such initialization lets all but
one singular values of the last layers activation collapse towards zero as the depth increases.
Nevertheless, recent advances in neural architectures have allowed the training of very deep neural
networks with standard i.i.d. initialization schemes despite the above mentioned shortcomings.
∗

Shared first authorship

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

