Minimax Value Interval for Off-Policy Evaluation
and Policy Optimization

Nan Jiang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Jiawei Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801
jiaweih@illinois.edu

Abstract
We study minimax methods for off-policy evaluation (OPE) using value functions
and marginalized importance weights. Despite that they hold promises of overcoming the exponential variance in traditional importance sampling, several key
problems remain:
(1) They require function approximation and are generally biased. For the sake of
trustworthy OPE, is there anyway to quantify the biases?
(2) They are split into two styles (“weight-learning” vs “value-learning”). Can we
unify them?
In this paper we answer both questions positively. By slightly altering the derivation of previous methods (one from each style [1]), we unify them into a single
value interval that comes with a special type of double robustness: when either
the value-function or the importance-weight class is well specified, the interval is
valid and its length quantifies the misspecification of the other class. Our interval
also provides a unified view of and new insights to some recent methods, and we
further explore the implications of our results on exploration and exploitation in
off-policy policy optimization with insufficient data coverage.

1

Introduction

A major barrier to applying reinforcement learning (RL) to real-world applications is the difficulty of
evaluation: how can we reliably evaluate a new policy before actually deploying it, possibly using
historical data collected from a different policy? Known as off-policy evaluation (OPE), the problem
is genuinely difficult as the variance of any unbiased estimator—including the popular importance
sampling methods and their variants [2, 3]—inevitably grows exponentially in horizon [4].
To overcome this “curse of horizon”, the RL community has recently gained interest in a new family
of algorithms [e.g., 5], which require function approximation of value-functions and marginalized
importance weights and provide accurate evaluation when both function classes are well-specified (or
realizable). Despite that fast progress is made in this direction, several key problems remain:
• The methods are generally biased since they rely on function approximation. Is there anyway we
can quantify the biases, which is important for trustworthy evaluation?
• The original method by Liu et al. [5] estimates the marginalized importance weights (“weight”)
using a discriminator class of value-functions (“value”). Later, Uehara et al. [1] swap the roles of
value and weight to learn a Q-function using weight discriminators. Not only we have two styles of
methods now (“weight-learning” vs “value-learning”), each of them also ignores some important
components of the data in their core optimization (see Sec. 3 for details). Can we have a unified
method that makes effective use of all components of data?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

