Beyond Perturbations: Learning Guarantees with
Arbitrary Adversarial Test Examples

Shafi Goldwasser∗
UC Berkeley, MIT

Adam Tauman Kalai
Microsoft Research

Yael Tauman Kalai
Microsoft Research, MIT

Omar Montasser
TTI Chicago

Abstract
We present a transductive learning algorithm that takes as input training examples
from a distribution 𝑃 and arbitrary (unlabeled) test examples, possibly chosen by
an adversary. This is unlike prior work that assumes that test examples are small
perturbations of 𝑃 . Our algorithm outputs a selective classifier, which abstains from
predicting on some examples. By considering selective transductive learning, we
give the first nontrivial guarantees for learning classes of bounded VC dimension
with arbitrary train and test distributions—no prior guarantees were known even
for simple classes of functions such as intervals on the line. In particular, for any
function in a class 𝐶 of bounded VC dimension, we guarantee a low test error
rate and a low rejection rate with respect to 𝑃 . Our algorithm is efficient given
an Empirical Risk Minimizer (ERM) for 𝐶. Our guarantees hold even for test
examples chosen by an unbounded white-box adversary. We also give guarantees
for generalization, agnostic, and unsupervised settings.

1

Introduction

Consider binary classification where test examples are not from the training distribution. Specifically,
consider learning a binary function 𝑓 ∶ 𝑋 → {0, 1} where training examples are assumed to be iid
from a distribution 𝑃 over 𝑋, while the test examples are arbitrary. This includes both the possibility
that test examples are chosen by an adversary or that they are drawn from a distribution 𝑄 ≠ 𝑃
(sometimes called “covariate shift”). For a disturbing example of covariate shift, consider learning to
classify abnormal lung scans. A system trained on scans prior to 2019 may miss abnormalities due to
COVID-19 since there were none in the training data. As a troubling adversarial example, consider
explicit content detectors which are trained to classify normal vs. explicit images. Adversarial
spammers synthesize endless variations of explicit images that evade these detectors for purposes
such as advertising and phishing [Yuan et al., 2019].
A recent line of work on adversarial learning has designed algorithms that are robust to imperceptible
perturbations. However, perturbations do not cover all types of test examples. In the explicit image
detection example, Yuan et al. [2019] find adversaries using conspicuous image distortion techniques
(e.g., overlaying a large colored rectangle on an image) rather than imperceptible perturbations. In
the lung scan example, Fang et al. [2020] find noticeable signs of COVID in many scans.
In general, there are several reasons why learning with arbitrary test examples is actually impossible.
First of all, one may not be able to predict the labels of test examples that are far from training
examples, as illustrated by the examples in group (1) of Figure 1. Secondly, as illustrated by group (2),
given any classifier ℎ, an adversary or test distribution 𝑄 may concentrate on or near an error. High
error rates are thus unavoidable since an adversary can simply repeat any single erroneous example
they can find. This could also arise naturally, as in the COVID example, if 𝑄 contains a concentration
of new examples near one another–individually they appear “normal” (but are suspicious as a group).
∗

Author order is alphabetical.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

