Goal-directed Generation of Discrete Structures
with Conditional Generative Models
Amina Mollaysa
University of Geneva
University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland
maolaaisha.aminanmu@hesge.ch

Brooks Paige
University College London
Alan Turing Institute
b.paige@ucl.ac.uk

Alexandros Kalousis
University of Geneva
University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland
alexandros.kalousis@hesge.ch

Abstract
Despite recent advances, goal-directed generation of structured discrete data remains challenging. For problems such as program synthesis (generating source
code) and materials design (generating molecules), finding examples which satisfy
desired constraints or exhibit desired properties is difficult. In practice, expensive
heuristic search or reinforcement learning algorithms are often employed. In this
paper we investigate the use of conditional generative models which directly attack
this inverse problem, by modeling the distribution of discrete structures given
properties of interest. Unfortunately, maximum likelihood training of such models
often fails with the samples from the generative model inadequately respecting
the input properties. To address this, we introduce a novel approach to directly
optimize a reinforcement learning objective, maximizing an expected reward. We
avoid high-variance score-function estimators that would otherwise be required
by sampling from an approximation to the normalized rewards, allowing simple
Monte Carlo estimation of model gradients. We test our methodology on two
tasks: generating molecules with user-defined properties, and identifying short
python expressions which evaluate to a given target value. In both cases we find
improvements over maximum likelihood estimation and other baselines.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models for structured data such as program source code and molecules typically
represent the data as a sequence of discrete values. However, even as recent advances in sequence
models have made great strides in predicting properties from the sequences, the inverse problem of
generating sequences for a given set of pre-defined properties remains challenging. These sorts of
structure design problems have great potential in many application areas; e.g., in materials design,
where one may be interested in generating molecular structures appropriate as batteries, photovoltaics,
or drug targets. However, as the underlying sequence is discrete, directly optimizing it with respect
to target properties becomes problematic: gradients are unavailable, meaning we can not directly
estimate the change in (say) a material that would correspond to a desired change in properties.
An open question is how well machine learning models can help us quickly and easily explore the
space of discrete structures that correspond to particular properties. There are a few approaches
based on generative models which aim to directly simulate likely candidates. Neural sequence
models [23, 2] are used to directly learn the conditional distributions by maximizing conditional log
likelihoods and have shown potential in text generation, image captioning and machine translation.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

