Multi-Task Temporal Shift Attention Networks for
On-Device Contactless Vitals Measurement
Xin Liu1 , Josh Fromm3 , Shwetak Patel1 , Daniel McDuff2
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA1
Microsoft Research AI, Redmond, USA2
OctoML, Seattle, USA3
{xliu0, shwetak}@cs.washington.edu, jwfromm@octoml.ai, damcduff@microsoft.com

Abstract
Telehealth and remote health monitoring have become increasingly important during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and it is widely expected that this will have a lasting
impact on healthcare practices. These tools can help reduce the risk of exposing
patients and medical staff to infection, make healthcare services more accessible,
and allow providers to see more patients. However, objective measurement of
vital signs is challenging without direct contact with a patient. We present a videobased and on-device optical cardiopulmonary vital sign measurement approach.
It leverages a novel multi-task temporal shift convolutional attention network
(MTTS-CAN) and enables real-time cardiovascular and respiratory measurements
on mobile platforms. We evaluate our system on an Advanced RISC Machine
(ARM) CPU and achieve state-of-the-art accuracy while running at over 150 frames
per second which enables real-time applications. Systematic experimentation on
large benchmark datasets reveals that our approach leads to substantial (20%-50%)
reductions in error and generalizes well across datasets.

1

Introduction

The SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic is transforming the face of healthcare around the world
[1, 2]. One example of this is the sharp increase (by more than 10x) in the number of medical
appointments held via telehealth platforms because of the increased pressures on healthcare systems,
the desire to protect healthcare workers and restrictions on travel [2]. Telehealth includes the use of
telecommunication tools, such as phone calls and messaging, and online health portals that allow
patients to communicate with their providers. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention is
recommending the “use of telehealth strategies when feasible to provide high-quality patient care
and reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission in healthcare settings”1 . Performing primary care
visits from a patient’s home reduces the risk of exposing people to infections, increases the efficiency
of visits and facilitates care for people in remote locations or who are unable to travel. These are
longstanding arguments for telehealth and will still be valid after the end of the current pandemic.
Healthcare systems are likely to maintain a high number of telehealth appointments in the future [3].
However, despite the longstanding promise of telehealth, it is difficult to provide a similar level of
care on a video call as during an in-person visit. The physician can diagnose a patient based on visual
observations and self-reported symptoms; however, in most cases they cannot objectively assess the
patient’s physiological state. This means that physicians have to make decisions (e.g., recommending
a trip to the emergency department) without important data. In the case of COVID-19, there are
severe cardiopulmonary (heart and lung related) symptoms that are difficult to evaluate remotely. The
1

Github Link: https://github.com/xin71/MTTS-CAN
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/ways-operate-effectively.html

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

