Deep Transformation-Invariant Clustering

Tom Monnier

Thibault Groueix

Mathieu Aubry

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
{tom.monnier,thibault.groueix,mathieu.aubry}@enpc.fr

Abstract
Recent advances in image clustering typically focus on learning better deep representations. In contrast, we present an orthogonal approach that does not rely on
abstract features but instead learns to predict transformations and performs clustering directly in pixel space. This learning process naturally fits in the gradient-based
training of K-means and Gaussian mixture model, without requiring any additional
loss or hyper-parameters. It leads us to two new deep transformation-invariant
clustering frameworks, which jointly learn prototypes and transformations. More
specifically, we use deep learning modules that enable us to resolve invariance to
spatial, color and morphological transformations. Our approach is conceptually
simple and comes with several advantages, including the possibility to easily adapt
the desired invariance to the task and a strong interpretability of both cluster centers and assignments to clusters. We demonstrate that our novel approach yields
competitive and highly promising results on standard image clustering benchmarks. Finally, we showcase its robustness and the advantages of its improved
interpretability by visualizing clustering results over real photograph collections.

1

Introduction

Gathering collections of images on a topic of interest is getting easier every day: simple tools can
aggregate data from social media, web search, or specialized websites and filter it using hashtags,
GPS coordinates, or semantic labels. However, identifying visual trends in such image collections
remains difficult and usually involves manually organizing images or designing an ad hoc algorithm.
Our goal in this paper is to design a clustering method which can be applied to such image collections,
output a visual representation for each cluster and show how it relates to every associated image.
Directly comparing image pixels to decide if they belong to the same cluster leads to poor results
because they are strongly impacted by factors irrelevant to clustering, such as exact viewpoint or
lighting. Approaches to obtain clusters invariant to these transformations can be broadly classified
into two groups. A first set of methods extracts invariant features and performs clustering in feature
space. The features can be manually designed, but most state-of-the-art methods learn them directly
from data. This is challenging because images are high-dimensional and learning relevant invariances
thus requires huge amounts of data. For this reason, while recent approaches perform well on simple
datasets like MNIST, they still struggle with real images. Another limitation of these approaches is
that learned features are hard to interpret and visualize, making clustering results difficult to analyze.
A second set of approaches, following the seminal work of Frey and Jojic on transformation-invariant
clustering [11, 12, 13], uses explicit transformation models to align images before comparing them.
These approaches have several potential advantages: (i) they enable direct control of the invariances to
consider; (ii) because they do not need to discover invariances, they are potentially less data-hungry;
(iii) since images are explicitly aligned, clustering process and results can easily be visualized.
However, transformation-invariant approaches require solving a difficult joint optimization problem.
In practice, they are thus often limited to small datasets and simple transformations, such as affine
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

