Learning to Mutate with Hypergradient Guided
Population

Zhiqiang Tao1,4∗, Yaliang Li2 , Bolin Ding2 , Ce Zhang3 , Jingren Zhou2 , Yun Fu4
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Santa Clara University
2
Alibaba Group
3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
4
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
ztao@scu.edu, {yaliang.li, bolin.ding, jingren.zhou}@alibaba-inc.com
ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
Computing the gradient of model hyperparameters, i.e., hypergradient, enables a
promising and natural way to solve the hyperparameter optimization task. However,
gradient-based methods could lead to suboptimal solutions due to the non-convex
nature of optimization in a complex hyperparameter space. In this study, we propose
a hyperparameter mutation (HPM) algorithm to explicitly consider a learnable
trade-off between using global and local search, where we adopt a population
of student models to simultaneously explore the hyperparameter space guided by
hypergradient and leverage a teacher model to mutate the underperforming students
by exploiting the top ones. The teacher model is implemented with an attention
mechanism and is used to learn a mutation schedule for different hyperparameters
on the fly. Empirical evidence on synthetic functions is provided to show that HPM
outperforms hypergradient significantly. Experiments on two benchmark datasets
are also conducted to validate the effectiveness of the proposed HPM algorithm for
training deep neural networks compared with several strong baselines.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) [4, 11] is one of the fundamental research problems in the
field of automated machine learning. It aims to maximize the model performance by tuning model
hyperparameters automatically, which could be achieved either by searching a fixed hyperparameter configuration setting [3, 22, 32, 9] from the predefined hyperparameter space or by learning a
hyperparameter schedule along with the training process [17, 25]. Among existing methods, hypergradient [2, 26] forms a promising direction, as it naturally enables gradient descent on hyperparameters.
Hypergradient is usually defined as the gradient of a validation loss function w.r.t hyperparameters.
Previous methods mainly focus on computing hypergradients by using reverse-mode differentiation [2,
6, 26], or designing a differentiable response function [12, 25] for hyperparameters, yet without
explicitly considering the non-convex optimization nature in a complex hyperparameter space. Thus,
while hypergradient methods could deliver highly-efficient local search solutions, they may easily get
stuck in local minima and achieve suboptimal performance. This can be clearly observed on some
synthetic functions which share a similar shape of parameter space to the HPO problem (see Sec. 4.1).
It also leads to the question: can we find a way to help hypergradient with global information?
The population based hyperparameter search methods work as a good complementary to the hypergradient, such as evolutionary search [27, 5], particle swarm optimization [8], and the population based
∗

Work done when Zhiqiang Tao interned at Alibaba Group and worked at Northeastern University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

