Discovering Symbolic Models from Deep Learning
with Inductive Biases
Miles Cranmer1
Kyle Cranmer3

3

Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez2
David Spergel4,1

Peter Battaglia2

Rui Xu1

Shirley Ho4,3,1,5

1
2
Princeton University, Princeton, USA
DeepMind, London, UK
4
New York University, New York City, USA
Flatiron Institute, New York City, USA
5
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
We develop a general approach to distill symbolic representations of a learned
deep model by introducing strong inductive biases. We focus on Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs). The technique works as follows: we first encourage sparse
latent representations when we train a GNN in a supervised setting, then we
apply symbolic regression to components of the learned model to extract explicit
physical relations. We find the correct known equations, including force laws and
Hamiltonians, can be extracted from the neural network. We then apply our method
to a non-trivial cosmology example—a detailed dark matter simulation—and
discover a new analytic formula which can predict the concentration of dark matter
from the mass distribution of nearby cosmic structures. The symbolic expressions
extracted from the GNN using our technique also generalized to out-of-distributiondata better than the GNN itself. Our approach offers alternative directions for
interpreting neural networks and discovering novel physical principles from the
representations they learn.

1

Introduction

The miracle of the appropriateness of the language of mathematics for the formulation of the laws of
physics is a wonderful gift which we neither understand nor deserve. We should be grateful for it and
hope that it will remain valid in future research and that it will extend, for better or for worse, to our
pleasure, even though perhaps also to our bafflement, to wide branches of learning.—Eugene Wigner
“The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences” [1].
For thousands of years, science has leveraged models made out of closed-form symbolic expressions,
thanks to their many advantages: algebraic expressions are usually compact, present explicit interpretations, and generalize well. However, finding these algebraic expressions is difficult. Symbolic
regression is one option: a supervised machine learning technique that assembles analytic functions
to model a given dataset. However, typically one uses genetic algorithms—essentially a brute force
procedure as in [2]—which scale exponentially with the number of input variables and operators.
Many machine learning problems are thus intractable for traditional symbolic regression.
On the other hand, deep learning methods allow efficient training of complex models on highdimensional datasets. However, these learned models are black boxes, and difficult to interpret.
Code for our models and experiments can be found at https://github.com/MilesCranmer/symbolic_
deep_learning.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

