Zero-Resource Knowledge-Grounded
Dialogue Generation
Linxiao Li ∗
Peking University

Can Xu†
Microsoft STCA

Wei Wu
Meituan

lilinxiao@pku.edu.cn

caxu@microsoft.com

wuwei19850318@gmail.com

Yufan Zhao
Microsoft STCA

Xueliang Zhao
Peking University

Chongyang Tao
Peking University

yufzhao@microsoft.com

xl.zhao@pku.edu.cn

chongyangtao@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
While neural conversation models have shown great potentials towards generating
informative and engaging responses via introducing external knowledge, learning
such a model often requires knowledge-grounded dialogues that are difficult to
obtain. To overcome the data challenge and reduce the cost of building a knowledgegrounded dialogue system, we explore the problem under a zero-resource setting
by assuming no context-knowledge-response triples are needed for training. To
this end, we propose representing the knowledge that bridges a context and a
response and the way that the knowledge is expressed as latent variables, and
devise a variational approach that can effectively estimate a generation model
from a dialogue corpus and a knowledge corpus that are independent with each
other. Evaluation results on three benchmarks of knowledge-grounded dialogue
generation indicate that our model can achieve comparable performance with stateof-the-art methods that rely on knowledge-grounded dialogues for training, and
exhibits a good generalization ability over different topics and different datasets.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed rapid progress on learning a dialogue generation model for open domain
human-machine conversation [40, 34, 50, 1]. Though such models in advanced neural architectures
[39] are capable of replying with natural and smooth responses regarding to conversation history,
people can still feel a clear gap when they converse with the systems, compared with the conversation
with humans. One primary reason is that existing dialogue systems lack of necessary knowledge and
thus cannot go deep with humans when they dive into a specific topic. To bridge the gap, researchers
begin to study how to ground open domain dialogues by external knowledge, which could be obtained
either from structured knowledge bases [26, 38], or from unstructured documents [10, 55, 16].
In this work, we study document-grounded dialogue generation in which a response is synthesized
regarding to a conversation context associated with a few sentences from external documents. While
the documents serve as content sources and hint response generation with knowledge, collecting
enough dialogues that are naturally grounded on documents for model training is not trivial. Although
some benchmarks built upon crowd-sourcing have been released by recent papers [55, 10, 16], the
small training size makes the generation models generalize badly on unseen topics [10] and the cost
of building such data also prevents from transferring the technology proved on the benchmarks to
∗
†

Work done during the internship at Microsoft STCA.
Corresponding author: Can Xu (caxu@microsoft.com).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

