Learning Discrete Energy-based Models via
Auxiliary-variable Local Exploration

Hanjun Dai, Rishabh Singh, Bo Dai, Charles Sutton, Dale Schuurmans
Google Research, Brain Team
{hadai, rising, bodai, charlessutton, schuurmans}@google.com

Abstract
Discrete structures play an important role in applications like program language
modeling and software engineering. Current approaches to predicting complex
structures typically consider autoregressive models for their tractability, with some
sacrifice in flexibility. Energy-based models (EBMs) on the other hand offer a
more flexible and thus more powerful approach to modeling such distributions, but
require partition function estimation. In this paper we propose ALOE, a new algorithm for learning conditional and unconditional EBMs for discrete structured data,
where parameter gradients are estimated using a learned sampler that mimics local
search. We show that the energy function and sampler can be trained efficiently
via a new variational form of power iteration, achieving a better trade-off between
flexibility and tractability. Experimentally, we show that learning local search
leads to significant improvements in challenging application domains. Most notably, we present an energy model guided fuzzer for software testing that achieves
comparable performance to well engineered fuzzing engines like libfuzzer.

1

Introduction

Many real-world applications involve prediction of discrete structured data, such as syntax trees for
natural language processing [1, 2], sequences of source code tokens for program synthesis [3], and
structured test inputs for software testing [4]. A common approach for modeling a distribution over
structured data is the autoregressive model. Although any distribution can be factorized in such a way,
the parameter sharing used in neural autoregressive models can restrict their flexibility. Intuitively, a
standard way to perform inference with autoregressive models has a single pass with a predetermined
order, which forces commitment to early decisions that cannot subsequently be rectified. Energybased models [5] (EBMs), on the other hand, define the distribution with an unnormalized energy
function, which allows greater flexibility by not committing to any inference order. In principle, this
allows more flexible model parameterizations such as bi-directional LSTMs, tree LSTMs [1, 2], and
graph neural networks [6, 7] to be used to capture non-local dependencies.
Unfortunately, the flexibility of EBMs exacerbates the difficulties of learning and inference, since the
partition function is typically intractable. EBM learning algorithms therefore employ approximate
strategies such as contrastive learning, where positive samples are drawn from data and negative samples obtained from an alternative sampler [8]. Contrastive divergence [9–12], pseudo-likelihood [13]
and score matching [14] are all examples of such a strategy. However, such approaches use handdesigned negative samplers, which can be overly restrictive in practice, thus [8, 15, 16] consider joint
training of a flexible negative sampler along with the energy function, achieving significant improvements in model quality. These recent techniques are not directly applicable to discrete structured data
however, since they exploit gradients over the data space. In addition, the parameter gradient involves
an intractable sum, which also poses a well-known challenge for stochastic estimation [17–24].
In this work, we propose Auxiliary-variable LOcal Exploration (ALOE), a new method for discrete
EBM training with a learned negative sampler. Inspired by viewing MCMC as a local search in
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

