ShapeFlow:
Learnable Deformations Among 3D Shapes
Chiyu “Max" Jiang∗
UC Berkeley
chiyu.jiang@berkeley.edu

Jingwei Huang∗
Stanford University
jingweih@stanford.edu

Andrea Tagliasacchi
Google Brain
taglia@google.com

Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University
guibas@stanford.edu

Abstract
We present ShapeFlow, a flow-based model for learning a deformation space for
entire classes of 3D shapes with large intra-class variations. ShapeFlow allows
learning a multi-template deformation space that is agnostic to shape topology, yet
preserves fine geometric details. Different from a generative space where a latent
vector is directly decoded into a shape, a deformation space decodes a vector into
a continuous flow that can advect a source shape towards a target. Such a space
naturally allows the disentanglement of geometric style (coming from the source)
and structural pose (conforming to the target). We parametrize the deformation
between geometries as a learned continuous flow field via a neural network and
show that such deformations can be guaranteed to have desirable properties, such
as bijectivity, freedom from self-intersections, or volume preservation. We illustrate the effectiveness of this learned deformation space for various downstream
applications, including shape generation via deformation, geometric style transfer,
unsupervised learning of a consistent parameterization for entire classes of shapes,
and shape interpolation.

1

Introduction

Learning a shared representation space for geometries is a central task in 3D Computer Vision and in
Geometric Modeling as it enables a series of important downstream applications, such as retrieval,
reconstruction, and editing. For instance, morphable models [1] is a commonly used representation for
entire classes of shapes with small intra-class variations (i.e., faces), allowing high quality geometry
generation. However, morphable models generally assume a shared topology and even the same mesh
connectivity for all represented shapes, and are thus less extensible to general shape categories with
large intra-class variations. Therefore, such approaches have limited applications beyond collections
with a shared structure such as humans [1, 2] or animals [3].
In contrast, when trained on large shape collections (e.g., ShapeNet [4]), 3D generative models are not
only able to learn a shared latent space for entire classes of shapes (e.g., chairs, tables, airplanes), but
also capture large geometric variations between classes. A main area of focus in this field has been
developing novel geometry decoders for these latent representations. These generative spaces allow
the mapping from a latent code z∈Rc to some geometric representation of a shape, examples being
voxels [5, 6], meshes [7, 8], convexes [9, 10], or implicit functions [11, 12]. Such latent spaces are
∗

Equal Contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

