Model Agnostic Multilevel Explanations

Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Bhanukiran Vinzamuri, Yunfeng Zhang, Amit Dhurandhar
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY USA 10598
knatesa@us.ibm.com, bhanu.vinzamuri@ibm.com, {zhangyun, adhuran}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
In recent years, post-hoc local instance-level and global dataset-level explainability
of black-box models has received a lot of attention. Lesser attention has been given
to obtaining insights at intermediate or group levels, which is a need outlined in
recent works that study the challenges in realizing the guidelines in the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR). In this paper, we propose a meta-method that, given
a typical local explainability method, can build a multilevel explanation tree. The
leaves of this tree correspond to local explanations, the root corresponds to global
explanation, and intermediate levels correspond to explanations for groups of data
points that it automatically clusters. The method can also leverage side information,
where users can specify points for which they may want the explanations to be
similar. We argue that such a multilevel structure can also be an effective form
of communication, where one could obtain few explanations that characterize
the entire dataset by considering an appropriate level in our explanation tree.
Explanations for novel test points can be cost-efficiently obtained by associating
them with the closest training points. When the local explainability technique is
generalized additive (viz. LIME, GAMs), we develop fast approximate algorithm
for building the multilevel tree and study its convergence behavior. We show that
we produce high fidelity sparse explanations on several public datasets and also
validate the effectiveness of the proposed technique based on two human studies –
one with experts and the other with non-expert users – on real world datasets.

1

Introduction

A very natural and effective way to communicate is to first provide high level general concepts and
then only dive into more of the specifics [1]. In addition, the transition from high level concepts to
more and more specific explanations should ideally be as logical or smooth as possible [2, 3]. For
example, when you call a service provider there is usually an automated message trying categorize
the problem at a high level followed by more specific questions. Eventually if the issue is not resolved
a human representative may intervene to delve into further details. In such cases, information or
explanations you provide at multiple levels enables others to obtain insights that are otherwise opaque.
Recent work [4] has stressed the importance of having such multilevel explanations to successfully
meet the requirements of Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [5]. They argue that
simply having local or global explanations may not suffice for providing satisfactory explanations in
many cases. In fact, even in the widely participated FICO explainability challenge [6] it was expected
that one provides not just local explanations but also insights at the intermediate class level.
Motivated by this need, in this paper, we propose a novel model agnostic multilevel explanation
(MAME) method that takes as input a post-hoc local explainability technique for black-box models
(e.g. LIME [7]) and an unlabeled dataset. The method then generates multiple explanations for
each of the examples corresponding to different degrees of cohesion (i.e. parameter tying) between
explanations of the examples. This explicitly controllable degree of cohesion determines a level
in our multilevel explanation tree. In addition, we constrain that the predictions of the explanation
model to be close to that of the black-box at each tree node, ensuring fidelity. At the extremes, the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

