ICE-BeeM: Identifiable Conditional Energy-Based
Deep Models Based on Nonlinear ICA

Ilyes Khemakhem 1

Ricardo P. Monti 1
1

Diederik P. Kingma 2

Aapo Hyvärinen 3,4

Gatsby Unit, University College London
2
Google Research
3
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria
4
University of Helsinki
ilyesk@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider the identifiability theory of probabilistic models and establish sufficient
conditions under which the representations learned by a very broad family of
conditional energy-based models are unique in function space, up to a simple
transformation. In our model family, the energy function is the dot-product between
two feature extractors, one for the dependent variable, and one for the conditioning
variable. We show that under mild conditions, the features are unique up to scaling
and permutation. Our results extend recent developments in nonlinear ICA, and
in fact, they lead to an important generalization of ICA models. In particular,
we show that our model can be used for the estimation of the components in
the framework of Independently Modulated Component Analysis (IMCA), a new
generalization of nonlinear ICA that relaxes the independence assumption. A
thorough empirical study shows that representations learned by our model from
real-world image datasets are identifiable, and improve performance in transfer
learning and semi-supervised learning tasks.

1

Introduction

A central question in unsupervised deep learning is how to learn nonlinear representations that
are a faithful reconstruction of the true latent variables behind the data. This allows us to learn
representations that are semantically meaningful, interpretable and useful for downstream tasks.
Identifiability is fundamental for meaningful and principled disentanglement, and in applications
such as causal discovery. However, this is a very difficult task: by definition, we never observe
the latent variables; the only information directly available to us is given by the observed variables.
Learning the true representations is only possible when the representation is identifiable: if, in the
limit of infinite data, only a single representation function can fit the data. Conversely, if, in the limit
of infinite data, multiple representation functions can fit the data, then the true representation function
is unidentifiable.
Until recently (Hyvärinen and Morioka, 2016, 2017), results relating to identifiability of (explicit and
implicit) latent variable models were mainly constrained to linear models (e.g., as in linear ICA), as it
was acknowledged that the flexibility of nonlinear mappings could yield arbitrary latent variables
which fulfill model assumptions such as independence (Hyvärinen and Pajunen, 1999). However, it
is now understood that nonlinear deep latent variable models can be identifiable provided we observe
some additional auxiliary variables such that the latent variables are conditionally independent given
the auxiliary variable. The approach was introduced using self-supervised learning by Hyvärinen
et al. (2019), and Khemakhem et al. (2020) explicited a connection between nonlinear ICA and the
framework of variational autoencoders. It was shortly followed by work by Sorrenson et al. (2020),
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

