POLY-HOOT: Monte-Carlo Planning in Continuous
Space MDPs with Non-Asymptotic Analysis

Weichao Mao
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
weichao2@illinois.edu

Kaiqing Zhang
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
kzhang66@illinois.edu

Qiaomin Xie
ORIE
Cornell University
qiaomin.xie@cornell.edu

Tamer Başar
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
basar1@illinois.edu

Abstract
Monte-Carlo planning, as exemplified by Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), has
demonstrated remarkable performance in applications with finite spaces. In this
paper, we consider Monte-Carlo planning in an environment with continuous
state-action spaces, a much less understood problem with important applications
in control and robotics. We introduce POLY-HOOT, an algorithm that augments
MCTS with a continuous armed bandit strategy named Hierarchical Optimistic
Optimization (HOO) (Bubeck et al., 2011). Specifically, we enhance HOO by using
an appropriate polynomial, rather than logarithmic, bonus term in the upper confidence bounds. Such a polynomial bonus is motivated by its empirical successes
in AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017b), as well as its significant role in achieving
theoretical guarantees of finite space MCTS (Shah et al., 2019). We investigate, for
the first time, the regret of the enhanced HOO algorithm in non-stationary bandit
problems. Using this result as a building block, we establish non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for POLY-HOOT: the value estimate converges to an arbitrarily
small neighborhood of the optimal value function at a polynomial rate. We further
provide experimental results that corroborate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) has recently demonstrated remarkable success in deterministic
games, especially in the game of Go (Silver et al., 2017b), Chess and Shogi (Silver et al., 2017a). It is
also among the very few viable approaches to problems with partial observability, e.g., Poker (Rubin
and Watson, 2011), and problems involving highly complicated strategies like real-time strategy
games (Uriarte and Ontanón, 2014). However, most Monte-Carlo planning solutions only work well
in finite state and action spaces, and are generally not compatible with continuous action spaces
with enormous branching factors. Many important applications such as robotics and control require
planning in a continuous state-action space, for which feasible solutions, especially those with
theoretical guarantees, are scarce. In this paper, we aim to develop an MCTS method for continuous
domains with non-asymptotic convergence guarantees.
Rigorous analysis of MCTS is highly non-trivial even in finite spaces. One crucial difficulty stems
from the fact that the state-action value estimates in MCTS are non-stationary over multiple simulations, because the policies in the lower levels of the search tree are constantly changing. Due to the
strong non-stationarity and interdependency of rewards, the reward concentration hypothesis made
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

