Multi-task Causal Learning with Gaussian Processes

Theodoros Damoulas
University of Warwick
The Alan Turing Institute
T.Damoulas@warwick.ac.uk

Virginia Aglietti
University of Warwick
The Alan Turing Institute
V.Aglietti@warwick.ac.uk
Mauricio A. Álvarez
University of Sheffield
Mauricio.Alvarez@sheffield.ac.uk

Javier González
Microsoft Research Cambridge
Gonzalez.Javier@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of learning the correlation structure of a set of
intervention functions defined on the directed acyclic graph (DAG) of a causal
model. This is useful when we are interested in jointly learning the causal effects of
interventions on different subsets of variables in a DAG, which is common in field
such as healthcare or operations research. We propose the first multi-task causal
Gaussian process (GP) model, which we call DAG - GP, that allows for information
sharing across continuous interventions and across experiments on different variables. DAG - GP accommodates different assumptions in terms of data availability
and captures the correlation between functions lying in input spaces of different
dimensionality via a well-defined integral operator. We give theoretical results
detailing when and how the DAG - GP model can be formulated depending on the
DAG . We test both the quality of its predictions and its calibrated uncertainties.
Compared to single-task models, DAG - GP achieves the best fitting performance in
a variety of real and synthetic settings. In addition, it helps to select optimal interventions faster than competing approaches when used within sequential decision
making frameworks, like active learning or Bayesian optimization.

1

Introduction

Solving decision making problems in a variety of domains such as healthcare, systems biology or
operations research, often requires experimentation. By performing interventions one can understand
how a system behaves when an action is taken and thus infer the cause-effect relationships of a
phenomenon. Experiments are especially useful when observational causal inference methods do
not provide accurate estimation of the causal effects. For instance, in healthcare, drugs are tested in
randomized clinical trials before commercialization. Biologists might want to understand how genes
interact in a cell once one of them is knocked out. Finally, engineers investigate the impact of design
changes on complex physical systems by conducting experiments on digital twins [34]. Experiments
in these scenarios are usually expensive, time-consuming, and, especially for field experiments, they
may present ethical issues. Therefore, researchers generally have to trade-off cost, time, and other
practical considerations to decide which experiments to conduct, if any, to learn about the system.
Consider the causal graph in Fig. 1 which describes how crop yield Y is affected by soil fumigants X and the level of eel-worm population at different times Z = {Z1 , Z2 , Z3 } [11, 27]. By
performing a set of experiments, the investigator aims at learning the intervention functions relating
the expected crop yield to each possible intervention set and level. Naïvely, one could achieve that
by modelling each intervention function separately. However, this approach would disregard the
correlation structure existing across experimental outputs and would increase the computational
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

