Auditing Differentially Private Machine Learning:
How Private is Private SGD?
Matthew Jagielski
Northeastern University
jagielski@ccs.neu.edu

Jonathan Ullman
Northeastern University
jullman@ccs.neu.edu

Alina Oprea
Northeastern University
a.oprea@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We investigate whether Differentially Private SGD offers better privacy in practice
than what is guaranteed by its state-of-the-art analysis. We do so via novel data
poisoning attacks, which we show correspond to realistic privacy attacks. While
previous work (Ma et al., arXiv 2019) proposed this connection between differential
privacy and data poisoning as a defense against data poisoning, our use as a tool
for understanding the privacy of a specific mechanism is new. More generally, our
work takes a quantitative, empirical approach to understanding the privacy afforded
by specific implementations of differentially private algorithms that we believe has
the potential to complement and influence analytical work on differential privacy.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy [DMNS06] has become the de facto standard for guaranteeing privacy in machine learning and statistical analysis, and is now being deployed by many organizations including
Apple [TVV+ 17], Google [EPK14, BEM+ 17, PSM+ 18], and the US Census Bureau [HMA+ 17].
Now that differential privacy has moved from theory to practice, there has been considerable attention
on optimizing and evaluating differentially private machine learning algorithms, notably differentially
private stochastic gradient descent (henceforth, DP-SGD) [SCS13, BST14, ACG+ 16], which is now
widely available in TensorFlow Privacy [Goo]. DP-SGD is the building block for training many
widely used private classification models, including feed-forward and convolutional neural networks.
Differential privacy gives a strong worst-case guarantee of individual privacy: a differentially private
algorithm ensures that, for any set of training examples, no attacker, no matter how powerful, can
learn much more information about a single training example than they could have learned had that
example been excluded from the training data. The amount of information is quantified by a privacy
parameter ε.1 Intuitively, a smaller ε means stronger privacy protections, but leads to lower accuracy.
As such there is often pressure to set this parameter as large as one feels still gives a reasonable
privacy guarantee, and relatively large parameters such as ε = 2 are not uncommon. However, this
guarantee is not entirely satisfying, as such an algorithm might allow an attacker to guess a random
bit of information about each training example with approximately 86% accuracy. As such there is
often a gap between the strong formal protections promised by differential privacy and the specific
quantitative implications of the choice of ε in practice.
This state-of-affairs is often justified by the fact that our analysis of the algorithm is often pessimistic.
First of all, ε is a parameter that has to be determined by careful analysis, and often existing theoretical
analysis is not tight. Indeed a big part of making differentially private machine learning practical
has been the significant body of work giving progressively more refined privacy analyses specifically
There are several common variants of differential privacy [DKM+ 06, DR16, BS16, Mir17, BDRS18,
DRS19] that quantify the influence of a single example in slightly different ways, sometimes using more than
one parameter. For this high-level discussion, we focus on the single, primary parameter ε.
1

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

