Towards a Combinatorial Characterization of
Bounded-Memory Learning
Alon Gonen

Shachar Lovett

Michal Moshkovitz

University of California San Diego

Abstract
Combinatorial dimensions play an important role in the theory of machine learning.
For example, VC dimension characterizes PAC learning, SQ dimension characterizes weak learning with statistical queries, and Littlestone dimension characterizes
online learning. In this paper we aim to develop combinatorial dimensions that
characterize bounded memory learning. We propose a candidate solution for the
case of realizable strong learning under a known distribution, based on the SQ
dimension of neighboring distributions. We prove both upper and lower bounds
for our candidate solution, that match in some regime of parameters. This is the
first characterization of strong learning under space constraints in any regime. In
this parameter regime there is an equivalence between bounded memory and SQ
learning. We conjecture that our characterization holds in a much wider regime of
parameters.

1

Introduction

Characterization of different learning tasks using a combinatorial condition has been investigated in
depth in machine learning. Learning a class in an unconstrained fashion is characterized by a finite
VC dimension [40, 9], and weakly learning in the statistical query (SQ) framework is characterized
by a small SQ dimension [7]. Is there a simple combinatorial condition that characterizes learnability
with bounded memory? In this paper we propose a candidate condition, prove upper and lower
bounds that match in some of the regime of parameters, and conjecture that they match in a much
wider regime of parameters.
A learning algorithm that uses b bits of memory, m samples, and accuracy 1 ✏ is defined as follows:
the algorithm receives a series of m labeled examples one by one, while only preserving an internal
state in {0, 1}b between examples. In this paper we focus our attention on the realizable setting: the
labeled examples are pairs (xi , c(xi )), where xi 2 X and c : X ! { 1, 1} is a concept in a concept
class C. The algorithm is supposed to return with constant probability a hypothesis h which matches
the unknown concept c on a 1 ✏ fraction of the underlying distribution. In this paper we further
assume that the underlying distribution P on X is known to the learner, similar to the setting in the
SQ framework.
There are two “trivial” algorithms for the problem which we now present. For ease of presentation,
we restrict our attention in the introduction to a small constant ✏, say ✏ = 0.01. Without making
any additional assumptions, the following space complexity bounds are known when learning with
accuracy 0.99:
1. The ERM algorithm keeps in memory m = O (log |C|) samples, and outputs a hypothesis
that is consistent with the entire sample. This requires b = O (log |C| log |X |) bits.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

