Causal Intervention for Weakly-Supervised
Semantic Segmentation
1

Dong Zhang

Hanwang Zhang

2

1∗

Jinhui Tang

3

Xiansheng Hua

4

Qianru Sun

1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology;
3
4
Nanyang Technological University; Damo Academy, Alibaba Group; Singapore Management University.

Abstract
We present a causal inference framework to improve Weakly-Supervised Semantic
Segmentation (WSSS). Specifically, we aim to generate better pixel-level pseudomasks by using only image-level labels — the most crucial step in WSSS. We
attribute the cause of the ambiguous boundaries of pseudo-masks to the confounding context, e.g., the correct image-level classification of “horse” and “person” may
be not only due to the recognition of each instance, but also their co-occurrence
context, making the model inspection (e.g., CAM) hard to distinguish between the
boundaries. Inspired by this, we propose a structural causal model to analyze the
causalities among images, contexts, and class labels. Based on it, we develop a
new method: Context Adjustment (CONTA), to remove the confounding bias in
image-level classification and thus provide better pseudo-masks as ground-truth for
the subsequent segmentation model. On PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS-COCO, we
1
show that CONTA boosts various popular WSSS methods to new state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation aims to classify each image pixel into its correClassification CAM
Seed Expansion Pseudosponding semantic class [32]. It is an
Model
Areas
Masks
indispensable computer vision buildClass
Pseudo-Mask Generation
ing block for scene understanding apLabels
Pseudo Ground-Truth
plications such as autonomous driving [54] and medical imaging [18].
Segmentation
Images
Model
Training Images
However, the pixel-level labeling is
expensive, e.g., it costs about 1.5
man-hours for one 500 × 500 daily Figure 1: The prevailing pipeline for training WSSS. Our
life image [12]. Therefore, to scale contribution is to improve the Classification Model, which is
up, we are interested in Weakly- the foundation for better pseudo-masks.
Supervised Semantic Segmentation
(WSSS), where the “weak” denotes a much cheaper labeling cost at the instance-level [9, 28]
or even at the image-level [23, 57]. In particular, we focus on the latter as it is the most economic
way — only a few man-seconds for tagging an image [26].
The prevailing pipeline for training WSSS is depicted in Figure 1. Given training images with only
image-level class labels, we first train a multi-label classification model. Second, for each image, we
infer the class-specific seed areas, e.g., by applying Classification Activation Map (CAM) [68] to the
above trained model. Finally, we expand them to obtain the Pseudo-Masks [20, 57, 59], which are
∗
1

Corresponding author.
Code is open-sourced at: https://github.com/ZHANGDONG-NJUST/CONTA

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

