Reconsidering Generative Objectives For
Counterfactual Reasoning

Danni Lu1,∗, Chenyang Tao2,∗ , Junya Chen2,3 , Fan Li4 , Feng Guo1,5 , Lawrence Carin2
1
Department of Statistics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
2
Electrical & Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
4
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
5
Virginia Tech Transportation Institute, Blacksburg, VA, USA
ludanni@vt.edu, chenyang.tao@duke.edu

Abstract
There has been recent interest in exploring generative goals for counterfactual
reasoning, e.g., individualized treatment effect (ITE) estimation. However, existing
solutions often fail to address issues that are unique to causal inference, such as
covariate balancing and counterfactual validation. As a step toward more flexible,
scalable and accurate ITE estimation, we present a novel generative Bayesian
estimation framework that integrates representation learning, adversarial matching
and causal estimation. By appealing to the Robinson decomposition, we derive a
reformulated variational bound that explicitly targets the causal effect estimation
rather than specific predictive goals. Our procedure acknowledges the uncertainties
in representation and solves a Fenchel mini-max game to resolve the representation
imbalance for better counterfactual generalization, justified by new theory.The
latent variable formulation enables robustness to unobservable latent confounders,
extending the scope of its applicability. The proposed approach is demonstrated via
an extensive set of tests against competing solutions, both under various simulation
setups and to real-world datasets, with encouraging results reported.

1

Introduction

Inferring the individualized treatment effects from observational data is a fundamental challenge
shared by many decision-making application domains, including healthcare [23], advertising [15],
and policy making [44], among others. Recent advances in machine learning have motivated new
causal inference methodologies inspired by modern learning perspectives, such as representation
learning, adversarial training, etc.
In this work we focus on the problem of causal estimation from observational data, which differs
from standard supervised learning in fundamental ways [60]. First, only partial observation of the
potential outcomes, the one corresponding to the assigned intervention, can be made. The lack of
counterfactual labels prohibits direct validation of the estimated CE. Second, observational studies
are susceptible to selection bias due to confounding. In particular, some variables obfuscate causation
as they affect both treatment assignment and outcome [81], and they may be latent. Without a proper
confounder compensation mechanism, causal estimation can face severe bias.
To resolve this difficulty, the classical statistics literature has mainly focused on sample-based adjustment strategies, namely matching and weighting. Matching pairs units that are similar with respect to
particular matching criteria [74], forming basic elements of synthetic “randomized trials”; weighting
reassigns importance weights to each sample unit to create a pseudo population of better balance
∗

Contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

