SMYRF:
Efficient Attention using Asymmetric Clustering

Giannis Daras
Computer Science Department
The University of Texas at Austin
giannisdaras@utexas.edu
Nikita Kitaev
Google Research
kitaev@cs.berkeley.edu

Augustus Odena
Google Research
augustusodena@google.com

Alexandros G. Dimakis
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel type of balanced clustering algorithm to approximate attention.
Attention complexity is reduced from O(N 2 ) to O(N log N ), where N is the
sequence length. Our algorithm, SMYRF, uses Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) in
a novel way by defining new Asymmetric transformations and an adaptive scheme
that produces balanced clusters. The biggest advantage of SMYRF is that it can
be used as a drop-in replacement for dense attention layers without any retraining.
On the contrary, prior fast attention methods impose constraints (e.g. queries and
keys share the same vector representations) and require re-training from scratch.
We apply our method to pre-trained state-of-the-art Natural Language Processing
and Computer Vision models and we report significant memory and speed benefits.
Notably, SMYRF-BERT outperforms (slightly) BERT on GLUE, while using 50%
less memory. We also show that SMYRF can be used interchangeably with dense
attention before and after training. Finally, we use SMYRF to train GANs with
attention in high resolutions. Using a single TPU, we were able to scale attention
to 128x128=16k and 256x256=65k tokens on BigGAN on CelebA-HQ.

1

Introduction

Attention layers enable long-range representation learning and are becoming indispensable in architectures for both Image Synthesis [1, 2, 3] and Natural Language Processing [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
Attention finds further uses in other domains like symbolic mathematics and music modeling as
well [10, 11, 12]. Unfortunately, attention layers have high computational and memory cost which
scales quadratically in the size of the input sequence. This constraint is so onerous that the canonical
implementation of attention for image synthesis - Self-Attention GAN [2] - could only afford to
use one self-attention layer. For NLP, modern transformer-based models can only be trained in
large industry research labs with massive infrastructure investments. For instance, the recently
published GPT-3 [13] model uses 96 attention layers trained on input sequences of 2048 tokens.
When fine-tuning pre-trained attention models, NLP researchers usually truncate input sentences,
limiting performance on datasets with longer inputs.
Recent research [14, 3] indicates that dense attention is statistically and computationally inefficient [15, 16, 3]: it does not account for the locality inherent in many tasks. Alternatives have been
proposed that are either more efficient [12, 17, 18, 19, 20, 7, 21, 22] or that better accommodate
locality [23, 3]. Most such alternatives have been sparse. Sparsity can be achieved by limiting
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

