GCOMB: Learning Budget-constrained
Combinatorial Algorithms over Billion-sized Graphs

Sahil Manchanda, Akash Mittal∗, Anuj Dhawan∗
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
{sahil.manchanda,cs1150208,Anuj.Dhawan.cs115}@cse.iitd.ac.in

1

Sourav Medya1 , Sayan Ranu2 , Ambuj Singh3
Northwestern University,2 Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
3
University of California Santa Barbara
1
sourav.medya@kellogg.northwestern.edu
2
sayanranu@cse.iitd.ac.in,3 ambuj@ucsb.edu

Abstract
There has been an increased interest in discovering heuristics for combinatorial
problems on graphs through machine learning. While existing techniques have
primarily focused on obtaining high-quality solutions, scalability to billion-sized
graphs has not been adequately addressed. In addition, the impact of budgetconstraint, which is necessary for many practical scenarios, remains to be studied.
In this paper, we propose a framework called G COMB to bridge these gaps. G COMB
trains a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) using a novel probabilistic greedy
mechanism to predict the quality of a node. To further facilitate the combinatorial
nature of the problem, G COMB utilizes a Q-learning framework, which is made
efficient through importance sampling. We perform extensive experiments on real
graphs to benchmark the efficiency and efficacy of G COMB. Our results establish
that G COMB is 100 times faster and marginally better in quality than state-of-the-art
algorithms for learning combinatorial algorithms. Additionally, a case-study on the
practical combinatorial problem of Influence Maximization (IM) shows G COMB is
150 times faster than the specialized IM algorithm IMM with similar quality.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Combinatorial optimization problems on graphs appear routinely in various applications such as
viral marketing in social networks [14, 4], computational sustainability [8], health-care [33], and
infrastructure deployment [20, 23, 24, 22]. In these set combinatorial problems, the goal is to identify
the set of nodes that optimizes a given objective function. These optimization problems are often
NP-hard. Therefore, designing an exact algorithm is infeasible and polynomial-time algorithms, with
or without approximation guarantees, are often desired and used in practice [13, 31]. Furthermore,
these graphs are often dynamic in nature and the approximation algorithms need to be run repeatedly
at regular intervals. Since real-world graphs may contain millions of nodes and edges, this entire
process becomes tedious and time-consuming.
To provide a concrete example, consider the problem of viral marketing on social networks through
Influence Maximization [2, 14]. Given a budget b, the goal is to select b nodes (users) such that their
endorsement of a certain product (ex: through a tweet) is expected to initiate a cascade that reaches
the largest number of nodes in the graph. This problem is NP-hard [14]. Advertising through social
networks is a common practice today and needs to solved repeatedly due to the graphs being dynamic
∗

denotes equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

