Correspondence Learning via Linearly-invariant
Embedding

Riccardo Marin∗
University of Verona
riccardo.marin_01@univr.it

Marie-Julie Rakotosaona∗
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
mrakotos@lix.polytechnique.fr

Simone Melzi
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
Sapienza University of Rome
melzi@di.uniroma1.it

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a fully differentiable pipeline for estimating accurate
dense correspondences between 3D point clouds. The proposed pipeline is an
extension and a generalization of the functional maps framework. However, instead
of using the Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions as done in virtually all previous works
in this domain, we demonstrate that learning the basis from data can both improve
robustness and lead to better accuracy in challenging settings. We interpret the basis
as a learned embedding into a higher dimensional space. Following the functional
map paradigm the optimal transformation in this embedding space must be linear
and we propose a separate architecture aimed at estimating the transformation by
learning optimal descriptor functions. This leads to the first end-to-end trainable
functional map-based correspondence approach in which both the basis and the
descriptors are learned from data. Interestingly, we also observe that learning a
canonical embedding leads to worse results, suggesting that leaving an extra linear
degree of freedom to the embedding network gives it more robustness, thereby also
shedding light onto the success of previous methods. Finally, we demonstrate that
our approach achieves state-of-the-art results in challenging non-rigid 3D point
cloud correspondence applications.

1

Introduction

Computing correspondences between geometric objects is a widely investigated task. Its applications
are countless: rigid and non-rigid registration methods are instrumental in engineering, medicine and
biology [25, 29, 16] among other fields. Point cloud registration is important for range scan data, e.g.,
in robotics [19, 52], but the problem can also be generalized to abstract domains like graphs [58, 15].
The non-rigid correspondence problem is particularly challenging as a successful solution must deal
with a large variability in shape deformations and be robust to noise in the input data. To address
this problem, in recent years, several data-driven approaches have been proposed to learn the optimal
transformation model from data rather than imposing it a priori, including [20, 61, 7] among others.
In this domain, a prominent direction is based on the functional map representation [39], which has
been adapted to the learning-based setting [31, 22, 48, 13]. These methods have shown that optimal
feature or descriptor functions (also known as “probe” functions) can be learned from data and
then used successfully within the functional map pipeline to obtain accurate dense correspondences.
∗

denotes equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

