A Statistical Framework for Low-bitwidth Training of
Deep Neural Networks

Jianfei Chen, Yu Gai, Zhewei Yao, Michael W. Mahoney, and Joseph E. Gonzalez
University of California, Berkeley
{jianfeic, yu_gai, zheweiy, mahoneymw, jegonzal}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Fully quantized training (FQT), which uses low-bitwidth hardware by quantizing
the activations, weights, and gradients of a neural network model, is a promising
approach to accelerate the training of deep neural networks. One major challenge
with FQT is the lack of theoretical understanding, in particular of how gradient
quantization impacts convergence properties. In this paper, we address this problem
by presenting a statistical framework for analyzing FQT algorithms. We view the
quantized gradient of FQT as a stochastic estimator of its full precision counterpart,
a procedure known as quantization-aware training (QAT). We show that the FQT
gradient is an unbiased estimator of the QAT gradient, and we discuss the impact
of gradient quantization on its variance. Inspired by these theoretical results, we
develop two novel gradient quantizers, and we show that these have smaller variance
than the existing per-tensor quantizer. For training ResNet-50 on ImageNet, our
5-bit block Householder quantizer achieves only 0.5% validation accuracy loss
relative to QAT, comparable to the existing INT8 baseline. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/cjf00000/StatQuant.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have a high computational cost and memory footprint that slow down
their training and inference. By taking advantage of low-bitwidth computational units in hardware,
neural network quantization methods provide promising approaches for reducing the cost of timing,
memory, and energy consumption, for both training and inference.
Notable quantization methods can be mainly categorized into two groups, inference quantization and
training quantization. In inference quantization, the weights and the activations are quantized to speed
up the inference phase. Among inference quantization approaches, post training quantization usually
does not require access to the partial/full training dataset, and it does not need to re-train/fine-tune the
quantized model [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. To reduce the performance gap between the quantized model and
its full precision counterpart, quantization-aware training (QAT) fine-tunes the quantized model on
the training dataset [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. However, QAT computes the gradients in full
precision, so the training phase is not accelerated.
Training quantization methods, also known as fully quantized training (FQT), further quantize the
gradients, compared with QAT. In FQT, all the activations, weights, and gradients are quantized in
both the forward and backward propagation. Hence, training can be implemented efficiently on lowbitwidth computational units, such as tensor cores [15]. Low-bitwidth hardware is faster and more
power-efficient, as compared to FP32 counterparts. As the need for training huge models continues
to grow [16, 17, 18], there has been increasing attention on FQT. Earlier work on FQT includes
mixed-precision FP16/FP32 training [19] and lossy 2-bit training [6]. Recently, 8-bit FQT has
emerged as a sweet spot on the accuracy versus efficiency tradeoff. Various 8-bit numerical formats
have been proposed, including INT8 [20, 21, 22, 23], FP8 [24, 25], block floating point [26], FP8
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

