Noise2Same: Optimizing A Self-Supervised Bound
for Image Denoising
Yaochen Xie
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
ethanycx@tamu.edu

Zhengyang Wang
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
zhengyang.wang@tamu.edu

Shuiwang Ji
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
sji@tamu.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised frameworks that learn denoising models with merely individual
noisy images have shown strong capability and promising performance in various
image denoising tasks. Existing self-supervised denoising frameworks are mostly
built upon the same theoretical foundation, where the denoising models are required
to be J -invariant. However, our analyses indicate that the current theory and the
J -invariance may lead to denoising models with reduced performance. In this
work, we introduce Noise2Same, a novel self-supervised denoising framework. In
Noise2Same, a new self-supervised loss is proposed by deriving a self-supervised
upper bound of the typical supervised loss. In particular, Noise2Same requires
neither J -invariance nor extra information about the noise model and can be used
in a wider range of denoising applications. We analyze our proposed Noise2Same
both theoretically and experimentally. The experimental results show that our
Noise2Same consistently outperforms previous self-supervised denoising methods
in terms of denoising performance and training efficiency.

1

Introduction

The quality of deep learning methods for signal reconstruction from noisy images, also known as deep
image denoising, has benefited from the advanced neural network architectures such as ResNet [8],
U-Net [19] and their variants [29, 16, 26, 31, 25, 14]. While more powerful deep image denoising
models are developed over time, the problem of data availability becomes more critical.
Most deep image denoising algorithms are supervised methods that require matched pairs of noisy
and clean images for training [27, 29, 2, 7]. The problem of these supervised methods is that, in many
denoising applications, the clean images are hard to obtain due to instrument or cost limitations. To
overcome this problem, Noise2Noise [13] explores an alternative training framework, where pairs of
noisy images are used for training. Here, each pair of noisy images should correspond to the same
but unknown clean image. Note that Noise2Noise is basically still a supervised method, just with
noisy supervision.
Despite the success of Noise2Noise, its application scenarios are still limited as pairs of noisy images
are not available in some cases and may have registration problems. Recently, various of denoising
frameworks that can be trained on individual noisy images [23, 17, 28, 10, 1, 12] have been developed.
These studies can be divided into two categories according to the amount of extra information required.
Methods in the first category requires the noise model to be known. For example, the simulation-based
methods [17, 28] use the noise model to generate simulated noises and make individual noisy images
noisier. Then a framework similar to Noise2Noise can be applied to train the model with pairs of
noisier image and the original noisy image. The limitation is obvious as the noise model may be too
complicated or even not available.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

