High-Fidelity Generative Image Compression

Fabian Mentzer∗
ETH Zürich

George Toderici
Google Research

Michael Tschannen†

Eirikur Agustsson
Google Research

Abstract
We extensively study how to combine Generative Adversarial Networks and learned
compression to obtain a state-of-the-art generative lossy compression system.
In particular, we investigate normalization layers, generator and discriminator
architectures, training strategies, as well as perceptual losses. In contrast to previous
work, i) we obtain visually pleasing reconstructions that are perceptually similar
to the input, ii) we operate in a broad range of bitrates, and iii) our approach can
be applied to high-resolution images. We bridge the gap between rate-distortionperception theory and practice by evaluating our approach both quantitatively with
various perceptual metrics, and with a user study. The study shows that our method
is preferred to previous approaches even if they use more than 2× the bitrate.

1

Introduction

The ever increasing availability of cameras produces an endless stream of images. To store them
efficiently, lossy image compression algorithms are used in many applications. Instead of storing the
raw RGB data, a lossy version of the image is stored, with—hopefully—minimal visual changes to
the original. Various algorithms have been proposed over the years [50, 43, 54], including using stateof-the-art video compression algorithms for single image compression (BPG [7]). At the same time,
deep learning-based lossy compression has seen great interest [45, 5, 31], where a neural network is
directly optimized for the rate-distortion trade-off, which led to new state-of-the-art methods.
However, all of these approaches degrade images significantly as the compression factor increases.
While classical algorithms start to exhibit algorithm-specific artifacts such as blocking or banding,
learning-based approaches reveal issues with the distortion metric that was used to train the networks.
Despite the development of a large variety of “perceptual metrics” (e.g., (Multi-Scale) Structural
Similarity Index ((MS-)SSIM) [53, 52], Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [57]),
the weakness of each metric is exploited by the learning algorithm, e.g., checkerboard artifacts may
appear when targeting neural network derived metrics, relying on MS-SSIM can cause poor text
reconstructions, and MSE yields blurry reconstructions.
In [3], Agustsson et al. demonstrated the potential of using GANs to prevent compression artifacts
with a compression model that produces perceptually convincing reconstructions for extremely low
bitrates (<0.08 bpp). However, their reconstructions tend to only preserve high-level semantics,
deviating significantly from the input.
Recent work by Blau and Michaeli [9] characterized this phenomenon by showing the existence of a
triple “rate-distortion-perception” trade-off, formalizing “distortion” as a similarity metric comparing
pairs of images, and “perceptual quality” as the distance between the image distribution pX and the
distribution of the reconstructions pX̂ produced by the decoder, measured as a distribution divergence.
They show that at a fixed rate, better perceptual quality always implies worse distortion. Conversely,
only minimizing distortion will yield poor perceptual quality. To overcome this issue, distortion can
∗
†

Work done while interning at Google Research.
Work done while at Google Research.

Project page and demo: hific.github.io
Correspondence: eirikur@google.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

