CoinDICE: Off-Policy Confidence Interval Estimation
Bo Dai1 , ⇤ Ofir Nachum1 ,
Yinlam Chow1
1
2,3
Lihong Li ,
Csaba Szepesvári ,
Dale Schuurmans1,3
1
2
3
Google Research, Brain Team
University of Alberta
DeepMind
⇤

Abstract
We study high-confidence behavior-agnostic off-policy evaluation in reinforcement
learning, where the goal is to estimate a confidence interval on a target policy’s
value, given only access to a static experience dataset collected by unknown behavior policies. Starting from a function space embedding of the linear program
formulation of the Q-function, we obtain an optimization problem with generalized
estimating equation constraints. By applying the generalized empirical likelihood
method to the resulting Lagrangian, we propose CoinDICE, a novel and efficient
algorithm for computing confidence intervals. Theoretically, we prove the obtained
confidence intervals are valid, in both asymptotic and finite-sample regimes. Empirically, we show in a variety of benchmarks that the confidence interval estimates
are tighter and more accurate than existing methods.2

1

Introduction

One of the major barriers that hinders the application of reinforcement learning (RL) is the ability to evaluate new policies reliably before deployment, a problem generally known as off-policy
evaluation (OPE). In many real-world domains, e.g., healthcare (Murphy et al., 2001; Gottesman
et al., 2018), recommendation (Li et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2019), and education (Mandel et al.,
2014), deploying a new policy can be expensive, risky or unsafe. Accordingly, OPE has seen a recent
resurgence of research interest, with many methods proposed to estimate the value of a policy (Precup
et al., 2000; Dudík et al., 2011; Bottou et al., 2013; Jiang and Li, 2016; Thomas and Brunskill, 2016;
Liu et al., 2018; Nachum et al., 2019a; Kallus and Uehara, 2019a,b; Zhang et al., 2020b).
However, the very settings where OPE is necessary usually entail limited data access. In these cases,
obtaining knowledge of the uncertainty of the estimate is as important as having a consistent estimator.
That is, rather than a point estimate, many applications would benefit significantly from having
confidence intervals on the value of a policy. The problem of estimating these confidence intervals,
known as high-confidence off-policy evaluation (HCOPE) (Thomas et al., 2015b), is imperative in
real-world decision making, where deploying a policy without high-probability safety guarantees can
have catastrophic consequences (Thomas, 2015). Most existing high-confidence off-policy evaluation
algorithms in RL (Bottou et al., 2013; Thomas et al., 2015a,b; Hanna et al., 2017) construct such
intervals using statistical techniques such as concentration inequalities and the bootstrap applied to
importance corrected estimates of policy value. The primary challenge with these correction-based
approaches is the high variance resulting from multiplying per-step importance ratios in long-horizon
problems. Moreover, they typically require full knowledge (or a good estimate) of the behavior policy,
which is not easily available in behavior-agnostic OPE settings (Nachum et al., 2019a).
In this work, we propose an algorithm for behavior-agnostic HCOPE. We start from a linear programming formulation of the state-action value function. We show that the value of the policy
may be obtained from a Lagrangian optimization problem for generalized estimating equations
⇤

2

Equal contribution. Email: {bodai, ofirnachum}@google.com.
Open-source code for CoinDICE is available at https://github.com/google-research/dice_rl.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

