Can the Brain Do Backpropagation?
— Exact Implementation of Backpropagation in
Predictive Coding Networks

Yuhang Song1 , Thomas Lukasiewicz1 , Zhenghua Xu2,∗ , Rafal Bogacz3
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
2
State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment,
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
3
MRC Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford, UK
yuhang.song@some.ox.ac.uk, thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk,
zhenghua.xu@hebut.edu.cn, rafal.bogacz@ndcn.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Backpropagation (BP) has been the most successful algorithm used to train artificial
neural networks. However, there are several gaps between BP and learning in
biologically plausible neuronal networks of the brain (learning in the brain, or
simply BL, for short), in particular, (1) it has been unclear to date, if BP can
be implemented exactly via BL, (2) there is a lack of local plasticity in BP, i.e.,
weight updates require information that is not locally available, while BL utilizes
only locally available information, and (3) there is a lack of autonomy in BP, i.e.,
some external control over the neural network is required (e.g., switching between
prediction and learning stages requires changes to dynamics and synaptic plasticity
rules), while BL works fully autonomously. Bridging such gaps, i.e., understanding
how BP can be approximated by BL, has been of major interest in both neuroscience
and machine learning. Despite tremendous efforts, however, no previous model
has bridged the gaps at a degree of demonstrating an equivalence to BP, instead,
only approximations to BP have been shown. Here, we present for the first time
a framework within BL that bridges the above crucial gaps. We propose a BL
model that (1) produces exactly the same updates of the neural weights as BP, while
(2) employing local plasticity, i.e., all neurons perform only local computations,
done simultaneously. We then modify it to an alternative BL model that (3) also
works fully autonomously. Overall, our work provides important evidence for the
debate on the long-disputed question whether the brain can perform BP.

1

Introduction

Backpropagation (BP) [1–3] as the main principle underlying learning in deep artificial neural networks (ANNs) [4] has long been criticized for its biological implausibility (i.e., BP’s computational
procedures and principles are unrealistic to be implemented in the brain) [5–10]. Despite such
criticisms, growing evidence demonstrates that ANNs trained with BP outperform alternative frameworks [11], as well as closely reproduce activity patterns observed in the cortex [12–20]. As indicated
in [10, 21], since we apparently cannot find a better alternative than BP, the brain is likely to employ
at least the core principles underlying BP, but perhaps implements them in a different way. Hence,
bridging the gaps between BP and learning in biological neuronal networks of the brain (learning in
the brain, for short, or simply BL) has been a major open question for both neuroscience and machine
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

