Curvature Regularization to Prevent Distortion
in Graph Embedding

Hongbin Pei1,4,∗
peihb15@mails.jlu.edu.cn

Bingzhe Wei2
bwei6@illinois.edu

Chunxu Zhang1,4
cxzhang19@mails.jlu.edu.cn

Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang2,3
kcchang@illinois.edu
Bo Yang1,4, †
ybo@jlu.edu.cn

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
4
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
2

Abstract
Recent research on graph embedding has achieved success in various applications.
Most graph embedding methods preserve the proximity in a graph into a manifold
in an embedding space. We argue an important but neglected problem about this
proximity-preserving strategy: Graph topology patterns, while preserved well into
an embedding manifold by preserving proximity, may distort in the ambient embedding Euclidean space, and hence to detect them becomes difficult for machine
learning models. To address the problem, we propose curvature regularization, to
enforce flatness for embedding manifolds, thereby preventing the distortion. We
present a novel angle-based sectional curvature, termed ABS curvature, and accordingly three kinds of curvature regularization to induce flat embedding manifolds
during graph embedding. We integrate curvature regularization into five popular
proximity-preserving embedding methods, and empirical results in two applications
show significant improvements on a wide range of open graph datasets.

1

Introduction

Recent research on graph embedding has achieved considerable success to represent graph data in
various applications, such as node classification [1, 2], link prediction [3, 4], community discovery
[5, 6], and recommendation [7, 8]. Graph embedding aims to encode the topology patterns in a graph
into distributed vector representations, which can be readily fed into machine learning models for
downstream applications. Thus, graph embedding bridges the gap between non-Euclidean graph
structures and machine learning models operating in an Euclidean space.
Most graph embedding methods aim to preserve the proximity in a graph into an embedding space.
For instance, the objective of node embedding is that proximal nodes in a graph should have similar
representations in the embedding space, wherein proximal nodes are usually defined as co-occurrence
nodes in a random walk path [9] or neighboring nodes some hops away [10]. Such proximitypreserving embedding methods are efficient and flexible, and the commonly employed models
include matrix factorization, deep neural networks, and edge reconstruction models [11].
∗
†

This work is conducted during his visit at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

