Adaptive Importance Sampling for Finite-Sum
Optimization and Sampling with Decreasing
Step-Sizes

Ayoub El Hanchi
McGill University
ayoub.elhanchi@mail.mcgill.ca

David A. Stephens
McGill University
david.stephens@mcgill.ca

Abstract
Reducing the variance of the gradient estimator is known to improve the convergence rate of stochastic gradient-based optimization and sampling algorithms. One
way of achieving variance reduction is to design importance sampling strategies.
Recently, the problem of designing such schemes was formulated as an online
learning problem with bandit feedback, and algorithms with sub-linear static regret
were designed. In this work, we build on this framework and propose Avare, a
simple and efficient algorithm for adaptive importance sampling for finite-sum
optimization and sampling with decreasing step-sizes. Under standard technical
conditions, we show that Avare achieves O(T 2/3 ) and O(T 5/6 ) dynamic regret
for SGD and SGLD respectively when run with O(1/t) step sizes. We achieve
this dynamic regret bound by leveraging our knowledge of the dynamics defined
by the algorithm, and combining ideas from online learning and variance-reduced
stochastic optimization. We validate empirically the performance of our algorithm
and identify settings in which it leads to significant improvements.

1

Introduction

Functions f : Rd → R of the form:
f (x) =

N
X

fi (x)

(1)

i=1

are prevalent in modern machine learning and statistics. Important examples include the empirical
risk in the empirical risk minimization framework, 1 or the log-posterior of an exchangeable Bayesian
model. When N is large, the preferred methods for solving the resulting optimization or sampling
problem usually rely on stochastic estimates of the gradient of f , using variants of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) [1] or stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD) [2]:
SGD
xSGD
− αt N ∇fIt (xSGD
)
t+1 = xt
t

xSGLD
= xSGLD
− αt N ∇fIt (xSGLD
) + ξt
t+1
t
t

(2)
ξt ∼ N (0, 2αt )

(3)

where {αt }Tt=1 is a sequence of step-sizes, and the index It is sampled uniformly from [N ], making
N ∇fIt (x) an unbiased estimator of the gradient of f . We use {xt }Tt=1 to refer to either sequence
when we do not wish to distinguish between them. It is well known that the quality of the answers
given by these algorithms depends on the (trace of the) variance of the gradient estimator, and
considerable efforts have been made to design methods that reduce this variance.
1

Up to a normalizing factor of N1 which does not affect the optimization

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

