Tight Nonparametric Convergence Rates
for Stochastic Gradient Descent
under the Noiseless Linear Model
Raphaël Berthier
INRIA, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France
raphael.berthier@inria.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France
francis.bach@inria.fr

Pierre Gaillard
INRIA, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France
pierre.gaillard@inria.fr

Abstract
In the context of statistical supervised learning, the noiseless linear model assumes that there exists a deterministic linear relation Y = hθ∗ , Φ(U )i between the
random output Y and the random feature vector Φ(U ), a potentially non-linear
transformation of the inputs U . We analyze the convergence of single-pass, fixed
step-size stochastic gradient descent on the least-square risk under this model. The
convergence of the iterates to the optimum θ∗ and the decay of the generalization
error follow polynomial convergence rates with exponents that both depend on the
regularities of the optimum θ∗ and of the feature vectors Φ(U ). We interpret our
result in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space framework. As a special case, we analyze an online algorithm for estimating a real function on the unit hypercube from
the noiseless observation of its value at randomly sampled points; the convergence
depends on the Sobolev smoothness of the function and of a chosen kernel. Finally,
we apply our analysis beyond the supervised learning setting to obtain convergence
rates for the averaging process (a.k.a. gossip algorithm) on a graph depending on
its spectral dimension.

1

Introduction

Linear regression is widely used in statistical supervised learning, sometimes in the implicit form
of kernel regression. A large theory describes the performance (reconstruction and generalization
errors) of various algorithms (penalized least-squares, stochastic gradient descent, . . . ) under various
data models (e.g., noisy or noiseless linear model) and the corresponding minimax bounds. In
nonparametric estimation theory, one seeks bounds independent of the dimension of the underlying
feature space [16, 30]: these bounds describe best the observed behavior in many modern linear
regressions, where the data are inherently high-dimensional or where a kernel associated to a highdimensional feature map is used. In this paper, we provide nonparametric bounds for stochastic
gradient descent under the noiseless linear model and under small perturbations of this model.
Under the noiseless linear model, we assume that there exists a ground-truth linear relation Y =
hθ∗ , Xi between the feature vector X and the output Y ∈ R. The feature vector X may be itself a
non-linear transformation of the inputs U , explicitly computed through a feature map X = Φ(U )
or implicitly defined through a positive-definite kernel k(U, U 0 ) [17]. The noiseless linear model
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

