Train-by-Reconnect: Decoupling Locations of
Weights from Their Values

Yushi Qiu
Reiji Suda
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
{yushi621, reiji}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
What makes untrained deep neural networks (DNNs) different from the trained
performant ones? By zooming into the weights in well-trained DNNs, we found
that it is the location of weights that holds most of the information encoded
by the training. Motivated by this observation, we hypothesized that weights
in DNNs trained using stochastic gradient-based methods can be separated into
two dimensions: the location of weights, and their exact values. To assess our
hypothesis, we propose a novel method called lookahead permutation (LaPerm) to
train DNNs by reconnecting the weights. We empirically demonstrate LaPerm’s
versatility while producing extensive evidence to support our hypothesis: when
the initial weights are random and dense, our method demonstrates speed and
performance similar to or better than that of regular optimizers, e.g., Adam. When
the initial weights are random and sparse (many zeros), our method changes the
way neurons connect, achieving accuracy comparable to that of a well-trained
dense network. When the initial weights share a single value, our method finds a
weight agnostic neural network with far-better-than-chance accuracy.

1

Introduction

Conventional gradient-based algorithms for training deep neural networks (DNNs), such as stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), find the appropriate numerical values for a set of predetermined weight
vectors θ. These algorithms apply the changes ∆θ to θ at each iteration. Denoting the weight vectors
at the t-th iteration as θt , the following update rule is used: θt ← θt−1 + ∆θt−1 . Therefore, we have
PT
the relationship between a trained and an untrained DNN: θT = θ0 + t=1 ∆θt , given the initial
weights θ0 and the weights θT obtained by training the network for T iterations. However, since
∆θt is dependent on θt−1 and ∆θt−1 for every t, it is difficult to directly interpret from the term
PT
t=1 ∆θt what is the most substantial change that the training has applied to the initial weights.
In this work, we examine the relationship between θ0 and θT from a novel perspective by hypothesizing that weights can be decoupled into two dimensions: the locations of weights and their
exact values. DNNs can be trained following the same stochastic gradient-based regime but using a
fundamentally different update rule: θt ← σt (θt−1 ), for a permutation operation σt . Consequently,
we have θT = σT (...(σ1 (θ0 ))), and thus have θT = σk (θ0 ) for σk from the same permutation
group. Supporting our hypothesis, in the first half of this paper, we demonstrate that SGD encodes
information to DNNs in the way their weights are connected. In the latter half of this paper, we
show that given an appropriately chosen neural architecture initialized with random weights, while
fine-tuning of the exact values of weights is essential for reaching state-of-the-art results, properly
determining the location of weights alone plays a crucial role in making neural networks performant.
In Section 2, we describe an interesting phenomenon in the distribution of weights in trained DNNs,
which casts light on understanding how training encodes information. In Section 3, we show that
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

