Chaos, Extremism and Optimism:
Volume Analysis of Learning in Games

Yun Kuen Cheung
Royal Holloway University of London
yunkuen.cheung@rhul.ac.uk

Georgios Piliouras
Singapore University of Technology and Design
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We perform volume analysis of Multiplicative Weights Updates (MWU) and its
optimistic variant (OMWU) in zero-sum as well as coordination games. Our
analysis provides new insights into these game/dynamical systems, which seem
hard to achieve via the classical techniques within Computer Science and ML.
First, we examine these dynamics not in their original space (simplex of actions) but
in a dual space (aggregate payoffs of actions). Second, we explore how the volume
of a set of initial conditions evolves over time when it is pushed forward according
to the algorithm. This is reminiscent of approaches in evolutionary game theory
where replicator dynamics, the continuous-time analogue of MWU, is known
to preserve volume in all games. Interestingly, when we examine discrete-time
dynamics, the choices of the game and the algorithm both play a critical role. So
whereas MWU expands volume in zero-sum games and is thus Lyapunov chaotic,
we show that OMWU contracts volume, providing an alternative understanding for
its known convergent behavior. Yet, we also prove a no-free-lunch type of theorem,
in the sense that when examining coordination games the roles are reversed.
Using these tools, we prove two novel, rather negative properties of MWU in
zero-sum games. (1) Extremism: even in games with a unique fully-mixed Nash
equilibrium, the system recurrently gets stuck near pure-strategy profiles, despite
them being clearly unstable from game-theoretic perspective. (2) Unavoidability:
given any set of good states (with a rather relaxed interpretation of “good” states),
the system cannot avoid bad states indefinitely.

Figure 1: MWU (left) and OMWU (right) in Matching-Pennies game in the dual space. The origin is
the unique Nash equilibrium. In these 2-D systems, volume is area. MWU: The initial set is the tiny
red square around the equilibrium. When it is evolved via MWU, it rotates tornado-like and its area
increases. [11] OMWU: The initial set is the outermost red square. When it is evolved via OMWU, it
shrinks toward the equilibrium and its area decreases.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

