Skeleton-bridged Point Completion: From Global
Inference to Local Adjustment

Yinyu Nie1,2,† Yiqun Lin2 Xiaoguang Han2,∗ Shihui Guo3
Jian Chang1 Shuguang Cui2 Jian Jun Zhang1
1
Bournemouth University 2 SRIBD, CUHKSZ 3 Xiamen University

Abstract
Point completion refers to complete the missing geometries of objects from partial
point clouds. Existing works usually estimate the missing shape by decoding a
latent feature encoded from the input points. However, real-world objects are
usually with diverse topologies and surface details, which a latent feature may
fail to represent to recover a clean and complete surface. To this end, we propose
a skeleton-bridged point completion network (SK-PCN) for shape completion.
Given a partial scan, our method first predicts its 3D skeleton to obtain the global
structure, and completes the surface by learning displacements from skeletal points.
We decouple the shape completion into structure estimation and surface reconstruction, which eases the learning difficulty and benefits our method to obtain
on-surface details. Besides, considering the missing features during encoding input
points, SK-PCN adopts a local adjustment strategy that merges the input point
cloud to our predictions for surface refinement. Comparing with previous methods,
our skeleton-bridged manner better supports point normal estimation to obtain the
full surface mesh beyond point clouds. The qualitative and quantitative experiments
on both point cloud and mesh completion show that our approach outperforms the
existing methods on various object categories.

1

Introduction

Shape completion shows its unique significance in fundamental applications such as 3D data scanning
& acquisition and robot navigation. It focuses on completing the missing topologies and geometries
of an object from partial and incomplete observations, e.g., point clouds captured under occlusion,
weak illumination or limited viewpoints. Unlike image completion [15, 44, 23] that is well addressed
with CNN-based approaches, point clouds present inherent irregularity and sparseness that challenge
the direct application of grid-based convolutions to 3D shape completion.
Deep learning methods attempt to achieve this target with various representations, e.g., points
[28, 42, 32, 14, 36, 20, 40, 37], voxels [10, 2, 35, 8, 12] or implicit fields [19, 29, 22, 5]. Voxels
discretize the shape volume into 3D grids. It preserves shape topology but fine-detailed voxel quality
relies on high resolution, improving which exponentially increases the time consumption. Implicit
fields represent shapes with a signed distance function (SDF). Theoretically it can achieve arbitrary
resolution though, learning an accurate SDF still relies on the quality of voxel grids, and these methods
require massive spatial sampling to obtain an SDF for a single object, which distinctly increases the
inference time [19, 29, 22, 5]. Besides, both voxel and SDF methods do not preserve the surface
information and present defective results on complex structures. Point cloud is a natural representation
of shapes that discretizes the 2-manifold surface. Comparing with voxels and SDFs, 3D points are
more controllable, scalable and efficient for learning, which makes it popular for shape completion.
However, existing methods commonly adopt an encoder&decoder to parse 3D points [42, 32], making
†

Work done during internship at Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese Univerisity of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen (SRIBD, CUHKSZ).
∗
Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

