Certified Robustness of Graph Convolution Networks
for Graph Classification under Topological Attacks

Hongwei Jin∗ ,

Zhan Shi∗ , Ashish Peruri, Xinhua Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{hjin25,zshi22,vperur2,zhangx}@uic.edu

Abstract
Graph convolution networks (GCNs) have become effective models for graph
classification. Similar to many deep networks, GCNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks on graph topology and node attributes. Recently, a number of effective
attack and defense algorithms have been designed, but no certificate of robustness
has been developed for GCN-based graph classification under topological perturbations with both local and global budgets. In this paper, we propose the first
certificate for this problem. Our method is based on Lagrange dualization and
convex envelope, which result in tight approximation bounds that are efficiently
computable by dynamic programming. When used in conjunction with robust
training, it allows an increased number of graphs to be certified as robust.

1

Introduction

Graph convolution networks [GCNs, 1] have been shown very effective for modeling graph structured data such as social networks [2] and protein interactive networks [3]. In this paper, we focus on
the application of GCN to graph classification, where given an attributed graph, the task is to predict
its class label. This is different from node classification where each node is assigned a (possibly
different) label. Along with other models such as graph kernels [4, 5], GCNs have achieved strong
performance in this task [6–9].
However, similar to most deep learning models, GCNs are also vulnerable to adversarial attacks
that maliciously perturb the data to induce specific errors [10, 11]. These include node attacks
(i.e., perturbing node features) [12–14] and topological attacks (i.e., adding or removing edges)
[11, 15]. They pose serious challenges because adversaries are often omnipresent in their typical
application scenarios [16–18], and even when no manual or computerized adversary is present, it is
still important to analyze the worst-case robustness of the model by treating nature as an adversary.
Since the strongest attack is often intractable to compute, an alternative approach that has recently
attracted considerable interest is to construct certificates of robustness, i.e., certain sufficient conditions which, once satisfied, guarantee the immunity to any admissible attack (see Related Work).
Unfortunately such results have been scarce on graph data. [12] certified GCNs against node feature
perturbations for node classification. Under topological perturbation, [19] developed certificates for
PageRank and label/feature propagation, while [20] developed them for community detection.
Unfortunately, all of these techniques meet with substantial obstacles or slackness when extended
to GCNs for graph classification under topological attacks, an important application setting where
vulnerability is a real issue (Section 5). First of all, the technique of restricting to the k-hop subgraph
in node classification such as [12, 21] can no longer be utilized because graph classification requires
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

