Scalable Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for
Networked Systems with Average Reward
Guannan Qu
Caltech, Pasadena, CA
gqu@caltech.edu

Yiheng Lin
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
linyh16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Adam Wierman
Caltech, Pasadena, CA
adamw@caltech.edu

Na Li
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
nali@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
It has long been recognized that multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) faces
significant scalability issues due to the fact that the size of the state and action
spaces are exponentially large in the number of agents. In this paper, we identify
a rich class of networked MARL problems where the model exhibits a local
dependence structure that allows it to be solved in a scalable manner. Specifically,
we propose a Scalable Actor-Critic (SAC) method that can learn a near optimal
localized policy for optimizing the average reward with complexity scaling with
the state-action space size of local neighborhoods, as opposed to the entire network.
Our result centers around identifying and exploiting an exponential decay property
that ensures the effect of agents on each other decays exponentially fast in their
graph distance.

1

Introduction

As a result of its impressive performance in a wide array of domains such as game play (Silver et al.,
2016; Mnih et al., 2015), robotics (Duan et al., 2016), and autonomous driving (Li et al., 2019),
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a promising tool for decision and control and there has
been renewed interest in the use of RL in multi-agent systems, i.e., Multi-Agent RL (MARL).
The multi-agent aspect of MARL creates additional challenges compared with single agent RL. One
core challenge is scalability. Even if individual agents’ state or action spaces are small, the global state
space or action space can take values from a set of size exponentially large in the number of agents.
This “curse of dimensionality” renders the problem intractable in many cases. For example, RL
algorithms such as temporal difference (TD) learning or Q-learning require storage of a Q-function
(Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996) whose size is the same as the state-action space, which in MARL is
exponentially large in n. Such scalability issues have been observed in the literature in a variety of
settings, including Blondel and Tsitsiklis (2000); Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis (1999); Zhang et al.
(2019); Kearns and Koller (1999); Guestrin et al. (2003).
To address the issue of scalability, a promising approach that has emerged in recent years is to exploit
problem structure, e.g., (Gu et al., 2020; Qu and Li, 2019; Qu et al., 2019). One promising form
of structure is enforcing local interactions, i.e., agents are associated with a graph and they interact
only with nearby agents in the graph. Such local interactions are common in networked systems,
including epidemics (Mei et al., 2017), social networks (Chakrabarti et al., 2008; Llas et al., 2003),
communication networks (Zocca, 2019; Vogels et al., 2003), queueing networks (Papadimitriou and
Tsitsiklis, 1999), smart transportation (Zhang and Pavone, 2016), smart building systems (Wu et al.,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

