Falcon: Fast Spectral Inference on Encrypted Data

Qian Lou
Indiana University Bloomington

Wen-jie Lu
Alibaba Group

louqian@iu.edu

juhou.lwj@alibaba-inc.com

Cheng Hong
Alibaba Group

Lei Jiang
Indiana University Bloomington

vince.hc@alibaba-inc.com

jiang60@iu.edu

Abstract
Homomorphic Encryption (HE) based secure Neural Networks(NNs) inference is
one of the most promising security solutions to emerging Machine Learning as a
Service (MLaaS). In the HE-based MLaaS setting, a client encrypts the sensitive
data, and uploads the encrypted data to the server that directly processes the
encrypted data without decryption, and returns the encrypted result to the client.
The client’S data privacy is preserved since only the client has the private key.
Existing HE-enabled Neural Networks (HENNs), however, suffer from heavy
computational overheads. The state-of-the-art HENNs adopt ciphertext packing
techniques to reduce homomorphic multiplications by packing multiple messages
into one single ciphertext. Nevertheless, rotations are required in these HENNs
to implement the sum of the elements within the same ciphertext. We observed
that HENNs have to pay significant computing overhead on rotations, and each of
rotations is ∼ 10× more expensive than homomorphic multiplications between
ciphertext and plaintext. So the massive rotations have become a primary obstacle
of efficient HENNs.
In this paper, we propose a fast, frequency-domain deep neural network called
Falcon, for fast inferences on encrypted data. Falcon includes a fast Homomorphic Discrete Fourier Transform (HDFT) using block-circulant matrices to homomorphically support spectral operations. We also propose several efficient
methods to reduce inference latency, including Homomorphic Spectral Convolution and Homomorphic Spectral Fully Connected operations by combining the
batched HE and block-circulant matrices. Our experimental results show Falcon
achieves the state-of-the-art inference accuracy and reduces the inference latency
by 45.45% ∼ 85.34% over prior HENNs on MNIST and CIFAR-10.

1

Introduction

Homomorphic Encryption (HE)-enabled neural networks (NNs) [1, 2, 3] are designed for secure
Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS). In HE-enabled MLaaS, a client encrypts his/her data and
uploads the encrypted data to a server in the cloud. The server computes inferences on the encrypted
data and returns the encrypted output to the client. The server cannot decrypt the encrypted input or
output during an inference. However, HE naturally supports only linear layers of a neural network.
Some interactive HE-enabled NNs (HENNs) [4, 5, 6] take advantage of multi-party computation
(MPC) to get the client involved in the computation of activation layers by exchanging several
gigabyte data with the client during an inference, while other non-interactive HENNs [1, 2, 3]
approximate activations by a square function to perform secure inferences without involving the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

