Uncertainty Aware Semi-Supervised Learning on
Graph Data

1

Xujiang Zhao1 , Feng Chen1 , Shu Hu2 , Jin-Hee Cho3
The University of Texas at Dallas, {xujiang.zhao, feng,chen}@utdallas.edu
2
University at Buffalo, SUNY, shuhu@buffalo.edu
3
Virginia Tech, jicho@vt.edu

Abstract
Thanks to graph neural networks (GNNs), semi-supervised node classification
has shown the state-of-the-art performance in graph data. However, GNNs have
not considered different types of uncertainties associated with class probabilities
to minimize risk of increasing misclassification under uncertainty in real life.
In this work, we propose a multi-source uncertainty framework using a GNN
that reflects various types of predictive uncertainties in both deep learning and
belief/evidence theory domains for node classification predictions. By collecting
evidence from the given labels of training nodes, the Graph-based Kernel Dirichlet
distribution Estimation (GKDE) method is designed for accurately predicting nodelevel Dirichlet distributions and detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) nodes. We
validated the outperformance of our proposed model compared to the state-of-theart counterparts in terms of misclassification detection and OOD detection based
on six real network datasets. We found that dissonance-based detection yielded
the best results on misclassification detection while vacuity-based detection was
the best for OOD detection. To clarify the reasons behind the results, we provided
the theoretical proof that explains the relationships between different types of
uncertainties considered in this work.

1

Introduction

Inherent uncertainties derived from different root causes have realized as serious hurdles to find
effective solutions for real world problems. Critical safety concerns have been brought due to
lack of considering diverse causes of uncertainties, resulting in high risk due to misinterpretation
of uncertainties (e.g., misdetection or misclassification of an object by an autonomous vehicle).
Graph neural networks (GNNs) [12, 21] have received tremendous attention in the data science
community. Despite their superior performance in semi-supervised node classification and regression,
they didn’t consider various types of uncertainties in the their decision process. Predictive uncertainty
estimation [11] using Bayesian NNs (BNNs) has been explored for classification prediction and
regression in the computer vision applications, based on aleatoric uncertainty (AU) and epistemic
uncertainty (EU). AU refers to data uncertainty from statistical randomness (e.g., inherent noises in
observations) while EU indicates model uncertainty due to limited knowledge (e.g., ignorance) in
collected data. In the belief or evidence theory domain, Subjective Logic (SL) [9] considered vacuity
(or a lack of evidence or ignorance) as uncertainty in a subjective opinion. Recently other uncertainty
types, such as dissonance, consonance, vagueness, and monosonance [9], have been discussed based
on SL to measure them based on their different root causes.
We first considered multidimensional uncertainty types in both deep learning (DL) and belief and evidence theory domains for node-level classification, misclassification detection, and out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection tasks. By leveraging the learning capability of GNNs and considering multidimensional uncertainties, we propose a uncertainty-aware estimation framework by quantifying
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

