Robust large-margin learning in hyperbolic space

Melanie Weber∗
Princeton University
mw25@math.princeton.edu

Manzil Zaheer
Google Research
manzilzaheer@google.com

Aditya Menon
Google Research
adityakmenon@google.com

Ankit Singh Rawat
Google Research
ankitsrawat@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in representation learning in hyperbolic
spaces, driven by their ability to represent hierarchical data with significantly fewer
dimensions than standard Euclidean spaces. However, the viability and benefits
of hyperbolic spaces for downstream machine learning tasks have received less
attention. In this paper, we present, to our knowledge, the first theoretical guarantees
for learning a classifier in hyperbolic rather than Euclidean space. Specifically, we
consider the problem of learning a large-margin classifier for data possessing a
hierarchical structure. Our first contribution is a hyperbolic perceptron algorithm,
which provably converges to a separating hyperplane. We then provide an algorithm
to efficiently learn a large-margin hyperplane, relying on the careful injection of
adversarial examples. Finally, we prove that for hierarchical data that embeds well
into hyperbolic space, the low embedding dimension ensures superior guarantees
when learning the classifier directly in hyperbolic space.

1

Introduction

Hyperbolic spaces have received sustained interest in recent years, owing to their ability to compactly
represent data possessing hierarchical structure (e.g., trees and graphs). In terms of representation
learning, hyperbolic spaces offer a provable advantage over Euclidean spaces for such data: objects
requiring an exponential number of dimensions in Euclidean space can be represented in a polynomial
number of dimensions in hyperbolic space [28]. This has motivated research into efficiently learning
a suitable hyperbolic embedding for large-scale datasets [22, 4, 31].
Despite this impressive representation power, little is known about the benefits of hyperbolic spaces for
downstream tasks. For example, suppose we wish to perform classification on data that is intrinsically
hierarchical. One may naïvely ignore this structure, and use a standard Euclidean embedding and
corresponding classifier (e.g., SVM). However, can we design classification algorithms that exploit the
structure of hyperbolic space, and offer provable benefits in terms of performance? This fundamental
question has received surprisingly limited attention. While some prior work has proposed specific
algorithms for learning classifiers in hyperbolic space [6, 21], these have been primarily empirical in
nature, and do not come equipped with theoretical guarantees on convergence and generalization.
In this paper, we take a first step towards addressing this question for the problem of learning a largemargin classifier. We provide a series of algorithms to provably learn such classifiers in hyperbolic
space, and establish their superiority over the classifiers naïvely learned in Euclidean space. This
shows that by using a hyperbolic space that better reflects the intrinsic geometry of the data, one can
see gains in both representation size and performance. Specifically, our contributions are:
∗

Work performed while intern at Google Research, New York.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

