Biological Credit Assignment through
Dynamic Inversion of Feedforward Networks

William F. Podlaski∗
Champalimaud Research
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown
1400-038 Lisbon, Portugal

Christian K. Machens∗
Champalimaud Research
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown
1400-038 Lisbon, Portugal

Abstract
Learning depends on changes in synaptic connections deep inside the brain. In
multilayer networks, these changes are triggered by error signals fed back from the
output, generally through a stepwise inversion of the feedforward processing steps.
The gold standard for this process — backpropagation — works well in artificial
neural networks, but is biologically implausible. Several recent proposals have
emerged to address this problem, but many of these biologically-plausible schemes
are based on learning an independent set of feedback connections. This complicates
the assignment of errors to each synapse by making it dependent upon a second
learning problem, and by fitting inversions rather than guaranteeing them. Here, we
show that feedforward network transformations can be effectively inverted through
dynamics. We derive this dynamic inversion from the perspective of feedback
control, where the forward transformation is reused and dynamically interacts
with fixed or random feedback to propagate error signals during the backward
pass. Importantly, this scheme does not rely upon a second learning problem for
feedback because accurate inversion is guaranteed through the network dynamics.
We map these dynamics onto generic feedforward networks, and show that the
resulting algorithm performs well on several supervised and unsupervised datasets.
Finally, we discuss potential links between dynamic inversion and second-order
optimization. Overall, our work introduces an alternative perspective on credit
assignment in the brain, and proposes a special role for temporal dynamics and
feedback control during learning.

1

Introduction

Synaptic credit assignment refers to the difficult task of relating a motor or behavioral output of
the brain to the many neurons and synapses that produced it (Roelfsema and Holtmaat, 2018) — a
problem which must be solved in order for effective learning to occur. While credit is assigned in
artificial neural networks through the backpropagation of error gradients (Rumelhart et al., 1986;
LeCun et al., 2015), a direct mapping of this algorithm to biology leads to several characteristics
that are either in conflict with what is currently known about neural circuits, or that violate harder
physical constraints, such as the local nature of synaptic plasticity (Grossberg, 1987; Crick, 1989).
Many biologically-plausible modifications to backpropagation have been proposed over the years
(Whittington and Bogacz, 2019), with several recent studies focusing on one issue in particular,
the fact that error is fed back using an exact copy of the forward weights (the “weight transport”
or “weight symmetry” problem, Lillicrap et al. (2020)). Recently, it was discovered that random
feedback weights are sufficient to train deep networks on modest supervised learning problems
(Lillicrap et al., 2016). However, this method appears to have shortcomings in scaled-up tasks, as
∗

Correspondence: {william.podlaski, christian.machens}@research.fchampalimaud.org

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

