Learning discrete distributions with infinite support

Doron Cohen
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
doronv@post.bgu.ac.il

Aryeh Kontorovich
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
karyeh@cs.bgu.ac.il

Geoffrey Wolfer
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
geoffrey@post.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
We present a novel approach to estimating discrete distributions with (potentially)
infinite support in the total variation metric. In a departure from the established
paradigm, we make no structural assumptions whatsoever on the sampling distribution. In such a setting, distribution-free risk bounds are impossible, and the best one
could hope for is a fully empirical data-dependent bound. We derive precisely such
bounds, and demonstrate that these are, in a well-defined sense, the best possible.
Our main discovery is that the half-norm of the empirical distribution provides tight
upper and lower estimates on the empirical risk. Furthermore, this quantity decays
at a nearly optimal rate as a function of the true distribution. The optimality follows
from a minimax result, of possible independent interest. Additional structural
results are provided, including an exact Rademacher complexity calculation and
apparently a first connection between the total variation risk and the missing mass.

1

Introduction

Estimating a discrete distribution in the total variation (TV) metric is a central problem in computer
science and statistics (see, e.g., Han et al. [2015], Kamath et al. [2015], Orlitsky and Suresh [2015] and
the references therein). The TV metric, which we use throughout the paper, is a natural and abundantly
motivated choice [Devroye and Lugosi, 2001]. For support size d, a sample of size O(d/ε2 ) suffices
for the maximum-likelihood estimator (MLE) to be ε-close (with constant probability) to the unknown
target distribution. A matching lower bound is known [Anthony and Bartlett, 1999], and has been
computed down to the exact constants [Kamath et al., 2015].
Classic VC theory — and, in particular, the aforementioned results — imply that for infinite support,
b m is its
no distribution-free sample complexity bound is possible. If µ is the target distribution and µ
empirical (i.e., MLE) estimate based on m iid samples, then Berend and Kontorovich [2013] showed
that
1
1
b m kTV ] ≤ Λm (µ),
Λm (µ) − √
≤ E [kµ − µ
m ≥ 2,
(1)
4
4 m
where
Λm (µ) =

X
j∈N:µ(j)<1/m

1
µ(j) + √
2 m

X

p
µ(j).

j∈N:µ(j)≥1/m

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(2)

