Generalized Independent Noise Condition
for Estimating Latent Variable Causal Graphs
∗1,2

∗1,3

4

4

1,5

Feng Xie
, Ruichu Cai
, Biwei Huang , Clark Glymour , Zhifeng Hao , Kun Zhang
1
School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
4
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
5
School of Mathematics and Big Data, Foshan University, Foshan, China
xiefeng009@gmail.com, cairuichu@gdut.edu.cn, biweih@andrew.cmu.edu
cg09@andrew.cmu.edu, zfhao@gdut.edu.cn, kunz1@cmu.edu

∗4

Abstract
Causal discovery aims to recover causal structures or models underlying the observed data. Despite its success in certain domains, most existing methods focus
on causal relations between observed variables, while in many scenarios the observed ones may not be the underlying causal variables (e.g., image pixels), but are
generated by latent causal variables or confounders that are causally related. To
this end, in this paper, we consider Linear, Non-Gaussian Latent variable Models
(LiNGLaMs), in which latent confounders are also causally related, and propose a
Generalized Independent Noise (GIN) condition to estimate such latent variable
graphs. Specifically, for two observed random vectors Y and Z, GIN holds if and
⊺
only if ω Y and Z are statistically independent, where ω is a parameter vector
characterized from the cross-covariance between Y and Z. From the graphical
view, roughly speaking, GIN implies that causally earlier latent common causes of
variables in Y d-separate Y from Z. Interestingly, we find that the independent
noise condition, i.e., if there is no confounder, causes are independent from the
error of regressing the effect on the causes, can be seen as a special case of GIN.
Moreover, we show that GIN helps locate latent variables and identify their causal
structure, including causal directions. We further develop a recursive learning
algorithm to achieve these goals. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world
data demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Identifying causal relationships from observational data, known as causal discovery, has drawn
much attention in the fields of empirical science and artificial intelligence [Spirtes et al., 2010, Pearl,
2019]. Most causal discovery approaches focus on the situation without latent variables, such as
the PC algorithm [Spirtes and Glymour, 1991], Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) [Chickering,
2002], and methods based on the Linear, Non-Gaussian Acyclic Model (LiNGAM) [Shimizu et al.,
2006], the Additive Noise Model (ANM) [Hoyer et al., 2009], and the Post-NonLinear causal model
(PNL) [Zhang and Chan, 2006, Zhang and Hyvärinen, 2009]. However, although these methods
have been used in a range of fields, they may fail to produce convincing results in cases with latent
variables (or more specifically, confounders), because they do not properly take into account the
influences from latent variables as well as many other practical issues [Zhang et al., 2018].
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work. The work was done while FX was visiting CMU.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

