Model Fusion via Optimal Transport

Sidak Pal Singh∗
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
contact@sidakpal.com

Martin Jaggi
EPFL, Switzerland
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Combining different models is a widely used paradigm in machine learning applications. While the most common approach is to form an ensemble of models and
average their individual predictions, this approach is often rendered infeasible by
given resource constraints in terms of memory and computation, which grow linearly with the number of models. We present a layer-wise model fusion algorithm
for neural networks that utilizes optimal transport to (soft-) align neurons across
the models before averaging their associated parameters.
We show that this can successfully yield “one-shot” knowledge transfer (i.e,
without requiring any retraining) between neural networks trained on heterogeneous non-i.i.d. data. In both i.i.d. and non-i.i.d. settings, we illustrate that our
approach significantly outperforms vanilla averaging, as well as how it can serve as
an efficient replacement for the ensemble with moderate fine-tuning, for standard
convolutional networks (like VGG11), residual networks (like R ES N ET 18), and
multi-layer perceptrons on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and MNIST. Finally, our approach also provides a principled way to combine the parameters of neural networks
with different widths, and we explore its application for model compression. The
code is available at the following link, https://github.com/sidak/otfusion.

1

Introduction

If two neural networks had a child, what would be its weights? In this work, we study the fusion of
two parent neural networks—which were trained differently but have the same number of layers—into
a single child network. We further focus on performing this operation in a one-shot manner, based on
the network weights only, so as to minimize the need of any retraining.
This fundamental operation of merging several neural networks into one contrasts other widely used
techniques for combining machine learning models:
Ensemble methods have a very long history. They combine the outputs of several different models as
a way to improve the prediction performance and robustness. However, this requires maintaining
the K trained models and running each of them at test time (say, in order to average their outputs).
This approach thus quickly becomes infeasible for many applications with limited computational
resources, especially in view of the ever-growing size of modern deep learning models.
The simplest way to fuse several parent networks into a single network of the same size is direct weight
averaging, which we refer to as vanilla averaging; here for simplicity, we assume that all network
architectures are identical. Unfortunately, neural networks are typically highly redundant in their
parameterizations, so that there is no one-to-one correspondence between the weights of two different
neural networks, even if they would describe the same function of the input. In practice, vanilla
averaging is known to perform very poorly on trained networks whose weights differ non-trivially.
Finally, a third way to combine two models is distillation, where one network is retrained on its
training data, while jointly using the output predictions of the other ‘teacher’ network on those
∗

Work done while at EPFL.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

