High-Dimensional Sparse Linear Bandits

Botao Hao
Deepmind
haobotao000@gmail.com

Tor Lattimore
Deepmind
lattimore@google.com

Mengdi Wang
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Abstract
Stochastic linear bandits with high-dimensional sparse features are a practical
model for a variety of domains, including personalized medicine and online advertising [Bastani and Bayati, 2020]. We derive a novel Ω(n2/3 ) dimension-free
minimax regret lower bound for sparse linear bandits in the data-poor regime
where the horizon is smaller than the ambient dimension and where the feature
vectors admit a well-conditioned exploration distribution. This is complemented
by a nearly matching upper bound for an explore-then-commit algorithm showing
that that Θ(n2/3 ) is the optimal rate in the data-poor regime. The results complement existing bounds for the data-rich regime and provide another example
where carefully balancing the trade-off√
between information and regret is necessary.
Finally, we prove a dimension-free O( n) regret upper bound under an additional
assumption on the magnitude of the signal for relevant features.

1

Introduction

Stochastic linear bandits generalize the standard reward model for multi-armed bandits by associating
each action with a feature vector and assuming the mean reward is the inner product between the
feature vector and an unknown parameter vector [Auer, 2002, Dani et al., 2008, Rusmevichientong
and Tsitsiklis, 2010, Chu et al., 2011, Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011].
In most practical applications, there are many candidate features but no clear indication about which
are relevant. Therefore, it is crucial to consider stochastic linear bandits in the high-dimensional
regime but with low-dimensional structure, captured here by the notion of sparsity. Previous work on
sparse linear bandits has mostly focused on the data-rich regime, where the time horizon is larger
than the ambient dimension [Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012, Carpentier and Munos, 2012, Wang et al.,
2018, Kim and Paik, 2019, Bastani and Bayati, 2020]. The reason for studying the data-rich regime
is partly justified by minimax lower bounds showing that for smaller time horizons the regret is linear
in the worst case.
Minimax bounds, however, do not tell the whole story. A crude maximisation over all environments
hides much of the rich structure of linear bandits with sparsity. We study sparse linear bandits in the
high-dimensional regime when the ambient dimension is much larger than the time horizon. In order
to sidestep existing lower bounds, we refine the minimax notion by introducing a dependence in our
bounds on the minimum eigenvalue of a suitable exploration distribution over the actions. Similar
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

