Adaptive Sampling for Stochastic Risk-Averse
Learning
Sebastian Curi
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
scuri@inf.ethz.ch
Stefanie Jegelka
CSAIL
MIT
stefje@mit.edu

Kfir Y. Levy
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Technion
kfirylevy@technion.ac.il
Andreas Krause
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
In high-stakes machine learning applications, it is crucial to not only perform well
on average, but also when restricted to difficult examples. To address this, we
consider the problem of training models in a risk-averse manner. We propose an
adaptive sampling algorithm for stochastically optimizing the Conditional Valueat-Risk (CVaR) of a loss distribution, which measures its performance on the α
fraction of most difficult examples. We use a distributionally robust formulation
of the CVaR to phrase the problem as a zero-sum game between two players, and
solve it efficiently using regret minimization. Our approach relies on sampling
from structured Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs), which enables scaling it to
large data sets. Finally, we empirically demonstrate its effectiveness on large-scale
convex and non-convex learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems are increasingly deployed in high-stakes applications. This imposes
reliability requirements that are in stark discrepancy with how we currently train and evaluate these
systems. Usually, we optimize expected performance both in training and evaluation via empirical
risk minimization (Vapnik, 1992). Thus, we sacrifice occasional large losses on “difficult” examples
in order to perform well on average. In this work, we instead consider a risk-averse optimization
criterion, namely the Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR), also known as the Expected Shortfall. In
short, the α-CVaR of a loss distribution is the average of the losses in the α-tail of the distribution.
Optimizing the CVaR is well-understood in the convex setting, where duality enables a reduction to
standard empirical risk minimization using a modified, truncated loss function from Rockafellar et al.
(2000). Unfortunately, this approach fails when stochastically optimizing the CVaR – especially on
non-convex problems, such as training deep neural network models. A likely reason for this failure is
that mini-batch estimates of gradients of the CVaR suffer from high variance.
To address this issue, we propose a novel adaptive sampling algorithm – A DA -CVA R (Section 4). Our
algorithm initially optimizes the mean of the losses but gradually adjusts its sampling distribution to increasingly sample tail events (difficult examples), until it eventually minimizes the CVaR (Section 4.1).
Our approach naturally enables the use of standard stochastic optimizers (Section 4.2). We provide
convergence guarantees of the algorithm (Section 4.3) and an efficient implementation (Appendix A).
Finally, we demonstrate the performance of our algorithm in a suite of experiments (Section 5).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

