Impossibility Results for Grammar-Compressed
Linear Algebra

Amir Abboud
IBM Almaden Research Center
amir.abboud@gmail.com

Arturs Backurs
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
backurs@ttic.edu

Karl Bringmann
Saarland University and
Max Planck Institute for Informatics,
Saarland Informatics Campus (SIC)
bringmann@cs.uni-saarland.de

Marvin Künnemann
Max Planck Institute for Informatics,
Saarland Informatics Campus (SIC)
marvin@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
To handle vast amounts of data, it is natural and popular to compress vectors and
matrices. When we compress a vector from size N down to size n ! N , it
certainly makes it easier to store and transmit efficiently, but does it also make it
easier to process?
In this paper we consider lossless compression schemes, and ask if we can run
our computations on the compressed data as efficiently as if the original data was
that small. That is, if an operation has time complexity T pinput-sizeq, can we
perform it on the compressed representation in time T pnq rather than T pN q? We
consider the most basic linear algebra operations: inner product, matrix-vector
multiplication, and matrix multiplication. In particular, given two compressed
vectors, can we compute their inner product in time Opnq? Or perhaps we must
decompress first and then multiply, spending ΩpN q time?
The answer depends on the compression scheme. While for simple ones such
as Run-Length-Encoding (RLE) the inner product can be done in Opnq time, we
prove that this is impossible for compressions from a richer class: essentially n2 or
even larger runtimes are needed in the worst case (under complexity assumptions).
This is the class of grammar-compressions containing most popular methods such
as the Lempel-Ziv family. These schemes are more compressing than the simple
RLE, but alas, we prove that performing computations on them is much harder.

1

Introduction

The idea of using compression to speed up computations can be found in any domain that deals with
large-scale data, and ML is no exception. By exploiting redundancies and various forms of structure
in a piece of data, compression algorithms such as zip can reduce its size from N down to n, where
n ! N . The data becomes cheaper to store, access, transmit, and perhaps also to analyze. Can we
run our ML tools on the compressed data, without decompressing it first, and make the computation
times proportional to n rather than N ? Since most ML algorithms boil down to large amounts of
basic algebraic operations such as multiplications of vectors and matrices, with inner product as the
atomic operation, the most basic question in this context is:

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

