A Fair Classifier Using Kernel Density Estimation

Jaewoong Cho
EE, KAIST
cjw2525@kaist.ac.kr

Gyeongjo Hwang
EE, KAIST
hkj4276@kaist.ac.kr

Changho Suh
EE, KAIST
chsuh@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
As machine learning becomes prevalent in a widening array of sensitive applications such as job hiring and criminal justice, one critical aspect in the design of
machine learning classifiers is to ensure fairness: Guaranteeing the irrelevancy of
a prediction to sensitive attributes such as gender and race. This work develops
a kernel density estimation (KDE) methodology to faithfully respect the fairness
constraint while yielding a tractable optimization problem that comes with high
accuracy-fairness tradeoff. One key feature of this approach is that the fairness
measure quantified based on KDE can be expressed as a differentiable function
w.r.t. model parameters, thereby enabling the use of prominent gradient descent to
readily solve an interested optimization problem. This work focuses on classification tasks and two well-known measures of group fairness: demographic parity
and equalized odds. We empirically show that our algorithm achieves greater or
comparable performances against prior fair classifers in accuracy-fairness tradeoff
as well as in training stability on both synthetic and benchmark real datasets.

1

Introduction

During the last decade, we have witnessed an unprecedented explosion of academic and popular
interests in machine learning. Machine learning is no longer just an engine behind image classifiers
and spam filters. It is now employed to make critical decisions that affect our lives, cultures, and
rights, e.g., screening job applicants, and informing bail & parole decisions. With a surge of such
applications, one major criterion in the design of machine learning algorithms is to ensure fairness.
A fair classifier aims at achieving the irrelevancy of a prediction to sensitive attributes such as race,
sex, age, and religion. Prior works in the fairness literature have developed several metrics that
capture various notions of discrimination. Three major fairness measures have been taken into
consideration: (i) group fairness [8, 3, 12, 42, 41] that intends to ensure similar statistics across
distinct demographics; (ii) individual fairness [7, 9, 33, 40] that targets nondiscriminatory predictions
across nearby examples; (iii) causality-based fairness counterparts [20, 24, 30, 37, 45, 46, 18]. This
work focuses on group fairness that has been widely explored in a variety of applications. Prominent
group fairness measures include demographic parity [8, 42], equal opportunity [12], and equalized
odds [12]. All of these intend to quantify how prediction outputs vary depending on sensitive
attributes.
There has been a proliferation of fair classifiers [12, 7, 5, 1, 28, 43, 17, 23]. One challenge that
arises in the prior algorithms is that they suffer from obtaining an explicit and possibly differentiable
fairness measure w.r.t. model parameters and the non-differentiability often prevents the use of popular
algorithms such as gradient descent. This naturally leads to a common approach: Incorporating an
expressible fairness proxy as a regularization term in an interested optimization. One pioneering
work along this direction [42] employs as a fairness proxy a covariance function between a sensitive
attribute and a prediction. However, such a proxy-based approach may not well respect fairness
constraints when it serves as a weak constraint as in [42]. A small covariance does not ensure
statistical independence although the reverse is always the case. Hence, any theoretical performance
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

