Forget About the LiDAR: Self-Supervised Depth
Estimators with MED Probability Volumes

Juan L. Gonzalez
juanluisgb@kaist.ac.kr

Munchurl Kim
mkimee@kaist.ac.kr

School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

Abstract
Self-supervised depth estimators have recently shown results comparable to the
supervised methods on the challenging single image depth estimation (SIDE) task,
by exploiting the geometrical relations between target and reference views in the
training data. However, previous methods usually learn forward or backward image
synthesis, but not depth estimation, as they cannot effectively neglect occlusions between the target and the reference images. Previous works rely on rigid photometric
assumptions or on the SIDE network to infer depth and occlusions, resulting in
limited performance. On the other hand, we propose a method to “Forget About the
LiDAR” (FAL), with Mirrored Exponential Disparity (MED) probability volumes
for the training of monocular depth estimators from stereo images. Our MED representation allows us to obtain geometrically inspired occlusion maps with our novel
Mirrored Occlusion Module (MOM), which does not impose a learning burden
on our FAL-net. Contrary to the previous methods that learn SIDE from stereo
pairs by regressing disparity in the linear space, our FAL-net regresses disparity by
binning it into the exponential space, which allows for better detection of distant
and nearby objects. We define a two-step training strategy for our FAL-net: It
is first trained for view synthesis and then fine-tuned for depth estimation with
our MOM. Our FAL-net is remarkably light-weight and outperforms the previous
state-of-the-art methods with 8× fewer parameters and 3× faster inference speeds
on the challenging KITTI dataset. We present extensive experimental results on
the KITTI, CityScapes, and Make3D datasets to verify our method’s effectiveness.
To the authors’ best knowledge, the presented method performs the best among all
the previous self-supervised methods until now.

1

Introduction

Single Image Depth Estimation (SIDE) is a critical computer vision task that has been pushed
forward by the recent advances in deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs). In particular, the
self-supervised SIDE methods, which exploit geometrical dependencies in the training data, have
shown promising results [11, 12, 31], even compared to those of the methods that are supervised with
depth ground-truth [2, 3, 17, 30]. However, the previous self-supervised SIDE methods [11, 12, 31] fail
because they are not trained directly for depth estimation, but indirectly for view synthesis. In these
methods, the occluded regions among the training images prevent them from learning precise depth.
We present a self-supervised method that can accurately learn the SIDE with our novel Mirrored
Exponential Disparity (MED) probability volumes. We show that our self-supervised SIDE method
achieves superior performance than the state-of-the-art (SOTA) self-, semi- and fully-supervised meth34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

