Decentralized TD Tracking with Linear Function
Approximation and its Finite-Time Analysis

Gang Wang∗ Songtao Lu2 Georgios B. Giannakis1
2

Gerald Tesauro2

Jian Sun3

1
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, US; georgios@umn.edu
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, US; {songtao@ibm.com, gtesauro@us.ibm.com}
3
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China; sunjian@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
The present contribution deals with decentralized policy evaluation in multi-agent
Markov decision processes using temporal-difference (TD) methods with linear
function approximation for scalability. The agents cooperate to estimate the value
function of such a process by observing continual state transitions of a shared
environment over the graph of interconnected nodes (agents), along with locally
private rewards. Different from existing consensus-type TD algorithms, the approach here develops a simple decentralized TD tracker by wedding TD learning
with gradient tracking techniques. The non-asymptotic properties of the novel TD
tracker are established for both independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) as
well as Markovian transitions through a unifying multistep Lyapunov analysis. In
contrast to the prior art, the novel algorithm forgoes the limiting error bounds on
the number of agents, which endows it with performance comparable to that of
centralized TD methods that are the sharpest known to date.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent relies on interactions with an environment to maximize a
given cumulative reward. RL has made major advances in control and decision-making tasks encountered in areas as diverse as robotics, neuroscience, game theory, and artificial intelligence [35], [39]. It
is particularly powerful when combined with deep neural network representations [27]. Temporaldifference (TD) learning [34] with gradient descent and function approximation is a cornerstone RL
algorithm with documented success in several large-scale applications [40], [35], [31]. TD2 learning
offers a means of estimating the long-term cumulative future reward of a given policy as a function
of the current state–what is referred to as policy evaluation. Function approximation is typically
employed to estimate the expected cumulative future reward from a given state. Parameters of the
function approximator are updated based on state transitions along with the associated rewards.
While TD updates are simple, a rigorous analysis of TD methods requires sophisticated tools. In
this direction, a number of contributions have offered promising results in recent years. Asymptotic
properties that hold as the number of updates grows to infinity (e.g., almost sure convergence, and
convergence in mean) have been analyzed for TD methods with linear function approximation in e.g.,
[34, 10, 16, 12, 1, 41, 38, 36, 15]. To accommodate practical settings in control, signal processing, and
machine learning tasks, where the data can be voluminous and continual [27, 35], research focus has
gradually shifted toward non-asymptotic performance guarantees holding even with finite iterations,
that is state transitions in the context of RL. Such analysis helps one understand the algorithm (a.k.a.
∗
G. Wang’s research in this paper was carried out when he was with the University of Minnesota. He is
currently affiliated with Beijing Institute of Technology, China. (e-mail: gangwang@bit.edu.cn.)
2
Hereafter we use TD(0), abbreviated as TD.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

