Design Space for Graph Neural Networks
Jiaxuan You
Rex Ying
Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{jiaxuan, rexy, jure}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The rapid evolution of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has led to a growing
number of new architectures as well as novel applications. However, current
research focuses on proposing and evaluating specific architectural designs of
GNNs, such as GCN, GIN, or GAT, as opposed to studying the more general design
space of GNNs that consists of a Cartesian product of different design dimensions,
such as the number of layers or the type of the aggregation function. Additionally,
GNN designs are often specialized to a single task, yet few efforts have been made
to understand how to quickly find the best GNN design for a novel task or a novel
dataset. Here we define and systematically study the architectural design space
for GNNs which consists of 315,000 different designs over 32 different predictive
tasks. Our approach features three key innovations: (1) A general GNN design
space; (2) a GNN task space with a similarity metric, so that for a given novel
task/dataset, we can quickly identify/transfer the best performing architecture; (3)
an efficient and effective design space evaluation method which allows insights
to be distilled from a huge number of model-task combinations. Our key results
include: (1) A comprehensive set of guidelines for designing well-performing
GNNs; (2) while best GNN designs for different tasks vary significantly, the
GNN task space allows for transferring the best designs across different tasks; (3)
models discovered using our design space achieve state-of-the-art performance.
Overall, our work offers a principled and scalable approach to transition from
studying individual GNN designs for specific tasks, to systematically studying
the GNN design space and the task space. Finally, we release GraphGym, a
powerful platform for exploring different GNN designs and tasks. GraphGym
features modularized GNN implementation, standardized GNN evaluation, and
reproducible and scalable experiment management.

1

Introduction

The field of Graph Neural Network (GNN) research has made substantial progress in recent years.
Notably, a growing number of GNN architectures, including GCN [16], GraphSAGE [6], and GAT
[31], have been developed. These architectures are then applied to a growing number of applications,
such as social networks [39, 46], chemistry [13, 44], and biology [52]. However, with this growing
trend several issues emerge, which limit further development of GNNs.
Issues in GNN architecture design. In current GNN literature, GNN models are defined and
evaluated as specific architectural designs. For example, architectures, such as GCN, GraphSAGE,
GIN and GAT, are widely adopted in existing works [3, 4, 28, 41, 48, 37]. However, these models are
specific instances in the GNN design space consisting of a cross product of design dimensions. For
example, a GNN model that changes the aggregation function of GraphSAGE to a summation, or
adds skip connections [8] across GraphSAGE layers, is not referred to as GraphSAGE model, but it
could empirically outperform it in certain tasks [32]. Therefore, the practice of only focusing on a
specific GNN design, rather than the design space, limits the discovery of successful GNN models.
Issues in GNN evaluation. GNN models are usually evaluated on a limited and non-diverse set of
tasks, such as node classification on citation networks [15, 16, 31]. Recent efforts use additional
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

