GS-WGAN: A Gradient-Sanitized Approach for
Learning Differentially Private Generators

Dingfan Chen1
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy2
Mario Fritz1
1
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Abstract
The wide-spread availability of rich data has fueled the growth of machine learning
applications in numerous domains. However, growth in domains with highlysensitive data (e.g., medical) is largely hindered as the private nature of data
prohibits it from being shared. To this end, we propose Gradient-sanitized Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks (GS-WGAN), which allows releasing a
sanitized form of the sensitive data with rigorous privacy guarantees. In contrast to
prior work, our approach is able to distort gradient information more precisely, and
thereby enabling training deeper models which generate more informative samples.
Moreover, our formulation naturally allows for training GANs in both centralized
and federated (i.e., decentralized) data scenarios. Through extensive experiments,
we find our approach consistently outperforms state-of-the-art approaches across
multiple metrics (e.g., sample quality) and datasets.

1

Introduction

Releasing statistical and sensory data to a broad community has contributed towards advances in
numerous machine learning (ML) techniques e.g., object recognition (ImageNet [11]), language
modeling (RCV [24]), recommendation systems (Netflix ratings [6]). However, in many sensitive
domains (e.g., medical, financial), similar advances are often held back as the private nature of
collected data prohibits release in its original form. Privacy-preserving data publishing [5, 13, 17]
provides a reasonable solution, where only a sanitized form of the original data (with rigorous privacy
guarantees) is publicly released.
Traditionally, sanitization is performed in a differentially private (DP) framework [12]. The sanitization method employed is often hand-crafted for the given input data [28, 30, 43] and the specific
data-dependent task the sanitized data is intended for (e.g., answering linear queries) [7, 14, 21, 36].
As a result, such sanitization techniques greatly restrict the expressiveness of the released data
distribution and fail to generalize to novel tasks unanticipated by the publisher. Instead, recent
privacy-preserving techniques [5, 41, 42, 44] build on top of successes in generative adversarial
network (GANs) [18] literature, to generate synthetic data faithful to the original input distribution.
Specifically, GANs are trained using a privacy-preserving algorithm (e.g., using DP-SGD [1]) and
demonstrate promising results in modeling a variety of real-world high-dimensional data distributions.
Common to most privacy-preserving training algorithms for neural network models is manipulating
the gradient information generated during backpropagation. Manipulation most commonly involves
clipping the gradients (to bound sensitivity) and adding calibrated random noise (to introduce stochasticity). Although recent techniques that employ such an approach demonstrate reasonable success,
they are mostly limited to shallow networks and fail to sufficiently capture the sample quality of the
original data.
In this paper, towards the goal of a generative model capable of synthesizing high-quality samples
in a privacy-preserving manner, we propose a differentially private GAN. We first identify that in
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

