M INI LM: Deep Self-Attention Distillation for
Task-Agnostic Compression of Pre-Trained
Transformers
Furu Wei∗ Li Dong Hangbo Bao Nan Yang Ming Zhou
Microsoft Research
{wenwan,fuwei,lidong1,t-habao,nanya,mingzhou}@microsoft.com

Wenhui Wang

Abstract
Pre-trained language models (e.g., BERT [12] and its variants) have achieved
remarkable success in varieties of NLP tasks. However, these models usually
consist of hundreds of millions of parameters which brings challenges for finetuning and online serving in real-life applications due to latency and capacity
constraints. In this work, we present a simple and effective approach to compress
large Transformer [42] based pre-trained models, termed as deep self-attention
distillation. The small model (student) is trained by deeply mimicking the selfattention module, which plays a vital role in Transformer networks, of the large
model (teacher). Specifically, we propose distilling the self-attention module of
the last Transformer layer of the teacher, which is effective and flexible for the
student. Furthermore, we introduce the scaled dot-product between values in the
self-attention module as the new deep self-attention knowledge, in addition to
the attention distributions (i.e., the scaled dot-product of queries and keys) that
have been used in existing works. Moreover, we show that introducing a teacher
assistant [26] also helps the distillation of large pre-trained Transformer models.
Experimental results demonstrate that our monolingual model2 outperforms stateof-the-art baselines in different parameter size of student models. In particular, it
retains more than 99% accuracy on SQuAD 2.0 and several GLUE benchmark tasks
using 50% of the Transformer parameters and computations of the teacher model.
We also obtain competitive results in applying deep self-attention distillation to
multilingual pre-trained models.

1

Introduction

Language model (LM) pre-training has achieved remarkable success for various natural language
processing tasks [28, 18, 29, 12, 14, 48, 21, 25]. The pre-trained LMs, such as BERT [12] and its
variants, learn contextualized representations by predicting words given their context using large scale
text corpora, and can be fine-tuned with additional task-specific layers to adapt to downstream tasks.
However, these models usually contain hundreds of millions of parameters which brings challenges
for fine-tuning and online serving in real-life applications for latency and capacity constraints.
Knowledge distillation [17, 32] (KD) has been proven to be a promising way to compress a large
model (called the teacher model) into a small model (called the student model), which uses much
fewer parameters and computations while achieving competitive results on downstream tasks. There
have been some works that task-specifically distill pre-trained large LMs into small models [39, 41,
37, 1, 47, 27]. They first fine-tune the pre-trained LMs on specific tasks and then perform distillation.
∗
2

Contact person.
The code and models will be publicly available at https://aka.ms/minilm.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

