A random matrix analysis of random Fourier
features: beyond the Gaussian kernel, a precise phase
transition, and the corresponding double descent
Zhenyu Liao
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley, USA
zhenyu.liao@berkeley.edu
Romain Couillet
G-STATS Data Science Chair, GIPSA-lab
University Grenobles-Alpes, France
romain.couillet@gipsa-lab.grenoble-inp.fr
Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley, USA
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
This article characterizes the exact asymptotics of random Fourier feature (RFF)
regression, in the realistic setting where the number of data samples n, their
dimension p, and the dimension of feature space N are all large and comparable.
In this regime, the random RFF Gram matrix no longer converges to the wellknown limiting Gaussian kernel matrix (as it does when N ! 1 alone), but it
still has a tractable behavior that is captured by our analysis. This analysis also
provides accurate estimates of training and test regression errors for large n, p, N .
Based on these estimates, a precise characterization of two qualitatively different
phases of learning, including the phase transition between them, is provided;
and the corresponding double descent test error curve is derived from this phase
transition behavior. These results do not depend on strong assumptions on the data
distribution, and they perfectly match empirical results on real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

For a machine learning system having N parameters, trained on a data set of size n, asymptotic
analysis as used in classical statistical learning theory typically either focuses on the (statistical)
population n ! 1 limit, for N fixed, or the over-parameterized N ! 1 limit, for a given n. These
two settings are technically more convenient to work with, yet less practical, as they essentially
assume that one of the two dimensions is negligibly small compared to the other, and this is rarely the
case in practice. Indeed, with a factor of 2 or 10 more data, one typically works with a more complex
model. This has been highlighted perhaps most prominently in recent work on neural network models,
in which the model complexity and data size increase together. For this reason, the double asymptotic
regime where n, N ! 1, with N/n ! c, a constant, is a particularly interesting (and likely more
realistic) limit, despite being technically more challenging [48, 51, 21, 15, 37, 32, 5]. In particular,
working in this regime allows for a finer quantitative assessment of machine learning systems, as
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

