Learning Diverse and Discriminative Representations
via the Principle of Maximal Coding Rate Reduction

Yaodong Yu†
UC Berkeley
yyu@eecs.berkeley.edu

Kwan Ho Ryan Chan†
UC Berkeley
ryanchankh@berkeley.edu

Chaobing Song
Tsinghua University
songcb16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Chong You
UC Berkeley
cyou@berkeley.edu

Yi Ma
UC Berkeley
yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
To learn intrinsic low-dimensional structures from high-dimensional data that most
discriminate between classes, we propose the principle of Maximal Coding Rate
Reduction (MCR2 ), an information-theoretic measure that maximizes the coding
rate difference between the whole dataset and the sum of each individual class.
We clarify its relationships with most existing frameworks such as cross-entropy,
information bottleneck, information gain, contractive and contrastive learning, and
provide theoretical guarantees for learning diverse and discriminative features.
The coding rate can be accurately computed from finite samples of degenerate
subspace-like distributions and can learn intrinsic representations in supervised,
self-supervised, and unsupervised settings in a unified manner. Empirically, the
representations learned using this principle alone are significantly more robust to
label corruptions in classification than those using cross-entropy, and can lead to
state-of-the-art results in clustering mixed data from self-learned invariant features.

1

Context and Motivation

Given a random vector x ∈ RD which is drawn from a mixture of, say k, distributions D = {Dj }kj=1 ,
one of the most fundamental problems in machine learning is how to effectively and efficiently learn
the distribution from a finite set of i.i.d samples, say X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ] ∈ RD×m . To this end,
we seek a good representation through a continuous mapping, f (x, θ) : RD → Rd , that captures
intrinsic structures of x and best facilitates subsequent tasks such as classification or clustering.
Supervised learning of discriminative representations. To ease the task of learning D, in the
popular supervised setting, a true class label, represented as a one-hot vector yi ∈ Rk , is given for
each sample xi . Extensive studies have shown that for many practical datasets (images, audios, and
natural languages, etc.), the mapping from the data x to its class label y can be effectively modeled
by training a deep network [GBC16], here denoted as f (x, θ) : x 7→ y with network parameters
θ ∈ Θ. This is typically done by minimizing the cross-entropy loss over a training set {(xi , yi )}m
i=1 ,
through backpropagation over the network parameters θ:
m

1 X
.
min CE(θ, x, y) = −E[hy, log[f (x, θ)]i] ≈ −
hyi , log[f (xi , θ)]i.
θ∈Θ
m i=1

(1)

Despite its effectiveness and enormous popularity, there are two serious limitations with this approach:
1) It aims only to predict the labels y even if they might be mislabeled. Empirical studies show
†

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

