Debiased Contrastive Learning

Ching-Yao Chuang, Joshua Robinson, Lin Yen-Chen
Antonio Torralba, Stefanie Jegelka
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{cychuang, joshrob, yenchenl, torralba, stefje}@mit.edu

Abstract
A prominent technique for self-supervised representation learning has been to
contrast semantically similar and dissimilar pairs of samples. Without access to
labels, dissimilar (negative) points are typically taken to be randomly sampled
datapoints, implicitly accepting that these points may, in reality, actually have the
same label. Perhaps unsurprisingly, we observe that sampling negative examples
from truly different labels improves performance, in a synthetic setting where labels
are available. Motivated by this observation, we develop a debiased contrastive
objective that corrects for the sampling of same-label datapoints, even without
knowledge of the true labels. Empirically, the proposed objective consistently
outperforms the state-of-the-art for representation learning in vision, language, and
reinforcement learning benchmarks. Theoretically, we establish generalization
bounds for the downstream classification task.

1

Introduction

Learning good representations without supervision has been a long-standing goal of machine learning.
One such approach is self-supervised learning, where auxiliary learning objectives leverage labels
that can be observed without a human labeler. For instance, in computer vision, representations
can be learned from colorization [45], predicting transformations [10, 32], or generative modeling
[24, 14, 3]. Remarkable success has also been achieved in the language domain [30, 25, 8].
Recently, self-supervised representation learning algorithms that use a contrastive loss have outperformed even supervised learning [15, 28, 19, 18, 2]. The key idea of contrastive learning is to
contrast semantically similar (positive) and dissimilar (negative) pairs of data points, encouraging
the representations f of similar pairs (x, x+ ) to be close, and those of dissimilar pairs (x, x− ) to be
more orthogonal [33, 2]:
#
"
T
+
ef (x) f (x )
Ex,x+ ,{x− }N − log
.
(1)
PN
−
T
i i=1
ef (x)T f (x+ ) + i=1 ef (x) f (xi )
In practice, the expectation is replaced by the empirical estimate. For each training data point x, it is
common to use one positive example, e.g., derived from perturbations, and N negative examples x−
i .
Since true labels or true semantic similarity are typically not available, negative counterparts x−
are
i
commonly drawn uniformly from the training data. But, this means it is possible that x− is actually
similar to x, as illustrated in Figure 1. This phenomenon, which we refer to as sampling bias, can
empirically lead to significant performance drop. Figure 2 compares the accuracy for learning with
this bias, and for drawing x−
i from data with truly different labels than x; we refer to this method as
unbiased (further details in Section 5.1).
However, the ideal unbiased objective is unachievable in practice since it requires knowing the labels,
i.e., supervised learning. This dilemma poses the question whether it is possible to reduce the gap
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

