Factor Graph Grammars

David Chiang
University of Notre Dame
dchiang@nd.edu

Darcey Riley
University of Notre Dame
darcey.riley@nd.edu

Abstract
We propose the use of hyperedge replacement graph grammars for factor graphs,
or factor graph grammars (FGGs) for short. FGGs generate sets of factor graphs
and can describe a more general class of models than plate notation, dynamic
graphical models, case–factor diagrams, and sum–product networks can. Moreover,
inference can be done on FGGs without enumerating all the generated factor graphs.
For finite variable domains (but possibly infinite sets of graphs), a generalization
of variable elimination to FGGs allows exact and tractable inference in many
situations. For finite sets of graphs (but possibly infinite variable domains), a
FGG can be converted to a single factor graph amenable to standard inference
techniques.

1

Introduction

Graphs have been used with great success as representations of probability models, both Bayesian and
Markov networks (Koller and Friedman, 2009) as well as latent-variable neural networks (Schulman
et al., 2015). But in many applications, especially in speech and language processing, a fixed graph is
not sufficient. The graph may have substructures that repeat a variable number of times: for example,
a hidden Markov model (HMM) depends on the number of words in the string. Or, part of the graph
may have several alternatives with different structures: for example, a probabilistic context-free
grammar (PCFG) contains many trees for a given string.
Several formalisms have been proposed to fill this need. Plate notation (Buntine, 1994), plated
factor graphs (Obermeyer et al., 2019), and dynamic graphical models (Bilmes, 2010) address
the repeated-substructure problem, but only for sequence models like HMMs. Case–factor diagrams (McAllester et al., 2008) and sum–product networks (Poon and Domingos, 2011) address the
alternative-substructure problem, so they can describe PCFGs, but only for fixed-length inputs.
More general formalisms like probabilistic relational models (Getoor et al., 2007) and probabilistic
programming languages (van de Meent et al., 2018) address both problems successfully, but because
of their generality, tractable exact inference in them is often not possible.
Here, we explore the use of hyperedge replacement graph grammars (HRGs), a formalism for defining
sets of graphs (Bauderon and Courcelle, 1987; Habel and Kreowski, 1987; Drewes et al., 1997). We
show that HRGs for factor graphs, or factor graph grammars (FGGs) for short, are expressive enough
to solve both the repeated-substructure and alternative-substructure problems, and constrained enough
allow exact and tractable inference in many situations. We make three main contributions:
• We define FGGs and show how they generalize the constrained formalisms mentioned above (§3).
• We define a conjunction operation that enables one to modularize a FGG into two parts, one
which defines the model and one which defines a query (§4).
• We show how to perform inference on FGGs without enumerating the (possibly infinite) set of
graphs they generate. For finite variable domains, we generalize variable elimination to FGGs
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

