Robust Reinforcement Learning via
Adversarial training with Langevin Dynamics

Parameswaran Kamalaruban∗
The Alan Turing Institute
kparameswaran@turing.ac.uk
Paul Rolland
LIONS, EPFL
paul.rolland@epfl.ch

Yu-Ting Huang
EPFL
yu.huang@epfl.ch

Cheng Shi
University of Basel
cheng.shi@unibas.ch

Ya-Ping Hsieh
LIONS, EPFL
ya-ping.hsieh@epfl.ch
Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
We introduce a sampling perspective to tackle the challenging task of training
robust Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents. Leveraging the powerful Stochastic
Gradient Langevin Dynamics, we present a novel, scalable two-player RL algorithm, which is a sampling variant of the two-player policy gradient method. Our
algorithm consistently outperforms existing baselines, in terms of generalization
across different training and testing conditions, on several MuJoCo environments.
Our experiments also show that, even for objective functions that entirely ignore
potential environmental shifts, our sampling approach remains highly robust in
comparison to standard RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) promise automated solutions to many real-world tasks with beyondhuman performance. Indeed, recent advances in policy gradient methods [1, 2, 3, 4] and deep
reinforcement learning have demonstrated impressive performance in games [5, 6], continuous
control [7], and robotics [8].
Despite the success of deep RL, the progress is still upset by the fragility in real-life deployments.
In particular, the majority of these methods fail to perform well when there is some difference
between training and testing scenarios, thereby posting serious safety and security concerns. To this
end, learning policies that are robust to environmental shifts, mismatched configurations, and even
mismatched control actions are becoming increasingly more important.
A powerful framework to learning robust policies is to interpret the changing of the environment as an
adversarial perturbation. This notion naturally lends itself to a two-player max-min problem involving
a pair of agents, a protagonist and an adversary, where the protagonist learns to fulfill the original
task goals while being robust to the disruptions generated by its adversary. Two prominent examples
along this research vein, differing in how they model the adversary, are the Robust Adversarial
Reinforcement Learning (RARL) [9] and Noisy Robust Markov Decision Process (NR-MDP) [10].
Despite the impressive empirical progress, the training of the robust RL objectives remains an open
and critical challenge. In particular, [10] prove that it is in fact strictly suboptimal to directly apply
(deterministic) policy gradient steps to their NR-MDP max-min objectives. Owing to the lack of
a better algorithm, the policy gradient is nonetheless still employed in their experiments; similar
comments also apply to [9].
∗

Work done while Parameswaran Kamalaruban and Cheng Shi were working at LIONS, EPFL.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

