wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised
Learning of Speech Representations
Alexei Baevski

Henry Zhou

Abdelrahman Mohamed

Michael Auli

{abaevski,henryzhou7,abdo,michaelauli}@fb.com
Facebook AI

Abstract
We show for the first time that learning powerful representations from speech
audio alone followed by fine-tuning on transcribed speech can outperform the best
semi-supervised methods while being conceptually simpler. wav2vec 2.0 masks
the speech input in the latent space and solves a contrastive task defined over a
quantization of the latent representations which are jointly learned. Experiments
using all labeled data of Librispeech achieve 1.8/3.3 WER on the clean/other
test sets. When lowering the amount of labeled data to one hour, wav2vec 2.0
outperforms the previous state of the art on the 100 hour subset while using 100
times less labeled data. Using just ten minutes of labeled data and pre-training
on 53k hours of unlabeled data still achieves 4.8/8.2 WER. This demonstrates the
feasibility of speech recognition with limited amounts of labeled data.1

1

Introduction

Neural networks benefit from large quantities of labeled training data. However, in many settings
labeled data is much harder to come by than unlabeled data: current speech recognition systems
require thousands of hours of transcribed speech to reach acceptable performance which is not
available for the vast majority of the nearly 7,000 languages spoken worldwide [31]. Learning purely
from labeled examples does not resemble language acquisition in humans: infants learn language by
listening to adults around them - a process that requires learning good representations of speech.
In machine learning, self-supervised learning has emerged as a paradigm to learn general data
representations from unlabeled examples and to fine-tune the model on labeled data. This has been
particularly successful for natural language processing [43, 45, 9] and is an active research area for
computer vision [20, 2, 36, 19, 6].
In this paper, we present a framework for self-supervised learning of representations from raw audio
data. Our approach encodes speech audio via a multi-layer convolutional neural network and then
masks spans of the resulting latent speech representations [26, 56], similar to masked language
modeling [9]. The latent representations are fed to a Transformer network to build contextualized representations and the model is trained via a contrastive task where the true latent is to be distinguished
from distractors [54, 49, 48, 28] (§ 2).
As part of training, we learn discrete speech units [53, 32, 7, 18] via a gumbel softmax [24, 5]
to represent the latent representations in the contrastive task (Figure 1) which we find to be more
effective than non-quantized targets. After pre-training on unlabeled speech, the model is fine-tuned
1

Code and models are available at https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

