Meta-learning from Tasks with Heterogeneous
Attribute Spaces

Tomoharu Iwata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
tomoharu.iwata.gy@hco.ntt.co.jp

Atsutoshi Kumagai
NTT Software Innovation Center
atsutoshi.kumagai.ht@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
We propose a heterogeneous meta-learning method that trains a model on tasks with
various attribute spaces, such that it can solve unseen tasks whose attribute spaces
are different from the training tasks given a few labeled instances. Although many
meta-learning methods have been proposed, they assume that all training and target
tasks share the same attribute space, and they are inapplicable when attribute sizes
are different across tasks. Our model infers latent representations of each attribute
and each response from a few labeled instances using an inference network. Then,
responses of unlabeled instances are predicted with the inferred representations
using a prediction network. The attribute and response representations enable
us to make predictions based on the task-specific properties of attributes and
responses even when attribute and response sizes are different across tasks. In our
experiments with synthetic datasets and 59 datasets in OpenML, we demonstrate
that our proposed method can predict the responses given a few labeled instances
in new tasks after being trained with tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces.

1

Introduction

Humans can learn from their various experiences and use such knowledge for new tasks that are related
to but different from their experiences. In contrast, since machine learning methods are usually trained
on a specific task, they can only be used for that task. Therefore, we need to prepare a large amount of
training data when we tackle new tasks. However, preparing sufficient training data requires high cost
and is time-consuming in real-world applications. For such problems, much attention has been paid
to few-shot learning, which is a framework for obtaining models that can learn from fewer examples.
Although many few-shot learning methods have recently been proposed [31, 22, 18, 28, 7, 13, 9], the
existing methods assume that all training and target tasks share the same attribute space, and cannot
handle tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces. Here, heterogeneous attribute spaces denote that
their attribute spaces are different from each other [38, 20, 37]. This limitation prevents us from
learning with a wide variety of tasks, which might contain useful knowledge to cope with new tasks.
Although tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces have been considered in domain adaptation, or
transfer learning [20, 38, 32, 34, 17, 33, 37], these methods assume only two tasks, and require target
datasets for training.
In this paper, we propose a few-shot learning method for tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces.
The proposed method trains a model on tasks with various attribute spaces, such that it can solve
unseen tasks whose attribute spaces are different from the training tasks given a few labeled instances.
Figure 1 shows our problem formulation. Our model predicts the response of an attribute vector,
which is called a query, given a few instances, which are called a support set, where the number of
attributes can be arbitrary, and the target task is different from the training tasks. Our model assumes
latent attribute vectors for the representation of each attribute, and latent response vectors for the
representation of each response. The latent attribute vectors and latent response vectors are inferred
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

