Finite Versus Infinite Neural Networks:
an Empirical Study

Jaehoon Lee

Samuel S. Schoenholz∗

Lechao Xiao∗

Jeffrey Pennington∗

Roman Novak∗

Ben Adlam∗†

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein

Google Brain
{jaehlee, schsam, jpennin, adlam, xlc, romann, jaschasd}@google.com

Abstract
We perform a careful, thorough, and large scale empirical study of the correspondence between wide neural networks and kernel methods. By doing so, we resolve
a variety of open questions related to the study of infinitely wide neural networks.
Our experimental results include: kernel methods outperform fully-connected
finite-width networks, but underperform convolutional finite width networks; neural network Gaussian process (NNGP) kernels frequently outperform neural tangent
(NT) kernels; centered and ensembled finite networks have reduced posterior variance and behave more similarly to infinite networks; weight decay and the use of a
large learning rate break the correspondence between finite and infinite networks;
the NTK parameterization outperforms the standard parameterization for finite
width networks; diagonal regularization of kernels acts similarly to early stopping;
floating point precision limits kernel performance beyond a critical dataset size; regularized ZCA whitening improves accuracy; finite network performance depends
non-monotonically on width in ways not captured by double descent phenomena;
equivariance of CNNs is only beneficial for narrow networks far from the kernel
regime. Our experiments additionally motivate an improved layer-wise scaling for
weight decay which improves generalization in finite-width networks. Finally, we
develop improved best practices for using NNGP and NT kernels for prediction,
including a novel ensembling technique. Using these best practices we achieve
state-of-the-art results on CIFAR-10 classification for kernels corresponding to
each architecture class we consider.

1

Introduction

A broad class of both Bayesian [1–17] and gradient descent trained [13–16, 18–29] neural networks
converge to Gaussian Processes (GPs) or closely-related kernel methods as their intermediate layers
are made infinitely wide. The predictions of these infinite width networks are described by the Neural
Network Gaussian Process (NNGP) [4, 5] kernel for Bayesian networks, and by the Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK) [18] and weight space linearization [24, 25] for gradient descent trained networks.
This correspondence has been key to recent breakthroughs in our understanding of neural networks
[30–40]. It has also enabled practical advances in kernel methods [8, 9, 15, 16, 26, 41–43], Bayesian
deep learning [44–46], active learning [47], and semi-supervised learning [17]. The NNGP, NTK,
and related large width limits [10, 30, 48–66] are unique in giving an exact theoretical description of
large scale neural networks. Because of this, we believe they will continue to play a transformative
role in deep learning theory.
∗
†

SSS, JP, BA, LX, and RN contributed equally.
Work done as a member of the Google AI Residency program (https://g.co/airesidency).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

