Neuron-level Structured Pruning using Polarization
Regularizer

Tao Zhuang1 , Zhixuan Zhang∗ 1 , Yuheng Huang2 , Xiaoyi Zeng1 , Kai Shuang2 , Xiang Li1
1
Alibaba Group
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zhuangtao.zt, zhibing.zzx}@alibaba-inc.com, hyhlryf@bupt.edu.cn,
yuanhan@taobao.com, shuangk@bupt.edu.cn, leo.lx@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Neuron-level structured pruning is a very effective technique to reduce the computation of neural networks without compromising prediction accuracy. In previous
works, structured pruning is usually achieved by imposing L1 regularization on the
scaling factors of neurons, and pruning the neurons whose scaling factors are below
a certain threshold. The reasoning is that neurons with smaller scaling factors have
weaker influence on network output. A scaling factor close to 0 actually suppresses
a neuron. However, L1 regularization lacks discrimination between neurons because it pushes all scaling factors towards 0. A more reasonable pruning method is
to only suppress unimportant neurons (with 0 scaling factors), and simultaneously
keep important neurons intact (with larger scaling factor). To achieve this goal,
we propose a new regularizer on scaling factors, namely polarization regularizer.
Theoretically, we prove that polarization regularizer pushes some scaling factors to
0 and others to a value a > 0. Experimentally, we show that structured pruning
using polarization regularizer achieves much better results than using L1 regularizer. Experiments on CIFAR and ImageNet datasets show that polarization pruning
achieves the state-of-the-art result.

1

Introduction

Network pruning is proved to effectively reduce the computational cost of inference without significantly compromising accuracy [Liu et al., 2019a]. There are two major branches of network pruning.
One branch is unstructured pruning, which prunes at the level of individual weights [LeCun et al.,
1989, Han et al., 2015, Zhou et al., 2019, Ding et al., 2019, Frankle and Carbin, 2019]. The other
branch is structured pruning, which prunes at the level of neurons (or channels) [Wen et al., 2016,
Liu et al., 2017, Ye et al., 2018]. Although unstructured pruning usually reduces more weights than
structured pruning [Liu et al., 2019a], it has the drawback that the resulting weight matrices are
sparse, which cannot lead to speedup without dedicated hardware or libraries [Han et al., 2016]. In
this paper, we focus on neuron-level structured pruning, which does not require additional hardware
or libraries to reduce computation on common GPU/CPU devices.
For structured pruning, one promising method is to associate each neuron with a scaling factor,
and regularize these scaling factors in training. Then neurons with scaling factors below a certain
threshold are pruned [Huang and Wang, 2018]. The regularizer on scaling factors is usually chosen
to be L1 [Liu et al., 2017]. However, L1 regularizer tries to push all scaling factors to 0. It is often
difficult to find a reasonable pruning threshold. For example, the distribution of scaling factors under
L1 regularization for VGG-16 network trained on CIFAR-10 dataset is shown in Figure 1 (a), where
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

