Continual Learning in Low-rank Orthogonal
Subspaces

Arslan Chaudhry1 , Naeemullah Khan1 , Puneet K. Dokania1,2 , Philip H. S. Torr1
University of Oxford1 & Five AI Ltd., UK2
arslan.chaudhry@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In continual learning (CL), a learner is faced with a sequence of tasks, arriving one
after the other, and the goal is to remember all the tasks once the continual learning
experience is finished. The prior art in CL uses episodic memory, parameter
regularization or extensible network structures to reduce interference among tasks,
but in the end, all the approaches learn different tasks in a joint vector space. We
believe this invariably leads to interference among different tasks. We propose
to learn tasks in different (low-rank) vector subspaces that are kept orthogonal
to each other in order to minimize interference. Further, to keep the gradients of
different tasks coming from these subspaces orthogonal to each other, we learn
isometric mappings by posing network training as an optimization problem over
the Stiefel manifold. To the best of our understanding, we report, for the first
time, strong results over experience-replay baseline with and without memory on
standard classification benchmarks in continual learning.1

1

Introduction

In continual learning, a learner experiences a sequence of tasks with the objective to remember all
or most of the observed tasks to speed up transfer of knowledge to future tasks. Learning from a
diverse sequence of tasks is useful as it allows for the deployment of machine learning models that
can quickly adapt to changes in the environment by leveraging past experiences. Contrary to the
standard supervised learning setting, where only a single task is available, and where the learner can
make several passes over the dataset of the task, the sequential arrival of multiple tasks poses unique
challenges for continual learning. The chief one among which is catastrophic forgetting [McCloskey
and Cohen, 1989], whereby the global update of model parameters on the present task interfere with
the learned representations of past tasks. This results in the model forgetting the previously acquired
knowledge.
In neural networks, to reduce the deterioration of accumulated knowledge, existing approaches modify
the network training broadly in three different ways. First, regularization-based approaches [Kirkpatrick et al., 2016, Zenke et al., 2017, Aljundi et al., 2018, Chaudhry et al., 2018, Nguyen et al.,
2018] reduce the drift in network parameters that were important for solving previous tasks. Second,
modular approaches [Rusu et al., 2016, Lee et al., 2017] add network components as new tasks arrive.
These approaches rely on the knowledge of correct module selection at test time. Third, and perhaps
the strongest, memory-based approaches [Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017, Hayes et al., 2018, Isele
and Cosgun, 2018, Riemer et al., 2019], maintain a small replay buffer, called episodic memory, and
mitigate catastrophic forgetting by replaying the data in the buffer along with the new task data. One
common feature among all the three categories is that, in the end, all the tasks are learned in the same
1

Code: https://github.com/arslan-chaudhry/orthog_subspace

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

