Memory-Efficient Learning of Stable Linear
Dynamical Systems for Prediction and Control

Giorgos Mamakoukas
Northwestern University
giorgosmamakoukas@u.northwestern.edu

Orest Xherija
University of Chicago
orest.xherija@uchicago.edu

Todd Murphey
Northwestern University
t-murphey@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Learning a stable Linear Dynamical System (LDS) from data involves creating
models that both minimize reconstruction error and enforce stability of the learned
representation. We propose a novel algorithm for learning stable LDSs. Using
a recent characterization of stable matrices, we present an optimization method
that ensures stability at every step and iteratively improves the reconstruction
error using gradient directions derived in this paper. When applied to LDSs
with inputs, our approach—in contrast to current methods for learning stable
LDSs—updates both the state and control matrices, expanding the solution space
and allowing for models with lower reconstruction error. We apply our algorithm in simulations and experiments to a variety of problems, including learning
dynamic textures from image sequences and controlling a robotic manipulator.
Compared to existing approaches, our proposed method achieves an orders-ofmagnitude improvement in reconstruction error and superior results in terms of
control performance. In addition, it is provably more memory efficient, with
an O(n2 ) space complexity compared to O(n4 ) of competing alternatives, thus
scaling to higher-dimensional systems when the other methods fail. The code
of the proposed algorithm and animations of the results can be found at https:
//github.com/giorgosmamakoukas/MemoryEfficientStableLDS.

1

Introduction

Linear dynamical systems arise in many areas of machine learning and time series modeling with
active research applications in computer vision [2], robotics [28], and control [8, 19, 20]. Linear
representations are often desirable because they admit closed-form solutions, simplify modeling,
and are general enough to be useful in many applications (e.g. Kalman filters). Further, there are
well-established tools for the analysis (e.g. investigating properties of a system, such as stability
and dissipativity), prediction, estimation, and control of linear systems [16]. They are, in general,
computationally more efficient than nonlinear systems and highly promising candidates for real-time
applications or data-intensive tasks. Last but not least, linear dynamical models can also be used to
capture nonlinear systems using Koopman operators, which linearly evolve nonlinear functions of the
states [22, 4, 27, 15].
LDSs are models that are learned in a self-supervised manner and are therefore promising for
data-driven applications. Consequently, with the availability of higher computational power and
the wide applicability of data-driven modeling, there is renewed interest in learning LDSs from
data. Examples include learning spatio-temporal data for dynamic texture classification [2, 10],
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

