Debugging Tests for Model Explanations

Julius Adebayo† , Michael Muelly] , Ilaria Liccardi† , Been Kim]
{juliusad,licardi}@mit.edu {muelly,beenkim}@google.com
†
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
]
Google Inc

Abstract
We investigate whether post-hoc model explanations are effective for diagnosing model errors–model debugging. In response to the challenge of explaining
a model’s prediction, a vast array of explanation methods have been proposed.
Despite increasing use, it is unclear if they are effective. To start, we categorize bugs, based on their source, into: data, model, and test-time contamination
bugs. For several explanation methods, we assess their ability to: detect spurious
correlation artifacts (data contamination), diagnose mislabeled training examples
(data contamination), differentiate between a (partially) re-initialized model and a
trained one (model contamination), and detect out-of-distribution inputs (test-time
contamination). We find that the methods tested are able to diagnose a spurious
background bug, but not conclusively identify mislabeled training examples. In addition, a class of methods, that modify the back-propagation algorithm are invariant
to the higher layer parameters of a deep network; hence, ineffective for diagnosing
model contamination. We complement our analysis with a human subject study,
and find that subjects fail to identify defective models using attributions, but instead
rely, primarily, on model predictions. Taken together, our results provide guidance for practitioners and researchers turning to explanations as tools for model
debugging.1

1

Introduction

Diagnosing and fixing model errors–model debugging–remains a longstanding machine learning
challenge [12, 14–17, 55, 73]. Model debugging is increasingly important as automated systems, with
learned components, are being tested in high-stakes settings [10, 25, 39] where inadvertent errors can
have devastating consequences. Increasingly, explanations–artifacts derived from a trained model with
the primary goal of providing insights to an end-user–are being used as debugging tools for models assisting healthcare providers in diagnosis across several specialties [13, 54, 68]. Despite a vast array of
explanation methods and increased use for debugging, little guidance exists on method effectiveness.
For example, should an explanation work equally well for diagnosing mislabeled training samples and
detecting spurious correlation artifacts? Should an explanation that is sensitive to model parameters
also be effective for detecting domain shift? Consequently, we ask and address the following question:
which explanation methods are effective for which classes of model bugs?
To address this question, we make the following contributions:
1. Bug Categorization. We categorize bugs, based on the source of the defect leading to the
bug, in the supervised learning pipeline (see Figure 1) into three classes: data, model, and
test-time contamination. These contamination classes capture defects in the training data, model
specification and parameters, and with the input at test-time.
1

We encourage readers to consult the more complete manuscript on the arXiv.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

