Learning Kernel Tests Without Data Splitting

Jonas M. Kübler Wittawat Jitkrittum∗ Bernhard Schölkopf Krikamol Muandet
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{jmkuebler, bs, krikamol}@tue.mpg.de, wittawatj@gmail.com

Abstract
Modern large-scale kernel-based tests such as maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)
and kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD) optimize kernel hyperparameters on a
held-out sample via data splitting to obtain the most powerful test statistics. While
data splitting results in a tractable null distribution, it suffers from a reduction
in test power due to smaller test sample size. Inspired by the selective inference
framework, we propose an approach that enables learning the hyperparameters
and testing on the full sample without data splitting. Our approach can correctly
calibrate the test in the presence of such dependency, and yield a test threshold in
closed form. At the same significance level, our approach’s test power is empirically
larger than that of the data-splitting approach, regardless of its split proportion.

1

Introduction

Statistical hypothesis testing is a ubiquitous problem in numerous fields ranging from astronomy and
high-energy physics to medicine and psychology [1]. Given a hypothesis about a natural phenomenon,
it prescribes a systematic way to test the hypothesis empirically [2]. Two-sample testing, for instance,
addresses whether two samples originate from the same process, which is instrumental in experimental
science such as psychology, medicine, and economics. This procedure of rejecting false hypotheses
while retaining the correct ones governs most advances in science.
Traditionally, test statistics are usually fixed prior to the testing phase. In modern-day hypothesis
testing, however, practitioners often face a large family of test statistics from which the best one
must be selected before performing the test. For instance, the popular kernel-based two-sample tests
[3, 4] and goodness-of-fit tests [5, 6] require the specification of a kernel function and its parameter
values. Abundant evidence suggests that finding good parameter values for these tests improves
their performance in the testing phase [4, 7–9]. As a result, several approaches have recently been
proposed to learn optimal tests directly from data using different techniques such as optimized kernels
[4, 9–13], classifier two-sample tests [14, 15], and deep neural networks [16, 17], to name a few. In
other words, the modern-day hypothesis testing has become a two-stage “learn-then-test” problem.
Special care must be taken in the subsequent testing when optimal tests are learned from data. If
the same data is used for both learning and testing, it becomes harder to derive the asymptotic null
distribution because the selected test and the data are now dependent. In this case, conducting the
tests as if the test statistics are independent from the data leads to an uncontrollable false positive
rate, see, e.g., our experimental results. While permutation testing can be applied [18], it is too
computationally prohibitive for real-world applications. Up to now, the most prevalent solution is
data splitting: the data is randomly split into two parts, of which the former is used for learning the
test while the latter is used for testing. Although data splitting is simple and in principle leads to the
correct false positive rate, its downside is a potential loss of power.
In this paper, we investigate the two-stage “learn-then-test” problem in the context of modern kernelbased tests [3–6] where the choice of kernel function and its parameters play an important role. The
∗

Now with Google Research

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

