Sampling-Decomposable Generative Adversarial
Recommender
Binbin Jin† , Defu Lian†§∗, Zheng Liu‡ , Qi Liu†§ Jianhui Ma† , Xing Xie‡ , Enhong Chen†§∗
†
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
§
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
‡
Microsoft Research Asia
bb0725@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liandefu, qiliuql, jianhui, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn,
{zhengliu, xingx}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recommendation techniques are important approaches for alleviating information
overload. Being often trained on implicit user feedback, many recommenders
suffer from the sparsity challenge due to the lack of explicitly negative samples.
The GAN-style recommenders (i.e., IRGAN) addresses the challenge by learning
a generator and a discriminator adversarially, such that the generator produces
increasingly difficult samples for the discriminator to accelerate optimizing the
discrimination objective. However, producing samples from the generator is very
time-consuming, and our empirical study shows that the discriminator performs
poor in top-k item recommendation. To this end, a theoretical analysis is made for
the GAN-style algorithms, showing that the generator of limit capacity is diverged
from the optimal generator. This may interpret the limitation of discriminator’s
performance. Based on these findings, we propose a Sampling-Decomposable Generative Adversarial Recommender (SD-GAR). In the framework, the divergence
between some generator and the optimum is compensated by self-normalized
importance sampling; the efficiency of sample generation is improved with a
sampling-decomposable generator, such that each sample can be generated in O(1)
with the Vose-Alias method. Interestingly, due to decomposability of sampling,
the generator can be optimized with the closed-form solutions in an alternating
manner, being different from policy gradient in the GAN-style algorithms. We
extensively evaluate the proposed algorithm with five real-world recommendation
datasets. The results show that SD-GAR outperforms IRGAN by 12.4% and the
SOTA recommender by 10% on average. Moreover, discriminator training can be
20x faster on the dataset with more than 120K items.

1

Introduction

With the popularity of Web 2.0, content disseminated on Internet has been growing explosively,
which greatly intensifies the information overload problem. Recommender system is regarded as an
important approach to address this problem by filtering out irrelevant information automatically. In
recent years, personalized ranking algorithms, such as [7, 11, 16, 17, 13, 18, 32], have been widely
used in E-commerce and online advertisement, creating huge business value and social impact for
various kinds of web services. Since the recommendation algorithms are usually trained with implicit
user feedback such as click and purchase history, the lack of explicitly negative samples become
an imperative problem. In other words, how to discover and utilize informative negative samples
becomes critical in optimizing the learning performance.
∗

Defu Lian and Enhong Chen are corresponding authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

