Efficient Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
through Optimistic Policy Search and Planning
Sebastian Curi ∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
scuri@inf.ethz.ch

Felix Berkenkamp ∗
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
felix.berkenkamp@de.bosch.com

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning algorithms with probabilistic dynamical
models are amongst the most data-efficient learning methods. This is often
attributed to their ability to distinguish between epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty.
However, while most algorithms distinguish these two uncertainties for learning
the model, they ignore it when optimizing the policy, which leads to greedy
and insufficient exploration. At the same time, there are no practical solvers
for optimistic exploration algorithms. In this paper, we propose a practical
optimistic exploration algorithm (H-UCRL). H-UCRL reparameterizes the set of
plausible models and hallucinates control directly on the epistemic uncertainty.
By augmenting the input space with the hallucinated inputs, H-UCRL can be
solved using standard greedy planners. Furthermore, we analyze H-UCRL and
construct a general regret bound for well-calibrated models, which is provably
sublinear in the case of Gaussian Process models. Based on this theoretical
foundation, we show how optimistic exploration can be easily combined with
state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algorithms and different probabilistic
models. Our experiments demonstrate that optimistic exploration significantly
speeds-up learning when there are penalties on actions, a setting that is notoriously
difficult for existing model-based reinforcement learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Model-Based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) with probabilistic dynamical models can solve many
challenging high-dimensional tasks with impressive sample efficiency (Chua et al., 2018). These
algorithms alternate between two phases: first, they collect data with a policy and fit a model to the
data; then, they simulate transitions with the model and optimize the policy accordingly. A key feature
of the recent success of MBRL algorithms is the use of models that explicitly distinguish between
epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty when learning a model (Gal, 2016). Aleatoric uncertainty is inherent to the system (noise), whereas epistemic uncertainty arises from data scarcity (Der Kiureghian
and Ditlevsen, 2009). However, to optimize the policy, practical algorithms marginalize over both the
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty to optimize the expected performance under the current model, as
in PILCO (Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011). This greedy exploitation can cause the optimization to
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

