On Power Laws in Deep Ensembles

Ekaterina Lobacheva1 , Nadezhda Chirkova1 , Maxim Kodryan1 , Dmitry Vetrov1,2
1
Samsung-HSE Laboratory, National Research University Higher School of Economics
2
Samsung AI Center Moscow
Moscow, Russia
{elobacheva,nchirkova,mkodryan,dvetrov}@hse.ru

Abstract
Ensembles of deep neural networks are known to achieve state-of-the-art performance in uncertainty estimation and lead to accuracy improvement. In this work,
we focus on a classification problem and investigate the behavior of both noncalibrated and calibrated negative log-likelihood (CNLL) of a deep ensemble as
a function of the ensemble size and the member network size. We indicate the
conditions under which CNLL follows a power law w. r. t. ensemble size or member
network size, and analyze the dynamics of the parameters of the discovered power
laws. Our important practical finding is that one large network may perform worse
than an ensemble of several medium-size networks with the same total number
of parameters (we call this ensemble a memory split). Using the detected power
law-like dependencies, we can predict (1) the possible gain from the ensembling
of networks with given structure, (2) the optimal memory split given a memory
budget, based on a relatively small number of trained networks.

1

Introduction

Neural networks provide state-of-the-art results in a variety of machine learning tasks, however,
several neural network’s aspects complicate their usage in practice, including overconfidence [18],
vulnerability to adversarial attacks [30], and overfitting [29]. One of the ways to compensate these
drawbacks is using deep ensembles, i. e. the ensembles of neural networks trained from different
random initialization [18]. In addition to increasing the task-specific metric, e. g. accuracy, the deep
ensembles are known to improve the quality of uncertainty estimation, compared to a single network.
There is yet no consensus on how to measure the quality of uncertainty estimation. Ashukha et al.
[2] consider a wide range of possible metrics and show that the calibrated negative log-likelihood
(CNLL) is the most reliable one because it avoids the majority of pitfalls revealed in the same work.
Increasing the size n of the deep ensemble, i. e. the number of networks in the ensemble, is known to
improve the performance [2]. The same effect holds for increasing the size s of a neural network, i. e.
the number of its parameters. Recent works [3, 22] show that even in an extremely overparameterized
regime, increasing s leads to a higher quality. These works also mention a curious effect of nonmonotonicity of the test error w. r. t. the network size, called double descent behaviour.
In figure 1, left, we may observe the saturation and stabilization of quality with the growth of both the
ensemble size n and the network size s. The goal of this work is to study the asymptotic properties
of CNLL of deep ensembles as a function of n and s. We investigate under which conditions and
w. r. t. which dimensions the CNLL follows a power law for deep ensembles in practice. In addition
to the horizontal and vertical cuts of the diagram shown in figure 1, left, we also study its diagonal
direction, which corresponds to the increase of the total parameter count.
The power-law behaviour of deep ensembles has previously been touched in the literature. Geiger
et al. [8] consider simple shallow architectures and reason about the power-law behaviour of the test
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

