Finer Metagenomic Reconstruction
via Biodiversity Optimization

Simon Foucart
Department of Mathematics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
foucart@tamu.edu

David Koslicki
Departments of Computer Science and Engineering,
Biology, and the Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
dmk333@psu.edu

Abstract
When analyzing communities of microorganisms from their sequenced DNA, an
important task is taxonomic profiling: enumerating the presence and relative abundance of all organisms, or merely of all taxa, contained in the sample. This task can
be tackled via compressive-sensing-based approaches, which favor communities
featuring the fewest organisms among those consistent with the observed DNA
data. Despite their successes, these parsimonious approaches sometimes conflict
with biological realism by overlooking organism similarities. Here, we leverage a
recently developed notion of biological diversity that simultaneously accounts for
organism similarities and retains the optimization strategy underlying compressivesensing-based approaches. We demonstrate that minimizing biological diversity
still produces sparse taxonomic profiles and we experimentally validate superiority
to existing compressive-sensing-based approaches. Despite showing that the objective function is almost never convex and often concave, generally yielding NP-hard
problems, we exhibit ways of representing organism similarities for which minimizing diversity can be performed via a sequence of linear programs guaranteed
to decrease diversity. Better yet, when biological similarity is quantified by k-mer
co-occurrence (a popular notion in bioinformatics), minimizing diversity actually
reduces to one linear program that can utilize multiple k-mer sizes to enhance
performance. In proof-of-concept experiments, we verify that the latter procedure
can lead to significant gains when taxonomically profiling a metagenomic sample,
both in terms of reconstruction accuracy and computational performance.

1

Introduction

Metagenomics is the study of microbial communities from the content of their sequenced DNA or
RNA. This field has experienced a surge in activity as researchers have produced numerous computational tools to analyze such data sets. These tools aim to accomplish one or more of the following
tasks: reassemble short sequences into partial or whole genomes or into contigs (called metagenomic
assembly), classify or cluster the resulting longer sequences into single taxa or organism sets (called
binning), or else infer the identity and relative abundance of taxa in a sample (called taxonomic
profiling). Recent reviews have indicated that significant challenges exist for each of these tasks,
and in particular taxonomic profiling methods still struggle to accurately characterize metagenomic
samples below the genus taxonomic level [17, 15]. Many of these taxonomic profiling tools attempt
to determine the fewest taxa required to explain some measurement of a given metagenomic sample
[4, 16, 18, 11]. In previous work [12, 13], a method was introduced that leverages compressive
sensing techniques to find the fewest taxa that fits the frequency of short sequences of nucleotides
(i.e., k-mers) in a given sample. It enables taxonomic profiling of a given metagenome without
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

