Regret in Online Recommendation Systems

Narae Ryu
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
nrryu@kaist.ac.kr

Kaito Ariu
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
ariu@kth.se
Se-Young Yun
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
yunseyoung@kaist.ac.kr

Alexandre Proutière
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
This paper proposes a theoretical analysis of recommendation systems in an online
setting, where items are sequentially recommended to users over time. In each
round, a user, randomly picked from a population of m users, requests a recommendation. The decision-maker observes the user and selects an item from a catalogue
of n items. Importantly, an item cannot be recommended twice to the same user.
The probabilities that a user likes each item are unknown. The performance of
the recommendation algorithm is captured through its regret, considering as a
reference an Oracle algorithm aware of these probabilities. We investigate various
structural assumptions on these probabilities: we derive for each structure regret
lower bounds, and devise algorithms achieving these limits. Interestingly, our
analysis reveals the relative weights of the different components of regret: the
component due to the constraint of not presenting the same item twice to the same
user, that due to learning the chances users like items, and finally that arising when
learning the underlying structure.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems [28] have over the last two decades triggered important research efforts
(see, e.g., [9, 10, 21, 3] for recent works and references therein), mainly focused towards the design
and analysis of algorithms with improved efficiency. These algorithms are, to some extent, all
based on the principle of collaborative filtering: similar items should yield similar user responses,
and similar users have similar probabilities of liking or disliking a given item. In turn, efficient
recommendation algorithms need to learn and exploit the underlying structure tying the responses of
the users to the various items together.
Most recommendation systems operate in an online setting, where items are sequentially recommended to users over time. We investigate recommendation algorithms in this setting. More precisely,
we consider a system of n items and m users, where m ≥ n (as this is typically the case in practice).
In each round, the algorithm needs to recommend an item to a known user, picked randomly among
the m users. The response of the user is noisy: the user likes the recommended item with an a
priori unknown probability depending on the (item, user) pair. In practice, it does not make sense to
recommend an item twice to the same user (why should we recommend an item to a user who already
considered or even bought the item?). We restrict our attention to algorithms that do not recommend
an item twice to the same user, a constraint referred to as the no-repetition constraint. The objective
is to devise algorithms maximizing the expected number of successful recommendations over a time
horizon of T rounds.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

