Learning Loss for Test-Time Augmentation

Ildoo Kim∗
Kakao Brain
ildoo.kim@kakaobrain.com

Younghoon Kim∗†
Sungshin Women’s University
yhkim@sungshin.ac.kr

Sungwoong Kim
Kakao Brain
swkim@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Data augmentation has been actively studied for robust neural networks. Most
of the recent data augmentation methods focus on augmenting datasets during
the training phase. At the testing phase, simple transformations are still widely
used for test-time augmentation. This paper proposes a novel instance-level testtime augmentation that efficiently selects suitable transformations for a test input.
Our proposed method involves an auxiliary module to predict the loss of each
possible transformation given the input. Then, the transformations having lower
predicted losses are applied to the input. The network obtains the results by
averaging the prediction results of augmented inputs. Experimental results on
several image classification benchmarks show that the proposed instance-aware testtime augmentation improves the model’s robustness against various corruptions.

1

Introduction

Various autonomous systems (e.g., autonomous vehicle [11], medical diagnosis [2, 58], fault detection
in the manufacturing process [27]) try to adopt neural networks as visual recognition module. The
neural networks efficiently learn visual patterns to classify critical objects such as humans on the
roads, cancers in our body, and manufacturing products’ faults. Although recent research on deep
learning with the benchmark datasets has shown promising results [5, 44], robustness problems can
arise in real-world applications. As shown in previous works [19, 20, 15], the classification result
can be easily broken even with slight deformations to the input image. In processing an input image
using neural networks in real-world situations, several variations or corruptions can occur, leading
to unexpected results [38]. Ensuring robustness is mission-critical in many applications, so many
researchers have focused on the problem of neural networks [16, 51, 35, 3, 39, 31].
Recently, advanced data augmentation techniques have been proposed to improve the robustness of
neural networks [47, 57, 7, 59, 55, 5, 29]. Automatically searching augmentation policies in a datadriven manner [5, 29] is critical to achieve the state-of-the-art result [23, 44]. Although the methods
enhance the robustness of networks significantly, there are potentials to improve the performance with
data augmentation in the testing phase. We empirically observe that simple deformations of input
images at test time cause significant performance drop even the network is trained with advanced data
augmentation. Moreover, we verify that there is still a large room to improve the trained network’s
performance with the appropriate data transformation at the testing phase.
Test-time augmentation of the input data has often been used to produce more robust prediction
results. Given a test input image, it averages the network’s predictions over multiple transformations
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

