Beta Embeddings for Multi-Hop Logical Reasoning
in Knowledge Graphs

Hongyu Ren
Stanford University
hyren@cs.stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec
Stanford University
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
One of the fundamental problems in Artificial Intelligence is to perform complex
multi-hop logical reasoning over the facts captured by a knowledge graph (KG).
This problem is challenging, because KGs can be massive and incomplete. Recent
approaches embed KG entities in a low dimensional space and then use these
embeddings to find the answer entities. However, it has been an outstanding
challenge of how to handle arbitrary first-order logic (FOL) queries as present
methods are limited to only a subset of FOL operators. In particular, the negation
operator is not supported. An additional limitation of present methods is also that
they cannot naturally model uncertainty. Here, we present B ETA E, a probabilistic
embedding framework for answering arbitrary FOL queries over KGs. B ETA E is
the first method that can handle a complete set of first-order logical operations:
conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨), and negation (¬). A key insight of B ETA E
is to use probabilistic distributions with bounded support, specifically the Beta
distribution, and embed queries/entities as distributions, which as a consequence
allows us to also faithfully model uncertainty. Logical operations are performed in
the embedding space by neural operators over the probabilistic embeddings. We
demonstrate the performance of B ETA E on answering arbitrary FOL queries on
three large, incomplete KGs. While being more general, B ETA E also increases
relative performance by up to 25.4% over the current state-of-the-art KG reasoning
methods that can only handle conjunctive queries without negation.

1

Introduction

Reasoning is a process of deriving logical conclusion or making predictions from available knowledge/facts. Knowledge can be encoded in a knowledge graph (KG), where entities are expressed
as nodes and relations as edges. Real-world KGs, such as Freebase [1], Yago [2], NELL [3], are
large-scale as well as noisy and incomplete. Reasoning in KGs is a fundamental problem in Artificial Intelligence. In essence, it involves answering first-order logic (FOL) queries over KGs using
operators existential quantification (∃), conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨), and negation (¬).
To find answers, a given FOL query can be viewed as a computation graph which specifies the steps
needed. A concrete example of the computation graph for the query “List the presidents of European
countries that have never held the World Cup” is shown in Fig. 1. The query can be represented as a
conjunction of three terms: “Located(Europe,V)”, which finds all European countries; “¬Held(World
Cup,V)”, which finds all countries that never held the World Cup; and “President(V,V? )”, which finds
presidents of given countries. In order to answer this query, one first locates the entity “Europe”
and then traverses the KG by relation “Located” to identify a set of European countries. Similar
operations are needed for the entity “World Cup” to obtain countries that hosted the World Cup. One
then needs to complement the second set to identify countries that have never held the World Cup and
intersect the complement with the set of European countries. The final step is to apply the relation
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

