Investigating Gender Bias in Language Models
Using Causal Mediation Analysis

Jesse Vig∗1
Sebastian Gehrmann*2
Yonatan Belinkov*2
2
3
Sharon Qian
Daniel Nevo
Yaron Singer2
Stuart Shieber2
1
2
3
Salesforce Research
Harvard University
Tel Aviv University
jvig@salesforce.com
danielnevo@tauex.tau.ac.il
{gehrmann,belinkov,sharonqian,yaron,shieber}@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Many interpretation methods for neural models in natural language processing
investigate how information is encoded inside hidden representations. However,
these methods can only measure whether the information exists, not whether it is
actually used by the model. We propose a methodology grounded in the theory
of causal mediation analysis for interpreting which parts of a model are causally
implicated in its behavior. The approach enables us to analyze the mechanisms
that facilitate the flow of information from input to output through various model
components, known as mediators. As a case study, we apply this methodology to
analyzing gender bias in pre-trained Transformer language models. We study the
role of individual neurons and attention heads in mediating gender bias across three
datasets designed to gauge a model’s sensitivity to gender bias. Our mediation
analysis reveals that gender bias effects are concentrated in specific components of
the model that may exhibit highly specialized behavior.

1

Introduction

The success of neural network models in various natural language processing tasks, coupled with
their opaque nature, has led to much interest in interpreting and analyzing such models. One goal of
these analyses is to identify whether a model utilizes latent information in its internal representations
to arrive at a prediction. This is of particular importance when diagnosing the reasons for a biased
prediction. A popular class of analysis methods, often called structural analysis, aims to extract
this information using probing classifiers that predict linguistic properties from representations of
trained models (e.g., Adi et al., 2017; Conneau et al., 2018; Hupkes et al., 2018; Tenney et al.,
2019). However, since probing classifiers only yield a correlational measure between a model’s
representations and an external property (Belinkov and Glass, 2019), they cannot show if the property
is causally connected to the model’s predictions. Moreover, Barrett et al. (2019) showed that probing
classifiers may generate unfaithful interpretations and fail to generalize to unseen data.
We introduce a methodology for interpreting neural models to address these limitations. We adapt
causal mediation analysis (Pearl, 2001) for analyzing the mechanisms by which information flows
from input to output through different model components. Mediation analysis relies on measuring the
change in an output following a counterfactual intervention in an intermediate variable, or mediator.
Through such interventions, one can measure the degree to which inputs influence outputs directly
(direct effect), or indirectly through the mediator (indirect effect). In our case, the mediator can be any
model components that we wish to study, such as neurons or attention heads. We propose multiple
controlled interventions in these mediators, which reveal their causal role in a model’s behavior.
∗

Equal contribution. Y.B. is now at the Technion – Israel Institute of Technology. Work conducted while J.V.
was at Palo Alto Research Center.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

