Provably Efficient Neural Estimation of Structural
Equation Model: An Adversarial Approach

Luofeng Liao
The University of Chicago
luofengl@uchicago.edu
Bo Dai
Google Research, Brain Team
bodai@google.com

You-Lin Chen
The University of Chicago
youlinchen@uchicago.edu
Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University
zy6@princeton.edu

Mladen Kolar
The University of Chicago
mkolar@chicagobooth.edu

Abstract
Structural equation models (SEMs) are widely used in sciences, ranging from
economics to psychology, to uncover causal relationships underlying a complex
system under consideration and estimate structural parameters of interest. We
study estimation in a class of generalized SEMs where the object of interest is
defined as the solution to a linear operator equation. We formulate the linear
operator equation as a min-max game, where both players are parameterized by
neural networks (NNs), and learn the parameters of these neural networks using
the stochastic gradient descent. We consider both 2-layer and multi-layer NNs with
ReLU activation functions and prove global convergence in an overparametrized
regime, where the number of neurons is diverging. The results are established using
techniques from online learning and local linearization of NNs, and improve in
several aspects the current state-of-the-art. For the first time we provide a tractable
estimation procedure for SEMs based on NNs with provable convergence and
without the need for sample splitting.

1

Introduction

Structural equation models (SEMs) are widely used in economics [50], psychology [9], and causal
inference [41]. In the most general form [41, 42], an SEM defines a joint distribution over p observed
random variables tXj upj“1 as Xj “ fj pXpaD pjq , εj q, j “ 1, . . . , p, where tfj u are unknown
functions of interest, tεj u are mutually independent noise variables, D is the underlying directed
acyclic graph (DAG), and paD pjq denotes the set of parents of Xj in D. The joint distribution of
tXj u is Markov with respect to the graph D.
In most cases, estimation of SEMs are based on the conditional moment restrictions implied by the
model. For example, some observational data can be thought of as coming from the equilibrium of a
dynamic system. Examples include dynamic models where an agent interacts with the environment,
such as in reinforcement learning [17], consumption-based asset pricing models [20], and rational
expectation models [25]. In these models, the equilibrium behavior of the agent is characterized
by conditional moment equations. A second example is instrument variable (IV) regression, where
conditional moment equations also play a fundamental role. IV regression is used to estimate causal
effects of input X on output Y in the presence of confounding noise e [38]. Finally, in time-series
and panel data models, observed variables exhibit temporal or cross-sectional dependence that can
also be depicted by conditioning [46].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

