Random Walk Graph Neural Networks

Giannis Nikolentzos
École Polytechnique and AUEB
nikolentzos@aueb.gr

Michalis Vazirgiannis
École Polytechnique and AUEB
mvazirg@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have become the de facto tool
for performing machine learning tasks on graphs. Most GNNs belong to the
family of message passing neural networks (MPNNs). These models employ an
iterative neighborhood aggregation scheme to update vertex representations. Then,
to compute vector representations of graphs, they aggregate the representations
of the vertices using some permutation invariant function. One would expect
the hidden layers of a GNN to be composed of parameters that take the form of
graphs. However, this is not the case for MPNNs since their update procedure is
parameterized by fully-connected layers. In this paper, we propose a more intuitive
and transparent architecture for graph-structured data, so-called Random Walk
Graph Neural Network (RWNN). The first layer of the model consists of a number
of trainable “hidden graphs” which are compared against the input graphs using a
random walk kernel to produce graph representations. These representations are
then passed on to a fully-connected neural network which produces the output. The
employed random walk kernel is differentiable, and therefore, the proposed model
is end-to-end trainable. We demonstrate the model’s transparency on synthetic
datasets. Furthermore, we empirically evaluate the model on graph classification
datasets and show that it achieves competitive performance.

1

Introduction

In recent years, graphs have become a very useful abstraction for representing a wide variety of
real-world datasets. Graphs are ubiquitous in several application domains, such as in social networks,
in bioinformatics, and in information networks. Due to this abundance of graph-structured data,
machine learning on graphs has recently emerged as a very important task with applications ranging
from drug design [18] to modeling physical systems [3].
In the past years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have attracted considerable attention in the machine
learning community. These models offer a powerful tool for performing machine learning on graphs.
Although numerous GNN variants have been recently proposed [35, 24, 23, 48, 46, 44], most of
them share the same basic idea, and can be reformulated into a single common framework, so-called
message passing neural networks (MPNNs) [13]. These models employ a message passing procedure
to aggregate local information of vertices. For graph-related tasks, MPNNs usually apply some
permutation invariant readout function to the vertex representations to produce a representation for
the entire graph. Common readout functions treat each graph as a set of vertex representations, thus
ignoring the interactions between the vertices. These interactions are implicitly encoded into the
learned vertex representations produced by the message passing procedure. However, due to the lack
of transparency brought by the combination of graph structure with feature information, it is not clear
whether the information of interest is encoded into these representations.
Before the advent of deep learning, graph kernels had established themselves as the standard approach
for performing machine learning tasks on graphs [33, 22]. A graph kernel is a symmetric positive
semidefinite function defined on the space of graphs. These methods enable the application of kernel
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

