Better Set Representations For Relational Reasoning

Qian Huang ∗
Cornell University
qh53@cornell.edu

Horace He *
Cornell University & Facebook
hh498@cornell.edu

Yan Zhang
University of Southampton
yz5n12@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Ser-Nam Lim
Facebook AI
sernam@gmail.com

Abhay Singh
Cornell University
as2626@cornell.edu
Austin R. Benson
Cornell University
arb@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Incorporating relational reasoning into neural networks has greatly expanded their
capabilities and scope. One defining trait of relational reasoning is that it operates
on a set of entities, as opposed to standard vector representations. Existing endto-end approaches for relational reasoning typically extract entities from inputs
by directly interpreting the latent feature representations as a set. We show that
these approaches do not respect set permutational invariance and thus have fundamental representational limitations. To resolve this limitation, we propose a simple
and general network module called Set Refiner Network (SRN). We first use synthetic image experiments to demonstrate how our approach effectively decomposes
objects without explicit supervision. Then, we insert our module into existing relational reasoning models and show that respecting set invariance leads to substantial
gains in prediction performance and robustness on several relational reasoning
tasks. Code can be found at github.com/CUAI/BetterSetRepresentations.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning models perform many tasks well, from speech recognition to object detection.
However, despite their success, a criticism of deep learning is its limitation to low-level tasks as
opposed to more sophisticated reasoning. This gap has drawn analogies to the difference in so-called
“System 1” (i.e., low-level perception and intuitive knowledge) and “System 2” (i.e., reasoning,
planning, and imagination) thinking from cognitive psychology [3, 9]. Proposals for moving towards
System 2 reasoning in learning systems involve creating new abilities for composition, combinatorial
generalization, and disentanglement [2, 13, 17].
One approach for augmenting neural networks with these capabilities is performing relational
reasoning over structured representations, such as sets or graphs. This approach is effective in
computer vision for tasks such as visual question answering, image captioning, and video understanding [7, 15, 19]. For relational reasoning, these systems are commonly split into two stages:
(1) a perceptual stage that extracts structured sets of vector representations, intended to correspond
to entities from the raw data, and (2) a reasoning stage that uses these representations. As the
underlying data is unstructured (e.g., images or text), designing end-to-end models that generate
set representations is challenging. Typical differentiable methods directly map the input to latent
features using a feedforward neural network and partition the latent features into a set representation
for downstream reasoning [1, 10, 15, 22].
However, this class of existing methods has a fundamental flaw that prevents them from extracting
certain desired sets of entities — the so-called responsibility problem [24]. At a high level, if there
∗

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

