Reward Propagation
Using Graph Convolutional Networks

Martin Klissarov
Mila, McGill University
martin.klissarov@mail.mcgill.ca

Doina Precup
Mila, McGill University and DeepMind
dprecup@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
Potential-based reward shaping provides an approach for designing good reward
functions, with the purpose of speeding up learning. However, automatically finding potential functions for complex environments is a difficult problem (in fact,
of the same difficulty as learning a value function from scratch). We propose a
new framework for learning potential functions by leveraging ideas from graph
representation learning. Our approach relies on Graph Convolutional Networks
which we use as a key ingredient in combination with the probabilistic inference
view of reinforcement learning. More precisely, we leverage Graph Convolutional
Networks to perform message passing from rewarding states. The propagated
messages can then be used as potential functions for reward shaping to accelerate learning. We verify empirically that our approach can achieve considerable
improvements in both small and high-dimensional control problems.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms provide a solution to the problem of learning a policy that
optimizes an expected, cumulative function of rewards. Consequently, a good reward function is
critical to the practical success of these algorithms. However, designing such a function can be
challenging [Amodei et al., 2016]. Approaches to this problem include, amongst others, intrinsic
motivation [Oudeyer and Kaplan, 2007, Schmidhuber, 2010], optimal rewards [Singh et al., 2010]
and potential-based reward shaping [Ng et al., 1999]. The latter provides an appealing formulation as
it does not change the optimal policy of an MDP while potentially speeding up the learning process.
However, the design of potential functions used for reward shaping is still an open question.
In this paper, we present a solution to this problem by leveraging the probabilistic inference view of
RL [Toussaint and Storkey, 2006, Ziebart et al., 2008]. In particular, we are interested in formulating
the RL problem as a directed graph whose structure is analogous to hidden Markov models. In
such graphs it is convenient to perform inference through message passing with algorithms such as
the forward-backward algorithm [Rabiner and Juang, 1986]. This inference procedure essentially
propagates information from the rewarding states in the MDP and results in a function over states.
This function could then naturally be leveraged as a potential function for potential-based reward
shaping. However, the main drawback of traditional message passing algorithms is that they can be
computationally expensive and are therefore hard to scale to large or continuous state space.
We present an implementation that is both scalable and flexible by drawing connections to spectral
graph theory [Chung, 1997]. We use Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) [Kipf and Welling,
2016] to propagate information about the rewards in an environment through the message passing
mechanism defined by the GCN’s structural bias and loss function. Indeed, GCNs belong to the
larger class of Message Passing Neural Networks [Gilmer et al., 2017] with the special characteristic
that their message passing mechanism builds on the graph Laplacian. The framework of Proto-Value
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

