Continuous Object Representation Networks: Novel
View Synthesis without Target View Supervision

Nicolai Häni
Selim Engin
Jun-Jee Chao
Volkan Isler
{haeni001, engin003, chao0107, isler}@umn.edu
University of Minnesota

Abstract
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) is concerned with synthesizing views under camera
viewpoint transformations from one or multiple input images. NVS requires explicit
reasoning about 3D object structure and unseen parts of the scene to synthesize
convincing results. As a result, current approaches typically rely on supervised
training with either ground truth 3D models or multiple target images. We propose
Continuous Object Representation Networks (CORN), a conditional architecture
that encodes an input image’s geometry and appearance that map to a 3D consistent
scene representation. We can train CORN with only two source images per object
by combining our model with a neural renderer. A key feature of CORN is that
it requires no ground truth 3D models or target view supervision. Regardless,
CORN performs well on challenging tasks such as novel view synthesis and singleview 3D reconstruction and achieves performance comparable to state-of-the-art
approaches that use direct supervision. For up-to-date information, data, and code,
please see our project page 1 .

1

Introduction

In 1971, Shephard and Metzler [44] introduced the concept of mental rotation, the ability to rotate
3D objects mentally and link the model to its projection. Novel View Synthesis (NVS) research
seeks to replicate this capability in machines by generating images of a scene from previously unseen
viewpoints, unlocking applications in image editing, animation, or robotic manipulation. View
synthesis is a challenging problem, as it requires understanding the 3D scene structure, reason on
image semantics, and the ability to render the internal representation into a target viewpoint. A
common approach for NVS is to use a large collection of views to reconstruct a 3D mesh [10, 43].
Recent methods have made progress in learning 3D object representations, such as voxel grids [60, 46,
52, 33, 32], point clouds [1, 61, 56], or meshes [54, 12, 48, 55]. However, the discrete nature of these
representations limit the achievable resolution and induce significant memory overhead. Continuous
representations [36, 25, 42, 47, 58, 6, 24, 27] address these challenges. However, proposed methods
require either 3D ground truth or multi-view supervision, limiting these approaches’ applicability to
domains where data is available.
We introduce Continuous Object Representation Networks (CORNs), a neural object representation
that enforces multi-view consistency in geometry and appearance with natural generalization across
scenes, learned from as few as two images per object. The key idea of CORNs is to extract
local and global features from the input images and represent the scene implicitly as a continuous,
differentiable function that maps local and global features to 3D world coordinates. We optimize
CORNs from only two source views using transformation chains and 3D feature consistency as
self-supervision, requiring 50× fewer data during training than the current state-of-the-art models.
1

Project page: nicolaihaeni.github.io/corn/

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

