Timeseries Anomaly Detection using
Temporal Hierarchical One-Class Network

Lifeng Shen1 , Zhuocong Li2 , James T. Kwok1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
{lshenae,jamesk}@cse.ust.hk
2
Cloud and Smart Industries Group, Tencent, China
zhuocongli@tencent.com
1

Abstract
Real-world timeseries have complex underlying temporal dynamics and the detection of anomalies is challenging. In this paper, we propose the Temporal Hierarchical One-Class (THOC) network, a temporal one-class classification model for
timeseries anomaly detection. It captures temporal dynamics in multiple scales
by using a dilated recurrent neural network with skip connections. Using multiple
hyperspheres obtained with a hierarchical clustering process, a one-class objective
called Multiscale Vector Data Description is defined. This allows the temporal
dynamics to be well captured by a set of multi-resolution temporal clusters. To
further facilitate representation learning, the hypersphere centers are encouraged to
be orthogonal to each other, and a self-supervision task in the temporal domain is
added. The whole model can be trained end-to-end. Extensive empirical studies
on various real-world timeseries demonstrate that the proposed THOC network
outperforms recent strong deep learning baselines on timeseries anomaly detection.

1

Introduction

In complex cyber-physical systems such as power plants, data centers and smart factories, there are
tons of sensors operating and generating substantial amounts of measurements continuously. To help
monitor the system’s real-time working conditions, it is critical to be able to find anomalies such
that potential risks and financial losses can be avoided. The problem of identifying the system’s
abnormal status in each time step of the timeseries data is called timeseries anomaly detection [31].
A comprehensive survey on the traditional techniques can be found in [6].
An effective timeseries anomaly detection method should be able to model the complex nonlinear
temporal dynamics of the underlying system’s normal behavior, while being robust and can be
generalized to unseen anomalies. However, the development of such a technique is very challenging.
First, real-world timeseries have highly nonlinear temporal dependencies and complex interactions
among variables. Moreover, anomalies are often rare. The finding and labeling of these anomalies
are very time-consuming and expensive in practice. Hence, timeseries anomaly detection is usually
formulated in the unsupervised learning setting [28], which is also the focus in this paper.
One-class classification [19] is a popular paradigm for anomaly detection. The idea is that by
assuming that most of the training data are normal, their characteristics are captured and learned by a
model. An outlier is then detected when the current observation cannot be well-fitted by the model.
Two well-known and closely related one-class classification models are the one-class support vector
machine (OC-SVM) [26], which uses a hyperplane to separate the normal data from anomalous data;
and the support vector data description (SVDD) [29], which uses a hypersphere to enclose the normal
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

