Optimal visual search based on a model of target
detectability in natural images

Shima Rashidi∗, Krista A. Ehinger, Andrew Turpin, Lars Kulik
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
rashidis@student.unimelb.edu.au, {kehinger, aturpin, lkulik}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
To analyse visual systems, the concept of an ideal observer promises an optimal
response for a given task. Bayesian ideal observers can provide optimal responses
under uncertainty, if they are given the true distributions as input. In visual search
tasks, prior studies have used signal to noise ratio (SNR) or psychophysics experiments to set the distributional parameters for simple targets on backgrounds
with known patterns, however these methods do not easily translate to complex
targets on natural scenes. Here, we develop a model of target detectability in
natural images to estimate the parameters of target-present and target-absent distributions for a visual search task. We present a novel approach for approximating the
foveated detectability of a known target in natural backgrounds based on biological
aspects of human visual system. Our model considers both the uncertainty about
target position and the visual system’s variability due to its reduced performance
in the periphery compared to the fovea. Our automated prediction algorithm uses
trained logistic regression as a post processing phase of a pre-trained deep neural
network. Eye tracking data from 12 observers detecting targets on natural image
backgrounds are used as ground truth to tune foveation parameters and evaluate the
model, using cross-validation. Finally, the model of target detectability is used in a
Bayesian ideal observer model of visual search, and compared to human search
performance.

1

Introduction

Humans have evolved a foveated visual system which, instead of processing an entire view with
uniform resolution, receives higher spatial detail in the centre of the visual field (the fovea). Thus, in
a visual search, the eyes make a series of movements to direct the high-resolution fovea to different
parts of a scene in order to find the target [1]. This process is constrained by limitations of the visual
system, namely lower acuity and degraded ability to resolve feature locations in the visual periphery,
resulting in target location uncertainty [2; 3; 4]. However, most models of human visual search and
attention are based on the concept of saliency [5; 6]; they do not model target detectability and are not
able to predict optimal eye movement sequences. Similarly, most computer vision object detectors
are based on discriminative models which do not predict target detection uncertainty[7].
A Bayesian ideal observer makes optimal decisions under uncertainty. Modelling a visual search
task as a Bayesian ideal observer problem [8], we assume that the visual system computes a series
of optimal eye movements that reduces the uncertainty of target location. However, this assumes
that the detectability of the target is known across the visual field. This process has been modeled
for simple targets in noise images, and has been shown to predict human eye movements in these
∗
The code to reproduce the results of the paper can be found at https://github.com/rashidis/bio_
based_detectability

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

