STLnet: Signal Temporal Logic Enforced
Multivariate Recurrent Neural Networks
Meiyi Ma, Ji Gao, Lu Feng, John Stankovic
University of Virginia
{meiyi,jg6yd,lu.feng,stankovic}@virginia.edu

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have made great achievements for sequential
prediction tasks. In practice, the target sequence often follows certain model
properties or patterns (e.g., reasonable ranges, consecutive changes, resource
constraint, temporal correlations between multiple variables, existence, unusual
cases, etc.). However, RNNs cannot guarantee their learned distributions satisfy
these properties. It is even more challenging for the prediction of large-scale and
complex Cyber-Physical Systems. Failure to produce outcomes that meet these
properties will result in inaccurate and even meaningless results. In this paper, we
develop a new temporal logic-based learning framework, STLnet, which guides
the RNN learning process with auxiliary knowledge of model properties, and
produces a more robust model for improved future predictions. Our framework
can be applied to general sequential deep learning models, and trained in an endto-end manner with back-propagation. We evaluate the performance of STLnet
using large-scale real-world city data. The experimental results show STLnet not
only improves the accuracy of predictions, but importantly also guarantees the
satisfaction of model properties and increases the robustness of RNNs.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), especially Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have great achievements for sequential prediction tasks and are broadly applied to support the decision making of
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) [6, 15, 26]. Usually, in CPSs, RNNs are applied to predict the
changing of system states or their environment. Systems take actions based on the prediction to
guarantee the safety and performance of the system. For example, the power plant predicts the usages
of energy in the next few days and decides how much energy to generate. An event service predicts
the population and traffic for a big concert and allocates police and security resources. Training
RNNs for complex CPSs (i.e., creating a prediction model) such as for Smart Cities is difficult [17].
The models are not always robust, often subject to anomalies, and subject to erroneous predictions,
especially when the predictions are projected into the future (errors grow over time).
On the other hand, the target sequence often follows specific model properties or patterns, which
should also be followed by the predicted sequence. For example, power plants have maximum and
minimum limits of energy that can be generated per day, and the changing of air quality is relevant
to the changing of traffic volume in the past hour. However, RNNs have no way to guarantee that
their estimated distributions satisfy these model properties, especially for the properties with multiple
variables and temporal features. Failure to follow these model properties can result in inaccurate and
even meaningless results, e.g., predicted traffic volume exceeding the road capacity and inaccurate
population estimation due to ignorance of big events happening a few hours ago.
Challenges: It is very challenging to enforce multivariate RNNs to follow temporal model properties
in a sequence prediction task. The optimization mechanism of RNNs (i.e., back propagate the
loss between estimated value and target value individually in a predicted sequence at each time
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

