A Benchmark for Systematic Generalization in
Grounded Language Understanding

Laura Ruis∗
University of Amsterdam
laura.ruis@student.uva.nl
Marco Baroni
ICREA
Facebook AI Research
mbaroni@fb.com

Jacob Andreas
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jda@mit.edu

Diane Bouchacourt
Facebook AI Research
dianeb@fb.com

Brenden M. Lake
New York University
Facebook AI Research
brenden@nyu.edu

Abstract
Humans easily interpret expressions that describe unfamiliar situations composed
from familiar parts (“greet the pink brontosaurus by the ferris wheel”). Modern
neural networks, by contrast, struggle to interpret novel compositions. In this paper,
we introduce a new benchmark, gSCAN, for evaluating compositional generalization in situated language understanding. Going beyond a related benchmark
that focused on syntactic aspects of generalization, gSCAN defines a language
grounded in the states of a grid world, facilitating novel evaluations of acquiring
linguistically motivated rules. For example, agents must understand how adjectives
such as ‘small’ are interpreted relative to the current world state or how adverbs
such as ‘cautiously’ combine with new verbs. We test a strong multi-modal baseline
model and a state-of-the-art compositional method finding that, in most cases, they
fail dramatically when generalization requires systematic compositional rules.

1

Introduction

Human language is a fabulous tool for generalization. If you know the meaning of the word ‘small’,
you can probably pick the ‘small wampimuk’ among larger ones, even if this is your first encounter
with wampimuks. If you know how to ‘walk cautiously,’ you can infer how to ‘bike cautiously’
through a busy intersection (see example in Figure 1). The ability to learn new words from limited data
and use them in a variety of contexts can be attributed to our aptness for systematic compositionality
[9, 33]: the algebraic capacity to understand and produce potentially infinite combinations from
known components. Modern deep neural networks, while strong in many domains [29], have
not mastered comparable language-based generalization challenges, a fact conjectured to underlie
their sample inefficiency and inflexibility [26, 25, 8]. Recent benchmarks have been proposed for
language-based generalization in deep networks [20, 16, 17], but they do not specifically test for a
model’s ability to perform rule-based generalization, or do so only in limited contexts. Systematic,
rule-based generalization is instead at the core of the recently introduced SCAN dataset [25] (see
[19, 3] for related ideas). In a series of studies, Lake, Baroni and colleagues [5, 30, 10] tested various
standard deep architectures for their ability to extract general composition rules supporting zero-shot
interpretation of new composite linguistic expressions (can you tell what ‘dax twice’ means, if you
know the meaning of ‘dax’ and ‘run twice’?). In most cases, neural networks were unable to generalize
correctly. Very recent work has shown that specific architectural or training-regime adaptations allow
∗

Work done during an internship at Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

