Guided Adversarial Attack for Evaluating and
Enhancing Adversarial Defenses

Gaurang Sriramanan∗, Sravanti Addepalli∗, Arya Baburaj, R.Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

Abstract
Advances in the development of adversarial attacks have been fundamental to
the progress of adversarial defense research. Efficient and effective attacks are
crucial for reliable evaluation of defenses, and also for developing robust models.
Adversarial attacks are often generated by maximizing standard losses such as the
cross-entropy loss or maximum-margin loss within a constraint set using Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD). In this work, we introduce a relaxation term to the
standard loss, that finds more suitable gradient-directions, increases attack efficacy
and leads to more efficient adversarial training. We propose Guided Adversarial
Margin Attack (GAMA), which utilizes function mapping of the clean image
to guide the generation of adversaries, thereby resulting in stronger attacks. We
evaluate our attack against multiple defenses and show improved performance when
compared to existing attacks. Further, we propose Guided Adversarial Training
(GAT), which achieves state-of-the-art performance amongst single-step defenses
by utilizing the proposed relaxation term for both attack generation and training.

1

Introduction

The remarkable success of Deep Learning algorithms has led to a surge in their adoption in a multitude
of applications which influence our lives in numerous ways. This makes it imperative to understand
their failure modes and develop reliable risk mitigation strategies. One of the biggest known threats
to systems that deploy Deep Networks is their vulnerability to crafted imperceptible noise known
as adversarial attacks, as demonstrated by Szegedy et al.[30] in 2014. This finding has spurred
immense interest towards identifying methods to improve the robustness of deep neural networks
against adversarial attacks. While initial attempts of improving robustness against adversarial attacks
used just single-step adversaries for training [14], they were later shown to be ineffective against
strong multi-step attacks by Kurakin et al.[22]. Some of the defenses introduced randomised or
non-differentiable components, either in the pre-processing stage or in the network architecture, so as
to minimise the effectiveness of generated gradients. However, many such defenses [4, 35, 29, 16]
were later broken by Athalye et al.[3] using smooth approximations of the function during the
backward pass or by computing reliable gradients using expectation over the randomized components.
This game of building defenses against existing attacks, and developing attacks against the proposed
defenses has been crucial for the progress in this field. Lately, the community has also recognized
that the true testimony of a developed defense is to evaluate it against adaptive attacks which are
constructed specifically to compromise the defense at hand [6].
Multi-step adversarial training is one of the best known methods of achieving robustness to adversarial
attacks today [24, 37]. This training regime attempts to solve the minimax optimization problem of
firstly generating strong adversarial samples by maximizing a loss, and subsequently training the
∗
Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Gaurang Sriramanan <gaurangs@iisc.ac.in>, Sravanti Addepalli <sravantia@iisc.ac.in>

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

