The Complete Lasso Tradeoff Diagram

Hua Wang

Yachong Yang

Zhiqi Bu

Weijie J. Su

University of Pennsylvania
{wanghua, yachong, zbu, suw}@upenn.edu

Abstract
A fundamental problem in the high-dimensional regression is to understand the
tradeoff between type I and type II errors or, equivalently, false discovery rate
(FDR) and power in variable selection. To address this important problem, we offer
the first complete tradeoff diagram that distinguishes all pairs of FDR and power
that can be asymptotically realized by the Lasso with some choice of its penalty
parameter from the remaining pairs, in a regime of linear sparsity under random
designs. The tradeoff between the FDR and power characterized by our diagram
holds no matter how strong the signals are. In particular, our results improve on the
earlier Lasso tradeoff diagram of [21] by recognizing two simple but fundamental
constraints on the pairs of FDR and power. The improvement is more substantial
when the regression problem is above the Donoho–Tanner phase transition. Finally,
we present extensive simulation studies to confirm the sharpness of the complete
Lasso tradeoff diagram.

1

Introduction

Consider a data matrix X ∈ Rn×p with p features and n rows, and a response y ∈ Rn from the
standard linear model
y = Xβ + z,
(1.1)
where z ∈ Rn is the noise term. In this paper, we study the Lasso, which, given a penalty parameter
λ > 0, finds the solution to the convex optimization problem [22]:
1
b
β(λ)
= argmin ky − Xbk22 + λkbk1 .
p
2
b∈R

(1.2)

A variable j is selected by the Lasso if βbj (λ) 6= 0 and the selection is false if the variable is a noise
variable in the sense that βj = 0.
The Lasso is perhaps the most popular method in a high-dimensional setting where the number of
features p is very large and therefore sparse solutions are wished for. Here the sparsity, defined as
k = #{j : βj 6= 0}, indicates that only k < p out of the sea of all the explanatory variables are in
effect and have non-zero regression coefficients. Owing to the sparsity of its solution, the Lasso is
also widely recognized as a feature selection tool in practice.
Therefore, one particularly interesting and important question is to understand how well the Lasso
performs as a feature selector. The best-case scenario is that one can find a well-tuned λ such that
the Lasso estimator can discover all the true variables and only the true variables, resulting in zero
type I error and full power. This is known as the feature selection consistency. In theory, when the
signals are strong enough, and when the sparsity is small enough, consistency can be guaranteed
asymptotically [23]. In practice, nevertheless, the model selection consistency is usually a pipe
dream: for example, even in a moderately sparse regime, consistency is impossible [21], and thus the
tradeoff between the type I error and the statistical power is unavoidable. Therefore, it is much more
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

