An Efficient Asynchronous Method for Integrating
Evolutionary and Gradient-based Policy Search

Kyunghyun Lee
Byeong-Uk Lee
Ukcheol Shin
In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, Korea
{kyunghyun.lee, byeonguk.lee, shinwc159, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms and evolution strategies (ES) have
been applied to various tasks, showing excellent performances. These have the
opposite properties, with DRL having good sample efficiency and poor stability,
while ES being vice versa. Recently, there have been attempts to combine these
algorithms, but these methods fully rely on synchronous update scheme, making
it not ideal to maximize the benefits of the parallelism in ES. To solve this challenge, asynchronous update scheme was introduced, which is capable of good
time-efficiency and diverse policy exploration. In this paper, we introduce an Asynchronous Evolution Strategy-Reinforcement Learning (AES-RL) that maximizes
the parallel efficiency of ES and integrates it with policy gradient methods. Specifically, we propose 1) a novel framework to merge ES and DRL asynchronously
and 2) various asynchronous update methods that can take all advantages of asynchronism, ES, and DRL, which are exploration and time efficiency, stability, and
sample efficiency, respectively. The proposed framework and update methods are
evaluated in continuous control benchmark work, showing superior performance
as well as time efficiency compared to the previous methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms, one major branch in policy search algorithm, were combined with deep learning and showed excellent performance in various environments, such as playing
simple video games with superhuman performance [1, 2], mastering the Go [3], and solving continuous control tasks [4–6]. Evolutionary methods, another famous policy search algorithm, were applied
to the parameters of deep neural network and showed compatible results as Deep Reinforcement
Learning (DRL) [7].
These two branches of policy search algorithms have different properties in terms of sample efficiency
and stability [8]. DRL is sample efficient, since it learns from every step of an episode, but is sensitive
to hyperparameters [9–12]. Evolution Strategies (ES) are often considered as the opposite because
they are relatively stable, learning from the result of the whole episode [8], yet they require much
more steps in the learning process [8, 13, 14].
ES and DRL are often considered as competitive approaches in policy search [7, 15], and relatively
few studies have tried to combine them [16–18]. Recently, some works tried to utilize the useful
gradient information of DRL into ES directly. Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (ERL) has an
independent RL agent that is periodically injected into the population [13]. In Cross-Entropy MethodReinforcement Learning (CEM-RL), half of the population is trained with gradient information, and
new mean and variance of the population are calculated with better performing individuals [19].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

