Meta-trained agents implement Bayes-optimal agents

Vladimir Mikulik∗, Grégoire Delétang∗, Tom McGrath∗, Tim Genewein∗,
Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, Pedro A. Ortega†
DeepMind
London, UK

Abstract
Memory-based meta-learning is a powerful technique to build agents that adapt
fast to any task within a target distribution. A previous theoretical study has
argued that this remarkable performance is because the meta-training protocol
incentivises agents to behave Bayes-optimally. We empirically investigate this
claim on a number of prediction and bandit tasks. Inspired by ideas from theoretical
computer science, we show that meta-learned and Bayes-optimal agents not only
behave alike, but they even share a similar computational structure, in the sense
that one agent system can approximately simulate the other. Furthermore, we
show that Bayes-optimal agents are fixed points of the meta-learning dynamics.
Our results suggest that memory-based meta-learning might serve as a general
technique for numerically approximating Bayes-optimal agents—that is, even for
task distributions for which we currently don’t possess tractable models.

1

Introduction

Within the paradigm of learning-to-learn, memory-based meta-learning is a powerful technique to
create agents that adapt fast to any task drawn from a target distribution [1–6]. In addition, it has
been claimed that meta-learning might be a key tool for creating systems that generalize to unseen
environments [7]. This claim is also partly supported by studies in computational neuroscience,
where experimental studies with human subjects have shown that fast skill adaptation relies on task
variation [8, 9]. Due to this, understanding how meta-learned agents acquire their representational
structure and perform their computations is of paramount importance, as it can inform architectural
choices, design of training tasks, and address questions about generalisation and safety in artificial
intelligence.
Previous theoretical work has argued that agents that fully optimise a meta-learning objective are
Bayes-optimal by construction, because meta-learning objectives are Monte-Carlo approximations
of Bayes-optimality objectives [10]. This is striking, as Bayes-optimal agents maximise returns
(or minimise loss) by optimally trading off exploration versus exploitation [11]. The theory also
makes a stronger, structural claim: namely, that meta-trained agents perform Bayesian updates “under
the hood”, where the computations are implemented via a state machine embedded in the memory
dynamics that tracks the sufficient statistics of the uncertainties necessary for solving the task class.
Here we set out to empirically investigate the computational structure of meta-learned agents. However, this comes with non-trivial challenges. Artificial neural networks are infamous for their
hard-to-interpret computational structure: they achieve remarkable performance on challenging
tasks, but the computations underlying that performance remain elusive. Thus, while much work in
explainable machine learning focuses on the I/O behaviour or memory content, only few investigate
the internal dynamics that give rise to them through careful bespoke analysis—see e.g. [12–18].
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence to {vmikulik|gdelt|mcgrathtom|timgen|pedroortega}@google.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

