Dense Correspondences between Human Bodies via
Learning Transformation Synchronization on Graphs

Xiangru Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, Texas
xiangruhuang816@gmail.com

Haitao Yang
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, Texas
yanghtr@outlook.com

Etienne Vouga
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, Texas
evouga@cs.utexas.edu

Qixing Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, Austin, Texas
huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We introduce an approach for establishing dense correspondences between partial scans of human models and a complete template model. Our approach’s
key novelty lies in formulating dense correspondence computation as initializing and synchronizing local transformations between the scan and the template
model. We introduce an optimization formulation for synchronizing transformations among a graph of the input scan, which automatically enforces smoothness
of correspondences and recovers the underlying articulated deformations. We
then show how to convert the iterative optimization procedure among a graph
of the input scan into an end-to-end trainable network. The network design utilizes additional trainable parameters to break the barrier of the original optimization formulation’s exact and robust recovery conditions. Experimental results
on benchmark datasets demonstrate that our approach considerably outperforms
baseline approaches. Our result, pretrained model and code are publicly available
at https://github.com/xiangruhuang/HumanCorresViaLearn2Sync.

1

Introduction

We introduce a novel approach for computing dense correspondences between partial scans of human
subjects and a complete template model. The correspondences computed with our approach are more
accurate than the state of the art, and are robust to input noise, pose of the scanned subject, and
variations in body shape and other non-rigid deformations of the scan relative to the template. Our
method is also efficient, capable of matching a 3 000-point partial scan to a 6 890-vertex template in
under 66 ms—suitable for real-time tracking applications running at 15 fps.
Algorithms for computing dense correspondences typically combine two key ideas. Local geometric
features are used to match points on the source to candidate points on the target. Only a sparse set of
prominent feature points can be reliably matched using these shape cues; to compute high-quality
dense correspondences insensitive to noise, pose, and global symmetries (such as human bilateral
symmetry), priors are enforced in the form of global regularization constraints (such as preservation
of pairwise distances or orientation [23, 46]).
While early works used hand-crafted shape descriptors to identify geometric features [23], recent
approaches [51, 15, 42, 31, 13, 17] have demonstrated that deep neural networks excel at this task.
However, the use of neural networks introduces a new challenge: there are many possible choices
for how to represent the set of dense correspondences [3, 2, 19, 29, 38, 33], and this choice of data
representation is critical, as it dictates which neural network architectures can be used and what types
of regularization constraints can be enforced.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

