Explicit Regularisation in Gaussian Noise Injections
Alexander Camuto
University of Oxford
Alan Turing Institute
acamuto@turing.ac.uk

Matthew Willetts
University of Oxford
Alan Turing Institute
mwilletts@turing.ac.uk

Stephen Roberts
University of Oxford
Alan Turing Institute
sjrob@robots.ox.ac.uk

Umut Şimşekli
University of Oxford
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
umut.simsekli@telecom-paris.fr
Chris Holmes
University of Oxford
Alan Turing Institute
cholmes@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the regularisation induced in neural networks by Gaussian noise injections (GNIs). Though such injections have been extensively studied when applied
to data, there have been few studies on understanding the regularising effect they
induce when applied to network activations. Here we derive the explicit regulariser of GNIs, obtained by marginalising out the injected noise, and show that it
penalises functions with high-frequency components in the Fourier domain; particularly in layers closer to a neural network’s output. We show analytically and
empirically that such regularisation produces calibrated classifiers with large classification margins.

1

Introduction

Noise injections are a family of methods that involve adding or multiplying samples from a noise
distribution, typically an isotropic Gaussian, to the weights or activations of a neural network during
training. The benefits of such methods are well documented. Models trained with noise often
generalise better to unseen data and are less prone to overfitting (Srivastava et al., 2014; Kingma
et al., 2015; Poole et al., 2014).
Even though the regularisation conferred by Gaussian noise injections (GNIs) can be observed empirically, and the benefits of noising data are well understood theoretically (Bishop, 1995; Cohen
et al., 2019; Webb, 1994), there have been few studies on understanding the benefits of methods
that inject noise throughout a network. Here we study the explicit regularisation of such injections,
which is a positive term added to the loss function obtained when we marginalise out the noise we
have injected.
Concretely our contributions are:
• We derive an analytic form for an explicit regulariser that explains most of GNIs’ regularising effect.
• We show that this regulariser penalises networks that learn functions with high-frequency
content in the Fourier domain and most heavily regularises neural network layers that are
closer to the output. See Figure 1 for an illustration.
• Finally, we show analytically and empirically that this regularisation induces larger classification margins and better calibration of models.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

