Recovery of sparse linear classifiers from mixture of
responses
Venkata Gandikota
University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA
Amherst, MA 01003
gandikota.venkata@gmail.com

Arya Mazumdar
University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA
Amherst, MA 01003
arya@cs.umass.edu

Soumyabrata Pal
University of Massachusetts Amherst, MA
Amherst, MA 01003
soumyabratap@umass.edu

Abstract
In the problem of learning a mixture of linear classifiers, the aim is to learn a
collection of hyperplanes from a sequence of binary responses. Each response
is a result of querying with a vector and indicates the side of a randomly chosen
hyperplane from the collection the query vector belong to. This model provides
a rich representation of heterogeneous data with categorical labels and has only
been studied in some special settings. We look at a hitherto unstudied problem
of query complexity upper bound of recovering all the hyperplanes, especially for
the case when the hyperplanes are sparse. This setting is a natural generalization
of the extreme quantization problem known as 1-bit compressed sensing. Suppose
we have a set of ` unknown k-sparse vectors. We can query the set with another
vector a, to obtain the sign of the inner product of a and a randomly chosen vector
from the `-set. How many queries are sufficient to identify all the ` unknown
vectors? This question is significantly more challenging than both the basic 1bit compressed sensing problem (i.e., ` = 1 case) and the analogous regression
problem (where the value instead of the sign is provided). We provide rigorous
query complexity results (with efficient algorithms) for this problem.

1

Introduction

One of the first and most basic tasks of machine learning is to train a binary linear classifier. Given a
set of explanatory variables (features) and the binary responses (labels), the objective of this task is
to find the hyperplane in the space of features that best separates the variables according to their responses. In this paper, we consider a natural generalization of this problem and model a classification
task as a mixture of ` components. In this generalization, each response is stochastically generated
by picking a hyperplane uniformly from the set of ` unknown hyperplanes, and then returning the
side of that hyperplane the feature vector lies. The goal is to learn all of these ` hyperplanes as
accurately as possible, using the least number of responses.
This can be termed as a mixture of binary linear classifiers [33]. Similar mixture of simple machine learning models have been around for at least the last thirty years [9] with mixture of linear
regression models being the most studied ones [8, 19, 23, 30, 32, 34, 35, 37]. Models of this type
are pretty good function approximators [4, 21] and have numerous applications in modeling heterogeneous settings such as machine translation [25], behavioral health [11], medicine [5], object
recognition [28] etc. While algorithms for learning the parameters of mixture of linear regressions
are solidly grounded (such as tensor decomposition based learning algorithms of [7]), in many of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

