Robust Disentanglement of a Few Factors at a Time
using rPU-VAE

Benjamin Estermann∗
Institute of Neuroinformatics, ETH Zurich
besterma@ethz.ch

Markus Marks∗
Institute of Neuroinformatics, ETH Zurich
marksm@ethz.ch

Mehmet Fatih Yanik
Institute of Neuroinformatics, ETH Zurich
yanik@ethz.ch

Abstract
Disentanglement is at the forefront of unsupervised learning, as disentangled
representations of data improve generalization, interpretability, and performance
in downstream tasks. Current unsupervised approaches remain inapplicable for
real-world datasets since they are highly variable in their performance and fail to
reach levels of disentanglement of (semi-)supervised approaches. We introduce
population-based training (PBT) for improving consistency in training variational
autoencoders (VAEs) and demonstrate the validity of this approach in a supervised
setting (PBT-VAE). We then use Unsupervised Disentanglement Ranking (UDR)
as an unsupervised heuristic to score models in our PBT-VAE training and show
how models trained this way tend to consistently disentangle only a subset of the
generative factors. Building on top of this observation we introduce the recursive
rPU-VAE approach. We train the model until convergence, remove the learned
factors from the dataset and reiterate. In doing so, we can label subsets of the
dataset with the learned factors and consecutively use these labels to train one model
that fully disentangles the whole dataset. With this approach, we show striking
improvement in state-of-the-art unsupervised disentanglement performance and
robustness across multiple datasets and metrics.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning has been highly successful in academia as well as industry over the past years, largely
in the supervised domain [1]. Unsupervised learning is becoming increasingly important, as for large
amounts of datasets human annotation is either limited or not possible and therefore these datasets
remain ’unused’. Disentanglement is a sub-field of representation learning that tries to identify the
low-dimensional generative factors of high-dimensional data [2]. Higgins et al. [3] introduced the
β-VAE, a stricter regularization of a variational auto-encoder (VAE) [4, 5], and showed that this
model can find generative factors in the dsprites dataset [6] without any supervision. Subsequently,
the field of disentanglement expanded quickly, as the potential benefits of finding a disentangled
representation of data are plentiful, i.e. they allow for more interpretability, cross-domain transfer,
robustness, generalizability across machine learning disciplines, as well as improvement of the
performance of downstream tasks, such as classification [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
Locatello et al. [7] showed that fully unsupervised disentanglement might not be possible without any
inductive biases. Subsequently, Locatello et al. [14, 15] introduced weak and partial supervision for
∗

contributed equally. Code: https://github.com/besterma/robust_disentanglement

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

