Improving Sample Complexity Bounds for (Natural)
Actor-Critic Algorithms

Tengyu Xu, Zhe Wang, Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE, The Ohio State University
{xu.3260,wang.10982,liang.889}@osu.edu

Abstract
The actor-critic (AC) algorithm is a popular method to find an optimal policy in reinforcement learning. In the infinite horizon scenario, the finite-sample convergence
rate for the AC and natural actor-critic (NAC) algorithms has been established
recently, but under independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) sampling and
single-sample update at each iteration. In contrast, this paper characterizes the convergence rate and sample complexity of AC and NAC under Markovian sampling,
with mini-batch data for each iteration, and with actor having general policy class
approximation. We show that the overall sample complexity for a mini-batch AC
to attain an -accurate stationary point improves the best known sample complexity
of AC by an order of O(−1 log(1/)), and the overall sample complexity for a
mini-batch NAC to attain an -accurate globally optimal point improves the existing sample complexity of NAC by an order of O(−2 / log(1/)). Moreover, the
sample complexity of AC and NAC characterized in this work outperforms that of
policy gradient (PG) and natural policy gradient (NPG) by a factor of O((1 − γ)−3 )
and O((1 − γ)−4 −2 / log(1/)), respectively. This is the first theoretical study
establishing that AC and NAC attain orderwise performance improvement over PG
and NPG under infinite horizon due to the incorporation of critic.

1

Introduction

The goal of reinforcement learning (RL) [39] is to maximize the expected total reward by taking
actions according to a policy in a stochastic environment, which is modelled as a Markov decision
process (MDP) [4]. To obtain an optimal policy, one popular method is the direct maximization
of the expected total reward via gradient ascent, which is referred to as the policy gradient (PG)
method [40, 47]. In practice, PG methods often suffer from large variance and high sampling cost
caused by Monte Carlo rollouts to acquire the value function for estimating the policy gradient, which
substantially slow down the convergence. To address such an issue, the actor-critic (AC) type of
algorithms have been proposed [22, 23], in which critic tracks the value function and actor updates
the policy using the return of critic. The usage of critic effectively reduces the variance of the policy
update and the sampling cost, and significantly speeds up the convergence.
The first AC algorithm was proposed by [23], in which actor’s updates adopt the simple stochastic
policy gradient ascent step. This algorithm was later extended to the natural actor-critic (NAC)
algorithm in [33, 9], in which actor’s updates adopt the natural policy gradient (NPG) algorithm [18].
The asymptotic convergence of AC and NAC algorithms under both independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) sampling and Markovian sampling have been established in [18, 21, 7, 9, 8].
The non-asymptotic convergence rate (i.e., the finite-sample analysis) of AC and NAC has recently
been studied. More specifically, [54] studied the sample complexity of AC with linear function
approximation in the linear quadratic regulator (LQR) problem. For general MDP with possibly
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

