A Continuous-Time Mirror Descent Approach to
Sparse Phase Retrieval

Fan Wu
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
fan.wu@stats.ox.ac.uk

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We analyze continuous-time mirror descent applied to sparse phase retrieval, which
is the problem of recovering sparse signals from a set of magnitude-only measurements. We apply mirror descent to the unconstrained empirical risk minimization
problem (batch setting), using the square loss and square measurements. We provide a convergence analysis of the algorithm in this non-convex setting and prove
that, with the hypentropy mirror map, mirror descent recovers any k-sparse vector
√
x? ∈ Rn with minimum (in modulus) non-zero entry on the order of kx? k2 / k
from k 2 Gaussian measurements, modulo logarithmic terms. This yields a simple
algorithm which, unlike most existing approaches to sparse phase retrieval, adapts
to the sparsity level, without including thresholding steps or adding regularization terms. Our results also provide a principled theoretical understanding for
Hadamard Wirtinger flow [54], as Euclidean gradient descent applied to the empirical risk problem with Hadamard parametrization can be recovered as a first-order
approximation to mirror descent in discrete time.1

1

Introduction

Mirror descent [37] is becoming increasingly popular in a variety of settings in optimization and
machine learning. One reason for its success is the fact that mirror descent can be adapted to fit
the geometry of the optimization problem at hand by choosing a suitable strictly convex potential
function, the so-called mirror map. Mirror descent has been extensively studied for convex problems,
and it is amenable to a general convergence analysis in terms of the Bregman divergence associated to
the mirror map, e.g. [5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 36, 44]. There is a growing literature considering mirror descent
in non-convex settings, e.g. [18, 16, 20, 21, 29, 30, 34, 57, 59, 60], and we contribute to this literature
by analyzing continuous-time mirror descent in the non-convex problem of sparse phase retrieval.
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in investigating continuous-time solvers in a variety of
settings in machine learning, for instance, in connection to implicit regularization, e.g. [1, 2, 46],
learning neural networks, e.g. [14, 35, 41, 45], and, more in general, to understand the foundations of
algorithmic paradigms and to provide design principles for discrete-time algorithms used in practice,
e.g. [3, 24, 40, 48, 52]. Convergence analyses for continuous-time algorithms are typically simpler
and more transparent than those for their discrete-time counterparts, as they allow to focus on the
main properties of the algorithm.
Phase retrieval is the problem of recovering a signal from the (squared) magnitude of a set of linear
measurements. Such a task arises in many applications such as optics [49], diffraction imaging [9]
and quantum mechanics [15], where detectors are able to measure intensities, but not phases. Due to
the missing phase information, exploiting additional prior information often becomes necessary to
1

For a full version of this paper see [53].

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

