SE(3)-Transformers: 3D Roto-Translation
Equivariant Attention Networks

Fabian B. Fuchs∗†
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
A2I Lab, Oxford University
fabian@robots.ox.ac.uk

Daniel E. Worrall∗
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab, Philips Lab
University of Amsterdam
d.e.worrall@uva.nl

Volker Fischer
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
volker.fischer@de.bosch.com

Max Welling
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
We introduce the SE(3)-Transformer, a variant of the self-attention module for
3D point clouds and graphs, which is equivariant under continuous 3D rototranslations. Equivariance is important to ensure stable and predictable performance in the presence of nuisance transformations of the data input. A positive
corollary of equivariance is increased weight-tying within the model. The SE(3)Transformer leverages the benefits of self-attention to operate on large point clouds
and graphs with varying number of points, while guaranteeing SE(3)-equivariance
for robustness. We evaluate our model on a toy N -body particle simulation dataset,
showcasing the robustness of the predictions under rotations of the input. We further achieve competitive performance on two real-world datasets, ScanObjectNN
and QM9. In all cases, our model outperforms a strong, non-equivariant attention
baseline and an equivariant model without attention.

1

Introduction

Self-attention mechanisms [31] have enjoyed a sharp rise in popularity in recent years. Their relative
implementational simplicity coupled with high efficacy on a wide range of tasks such as language
modeling [31], image recognition [18], or graph-based problems [32], make them an attractive
component to use. However, their generality of application means that for specific tasks, knowledge
of existing underlying structure is unused. In this paper, we propose the SE(3)-Transformer shown in
Fig. 1, a self-attention mechanism specifically for 3D point cloud and graph data, which adheres to
equivariance constraints, improving robustness to nuisance transformations and general performance.
Point cloud data is ubiquitous across many fields, presenting itself in diverse forms such as 3D
object scans [29], 3D molecular structures [21], or N -body particle simulations [14]. Finding neural
structures which can adapt to the varying number of points in an input, while respecting the irregular
sampling of point positions, is challenging. Furthermore, an important property is that these structures
should be invariant to global changes in overall input pose; that is, 3D translations and rotations of
the input point cloud should not affect the output. In this paper, we find that the explicit imposition
of equivariance constraints on the self-attention mechanism addresses these challenges. The SE(3)Transformer uses the self-attention mechanism as a data-dependent filter particularly suited for sparse,
non-voxelised point cloud data, while respecting and leveraging the symmetries of the task at hand.
∗
†

equal contribution
work done while at the Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

