Hard Example Generation by Texture Synthesis for
Cross-domain Shape Similarity Learning

Huan Fu1∗

Shunming Li1∗ Rongfei Jia1
Binqiang Zhao1

1

Mingming Gong2

Dacheng Tao3

TaoXi Technology Department, Alibaba Group, China
2
The University of Melbourne, Australia
3
The University of Sydney, Australia

{fuhuan.fh, shunming.lsm, rongfei.jrf, binqiang.zhao}@alibaba-inc.com
mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Image-based 3D shape retrieval (IBSR) aims to find the corresponding 3D shape
of a given 2D image from a large 3D shape database. The common routine is to
map 2D images and 3D shapes into an embedding space and define (or learn) a
shape similarity measure. While metric learning with some adaptation techniques
seems to be a natural solution to shape similarity learning, the performance is often
unsatisfactory for fine-grained shape retrieval. In the paper, we identify the source
of the poor performance and propose a practical solution to this problem. We find
that the shape difference between a negative pair is entangled with the texture
gap, making metric learning ineffective in pushing away negative pairs. To tackle
this issue, we develop a geometry-focused multi-view metric learning framework
empowered by texture synthesis. The synthesis of textures for 3D shape models
creates hard triplets, which suppress the adverse effects of rich texture in 2D images,
thereby push the network to focus more on discovering geometric characteristics.
Our approach shows state-of-the-art performance on a recently released large-scale
3D-FUTURE [1] repository, as well as three widely studied benchmarks, including
Pix3D [2], Stanford Cars [3], and Comp Cars [4]. Codes will be made publicly
available at: https://github.com/3D-FRONT-FUTURE/IBSR-texture.

1

Introduction

Cross-domain image-based 3D shape retrieval (IBSR) is to identify the matched 3D CAD model of
the object in a query image. With the growing number of 3D shapes, the establishment of reliable
IBSR platforms is significant. For example, it can help to build 3D virtual scenes for real-world
houses from 2D images. High-performing IBSR systems may also inspire and benefit studies in shape
collection based 3D object reconstruction. Unluckily, compared to content-based image retrieval
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9], IBSR is challenging due to the large appearance gap between 3D shapes and 2D
images.
There are mainly two directions to alleviate the issue, as shown in Fig. 1. For the first one, researchers
take efforts to predict 2.5D sketches from images, such as surface normal, depth, and location filed,
to bridge the gaps between 3D and 2D domains [2, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. These methods achieve
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

