Counterfactual Prediction for Bundle Treatment
Hao Zou1 , Peng Cui1 , Bo Li1 , Zheyan Shen1 , Jianxin Ma2 , Hongxia Yang2 , Yue He1
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Alibaba Group
zouh18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn,libo@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn,
shenzy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,majx13fromthu@gmail.com,
yang.yhx@alibaba-inc.com,heyue18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Estimating counterfactual outcome of different treatments from observational
data is an important problem to assist decision making in a variety of fields.
Among the various forms of treatment specification, bundle treatment has been
widely adopted in many scenarios, such as recommendation systems and online
marketing. The bundle treatment usually can be abstracted as a high dimensional
binary vector, which makes it more challenging for researchers to remove the
confounding bias in observational data. In this work, we assume the existence of
low dimensional latent structure underlying bundle treatment. Via the learned latent
representations of treatments, we propose a novel variational sample re-weighting
(VSR) method to eliminate confounding bias by decorrelating the treatments and
confounders. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate that the
predictive model trained on this re-weighted dataset can achieve more accurate
counterfactual outcome prediction.

1

Introduction

Accurately predicting the counterfactual outcome of different treatments is of paramount importance
for decision makers across many domains, such as healthcare [4] and marketing [5]. As the prediction
tasks being different, the treatment specification can also be in various forms, for instance, binary,
continuous, multi-level and bundle. Among these forms, bundle treatment, which can be abstracted
as a high dimensional binary vector, has been widely used in many real scenarios. For example, in
recommendation systems, the treatment can be a bundle of exposed items which are selected from a
large item pool. Each dimension of the treatment means whether the corresponding item is in the
bundle.
The availability of ample observational data reveals a promising possibility of applying machine
learning to predict the outcome when assigned different treatments. Nevertheless, a nonnegligible
challenge in this way is that when we collect observational data, the treatment is usually assigned not
randomly, but to be correlated with the confounders which can also affect outcomes. For instance, the
exposure of products in recommendation systems is usually been confounded with the profiles and
visiting history of the users. Such phenomenon, namely confounding bias, induce the distribution
discrepancy between the distribution from which the observational data is collected and the one where
the treatment is randomly assigned. This discrepancy may cause the predictive model to focus on
the outcome estimation for the treatment that the assignment policy puts larger probability on but
ignore the other treatments. Therefore, to obtain the reliable estimation regardless the dependency
between treatments and confounders, we need to reduce the confounding bias of observational data
by decorrelating confounders and treatments.
There has been a large amount of literature that attempted to resolve the challenge in counterfactual
prediction problem. For binary treatment, Johansson et al. [16] introduced the treatment invariant
representation learning borrowed from domain adaptation [8, 33, 6] to address the confounding bias.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

