Ensuring Fairness Beyond the Training Data

Debmalya Mandal
dm3557@columbia.edu
Columbia University

Samuel Deng
sd3013@columbia.edu
Columbia University

Jeannette M. Wing
wing@columbia.edu
Columbia University

Suman Jana
suman@cs.columbia.edu
Columbia University

Daniel Hsu
djhsu@cs.columbia.edu
Columbia University

Abstract
We initiate the study of fair classifiers that are robust to perturbations in the training
distribution. Despite recent progress, the literature on fairness has largely ignored
the design of fair and robust classifiers. In this work, we develop classifiers that
are fair not only with respect to the training distribution, but also for a class of
distributions that are weighted perturbations of the training samples. We formulate
a min-max objective function whose goal is to minimize a distributionally robust
training loss, and at the same time, find a classifier that is fair with respect to
a class of distributions. We first reduce this problem to finding a fair classifier
that is robust with respect to the class of distributions. Based on online learning
algorithm, we develop an iterative algorithm that provably converges to such a fair
and robust solution. Experiments on standard machine learning fairness datasets
suggest that, compared to the state-of-the-art fair classifiers, our classifier retains
fairness guarantees and test accuracy for a large class of perturbations on the test
set. Furthermore, our experiments show that there is an inherent trade-off between
fairness robustness and accuracy of such classifiers.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) systems are often used for high-stakes decision-making, including bail
decision and credit approval. Often these applications use algorithms trained on past biased data,
and such bias is reflected in the eventual decisions made by the algorithms. For example, Bolukbasi
et al. [9] show that popular word embeddings implicitly encode societal biases, such as gender norms.
Similarly, Buolamwini and Gebru [10] find that several facial recognition softwares perform better
on lighter-skinned subjects than on darker-skinned subjects. To mitigate such biases, there have been
several approaches in the ML fairness community to design fair classifiers [4, 19, 35].
However, the literature has largely ignored the robustness of such fair classifiers. The “fairness”
of such classifiers are often evaluated on the sampled datasets, and are often unreliable because of
various reasons including biased samples, missing and/or noisy attributes. Moreover, compared to the
traditional machine learning setting, these problems are more prevalent in the fairness domain, as the
data itself is biased to begin with. As an example, we consider how the optimized pre-processing
algorithm [11] performs on ProPublica’s COMPAS dataset [1] in terms of demographic parity (DP),
which measures the difference in accuracy between the protected groups. Figure 1 shows two
situations – (1) unweighted training distribution (in blue), and (2) weighted training distributions
(in red). The optimized pre-processing algorithm [11] yields a classifier that is almost fair on the
unweighted training set (DP ≤ 0.02). However, it has DP of at least 0.2 on the weighted set, despite
the fact that the marginal distributions of the features look almost the same for the two scenarios.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

