Is Plug-in Solver Sample-Efficient for Feature-based
Reinforcement Learning?

Qiwen Cui
School of Mathematical Science,
Peking University
cuiqiwen@pku.edu.cn

Lin F. Yang
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
University of California, Los Angles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
It is believed that a model-based approach for reinforcement learning (RL) is
the key to reduce sample complexity. However, the understanding of the sample
optimality of model-based RL is still largely missing, even for the linear case. This
work considers sample complexity of finding an -optimal policy in a Markov
decision process (MDP) that admits a linear additive feature representation, given
only access to a generative model. We solve this problem via a plug-in solver
approach, which builds an empirical model and plans in this empirical model via
an arbitrary plug-in solver. We prove that under the anchor-state assumption, which
implies implicit non-negativity in the feature space, the minimax sample complexity
of finding an -optimal policy in a γ-discounted MDP is O(K/(1 − γ)3 2 ), which
only depends on the dimensionality K of the feature space and has no dependence
on the state or action space. We further extend our results to a relaxed setting
where anchor-states may not exist and show that a plug-in approach can be sample
efficient as well, providing a flexible approach to design model-based algorithms
for RL.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto, 2018] is about learning to make optimal decisions
in an unknown environment. It has been believed to be one of the key approaches to reach artificial
general intelligence. In recent years, RL achieves phenomenal empirical successes in many real-world
applications, e.g., game-AI [Vinyals et al., 2017], robot control [Duan et al., 2016], health-care [Li
et al., 2018]. Most of these successful applications are based on a model-free approach, where the
agent directly learns the value function of the environment. Despite superior performance, these
algorithms usually take tremendous amount of samples. E.g. a typical model-free Atari-game agent
takes about several hours of training data in order to perform well [Mnih et al., 2013]. Reducing
sample complexity becomes a critical research topic of in RL.
It is well believed that model-based RL, where the agent learns the model of the environment and
then performs planning in the model, is significantly more sample efficient than model-free RL.
Recent empirical advances also justify such a belief (e.g. [Kaiser et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2019]).
However, the understanding of model-based RL is still far from complete. E.g., how to deal with
issues like model-bias and/or error compounding due to long horizon, in model-based RL is still
an open question [Jiang et al., 2015], especially with the presence of a function approximator (e.g.
a neural network) on the model. In order to get a better understanding on these issues, we target
on the sample complexity question of model-based RL from a very basic setting: feature-based
RL. In feature-based RL, we are given a hand-crafted or learned low-dimensional feature-vector
for each state-action pair and the transition model can be represented by a linear combination of
the feature vectors. Such a model recently has attracted much interest due to its provable guarantee
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

