Compositional Zero-Shot Learning via
Fine-Grained Dense Feature Composition

Dat Huynh
Northeastern University
huynh.dat@northeastern.edu

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University
eelhami@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
We develop a novel generative model for zero-shot learning to recognize finegrained unseen classes without training samples. Our observation is that generating
holistic features of unseen classes fails to capture every attribute needed to distinguish small differences among classes. We propose a feature composition
framework that learns to extract attribute-based features from training samples
and combines them to construct fine-grained features for unseen classes. Feature
composition allows us to not only selectively compose features of unseen classes
from only relevant training samples, but also obtain diversity among composed
features via changing samples used for composition. In addition, instead of building a global feature of an unseen class, we use all attribute-based features to form
a dense representation consisting of fine-grained attribute details. To recognize
unseen classes, we propose a novel training scheme that uses a discriminative
model to construct features that are subsequently used to train itself. Therefore,
we directly train the discriminative model on composed features without learning
separate generative models. We conduct experiments on four popular datasets
of DeepFashion, AWA2, CUB, and SUN, showing that our method significantly
improves the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Zero-shot learning is the important yet challenging task of recognizing unseen class without training
samples from samples of seen classes. This setting often arises when dealing with fine-grained
recognition problems where some classes have a few or no training samples due to their scarcity [1],
such as identifying new fashion trends [2, 3, 4, 5] or endangered species [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. We argue
that classes exhibit compositional structures [12, 13, 14] in which we only need to recognize basic
attributes such as color, shape, or material to recognize a large number of classes expressible in terms
of these attributes. We propose a zero-shot learning method that reuses attributes of seen classes to
construct features of unseen classes for training.
To address the lack of training samples, recent zero-shot works rely upon generative models [15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20] to synthesize features of unseen classes. These works infer features of unseen
classes from features of seen classes. However, methods based on Generative Adversarial Networks
[19, 15, 16] suffer from low diversity in generated features. On the other hand, likelihood-based
methods [21, 16, 17, 18, 22] promote diversity among generated features, but their generated features
are often non-discriminative. These issues are most severe for unseen classes as the feature generation
process cannot be regulated without training samples.
Leveraging the remarkable performance of Convolutional Neural Networks [23, 24], most works
extract image features by pooling local information from image regions into holistic representations
[15, 25, 17, 18, 26, 11]. Although holistic features encode discriminative information among classes,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

