Factor Graph Neural Network

Zhen Zhang1
Fan Wu 2
Wee Sun Lee3
Australian Institute for Machine Learning & The University of Adelaide, Australia
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
zhen.zhang02@adelaide.edu.au fanw6@illinois.edu leews@comp.nus.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Most of the successful deep neural network architectures are structured,
often consisting of elements like convolutional neural networks and gated
recurrent neural networks. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have
been successfully applied to graph-structured data such as point cloud and
molecular data. These networks often only consider pairwise dependencies,
as they operate on a graph structure. We generalize the GNN into a
factor graph neural network (FGNN) providing a simple way to incorporate
dependencies among multiple variables. We show that FGNN is able to
represent Max-Product belief propagation, an approximate inference method
on probabilistic graphical models, providing a theoretical understanding on
the capabilities of FGNN and related GNNs. Experiments on synthetic and
real datasets demonstrate the potential of the proposed architecture.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are powerful approximators that have been extremely successful in
practice. While fully connected networks are universal approximators, successful networks in
practice tend to be structured, e.g., grid-structured convolutional neural networks and chainstructured gated recurrent neural networks (e.g., LSTM, GRU). Graph neural networks [7,
34, 35] have recently been successfully used with graph-structured data to capture pairwise
dependencies between variables and to propagate the information to the entire graph.
The dependencies in the real-world are often beyond pairwise connections. E.g., in the LDPC
encoding, the bits of a signal are grouped into several clusters. In each cluster, the sum of all
bits should be equal to zero [36]. Then in the decoding procedure, these constraints should
be respected. In this paper, we show that the GNN can be naturally extended to capture
dependencies over multiple variables by using the factor graph structure. A factor graph is a
bipartite graph with a set of variable nodes connected to a set of factor nodes; each factor
node indicates the presence of dependencies among its connected variables. We call a neural
network formed from the factor graph a factor graph neural network (FGNN).
Factor graphs have been used extensively to specify Probabilistic Graph Models (PGMs)
for modeling dependencies among multiple random variables. In PGMs, the specification or
learning of the model is usually separate from the inference process. Approximate inference
algorithms such as Belief Propagation which is often used, since inference over PGMs are
often NP-hard. Unlike PGMs, graph neural networks usually learn a set of latent variables
and the inference procedure at the same time in an end-to-end manner; the graph structure
only provides information on the dependencies along which information propagates. For
problems where domain knowledge is weak, or where approximate inference algorithms do
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

