RANet: Region Attention Network for
Semantic Segmentation

Dingguo Shen1,2,∗ , Yuanfeng Ji3,∗ , Ping Li4 , Yi Wang2 , Di Lin1,†
1
Tianjin University, 2 Shenzhen University, 3 The University of Hong Kong,
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{qq237942920, jyuanfeng8}@gmail.com, p.li@polyu.edu.hk
onewang@szu.edu.cn, di.lin@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent semantic segmentation methods model the relationship between pixels to
construct the contextual representations. In this paper, we introduce the Region
Attention Network (RANet), a novel attention network for modeling the relationship
between object regions. RANet divides the image into object regions, where
we select the representative information. In contrast to the previous methods,
RANet configures the information pathways between the pixels in different regions,
enabling the region interaction to exchange the regional context for enhancing all of
the pixels in the image. We train the construction of object regions, the selection of
the representative regional contents, the configuration of information pathways and
the context exchange between pixels, jointly, to improve the segmentation accuracy.
We extensively evaluate our method on the challenging segmentation benchmarks,
demonstrating that RANet effectively helps to achieve the state-of-the-art results.
Code will be available at: https://github.com/dingguo1996/RANet.

1

Introduction

Recent success of semantic segmentation lies on the deep networks [1, 2, 3] that learn powerful visual
representations from the large-scale datasets [4, 5, 6]. The latest segmentation methods [7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12] model the spatial and category relationship between pixels. They provide rich context for
enhancing the representations of pixels and improving the segmentation accuracy.
The spatial pyramid pooling (SPP) and attention mechanism are two of the popular methods, which
have been vastly used for constructing the contextual representations. SPP [7, 13, 14, 15] uses various
sizes of regular convolutional/pooling kernels to capture the contextual information in different
ranges. The attentional models [9, 10, 11, 16] exchange context between each pair of pixels by
respecting the dependency between categories. These methods focus on modeling either the spatial
or the category relationship between pixels. However, rather than the pixel-level relationship, the
semantic segmentation task heavily relies on the understanding of the object-level relationship that
provides richer context for classifying the pixels.
In this paper, we advocate the idea of using the object regions for constructing the regional context,
which models the object-level relationship. Here, the region refers to an object or an object part.
Each object can be regarded as a region that consists of a set of nearby pixels belonging to the same
category. Intuitively, the boundaries of the object regions provide the spatial relationship between the
objects. In the same object region, the pixels contain the consistent category information. We resort
∗
†

The first two authors share the contribution equally.
Di Lin is the corresponding author of this paper.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

