Self-Supervised Visual Representation Learning
from Hierarchical Grouping

Xiao Zhang
University of Chicago
zhang7@uchicago.edu

Michael Maire
University of Chicago
mmaire@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We create a framework for bootstrapping visual representation learning from a
primitive visual grouping capability. We operationalize grouping via a contour
detector that partitions an image into regions, followed by merging of those regions
into a tree hierarchy. A small supervised dataset suffices for training this grouping
primitive. Across a large unlabeled dataset, we apply this learned primitive to
automatically predict hierarchical region structure. These predictions serve as
guidance for self-supervised contrastive feature learning: we task a deep network
with producing per-pixel embeddings whose pairwise distances respect the region
hierarchy. Experiments demonstrate that our approach can serve as state-of-theart generic pre-training, benefiting downstream tasks. We additionally explore
applications to semantic region search and video-based object instance tracking.

1

Introduction

The ability to learn from large unlabeled datasets appears crucial to deploying machine learning
techniques across many application domains for which annotating data is too costly or simply
infeasible due to scale. For visual data, quantity and collection rate often far outpace ability to
annotate, making self-supervised approaches particularly crucial to future advancement of the field.
Recent efforts on self-supervised visual learning fall into several broad camps. Among them,
Kingma et al. [24] and Donahue et al. [12] design general architectures to learn latent feature
representations, driven by modeling image distributions. Another group of approaches [16, 10, 28, 35]
leverage, as supervision, pseudo-labels automatically generated from hand-designed proxy tasks.
Here, the general strategy is to split data examples into two parts and predict one from the other.
Alternatively, Wu et al. [45] and Zhuang et al. [52] learn visual features by asking a deep network
to embed the entire training dataset, mapping each image to a location different from others, and
relying on this constraint to drive the emergence of a topology that reflects semantics. Across
many of these camps, technical improvements to the scale and efficiency of learning further boost
results [19, 7, 36, 13]. Section 2 provides a more complete background.
We approach self-supervised learning using a strategy somewhat different from those approaches
outlined above. While incorporating aspects of proxy tasks and embedding objectives, a key distinction is that our system’s proxy task is itself generated by a (simpler) trained vision system. We thus
seek to bootstrap visual representation learning in a manner loosely inspired by, though certainly
not accurately mirroring, a progression of simple to complex biological vision systems. This is an
under-explored, though not unrecognized, strategy in computer vision. Serving as a noteworthy
example is Li et al.’s [30] approach of using motion as a readily available, automatically-derived,
supervisory signal for learning to detect contours in static images. We focus on the next logical stage
in such a bootstrapping sequence: using a pre-existing contour detector to automatically define a
task objective for learning semantic visual representations. Figure 1 illustrates how this primitive
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

