Learning Agent Representations for Ice Hockey

Guiliang Liu1 , Oliver Schulte1,3 , Pascal Poupart2,4 , Mike Rudd2,4 , Mehrsan Javan3
1
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
2
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
3
SLiQ Lab, Sportlogiq
4
Vector Institute
gla68@sfu.ca, oschulte@cs.sfu.ca
{ppoupart,jmrudd}@uwaterloo.ca, mehrsan@sportlogiq.com

Abstract
Team sports is a new application domain for agent modeling with high real-world
impact. A fundamental challenge for modeling professional players is their large
number (over 1K), which includes many bench players with sparse participation in
a game season. The diversity and sparsity of player observations make it difficult
to extend previous agent representation models to the sports domain. This paper
develops a new approach for agent representations, based on a Markov game model,
that is tailored towards applications in professional ice hockey. We introduce a
novel framewwork player representation via player generation, where a variational
encoder embeds player information with latent variables. The encoder learns a
context-specific shared prior to induce a shrinkage effect for the posterior player
representations, allowing it to share statistical information across players with
different participation rates. To capture the complex play dynamics in sequential
sports data, we design a Variational Recurrent Ladder Agent Encoder (VaRLAE).
This architecture provides a contextualized player representation with a hierarchy
of latent variables that effectively prevents latent posterior collapse. We validate
our player representations in three major sports analytics tasks. Our experimental
results, based on a large dataset that contains over 4.5M events, show state-of-theart performance for our VarLAE on facilitating 1) identifying the acting player, 2)
estimating expected goals, and 3) predicting the final score difference.

1

Introduction

Team sports define complex interactions with a rich action space and a heterogeneous state space [1].
As more and larger event stream datasets for professional sports matches become available, advanced
machine learning algorithms have been applied to model the complex dynamics of sports games.
These models facilitate many applications with high real-world impact, such as predicting match
outcomes [2], assessing the performance of players or teams [3, 4, 5, 6], and recommending tactics to
coaches [7]. However, previous models often pool observations of different players without capturing
the specific roles and behaviors of each athlete. Neglecting the special characteristics of individual
players significantly compromises the model performance for the application tasks [8].
A promising approach to incorporating player information into sports statistics is deep agent representation. Learning agent representation in a sports game raises new challenges that require a
novel solution for several reasons: 1) Previous methods commonly learn a representation of agents’
policy [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. The policy embedding methods model only how a player acts in a given
match context, and thus fail to capture the statistical information about which match contexts players
are likely to act in, as well as their immediate outcomes (rewards). 2) Although policy embeddings can
facilitate the construction of an artificial agent in control problems, the goal of agent representation
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

