Small Nash Equilibrium Certificates in Very Large
Games
Brian Hu Zhang
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, CMU
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In many game settings, the game is not explicitly given but is only accessible
by playing it. While there have been impressive demonstrations in such settings,
prior techniques have not offered safety guarantees, that is, guarantees on the
game-theoretic exploitability of the computed strategies. In this paper we introduce
an approach that shows that it is possible to provide exploitability guarantees in
such settings without ever exploring the entire game. We introduce a notion of a
certificate of an extensive-form approximate Nash equilibrium. For verifying a
certificate, we give an algorithm that runs in time linear in the size of the certificate
rather than the size of the whole game. In zero-sum games, we further show that
an optimal certificate—given the exploration so far—can be computed with any
standard game-solving algorithm (e.g., using a linear program or counterfactual
regret minimization). However, unlike in the cases of normal form or perfect
information, we show that certain families of extensive-form games do not have
small approximate certificates, even after making extremely nice assumptions on
the structure of the game. Despite this difficulty, we find experimentally that very
small certificates, even exact ones, often exist in large and even in infinite games.
Overall, our approach enables one to try one’s favorite exploration strategies while
offering exploitability guarantees, thereby decoupling the exploration strategy from
the equilibrium-finding process.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed AI breakthroughs in games such as poker [5, 28, 10, 12] where the rules
are given. In many important applications—such as many war games and finance simulations—the
rules are only given via black-box access, that is, via playing the game [36, 25], and one can try to
construct good strategies by self play. In such settings, deep reinforcement learning techniques are
typically used today [16, 33, 25, 34, 35, 2]. However, such methods lack the guarantee of low (or
zero) exploitability that game-theoretic solving techniques offer.
Prior to our paper, to compute exploitability of a strategy, one needed to compute the other player’s
best response to it, which relies on the game being known. Sampling approaches to equilibrium
finding have been suggested, but their regret guarantees are vacuous unless the algorithms touch at
least as many information sets as there are in the game [24, 34, 38]. A recent PAC-learning algorithm
has logarithmic sample complexity for pure maxmin strategies in normal-form games; it extends to
some infinite games, but not effectively to mixed strategies in extensive-form games [27].
Game abstraction is commonly used to reduce the size of a game tree prior to solving [3, 14, 8, 13].
Practical abstraction techniques were fundamental to achieving superhuman performance in no-limit
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

