SurVAE Flows: Surjections to
Bridge the Gap between VAEs and Flows

Didrik Nielsen1 , Priyank Jaini2 , Emiel Hoogeboom2 , Ole Winther1 , Max Welling2
Technical University of Denmark1 , UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam2
didni@dtu.dk, p.jaini@uva.nl, e.hoogeboom@uva.nl
olwi@dtu.dk, m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
Normalizing flows and variational autoencoders are powerful generative models
that can represent complicated density functions. However, they both impose constraints on the models: Normalizing flows use bijective transformations to model
densities whereas VAEs learn stochastic transformations that are non-invertible and
thus typically do not provide tractable estimates of the marginal likelihood. In this
paper, we introduce SurVAE Flows: A modular framework of composable transformations that encompasses VAEs and normalizing flows. SurVAE Flows bridge the
gap between normalizing flows and VAEs with surjective transformations, wherein
the transformations are deterministic in one direction – thereby allowing exact
likelihood computation, and stochastic in the reverse direction – hence providing
a lower bound on the corresponding likelihood. We show that several recently
proposed methods, including dequantization and augmented normalizing flows,
can be expressed as SurVAE Flows. Finally, we introduce common operations
such as the max value, the absolute value, sorting and stochastic permutation as
composable layers in SurVAE Flows.

1

Introduction

Normalizing flows (Tabak and Vanden-Eijnden, 2010; Tabak and Turner, 2013; Rezende and Mohamed, 2015) provide a powerful modular and composable framework for representing expressive
probability densities via differentiable bijections (with a differentiable inverse). These composable
bijective transformations accord significant advantages due to their ability to be implemented using
a modular software framework with a general interface consisting of three important components:
(i) a forward transform, (ii) an inverse transform, and (iii) a log-likelihood contribution through the
Jacobian determinant. Thus, significant advances have been made in recent years to develop novel
flow modules that are easily invertible, expressive and computationally cheap (Dinh et al., 2015, 2017;
Kingma et al., 2016; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018; Jaini et al., 2019a,b; Kingma and
Dhariwal, 2018; Hoogeboom et al., 2019b, 2020; Durkan et al., 2019; van den Berg et al., 2018).
However, the bijective nature of the transformations used for building normalizing flows limit
their ability to alter dimensionality, model discrete data and distributions with discrete structure or
disconnected components. Specialized solutions have been developed to address these limitations
independently. Uria et al. (2013); Ho et al. (2019) use dequantization to model discrete distributions
using continuous densities, while Tran et al. (2019); Hoogeboom et al. (2019a) propose a discrete
analog of normalizing flows. Cornish et al. (2019) use an augmented space to model an infinite
mixtures of normalizing flows to address the problem of disconnected components whereas Huang
et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2020) use a similar idea of augmentation of the observation space to model
expressive distributions. VAEs (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014), on the other hand,
have no such limitations, but only provide lower bound estimates of the tractable estimates for the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

