Dual Manifold Adversarial Robustness:
Defense against Lp and non-Lp Adversarial Attacks

Wei-An Lin∗ †
University of Maryland
walin@umd.edu
Alexander Levine
University of Maryland
alevine0@cs.umd.edu

Chun Pong Lau∗
Johns Hopkins University
clau13@jhu.edu

Rama Chellappa
Johns Hopkins University
rchella4@jhu.edu

Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Adversarial training is a popular defense strategy against attack threat models
with bounded Lp norms. However, it often degrades the model performance on
normal images and more importantly, the defense does not generalize well to
novel attacks. Given the success of deep generative models such as GANs and
VAEs in characterizing (approximately) the underlying manifold of images, we
investigate whether or not the aforementioned deficiencies of adversarial training
can be remedied by exploiting the underlying manifold information. To partially
answer this question, we consider the scenario when the manifold information of
the underlying data is available. We use a subset of ImageNet natural images where
an approximate underlying manifold is learned using StyleGAN. We also construct
an “On-Manifold ImageNet” (OM-ImageNet) dataset by projecting the ImageNet
samples onto the learned manifold. For this dataset, the underlying manifold
information is exact. Using OM-ImageNet, we first show that adversarial training
in the latent space of images (i.e. on-manifold adversarial training) improves both
standard accuracy and robustness to on-manifold attacks. However, since no outof-manifold perturbations are realized, the defense can be broken by Lp adversarial
attacks. We further propose Dual Manifold Adversarial Training (DMAT) where
adversarial perturbations in both latent and image spaces are used in robustifying
the model. Our DMAT improves performance on normal images, and achieves
comparable robustness to the standard adversarial training against Lp attacks. In
addition, we observe that models defended by DMAT achieve improved robustness
against novel attacks which manipulate images by global color shifts or various
types of image filtering. Interestingly, similar improvements are also achieved
when the defended models are tested on (out-of-manifold) natural images. These
results demonstrate the potential benefits of using manifold information (exactly or
approximately) in enhancing robustness of deep learning models against various
types of novel adversarial attacks. Codes and models will be available in this link.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved impressive success in several fields including computer vision,
speech, and robot control [1, 2, 3]. However, they are vulnerable against adversarial attacks [4, 5, 6, 7,
∗
†

First two authors contributed equally.
Wei-An Lin is now at Adobe.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

