A mathematical theory of cooperative communication

Pei Wang
Rutgers University–Newark
peiwang@rutgers.edu

Junqi Wang
Rutgers University–Newark
junqi.wang@rutgers.edu

Pushpi Paranamana
Rutgers University–Newark
pushpi.paranamana@nd.edu

Patrick Shafto
Rutgers University–Newark
patrick.shafto@gmail.com

Abstract
Cooperative communication plays a central role in theories of human cognition,
language, development, culture, and human-robot interaction. Prior models of
cooperative communication are algorithmic in nature and do not shed light on why
cooperation may yield effective belief transmission and what limitations may arise
due to differences between beliefs of agents. Through a connection to the theory
of optimal transport, we establishing a mathematical framework for cooperative
communication. We derive prior models as special cases, statistical interpretations
of belief transfer plans, and proofs of robustness and instability. Computational
simulations support and elaborate our theoretical results, and demonstrate fit to
human behavior. The results show that cooperative communication provably
enables effective, robust belief transmission which is required to explain feats of
human learning and improve human-machine interaction.

1

Introduction

Cooperative communication is invoked across language, cognitive development, cultural anthropology,
and robotics to explain people’s ability to effectively transmit information and accumulate knowledge.
Theories claim that people have evolved a specialized ecological niche [Tomasello, 1999, Boyd et al.,
2011] and learning mechanisms [Csibra and Gergely, 2009, Grice, 1975, Sperber and Wilson, 1986],
which explain our abilities to learn and accumulate knowledge; however, we lack mathematical
theories that would allow us analyze basic properties of cooperative communication between agents.
Models of belief updating [Chater et al., 2008, Tenenbaum et al., 2011, Ghahramani, 2015] and action
selection [Luce, 2012, Sutton et al., 1998] have recently been combined into models of cooperative
communication in cognitive science [Shafto and Goodman, 2008a, Shafto et al., 2014], cognitive
development [Eaves Jr et al., 2016, Bonawitz et al., 2011, Bridgers et al., 2019], linguistic pragmatics
[Goodman and Stuhlmüller, 2013], and robotics [Ho et al., 2016, Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016, Fisac
et al., 2017, Milli and Dragan, 2019]. These models are algorithms for computing cooperative
communication plans using Theory of Mind reasoning. However, these models do not formalize
the problem mathematically and therefore do not support general conclusions about the nature or
limitations of cooperative communication.
Build upon mathematical and computational analysis, we provide answers to fundamental questions of
cooperative communication. Our contributions are as follows. In Section 2, we interpret cooperative
communication as a problem of optimal transport [Monge, 1781, Villani, 2008, Peyré and Cuturi,
2019], derive prior models of cooperative communication as special cases, and derive relationships to
rate distortion theory. In particular, we theoretically guarantee the existence of optimal communication
plan and algorithmically ensure the achievablility of such plans. In Section 3, we mathematically
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

