Generalization error in high-dimensional perceptrons:
Approaching Bayes error with convex optimization

Benjamin Aubin
Université Paris-Saclay
CNRS, CEA
Institut de physique théorique
91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Florent Krzakala
IdePHICS laboratory
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
1015, Lausanne, Switzerland

Yue M. Lu
John A. Paulson
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

Lenka Zdeborová
SPOC laboratory
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
1015, Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
We consider a commonly studied supervised classification of a synthetic dataset
whose labels are generated by feeding a one-layer neural network with random
i.i.d inputs. We study the generalization performances of standard classifiers in
the high-dimensional regime where α = n/d is kept finite in the limit of a high
dimension d and number of samples n. Our contribution is three-fold: First, we
prove a formula for the generalization error achieved by `2 regularized classifiers
that minimize a convex loss. This formula was first obtained by the heuristic
replica method of statistical physics. Secondly, focussing on commonly used loss
functions and optimizing the `2 regularization strength, we observe that while ridge
regression performance is poor, logistic and hinge regression are surprisingly able
to approach the Bayes-optimal generalization error extremely closely. As α → ∞
they lead to Bayes-optimal rates, a fact that does not follow from predictions of
margin-based generalization error bounds. Third, we design an optimal loss and
regularizer that provably leads to Bayes-optimal generalization error.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional statistics, where the ratio α = n/d is kept finite while the dimensionality d
and the number of samples n grow, often display interesting non-intuitive features. Asymptotic
generalization performances for such problems in the so-called teacher-student setting, with synthetic
data, have been the subject of intense investigations spanning many decades [1–6]. To understand
the effectiveness of modern machine learning techniques, and also the limitations of the classical
statistical learning approaches [7, 8], it is of interest to revisit this line of research. Indeed, this
direction is currently the subject to a renewal of interests, as testified by some very recent, yet
already rather influential papers [9–13]. The present paper subscribes to this line of work and studies
high-dimensional classification within one of the simplest models considered in statistics and machine
learning: convex linear estimation with data generated by a teacher perceptron [14]. We will focus
on the generalization abilities in this problem, and compare the performances of Bayes-optimal
estimation to the more standard Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM). We then compare the results
with the prediction of standard generalization bounds that illustrate in particular their limitation even
in this simple, yet non-trivial, setting.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

