Steady State Analysis of Episodic Reinforcement
Learning

Huang Bojun
Rakuten Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
bojhuang@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper proves that the episodic learning environment of every finite-horizon
decision task has a unique steady state under any behavior policy, and that the
marginal distribution of the agent’s input indeed converges to the steady-state
distribution in essentially all episodic learning processes. This observation supports
an interestingly reversed mindset against conventional wisdom: While the existence
of unique steady states was often presumed in continual learning but considered less
relevant in episodic learning, it turns out their existence is guaranteed for the latter.
Based on this insight, the paper unifies episodic and continual RL around several
important concepts that have been separately treated in these two RL formalisms.
Practically, the existence of unique and approachable steady state enables a general
way to collect data in episodic RL tasks, which the paper applies to policy gradient
algorithms as a demonstration, based on a new steady-state policy gradient theorem.
Finally, the paper also proposes and experimentally validates a perturbation method
that facilitates rapid steady-state convergence in real-world RL tasks.

1

Introduction

Given a decision task, reinforcement learning (RL) agents iteratively optimize decision policy based
on empirical data collected from continuously interacting with a learning environment of the task. To
have successful learning, the empirical data used for policy update should represent some desired
distribution. Every RL algorithm then faces two basic questions: what data distribution shall be
considered desired for the sake of learning, and how should the agent interact with the environment
to actually obtain the data as desired? Depending on the type of the given task, though, existing RL
literature have treated this data collection problem in two different ways.
In continual reinforcement learning, the agent immerses itself in a single everlasting sequentialdecision episode that is conceptually of infinite length (or of life-long length). In this case, a
stationary (or steady-state) distribution is a fixed-point distribution over the agent’s input space
under the transition dynamic induced by a decision policy. The concept of steady state has been
pivotal in continual RL literature. It is typically presumed that a unique stationary distribution exists
when rolling out any policy in the continual RL model being studied, and that the empirical data
distribution of the rollout indeed converges over time to this stationary distribution due to (again
assumed) ergodicity of the system dynamic [28, 3, 23, 35]. Continual RL algorithms can be derived
and analyzed by examining system properties under the steady state [10, 28, 27, 34], and many of the
resulted algorithms require the training data to follow the stationary distribution of some behavior
policy [3, 23] (or a mixture of such distributions [12]), which can then be efficiently collected from a
few (or even a single) time steps once the rollout of the behavior policy converges to its steady state.
The situation has been quite different for episodic reinforcement learning, in which the agent makes a
finite number of decisions before an episode of the task terminates. Episodic RL tasks account for the
vast majority of experimental RL benchmarks and of empirical RL applications at the moment [2, 14].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

