Understanding Approximate Fisher Information for
Fast Convergence of Natural Gradient Descent
in Wide Neural Networks
Ryo Karakida
Artificial Intelligence Research Center
AIST, Japan
karakida.ryo@aist.go.jp

Kazuki Osawa
Department of Computer Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan
oosawa.k.ad@m.titech.ac.jp

Abstract
Natural Gradient Descent (NGD) helps to accelerate the convergence of gradient descent dynamics, but it requires approximations in large-scale deep neural networks
because of its high computational cost. Empirical studies have confirmed that some
NGD methods with approximate Fisher information converge sufficiently fast in
practice. Nevertheless, it remains unclear from the theoretical perspective why and
under what conditions such heuristic approximations work well. In this work, we
reveal that, under specific conditions, NGD with approximate Fisher information
achieves the same fast convergence to global minima as exact NGD. We consider
deep neural networks in the infinite-width limit, and analyze the asymptotic training
dynamics of NGD in function space via the neural tangent kernel. In the function
space, the training dynamics with the approximate Fisher information are identical
to those with the exact Fisher information, and they converge quickly. The fast
convergence holds in layer-wise approximations; for instance, in block diagonal
approximation where each block corresponds to a layer as well as in block tridiagonal and K-FAC approximations. We also find that a unit-wise approximation
achieves the same fast convergence under some assumptions. All of these different
approximations have an isotropic gradient in the function space, and this plays a
fundamental role in achieving the same convergence properties in training. Thus,
the current study gives a novel and unified theoretical foundation with which to
understand NGD methods in deep learning.

1

Introduction

Natural gradient descent (NGD) was developed to speed up the convergence of the gradient method
[1]. The main drawback of the natural gradient is its high computational cost to compute the inverse
of the Fisher information matrix (FIM). Numerous studies have proposed approximation methods to
reduce the computational cost so that NGD can be used in large-scale models with many parameters,
especially, in deep neural networks (DNNs). For instance, to compute the inverse efficiently, some
studies have proposed layer-wise block diagonal approximations of the FIM [2–4], where each block
matrix corresponds to a layer of the DNN. This approach is usually combined with the Kroneckerfactored approximate curvature (K-FAC) to further reduce the computational cost. Others have
proposed unit-wise approximations, where each block matrix corresponds to a unit [5–7].
Although empirical experiments have confirmed that these approximations make the convergence
faster than the conventional first-order gradient descent, their conclusions are rather heuristic and
present few theoretical guarantees on how fast the approximate NGD converges. It is important
for both theory and practice to answer the question of how well approximate NGD preserves the
performance of the original NGD. The lack of theoretical evidence is mostly caused by the difficulty
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

