Learning Global Transparent Models Consistent with
Local Contrastive Explanations

Tejaswini Pedapati
IBM Research
tejaswinip@us.ibm.com

Avinash Balakrishnan
IBM Research
avinash.bala@us.ibm.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugan
IBM Research
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Amit Dhurandhar
IBM Research
adhuran@us.ibm.com

Abstract
There is a rich and growing literature on producing local contrastive/counterfactual
explanations for black-box models (e.g. neural networks). In these methods, for
an input, an explanation is in the form of a contrast point differing in very few
features from the original input and lying in a different class. Other works try to
build globally interpretable models like decision trees and rule lists based on the
data using actual labels or based on the black-box models predictions. Although
these interpretable global models can be useful, they may not be consistent with
local explanations from a specific black-box of choice. In this work, we explore
the question: Can we produce a transparent global model that is simultaneously
accurate and consistent with the local (contrastive) explanations of the black-box
model? We introduce a natural local consistency metric that quantifies if the local
explanations and predictions of the black-box model are also consistent with the
proxy global transparent model. Based on a key insight we propose a novel method
where we create custom boolean features from sparse local contrastive explanations
of the black-box model and then train a globally transparent model on just these,
and showcase empirically that such models have higher local consistency compared
with other known strategies, while still being close in performance to models that
are trained with access to the original data.

1

Introduction

With the ever increasing adoption of black-box artificial intelligence technologies in various facets of
society [12], a number of explainability algorithms have been developed to understand their decisions.
Two prominent types are: a) Local Explanations for a data point of interest [16, 20, 22, 25, 9] and
b) Constructing interpretable global models directly like decision trees, rule lists and boolean rules
[23, 10, 7]. One of the arguments for b) is that it is possible to construct interpretable global models
in such a way that for a single data point it can give a succinct local explanation in the form of a
sparse conjunction [23] while also highlighting non-trivial global behavior of the output. Methods
in a) naturally enjoy the parsimonious explanations on a single data point through either feature
importance scores or contrastive points that differ in very few features. Therefore, one generally
has the option of adopting an accurate black-box model (viz. Neural Network, XGBoost) with local
explanations obtained with additional computational effort or adopt a simpler but interpretable model
that can describe non local behavior as well as provide very fast local explanations. For tabular data
there is a growing set of techniques to build models of the later kind directly [23] that can compete in
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

