On the Power of Louvain in the Stochastic Block
Model
Vincent Cohen-Addad1 , Adrian Kosowski2 , Frederik Mallmann-Trenn3 , and David Saulpic4
1

Google Zürich, Switzerland
2
NavAlgo, France
3
Sorbonne Université, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, LIP6, France
4
King’s College London, UK

Abstract
A classic problem in machine learning and data analysis is to partition the vertices
of a network in such a way that vertices in the same set are densely connected and
vertices in different sets are loosely connected.
In practice, the most popular approaches rely on local search algorithms; not only
for the ease of implementation and the efficiency, but also because of the accuracy
of these methods on many real world graphs. For example, the Louvain algorithm
– a local search based algorithm – has quickly become the method of choice for
clustering in social networks. However, explaining the success of these methods
remains an open problem: in the worst-case, the runtime can be up to Ω(n2 ), much
worse than what is typically observed in practice, and no guarantee on the quality
of its output can be established.
The goal of this paper is to shed light on the inner-workings of Louvain; only
if we understand Louvain, can we rely on it and further improve it. To achieve
this goal, we study the behavior of Louvain in the famous two-bloc Stochastic
Block Model, which has a clear ground-truth and serves as the standard testbed
for graph clustering algorithms. We provide valuable tools for the analysis of
Louvain, but also for many other combinatorial algorithms. For example, we show
that the probability for a √
node to have more edges towards its own community is
1/2 + Ω(min(∆(p − q)/ np, 1)) in the SBM(n, p, q), where ∆ is the imbalance.
Note that this bound is asymptotically tight and useful for the analysis of a wide
range of algorithms (Louvain, Kernighan-Lin, Simulated Annealing etc).

1

Introduction

Local search algorithms are widely-used in machine learning and data analysis, to extract information or optimize models. Among the most classic examples are Gradient Descent for tuning
neural networks, Lloyd’s method and Expectation-Maximization (EM) for clustering, unsupervised
learning and statistical inference. However, understanding the practical success of local search algorithms through a theoretical analysis remains a major open problem. Proving guarantees on the
quality of the local optima found by the algorithm and the required running time remain notoriously
hard problems. For most of the above mentioned methods it is possible to construct adversarial examples that lead to highly sub-optimal local optima or induce very slow convergence. Nonetheless,
many of these worst-case examples are contrived and highly unlikely to arise in real-world scenarios.
Therefore, if one seeks to understand the success of local search algorithms, one must go beyond
the worst-case scenario. This path has been recently explored for various algorithms and numerous
papers have recently shown the power of gradient descent, EM, Lloyd’s method in various specific
contexts.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

