CASTLE: Regularization via
Auxiliary Causal Graph Discovery

Trent Kyono∗
University of California, Los Angeles
tmkyono@ucla.edu

Yao Zhang∗
University of Cambridge
yz555@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California, Los Angeles
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Regularization improves generalization of supervised models to out-of-sample data.
Prior works have shown that prediction in the causal direction (effect from cause)
results in lower testing error than the anti-causal direction. However, existing
regularization methods are agnostic of causality. We introduce Causal Structure
Learning (CASTLE) regularization and propose to regularize a neural network
by jointly learning the causal relationships between variables. CASTLE learns
the causal directed acyclical graph (DAG) as an adjacency matrix embedded in
the neural network’s input layers, thereby facilitating the discovery of optimal
predictors. Furthermore, CASTLE efficiently reconstructs only the features in the
causal DAG that have a causal neighbor, whereas reconstruction-based regularizers
suboptimally reconstruct all input features. We provide a theoretical generalization
bound for our approach and conduct experiments on a plethora of synthetic and real
publicly available datasets demonstrating that CASTLE consistently leads to better
out-of-sample predictions as compared to other popular benchmark regularizers.

1

Introduction

A primary concern of machine learning, and deep learning in particular, is generalization performance
on out-of-sample data. Over-parameterized deep networks efficiently learn complex models and
are, therefore, susceptible to overfit to training data. Common regularization techniques to mitigate
overfitting include data augmentation [1, 2], dropout [3, 4, 5], adversarial training [6], label smoothing
[7], and layer-wise strategies [8, 9, 10] to name a few. However, these methods are agnostic of the
causal relationships between variables limiting their potential to identify optimal predictors based
on graphical topology, such as the causal parents of the target variable. An alternative approach
to regularization leverages supervised reconstruction, which has been proven theoretically and
demonstrated empirically to improve generalization performance by obligating hidden bottleneck
layers to reconstruct input features [11, 12]. However, supervised auto-encoders suboptimally
reconstruct all features, including those without causal neighbors, i.e., adjacent cause or effect nodes.
Naively reconstructing these variables does not improve regularization and representation learning
for the predictive model. In some cases, it may be harmful to generalization performance, e.g.,
reconstructing a random noise variable.
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

