Online Non-Convex Optimization
with Imperfect Feedback

Amélie Héliou
Criteo AI Lab
a.heliou@criteo.com

Matthieu Martin
Criteo AI Lab
mat.martin@criteo.com

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, LIG &
Criteo AI Lab
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Thibaud Rahier
Criteo AI Lab
t.rahier@criteo.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of online learning with non-convex losses. In terms
of feedback, we assume that the learner observes – or otherwise constructs – an
inexact model for the loss function encountered at each stage, and we propose a
mixed-strategy learning policy based on dual averaging. In this general context, we
derive a series of tight regret minimization guarantees, both for the learner’s static
(external) regret, as well as the regret incurred against the best dynamic policy
in hindsight. Subsequently, we apply this general template to the case where the
learner only has access to the actual loss incurred at each stage of the process. This
is achieved by means of a kernel-based estimator which generates an inexact model
for each round’s loss function using only the learner’s realized losses as input.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following online learning framework:
1. At each stage t = 1, 2, . . . of a repeated decision process, the learner selects an action xt
from a compact convex subset K of a Euclidean space Rn .
2. The agent’s choice of action triggers a loss `t (xt ) based on an a priori unknown loss function
`t : K → R; subsequently, the process repeats.
If the loss functions `t encountered by the agent are convex, the above framework is the standard
online convex optimization setting of Zinkevich [58] – for a survey, see [16, 29, 45] and references
therein. In this case, simple first-order methods like online gradient descent (OGD) allow the learner
to achieve O(T 1/2 ) regret after T rounds [58], a bound which is well-known to be min-max optimal
in this setting [1, 45]. At the same time, it is also possible to achieve tight regret minimization
guarantees against dynamic comparators – such as the regret incurred against the best dynamic policy
in hindsight, cf. [11, 21, 23, 30, 33] and references therein.
On the other hand, when the problem’s loss functions are not convex, the situation is considerably
more difficult. When the losses are generated from a stationary stochastic distribution, the problem
can be seen as a version of a continuous-armed bandit in the spirit of Agrawal [3]; in this case, there
exist efficient algorithms guaranteeing logarithmic regret by discretizing the problem’s search domain
and using a UCB-type policy [18, 37, 48]. Otherwise, in an adversarial context, an informed adversary
can impose linear regret to any deterministic algorithm employed by the learner [31, 45, 50]; as a
result, UCB-type approaches are no longer suitable.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

