SURF: A Simple, Universal, Robust, Fast
Distribution Learning Algorithm

Yi Hao, Ayush Jain, Alon Orlitsky, Vaishakh Ravindrakumar
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{yih179, ayjain, aorlitsky, varavind}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Sample- and computationally-efficient distribution estimation is a fundamental
tenet in statistics and machine learning. We present SURF, an algorithm for approximating distributions by piecewise polynomials. SURF is: simple, replacing prior
complex optimization techniques by straight-forward empirical probability approximation of each potential polynomial piece through simple empirical-probability
interpolation, and using plain divide-and-conquer to merge the pieces; universal,
as well-known polynomial-approximation results imply that it accurately approximates a large class of common distributions; robust to distribution mis-specification
as for any degree d ≤ 8, it estimates any distribution to an `1 distance < 3 times
that of the nearest degree-d piecewise polynomial, improving known factor upper
bounds of 3 for single polynomials and 15 for polynomials with arbitrarily many
pieces; fast, using optimal sample complexity, running in near sample-linear time,
and if given sorted samples it may be parallelized to run in sub-linear time. In
experiments, SURF outperforms state-of-the art algorithms.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

Estimating an unknown distribution from its samples is a fundamental statistical problem arising in
many applications such as modeling language, stocks, weather, traffic patterns, and many more. It
has therefore been studied for over a century, e.g. [15].
def

Consider an unknown univariate distribution f over R, generating n samples X n = X1 , . . . ,Xn .
An estimator for f is a mapping fˆ : Rn → R. As in many of the prior works, we evaluate fˆ using
the `1 distance, kfˆ − f k1 . The `1 distance professes several desirable properties, including scale and
location invariance, and provides provable guarantees on the values of Lipschitz functionals of f [6].
Ideally, we would prefer an estimator that learns any distribution. However, arbitrary distributions
cannot be learned with any number of samples. Let u be the continuous uniform distribution over
[0, 1]. For any number n of samples, uniformly select n3 points from [0, 1] and let p be the discrete
uniform distribution over these n3 points. Since with high probability collisions do not occur within
samples under either distribution, u and p cannot be distinguished from the uniformly occurring
samples. As ku − pk1 = 2, it follows that for any estimator fˆ, maxf ∈{u,p} Ekfˆ − f k1 & 1.
A common modification, motivated by PAC agnostic learning, assumes that f is close to a natural
distribution class C, and tries to find the distribution in C closest to f . The following notion of
OPTC (f ) considers this lowest distance, and the usual minimax learning rate of C, Rn (C), is the
lowest worst-case expected distance achieved by any estimator,
def
def
OPTC (f ) = inf kf − gk1 , Rn (C) = min max E kfˆ − f k1 .
g∈C

fˆ

f ∈C X n ∼f

As has been considered in [2], fˆ is said to be a factor-c approximation for C if
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

