From Boltzmann Machines to Neural Networks and
Back Again

Surbhi Goel
Microsoft Research NYC
surbgoel@microsoft.com

Adam Klivans
University of Texas at Austin
klivans@cs.utexas.edu

Frederic Koehler
MIT
fkoehler@mit.edu

Abstract
Graphical models are powerful tools for modeling high-dimensional data, but
learning graphical models in the presence of latent variables is well-known to
be difficult. In this work we give new results for learning Restricted Boltzmann
Machines, probably the most well-studied class of latent variable models. Our
results are based on new connections to learning two-layer neural networks under
`∞ bounded input; for both problems, we give nearly optimal results under the
conjectured hardness of sparse parity with noise. Using the connection between
RBMs and feedforward networks, we also initiate the theoretical study of supervised RBMs [1], a version of neural-network learning that couples distributional
assumptions induced from the underlying graphical model with the architecture of
the unknown function class. We then give an algorithm for learning a natural class
of supervised RBMs with better runtime than what is possible for its related class
of networks without distributional assumptions.

1

Introduction

Graphical models are a powerful framework for modelling high-dimensional distributions in a way
that is interpretable and enables sophisticated forms of inference and reasoning. They are extensively
used in a variety of disciplines including the natural and social sciences where they have been used
to model the structure of gene regulatory networks, of connectivity in the brain, and the flocking
behavior of birds [2]. In many contexts, the structure of interactions between different observed
variables is unknown a priori and the goal is to infer this structure in a sample-efficient way from
data. There has been decades of research on various formulations of this problem, both theoretically
and empirically: for example, provable algorithms have been developed for learning tree-structured
graphical models [3], for learning models on graphs of bounded tree-width [4], for learning Ising
models on general graphs of bounded degree [5, 6, 7, 8] and in a variety of other contexts like
Gaussian graphical models (e.g. [9]). For the most part, the main interest has been on learning under
the assumption that the underlying model is sparse. Sparsity is a natural assumption since many
applications are in a sample-starved regime where the learning problem is information-theoretically
impossible without sparsity. Sparse models are generally considered to be more interpretable than
their dense counterparts since they satisfy large numbers of conditional independence relations.
A major challenge in probabilistic inference from data is the presence of latent or confounding
variables which are unobserved and may create complicated higher-order dependencies between
the observed variables. Specifically in the context of learning undirected graphical models, it is
well known that even if the underlying graphical model is well-behaved, if only a subset of the
variables are observed then the resulting marginal distribution can still be extremely complicated,
e.g. simulating the uniform distribution over satisfying assignments of an arbitrary circuit [10],
which makes the learning problem computationally intractable. On the other hand, under certain
assumptions we know that learning graphical models with latent variables can be both computationally
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

