Beyond the Mean-Field: Structured Deep Gaussian
Processes Improve the Predictive Uncertainties

Jakob Lindinger1,2,3 , David Reeb1 , Christoph Lippert2,3 , Barbara Rakitsch1
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
2
Hasso Plattner Institute, Potsdam, Germany
3
University of Potsdam, Germany
{jakob.lindinger, david.reeb, barbara.rakitsch}@de.bosch.com, christoph.lippert@hpi.de

Abstract
Deep Gaussian Processes learn probabilistic data representations for supervised
learning by cascading multiple Gaussian Processes. While this model family
promises flexible predictive distributions, exact inference is not tractable. Approximate inference techniques trade off the ability to closely resemble the posterior distribution against speed of convergence and computational efficiency. We
propose a novel Gaussian variational family that allows for retaining covariances
between latent processes while achieving fast convergence by marginalising out
all global latent variables. After providing a proof of how this marginalisation
can be done for general covariances, we restrict them to the ones we empirically
found to be most important in order to also achieve computational efficiency. We
provide an efficient implementation of our new approach and apply it to several
benchmark datasets. It yields excellent results and strikes a better balance between
accuracy and calibrated uncertainty estimates than its state-of-the-art alternatives.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Processes (GPs) provide a non-parametric framework for learning distributions over unknown functions from data [21]: As the posterior distribution can be computed in closed-form, they
return well-calibrated uncertainty estimates, making them particularly useful in safety critical applications [3, 22], Bayesian optimisation [10, 30], active learning [37] or under covariate shift [31].
However, the analytical tractability of GPs comes at the price of reduced flexibility: Standard kernel
functions make strong assumptions such as stationarity or smoothness. To make GPs more flexible, a
practitioner would have to come up with hand-crafted features or kernel functions. Both alternatives
require expert knowledge and are prone to overfitting.
Deep Gaussian Processes (DGPs) offer a compelling alternative since they learn non-linear feature
representations in a fully probabilistic manner via GP cascades [6]. The gained flexibility has the
drawback that inference can no longer be carried out in closed-form, but must be performed via
Monte Carlo sampling [9], or approximate inference techniques [5, 6, 24]. The most popular approximation, variational inference, searches for the best approximate posterior within a pre-defined
class of distributions: the variational family [4]. For GPs, variational approximations often build on
the inducing point framework where a small set of global latent variables acts as pseudo datapoints
summarising the training data [29, 32]. For DGPs, each latent GP is governed by its own set of
inducing variables, which, in general, need not be independent from those of other latent GPs. Here,
we offer a new class of variational families for DGPs taking the following two requirements into account: (i) all global latent variables, i.e., inducing outputs, can be marginalised out, (ii) correlations
between latent GP models can be captured. Satisfying (i) reduces the variance in the estimators and
is needed for fast convergence [16] while (ii) leads to better calibrated uncertainty estimates [33].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

