Extrapolation Towards Imaginary 0-Nearest Neighbour
and Its Improved Convergence Rate

Akifumi Okuno1,3 and Hidetoshi Shimodaira2,3
1

School of Statistical Thinking, The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
2
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project

Abstract
k-nearest neighbour (k-NN) is one of the simplest and most widely-used methods
for supervised classification, that predicts a query’s label by taking weighted ratio
of observed labels of k objects nearest to the query. The weights and the parameter
k ∈ N regulate its bias-variance trade-off, and the trade-off implicitly affects
the convergence rate of the excess risk for the k-NN classifier; several existing
studies considered selecting optimal k and weights to obtain faster convergence
rate. Whereas k-NN with non-negative weights has been developed widely, it was
also proved that negative weights are essential for eradicating the bias terms and
attaining optimal convergence rate. In this paper, we propose a novel multiscale
k-NN (MS-k-NN), that extrapolates unweighted k-NN estimators from several
k ≥ 1 values to k = 0, thus giving an imaginary 0-NN estimator. Our method
implicitly computes optimal real-valued weights that are adaptive to the query and
its neighbour points. We theoretically prove that the MS-k-NN attains the improved
rate, which coincides with the existing optimal rate under some conditions.

1

Introduction

Supervised classification has been a fundamental problem in machine learning and statistics over
the years. It is widely used in a number of applications, such as music-genre categorization (Li
et al., 2003), medical diagnosis (Soni et al., 2011), speaker recognition (Ge et al., 2017) and so
forth. Moreover, vast amounts of data have become readily available for anyone, along with the
development of information technology; potential demands for better classification are still growing.
One of the simplest and most widely-used methods for
Table 1: Convergence Rates
supervised classification is k-nearest neighbour (k-NN;
Fix & Hodges (1951)), where the estimator predicts a
Nadaraya-Watson
n−4/(4+d)
†
query’s label probability by taking the weighted ratio
Local polynomial
n−2β/(2β+d)
of observed labels of k objects nearest to the query,
k-NN (unweighted)
n−4/(4+d)
and the corresponding classifier specifies the class of
k-NN (with weights ≥ 0) n−4/(4+d)
objects via the predicted label probabilities. k-NN has
k-NN (with weights ∈ R) n−2β/(2β+d)
strengths in its simplicity and flexibility over and above
Multiscale k-NN
n−2β/(2β+d)
†
its statistical consistency (as k = kn → ∞, kn /n →
uniform bound; others are non-uniform.
0, n → ∞), proved by Fix & Hodges (1951), Cover &
α = 1, β = 2u, u ∈ N, γ = 2.
Hart (1967) and Stone (1977). However, such a simple
k-NN heavily depends on the selection of parameters, i.e., the weights and k therein; inexhaustible
discussions on parameter selection have been developed for long decades (Devroye et al., 1996;
Boucheron et al., 2005; Audibert & Tsybakov, 2007; Samworth, 2012; Chaudhuri & Dasgupta, 2014;
Anava & Levy, 2016; Cannings et al., 2017; Balsubramani et al., 2019).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

