Restless-UCB, an Efficient and Low-complexity
Algorithm for Online Restless Bandits

Siwei Wang1 , Longbo Huang2 , John C.S. Lui3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
wangsw2020@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
longbohuang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
1

Abstract
We study the online restless bandit problem, where the state of each arm evolves
according to a Markov chain, and the reward of pulling an arm depends on both the
pulled arm and the current state of the corresponding Markov chain. In this paper,
we propose Restless-UCB, a learning policy that follows the explore-then-commit
framework. In Restless-UCB, we present a novel method to construct offline
instances, which only requires O(N ) time-complexity (N is the number of arms)
and is exponentially better than the complexity of existing learning policy. We
2
also prove that Restless-UCB achieves a regret upper bound of Õ((N + M 3 )T 3 ),
where M is the Markov chain state space size and T is the time horizon. Compared
to existing algorithms, our result eliminates the exponential factor (in M, N ) in
the regret upper bound, due to a novel exploitation of the sparsity in transitions in
general restless bandit problems. As a result, our analysis technique can also be
adopted to tighten the regret bounds of existing algorithms. Finally, we conduct
experiments based on real-world dataset, to compare the Restless-UCB policy
with state-of-the-art benchmarks. Our results show that Restless-UCB outperforms
existing algorithms in regret, and significantly reduces the running time.

1

Introduction

The restless bandit problem is a time slotted game between a player and the environment [50]. In this
problem, there are N arms (or actions), and the state of each arm i evolves according to a Markov
chain Mi , which makes one transition per time slot during the game (regardless of being pulled
or not). At each time slot t, the player chooses one arm to pull. If he pulls arm i, he observes
the current state si (t) of Mi , and receives a random reward xi (t) that depends on i and si (t), i.e.,
E[xi (t)] = r(i, si (t)) for some function r. The goal of the player is to maximize his expected
PT
cumulative reward during the time horizon T , i.e., E[ t=1 xa(t) (t)], where a(t) ∈ [N ] denotes the
pulled arm at time step t.
Restless bandit can model many important applications. For instance, in a job allocation problem, an
operator allocates jobs to N different servers. The state of each server, i.e., the number of background
jobs currently running at the server, can be modeled by a Markov chain, and it changes every time
slot according to an underlying transition matrix [32, 20]. At each time slot, the operator allocates a
job to one server, and receives the reward from that server, i.e., whether the job is completed, which
depends on the current state of the server. At the same time, the operator can determine the current
state of the chosen server based on its feedback. For servers that are not assigned jobs at the current
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

