Glyph: Fast and Accurately Training Deep Neural
Networks on Encrypted Data

Qian Lou

Bo Feng

Geoffrey C. Fox

Lei Jiang

louqian@iu.edu

fengbo@iu.edu

gcf@indiana.edu

jiang60@iu.edu

Indiana University Bloomington

Abstract
Because of the lack of expertise, to gain benefits from their data, average users
have to upload their private data to cloud servers they may not trust. Due to legal or
privacy constraints, most users are willing to contribute only their encrypted data,
and lack interests or resources to join deep neural network (DNN) training in cloud.
To train a DNN on encrypted data in a completely non-interactive way, a recent work
proposes a fully homomorphic encryption (FHE)-based technique implementing
all activations by Brakerski-Gentry-Vaikuntanathan (BGV)-based lookup tables.
However, such inefficient lookup-table-based activations significantly prolong
private training latency of DNNs.
In this paper, we propose, Glyph, a FHE-based technique to fast and accurately
train DNNs on encrypted data by switching between TFHE (Fast Fully Homomorphic Encryption over the Torus) and BGV cryptosystems. Glyph uses logicoperation-friendly TFHE to implement nonlinear activations, while adopts vectorialarithmetic-friendly BGV to perform multiply-accumulations (MACs). Glyph further applies transfer learning on DNN training to improve test accuracy and reduce
the number of MACs between ciphertext and ciphertext in convolutional layers.
Our experimental results show Glyph obtains state-of-the-art accuracy, and reduces training latency by 69% ∼ 99% over prior FHE-based privacy-preserving
techniques on encrypted datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep learning is one of the most dominant approaches to solving a wide variety of problems such as
computer vision and natural language processing [1], because of its state-of-the-art accuracy. By only
sufficient data, DNN weights can be trained to achieve high enough accuracy. Average users typically
lack knowledge and expertise to build their own DNN models to harvest benefits from their own data,
so they have to depend on big data companies such as Google, Amazon and Microsoft. However, due
to legal or privacy constraints, there are many scenarios where the data required by DNN training is
extremely sensitive. It is risky to provide personal information, e.g., financial or healthcare records,
to untrusted companies to train DNNs. Federal privacy regulations also restrict the availability and
sharing of sensitive data.
Recent works [2, 3, 4] propose cryptographic schemes to enable privacy-preserving training of DNNs.
Private federated learning [4] (FL) is created to decentralize DNN training and enable users to train
with their own data locally. QUOTIENT [3] takes advantage of multi-party computation (MPC) to
interactively train DNNs on both servers and clients. Both FL and MPC require users to stay online
and heavily involve in DNN training. However, in some cases, average users may not have strong
interest, powerful hardware, or fast network connections for interactive DNN training [5]. To enable
DNN training on encrypted data in a completely non-interactive way, a recent study presents the first
fully homomorphic encryption (FHE)-based stochastic gradient descent technique [2], FHESGD.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

