AutoSync: Learning to Synchronize for Data-Parallel
Distributed Deep Learning

Hao Zhang† , 1,3 Yuan Li† , 4 Zhijie Deng, 1 Xiaodan Liang,
3
Lawrence Carin, 1,2 Eric P. Xing
1
Petuum Inc., 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Duke University, 4 Tsinghua University
{hao.zhang,christy.li,xiaodan.liang,eric.xing}@petuum.com,
dzj17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, lcarin@duke.edu
1,2

Abstract
Synchronization is a key step in data-parallel distributed machine learning (ML).
Different synchronization systems and strategies perform differently, and to achieve
optimal parallel training throughput requires synchronization strategies that adapt
to model structures and cluster configurations. Existing synchronization systems
often only consider a single or a few synchronization aspects, and the burden of
deciding the right synchronization strategy is then placed on the ML practitioners,
who may lack the required expertise. In this paper, we develop a model- and
resource-dependent representation for synchronization, which unifies multiple
synchronization aspects ranging from architecture, message partitioning, placement
scheme, to communication topology. Based on this representation, we build an endto-end pipeline, AutoSync, to automatically optimize synchronization strategies
given model structures and resource specifications, lowering the bar for dataparallel distributed ML. By learning from low-shot data collected in only 200
trial runs, AutoSync can discover synchronization strategies up to 1.6x better than
manually optimized ones. We develop transfer-learning mechanisms to further
reduce the auto-optimization cost – the simulators can transfer among similar
model architectures, among similar cluster configurations, or both. We also present
a dataset that contains nearly 10000 strategy and run-time pairs on a diverse set of
models and cluster specifications.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning (DL) have benefited greatly from training larger models on larger
datasets. To cope with the associated computational complexity, data-parallel training [19, 5, 37]
has been introduced and reported remarkable successes in scaling up model training to thousands
of GPUs [10] with billions of parameters [7, 28]. Data parallelism partitions and dispatches large
datasets to multiple worker devices, derives gradients for each worker on its independent data split,
and synchronizes gradients of all workers at the end of each iteration.
A variety of strategies and system implementations have been developed to facilitate synchronization
in data-parallel training, such as systems specialized in different communication architectures [27, 37,
29, 5], message encoding methods [21, 35], or parameter partitioning or merging schemes [18, 16].
Achieving desired data-parallel speedup, however, requires the synchronization strategy to fit well
with the statistical and algorithmic properties of the model and the cluster specification. For examples,
bipartite parameter servers work well for models whose sparsity structure creates “hot spots” [4, 19,
18], while collective all-reduce outperforms other communication architectures when the majority of
the distributed communication happens between GPUs [29, 10]. Existing systems struggle to provide
†

Equal contributions. The work is done while Yuan Li was an intern at Petuum Inc.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

