Bayesian Meta-Learning for the Few-Shot Setting via
Deep Kernels

Massimiliano Patacchiola
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
mpatacch@ed.ac.uk

Jack Turner
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
jack.turner@ed.ac.uk

Michael O’Boyle
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
mob@inf.ed.ac.uk

Elliot J. Crowley
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh
elliot.j.crowley@ed.ac.uk

Amos Storkey
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
a.storkey@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Recently, different machine learning methods have been introduced to tackle the
challenging few-shot learning scenario that is, learning from a small labeled dataset
related to a specific task. Common approaches have taken the form of meta-learning:
learning to learn on the new problem given the old. Following the recognition
that meta-learning is implementing learning in a multi-level model, we present a
Bayesian treatment for the meta-learning inner loop through the use of deep kernels.
As a result we can learn a kernel that transfers to new tasks; we call this Deep
Kernel Transfer (DKT). This approach has many advantages: is straightforward
to implement as a single optimizer, provides uncertainty quantification, and does
not require estimation of task-specific parameters. We empirically demonstrate
that DKT outperforms several state-of-the-art algorithms in few-shot classification,
and is the state of the art for cross-domain adaptation and regression. We conclude
that complex meta-learning routines can be replaced by a simpler Bayesian model
without loss of accuracy.

1

Introduction

One of the key differences between state-of-the-art machine learning methods, such as deep learning
(LeCun et al., 2015; Schmidhuber, 2015), and human learning is that the former needs a large amount
of data in order to find relevant patterns across samples, whereas the latter acquires rich structural
information from a handful of examples. Moreover, deep learning methods struggle in providing
a measure of uncertainty, which is a crucial requirement when dealing with scarce data, whereas
humans can effectively weigh up different alternatives given limited evidence. In this regard, some
authors have suggested that the human ability for few-shot inductive reasoning could derive from
a Bayesian inference mechanism (Steyvers et al., 2006; Tenenbaum et al., 2011). Accordingly, we
argue that the natural interpretation of meta-learning as implementing learning in a hierarchical
model, leads to a Bayesian equivalent through the use of deep kernel methods.
Deep kernels combine neural networks with kernels to provide scalable and expressive closed-form
covariance functions (Hinton and Salakhutdinov, 2008; Wilson et al., 2016). If one has a large number
of small but related tasks, as in few-shot learning, it is possible to define a common prior that induces
knowledge transfer. This prior can be a deep kernel with parameters shared across tasks, so that
given a new unseen task it is possible to effectively estimate the posterior distribution over a query
set conditioned on a small support set. In a meta-learning framework (Hospedales et al., 2020) this
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

