Sparse Symplectically Integrated Neural Networks

Daniel M. DiPietro, Shiying Xiong, Bo Zhu
Dartmouth College, Department of Computer Science
{daniel.m.dipietro.22, shiying.xiong, bo.zhu}@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
We introduce Sparse Symplectically Integrated Neural Networks (SSINNs), a novel
model for learning Hamiltonian dynamical systems from data. SSINNs combine
fourth-order symplectic integration with a learned parameterization of the Hamiltonian obtained using sparse regression through a mathematically elegant function
space. This allows for interpretable models that incorporate symplectic inductive
biases and have low memory requirements. We evaluate SSINNs on four classical
Hamiltonian dynamical problems: the Hénon-Heiles system, nonlinearly coupled
oscillators, a multi-particle mass-spring system, and a pendulum system. Our
results demonstrate promise in both system prediction and conservation of energy,
often outperforming the current state-of-the-art black-box prediction techniques by
an order of magnitude. Further, SSINNs successfully converge to true governing
equations from highly limited and noisy data, demonstrating potential applicability
in the discovery of new physical governing equations.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have demonstrated great ability in tasks ranging from text generation to image
classification [33, 9, 8, 49, 20]. While impressive, most of these tasks can be easily performed
by an intelligent human. The novelty is in a machine performing the task, rather than the task
itself. Researchers are becoming increasingly interested in the role that machine learning can play
in assisting humans–a role of discovery rather than of automation [16, 34, 21]. To this end, there
has been significant research interest in applying machine learning to physical dynamical systems
[12, 6, 24, 25, 32, 3, 35, 4]. Physical dynamical systems are everywhere, from weather to astronomy
to protein folding [26, 15, 38, 44]. The underlying dynamics of many of these systems have yet to
be unraveled, and many evade accurate prediction over time. Building accurate predictive models
can spur significant technological, medical, and scientific advancement. Unfortunately, data from
physical systems is often challenging to acquire and tainted with measurement and discretization
error. Consequently, a primary challenge in this domain is that data-driven techniques must be able to
cope with highly limited and noisy data.
Our work seeks to answer the following question: given the historical data of some physical dynamical
system, how can we not only predict its future states, but also discern its underlying governing equations? We focus specifically on energy-preserving systems that can be described in the Hamiltonian
formalism. There is a growing body of research in this domain, but much of it relies upon black-box
machine learning techniques that solve the prediction problem while neglecting the governing equations problem [12, 6]. Namely, there are two primary paradigms for incorporating physical priors
into neural networks: by embedding structure-enforcing algorithms into the network architecture,
(e.g., a symplectic integrator [6]), or by enforcing a set of known mathematical constraints (e.g.,
the Navier-Stokes equations) in the loss function [36]. Integrator-embedded networks function as
a black-box, and networks that use modified loss functions assume some knowledge of the system
beforehand. For machine learning to truly play a role in human discovery, interpretability should be a
paramount consideration.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

