Boosting First-Order Methods by Shifting Objective:
New Schemes with Faster Worst-Case Rates
Kaiwen Zhou†
Anthony Man-Cho So‡
James Cheng†
†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
‡
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
kwzhou@cse.cuhk.edu.hk; manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk; jcheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We propose a new methodology to design first-order methods for unconstrained
strongly convex problems. Specifically, instead of tackling the original objective
directly, we construct a shifted objective function that has the same minimizer as
the original objective and encodes both the smoothness and strong convexity of the
original objective in an interpolation condition. We then propose an algorithmic
template for tackling the shifted objective, which can exploit such a condition.
Following this template, we derive several new accelerated schemes for problems
that are equipped with various first-order oracles and show that the interpolation
condition allows us to vastly simplify and tighten the analysis of the derived
methods. In particular, all the derived methods have faster worst-case convergence
rates than their existing counterparts. Experiments on machine learning tasks are
conducted to evaluate the new methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on the following unconstrained smooth strongly convex problem:
n
1X
fi (x),
min f (x) =
n i=1
x∈Rd

(1)

where each fi is L-smooth and µ-strongly convex,1 and we denote x? ∈ Rd as the solution of this
problem. The n = 1 case covers a large family of classic strongly convex problems, for which
gradient descent (GD) and Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (NAG) [32, 33, 35] are the methods of
choice. The n ≥ 1 case is the popular finite-sum case, where many elegant methods that incorporate
the idea of variance reduction have been proposed. Problems with a finite-sum structure arise
frequently in machine learning and statistics, such as empirical risk minimization (ERM).
In this work, we tackle problem (1) from a new angle. Instead of designing methods to solve the
original objective function
f , we propose methods that are designed to solve a shifted objective h:
Pn
minx∈Rd h(x) = n1 i=1 hi (x), where hi (x) = fi (x) − fi (x? ) − h∇fi (x? ), x − x? i − µ2 kx − x? k2 .
It can be easily verified that each hi (x) is (L−µ)-smooth and convex, ∇hi (x) = ∇fi (x)−∇fi (x? )−
µ(x − x? ), ∇h(x) = ∇f (x) − µ(x − x? ), hi (x? ) = h(x? ) = 0 and ∇hi (x? ) = ∇h(x? ) = 0,
which means that the shifted problem and problem (1) share the same optimal solution x? . Let us
write a well-known property of h:
1
∀x, y ∈ Rd , h(x) − h(y) − h∇h(y), x − yi ≥
k∇h(x) − ∇h(y)k2 ,
(2)
2(L − µ)
1

The formal definitions of smoothness, strong convexity are given in Section 1.1. If each fi (·) is L-smooth,
the averaged function f (·) is itself L-smooth — but typically with a smaller L. We keep L as the smoothness
constant for consistency.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

