ShiftAddNet: A Hardware-Inspired Deep Network
Haoran You† , Xiaohan Chen‡ , Yongan Zhang† , Chaojian Li† , Sicheng Li , Zihao Liu ,
Zhangyang Wang‡ , and Yingyan Lin†
†

‡

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin

Alibaba DAMO Academy
†
{hy34, yz87, cl114, yingyan.lin}@rice.edu, ‡ {xiaohan.chen, atlaswang}@utexas.edu

{sicheng.li, zihao.liu}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Multiplication (e.g., convolution) is arguably a cornerstone of modern deep neural
networks (DNNs). However, intensive multiplications cause expensive resource
costs that challenge DNNs’ deployment on resource-constrained edge devices, driving several attempts for multiplication-less deep networks. This paper presented
ShiftAddNet, whose main inspiration is drawn from a common practice in energyefficient hardware implementation, that is, multiplication can be instead performed
with additions and logical bit-shifts. We leverage this idea to explicitly parameterize
deep networks in this way, yielding a new type of deep network that involves only
bit-shift and additive weight layers. This hardware-inspired ShiftAddNet immediately leads to both energy-efficient inference and training, without compromising
the expressive capacity compared to standard DNNs. The two complementary
operation types (bit-shift and add) additionally enable finer-grained control of the
model’s learning capacity, leading to more flexible trade-off between accuracy
and (training) efficiency, as well as improved robustness to quantization and pruning. We conduct extensive experiments and ablation studies, all backed up by our
FPGA-based ShiftAddNet implementation and energy measurements. Compared
to existing DNNs or other multiplication-less models, ShiftAddNet aggressively reduces over 80% hardware-quantified energy cost of DNNs training and inference,
while offering comparable or better accuracies. Codes and pre-trained models are
available at https://github.com/RICE-EIC/ShiftAddNet.

1

Introduction

Powerful deep neural networks (DNNs) come at the price of prohibitive resource costs during both
DNN inference and training, limiting the application feasibility and scope of DNNs in resourceconstrained device for more pervasive intelligence. DNNs are largely composed of multiplication
operations for both forward and backward propagation, which are much more computationally
costly than addition [1]. The above roadblock has driven several attempts to design new types of
hardware-friendly deep networks, which rely less on heavy multiplications in order for higher energy
efficiency. ShiftNet [2, 3] adopted spatial shift operations paired with pointwise convolutions, to
replace a large portion of convolutions. DeepShift [4] employed an alternative of bit-wise shifts,
which are equivalent to multiplying the input with powers of 2. Lately, AdderNet [5] pioneered to
demonstrate the feasibility and promise of replacing all convolutions with merely addition operations.
This paper takes one step further along this direction of multiplication-less deep networks, by drawing
a very fundamental idea in the hardware-design practice, computer processors, and even digital signal
processing. It has been known for long that multiplications can be performed with additions and
logical bit-shifts [6, 7], whose hardware implementation are very simple and much faster [8], without
compromising the result quality or precision. Also on currently available processors, a bit-shift
instruction is faster than a multiply instruction and can be leveraged to multiply (shift left) and divide
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

