A Feasible Level Proximal Point Method for
Nonconvex Sparse Constrained Optimization

Digvijay Boob˚
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, TX
dboob@smu.edu

Qi Deng
Shanghai university of Finance & Economics
Shanghai, China
qideng@sufe.edu.cn

Guanghui Lan
Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA
george.lan@isye.gatech.edu

Yilin Wang
Shanghai university of Finance & Economics
Shanghai, China
2017110765@live.sufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Nonconvex sparse models have received significant attention in high-dimensional
machine learning. In this paper, we study a new model consisting of a general
convex or nonconvex objectives and a variety of continuous nonconvex sparsityinducing constraints. For this constrained model, we propose a novel proximal
point algorithm that solves a sequence of convex subproblems with gradually
relaxed constraint levels. Each subproblem, having a proximal point objective and
a convex surrogate constraint, can be efficiently solved based on a fast routine for
projection onto the surrogate constraint. We establish the asymptotic convergence
of the proposed algorithm to the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) solutions. We
also establish new convergence complexities to achieve an approximate KKT
solution when the objective can be smooth/nonsmooth, deterministic/stochastic
and convex/nonconvex with complexity that is on a par with gradient descent
for unconstrained optimization problems in respective cases. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study of the first-order methods with complexity
guarantee for nonconvex sparse-constrained problems. We perform numerical
experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our new model and efficiency of
the proposed algorithm for large scale problems.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a great deal of work on the sparse optimization arising from machine
learning, statistics and signal processing. A fundamental challenge in this area lies in finding the best
set of size k out of a total of d (k ă d) features to form a parsimonious fit to the data:
min ψpxq,

subject to kxk0 ď k, x P Rd .

(1)

However, due to the discontinuity of k¨k0 norm2 , the above problem is intractable when there is no
other assumptions. To bypass this difficulty, a popular approach is to replace the `0 -norm by the
`1 -norm, giving rise to an `1 -constrained or `1 -regularized problem. A notable example is the Lasso
˚
2

Work done when author was at Georgia Tech
Note that }¨}0 is not a norm in mathematical sense. Indeed, }x}0 “ }tx}0 for any nonzero t.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

