Adapting Neural Architectures Between Domains

Yanxi Li 1 , Zhaohui Yang 2,3 , Yunhe Wang 2 , Chang Xu 1
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, China
3
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Department of Machine Intelligence,
Peking University, China
yali0722@uni.sydney.edu.au, zhaohuiyang@pku.edu.cn,
yunhe.wang@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au
1

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) has demonstrated impressive performance in
automatically designing high-performance neural networks. The power of deep
neural networks is to be unleashed for analyzing a large volume of data (e.g.
ImageNet), but the architecture search is often executed on another smaller dataset
(e.g. CIFAR-10) to finish it in a feasible time. However, it is hard to guarantee that
the optimal architecture derived on the proxy task could maintain its advantages on
another more challenging dataset. This paper aims to improve the generalization of
neural architectures via domain adaptation. We analyze the generalization bounds
of the derived architecture and suggest its close relations with the validation error
and the data distribution distance on both domains. These theoretical analyses
lead to AdaptNAS, a novel and principled approach to adapt neural architectures
between domains in NAS. Our experimental evaluation shows that only a small
part of ImageNet will be sufficient for AdaptNAS to extend its architecture success
to the entire ImageNet and outperform state-of-the-art comparison algorithms.

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) is to automate the design of neural architectures for networks.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) designed by NAS methods have already reached
better performance than those manually designed ones on ImageNet. However, early NAS methods
are computationally intensive, because of their demand for training and evaluation of a large number
of architectures [20, 26]. This, therefore, makes it intractable to directly conduct the architecture
search on large-scale benchmarks like ImageNet. As a trade-off, many NAS methods search on proxy
tasks, such as CIFAR-10, and then retrain obtained architectures on ImageNet. However, even though
on CIFAR-10, it is common for most methods to cost thousands of GPU days.
In the past years, great efforts were undertaken to significantly reduce the architecture search cost.
Remarkably, the line of research on the differentiable manner for architecture search [17] have
reduced the search cost dramatically to several GPU days or several GPU hours on the CIFAR-10
dataset. DARTS [17] relaxes discrete NAS search space as continuous architecture parameters and
constructs a super network by weighted mixing of all candidate operations. In the super network,
network weights and architecture parameters can be jointly optimized with gradient descent. The
search cost of DARTS on CIFAR-10 is only 1 GPU day, but the parallel optimization of all candidate
operations demands large GPU memory. GDAS [7] tackles this issue by using a differentiable sampler
and sampling one operation per connection in each epoch. This dramatically reduces the usage of
GPU memory, and the search can be completed within about 4 to 5 GPU hours depending on the
setting. As GDAS reduces the width of the super network, P-DARTS [6] starts with a shallow super
network and progressively increases its depth. This method slightly increases the search cost to about
7 GPU hours but can reach a better test performance. Besides direct reducing the training cost, CARS
[24] proposes a novel efficient continuous evolutionary approach based on the historical evaluation.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

