Conic Descent and its Application to
Memory-efficient Optimization over Positive
Semidefinite Matrices
John Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Oliver Hinder
Stanford University, Google, University of Pittsburgh
ohinder@pitt.edu

Andrew Naber
Stanford University
naber@stanford.edu

Yinyu Ye
Stanford University
yyye@stanford.edu

Abstract
We present an extension of the conditional gradient method to problems whose
feasible sets are convex cones. We provide a convergence analysis for the method
and for variants with nonconvex objectives, and we extend the analysis to practical
cases with effective line search strategies. For the specific case of the positive
semidefinite cone, we present a memory-efficient version based on randomized
matrix sketches and advocate a heuristic greedy step that greatly improves its
practical performance. Numerical results on phase retrieval and matrix completion
problems indicate that our method can offer substantial advantages over traditional
conditional gradient and Burer-Monteiro approaches.

1

Introduction

We want to solve problems of the form
minimize f (x)
subject to x 2 K

(1)

where K ⇢ Rn is a proper, convex cone and f is a convex, differentiable function which has no
nonzero direction of recession in K, i.e., it eventually curves upward along any nonzero ray in K.
Let p? denote its optimal value. These assumptions imply that an optimal solution x? exists. Our
work shows that it is possible to directly solve such a problem using a modification of the conditional
gradient algorithm that we call conic descent (CD). At each iteration, CD picks a descent direction
which is a conic combination of a step toward the origin and a direction in K. If CD fails to find a
descent direction, then an optimality certificate can be found.
We can add a redundant constraint kxk  R to problem (1) as long as kx? k  R. This ensures that
the feasible set is compact, and the well-known conditional gradient algorithm could be applied. With
a slight abuse of terminology, we will hereafter refer to this approach as simply CG. Unfortunately,
R is usually unknown in applications, and overestimates can greatly reduce the performance of CG.
Appendix E provides a worked example of this.
Prior work on projection-free optimization over cones In [12], the authors propose a version of
CG which is similar to CD in that it finds feasible directions of descent from a conic combination of a
step toward the origin and a direction in K; however, in distinction with CD, the method requires an
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

