Space-Time Correspondence
as a Contrastive Random Walk
Allan A. Jabri
UC Berkeley

Andrew Owens
University of Michigan

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

*

t+k

t

* query

target

t
negatives

Figure 1: We represent video as a graph, where nodes are image patches, and edges are affinities (in some feature
space) between nodes of neighboring frames. Our aim is to learn features such that temporal correspondences
are represented by strong edges. We learn to find paths through the graph by performing a random walk between
query and target nodes. A contrastive loss encourages paths that reach the target, implicitly supervising latent
correspondence along the path. Learning proceeds without labels by training on a palindrome sequence, walking
from frame t to t + k, then back to t, using the initial node itself as the target. Please see our webpage for videos.

Abstract
This paper proposes a simple self-supervised approach for learning a representation
for visual correspondence from raw video. We cast correspondence as prediction
of links in a space-time graph constructed from video. In this graph, the nodes are
patches sampled from each frame, and nodes adjacent in time can share a directed
edge. We learn a representation in which pairwise similarity defines transition
probability of a random walk, such that prediction of long-range correspondence
is computed as a walk along the graph. We optimize the representation to place
high probability along paths of similarity. Targets for learning are formed without
supervision, by cycle-consistency: the objective is to maximize the likelihood
of returning to the initial node when walking along a graph constructed from a
palindrome of frames. Thus, a single path-level constraint implicitly supervises
chains of intermediate comparisons. When used as a similarity metric without
adaptation, the learned representation outperforms the self-supervised state-of-theart on label propagation tasks involving objects, semantic parts, and pose. Moreover,
we demonstrate that a technique we call edge dropout, as well as self-supervised
adaptation at test-time, further improve transfer for object-centric correspondence.

1

Introduction

There has been a flurry of advances in self-supervised representation learning from still images, yet
this has not translated into commensurate advances in learning from video. Video is often treated as a
simple extension of an image into time, modeled as a spatio-temporal XY T volume [71, 117, 14].
Yet, treating time as yet another dimension is limiting [26]. One practical issue is the sampling rate
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

