Online Neural Connectivity Estimation with Noisy
Group Testing

Anne Draelos ∗
Biostatistics & Bioinformatics
Duke University
anne.draelos@duke.edu

John M. Pearson
Biostatistics & Bioinformatics
Electrical & Computer Engineering
Neurobiology
Duke University
john.pearson@duke.edu

Abstract
One of the primary goals of systems neuroscience is to relate the structure of
neural circuits to their function, yet patterns of connectivity are difficult to establish
when recording from large populations in behaving organisms. Many previous
approaches have attempted to estimate functional connectivity between neurons
using statistical modeling of observational data, but these approaches rely heavily on parametric assumptions and are purely correlational. Recently, however,
holographic photostimulation techniques have made it possible to precisely target selected ensembles of neurons, offering the possibility of establishing direct
causal links. A naive method for inferring functional connections is to stimulate
each individual neuron multiple times and observe the responses of cells in the
local network, but this approach scales poorly with the number of neurons. Here,
we propose a method based on noisy group testing that drastically increases the
efficiency of this process in sparse networks. By stimulating small ensembles of
neurons, we show that it is possible to recover binarized network connectivity
with a number of tests that grows only logarithmically with population size under
minimal statistical assumptions. Moreover, we prove that our approach, which
reduces to an efficiently solvable convex optimization problem, can be related to
Variational Bayesian inference on the binary connection weights, and we derive
rigorous bounds on the posterior marginals. This allows us to extend our method
to the streaming setting, where continuously updated posteriors allow for optional
stopping, and we demonstrate the feasibility of inferring connectivity for networks
of up to tens of thousands of neurons online.

1

Introduction

A long-standing problem in systems neuroscience is that of inferring the functional network structure
of a population of neurons from its neural activity. That is, given a set of neural recordings, we would
like to know which neurons influence which others in the system without a priori knowledge of
their anatomical connectivity. This problem is made difficult in two ways: First, new techniques in
microscopy and neural probe technology have dramatically increased the size of recorded neural
populations [1, 2], posing a computational challenge. Second, the fact that typical interventions in
these systems remain broad and non-specific poses problems for causal inference [3, 4].
However, recent advances in precision optics and opsin engineering have resulted in photostimulation
tools capable of precisely targeting individual neurons and neuronal ensembles [5–9]. This suggests
that a combination of simultaneous recording and selective stimulation could potentially allow for
∗

Code can be found at github.com/pearsonlab/BinaryStim

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

