Balanced Meta-Softmax
for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition

Jiawei Ren1 , Cunjun Yu1 , Shunan Sheng1,2 , Xiao Ma1,3 ,
Haiyu Zhao1* , Shuai Yi1 , Hongsheng Li4
1
SenseTime Research
2
Nanyang Technological University
3
National University of Singapore
4
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{renjiawei, zhaohaiyu, yishuai}@sensetime.com cunjun.yu@gmail.com
shen0152@e.ntu.edu.sg xiao-ma@comp.nus.edu.sg hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Deep classifiers have achieved great success in visual recognition. However, realworld data is long-tailed by nature, leading to the mismatch between training and
testing distributions. In this paper, we show that the Softmax function, though used
in most classification tasks, gives a biased gradient estimation under the long-tailed
setup. This paper presents Balanced Softmax, an elegant unbiased extension of
Softmax, to accommodate the label distribution shift between training and testing.
Theoretically, we derive the generalization bound for multiclass Softmax regression
and show our loss minimizes the bound. In addition, we introduce Balanced MetaSoftmax, applying a complementary Meta Sampler to estimate the optimal class
sample rate and further improve long-tailed learning. In our experiments, we
demonstrate that Balanced Meta-Softmax outperforms state-of-the-art long-tailed
classification solutions on both visual recognition and instance segmentation tasks.†

1

Introduction

Most real-world data comes with a long-tailed nature: a few high-frequency classes (or head classes)
contributes to most of the observations, while a large number of low-frequency classes (or tail classes)
are under-represented in data. Taking an instance segmentation dataset, LVIS [7], for example, the
number of instances in banana class can be thousands of times more than that of a bait class. In
practice, the number of samples per class generally decreases from head to tail classes exponentially.
Under the power law, the tails can be undesirably heavy. A model that minimizes empirical risk on
long-tailed training datasets often underperforms on a class-balanced test dataset. As datasets are
scaling up nowadays, the long-tailed nature poses critical difficulties to many vision tasks, e.g., visual
recognition and instance segmentation.
An intuitive solution to long-tailed task is to re-balance the data distribution. Most state-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods use the class-balanced sampling or loss re-weighting to “simulate" a balanced
training set [3, 31]. However, they may under-represent the head class or have gradient issues during
optimization. Cao et al. [4] introduced Label-Distribution-Aware Margin Loss (LDAM), from the
perspective of the generalization error bound. Given fewer training samples, a tail class should have
a higher generalization error bound during optimization. Nevertheless, LDAM is derived from the
hinge loss, under a binary classification setup and is not suitable for multi-class classification.
* Corresponding author
†

Code available at https://github.com/jiawei-ren/BalancedMetaSoftmax

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

