Practical Quasi-Newton Methods for Training Deep
Neural Networks
Donald Goldfarb, Yi Ren, Achraf Bahamou
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
{goldfarb, yr2322, ab4689}@columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider the development of practical stochastic quasi-Newton, and in particular
Kronecker-factored block-diagonal BFGS and L-BFGS methods, for training deep
neural networks (DNNs). In DNN training, the number of variables and components
of the gradient n is often of the order of tens of millions and the Hessian has n2
elements. Consequently, computing and storing a full n × n BFGS approximation
or storing a modest number of (step, change in gradient) vector pairs for use in
an L-BFGS implementation is out of the question. In our proposed methods,
we approximate the Hessian by a block-diagonal matrix and use the structure
of the gradient and Hessian to further approximate these blocks, each of which
corresponds to a layer, as the Kronecker product of two much smaller matrices.
This is analogous to the approach in KFAC [30], which computes a Kroneckerfactored block-diagonal approximation to the Fisher matrix in a stochastic natural
gradient method. Because of the indefinite and highly variable nature of the Hessian
in a DNN, we also propose a new damping approach to keep the upper as well as
the lower bounds of the BFGS and L-BFGS approximations bounded. In tests on
autoencoder feed-forward neural network models with either nine or thirteen layers
applied to three datasets, our methods outperformed or performed comparably to
KFAC and state-of-the-art first-order stochastic methods.

1

Introduction

We consider in this paper the development of practical stochastic quasi-Newton (QN), and in particular
Kronecker-factored block-diagonal BFGS [6, 13, 16, 39] and L-BFGS [27], methods for training
deep neural networks (DNNs). Recall that the BFGS method starts each iteration with a symmetric
positive definite matrix B (or H = B −1 ) that approximates the current Hessian matrix (or its inverse),
computes the gradient ∇f of f at the current iterate x and then takes a step s = −αH∇f , where α is
a step length (usually) determined by some inexact line-search procedure, such that y> s > 0, where
y = ∇f + −∇f and ∇f + is the gradient of f at the new point x+ = x+s. The method then computes
an updated approximation B + to B (or H + to H) that remains symmetric and positive-definite and
satisfies the so-called quasi-Newton (QN) condition B + s = y (or equivalently, H + y = s). A
consequence of this is that the matrix B + operates on the vector s in exactly the same way as the
average of the Hessian matrix along the line segment between x and x+ operates on s.
In DNN training, the number of variables and components of the gradient n is often of the order of
tens of millions and the Hessian has n2 elements. Hence, computing and storing a full n × n BFGS
approximation or storing p (s, y) pairs, where p is approximately 10 or larger for use in an L-BFGS
implementation, is out of the question. Consequently, in our methods, we approximate the Hessian
by a block-diagonal matrix, where each diagonal block corresponds to a layer, further approximating
them as the Kronecker product of two much smaller matrices, as in [30, 5, 19, 10].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

