Quantifying Learnability and Describability of Visual
Concepts Emerging in Representation Learning

Iro Laina

Ruth C. Fong

Andrea Vedaldi

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{iro, ruthfong, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The increasing impact of black box models, and particularly of unsupervised ones,
comes with an increasing interest in tools to understand and interpret them. In this
paper, we consider in particular how to characterise visual groupings discovered
automatically by deep neural networks, starting with state-of-the-art clustering
methods. In some cases, clusters readily correspond to an existing labelled dataset.
However, often they do not, yet they still maintain an “intuitive interpretability”.
We introduce two concepts, visual learnability and describability, that can be used to
quantify the interpretability of arbitrary image groupings, including unsupervised
ones. The idea is to measure (1) how well humans can learn to reproduce a
grouping by measuring their ability to generalise from a small set of visual examples
(learnability) and (2) whether the set of visual examples can be replaced by a
succinct, textual description (describability). By assessing human annotators as
classifiers, we remove the subjective quality of existing evaluation metrics. For
better scalability, we finally propose a class-level captioning system to generate
descriptions for visual groupings automatically and compare it to human annotators
using the describability metric.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in unsupervised and self-supervised learning have shown that it is possible to learn
data representations that are competitive with, and sometimes even superior to, the ones obtained
via supervised learning [27, 48]. However, this does not make unsupervised learning a solved
problem; unsupervised representations often need to be combined with labelled datasets before
they can perform useful data analysis tasks, such as image classification. Such labels induce the
semantic categories necessary to provide an interpretation of data that makes sense to a human. Thus,
it remains unclear whether unsupervised representations develop a human-like understanding of
complex data in their own right.
In this paper, we consider the problem of assessing to what extent abstract, human-interpretable
concepts can be discovered by unsupervised learning techniques. While this problem has been looked
at before, we wish to cast it in a more principled and general manner than previously done. We start
from a simple definition of a class as a subset Xc ⊂ X of patterns (e.g. images). While our method is
agnostic to the class generation mechanism, we are particularly interested in classes that are obtained
from an unsupervised learning algorithm. We then wish to answer three questions: (1) whether a
given class is interpretable and coherent, meaning that it can be indeed understood by humans, (2) if
so, whether it is also describable, i.e. it is possible to distill the concept(s) that the class represents
into a compact sentence in natural language, and (3) if such a summary description can be produced
automatically by an algorithm.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

