Entropic Optimal Transport between Unbalanced
Gaussian Measures has a Closed Form
Boris Muzellec
ENSAE,
Paris-Saclay, France
boris.muzellec@ensae.fr

Hicham Janati
Inria Saclay
Paris-Saclay, France
hicham.janati@inria.fr
Gabriel Peyré
CNRS and ENS, PSL University
Paris, France
gabriel.peyre@ens.fr

Marco Cuturi
Google Brain, ENSAE
Paris Saclay, France
cuturi@google.com

Abstract
Although optimal transport (OT) problems admit closed form solutions in a very
few notable cases, e.g. in 1D or between Gaussians, these closed forms have proved
extremely fecund for practitioners to define tools inspired from the OT geometry.
On the other hand, the numerical resolution of OT problems using entropic regularization has given rise to many applications, but because there are no known
closed-form solutions for entropic regularized OT problems, these approaches
are mostly algorithmic, not informed by elegant closed forms. In this paper, we
propose to fill the void at the intersection between these two schools of thought
in OT by proving that the entropy-regularized optimal transport problem between
two Gaussian measures admits a closed form. Contrary to the unregularized case,
for which the explicit form is given by the Wasserstein-Bures distance, the closed
form we obtain is differentiable everywhere, even for Gaussians with degenerate
covariance matrices. We obtain this closed form solution by solving the fixed-point
equation behind Sinkhorn’s algorithm, the default method for computing entropic
regularized OT. Remarkably, this approach extends to the generalized unbalanced
case — where Gaussian measures are scaled by positive constants. This extension
leads to a closed form expression for unbalanced Gaussians as well, and highlights the mass transportation / destruction trade-off seen in unbalanced optimal
transport. Moreover, in both settings, we show that the optimal transportation
plans are (scaled) Gaussians and provide analytical formulas of their parameters.
These formulas constitute the first non-trivial closed forms for entropy-regularized
optimal transport, thus providing a ground truth for the analysis of entropic OT and
Sinkhorn’s algorithm.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) theory [48, 20] has recently inspired several works in data science, where
dealing with and comparing probability distributions, and more generally positive measures, is an
important staple (see [39] and references therein). For these applications of OT to be successful, a
belief now widely shared in the community is that some form of regularization is needed for OT to
be both scalable and avoid the curse of dimensionality [17, 21]. Two approaches have emerged in
recent years to achieve these goals: either regularize directly the measures themselves, by looking at
them through a simplified lens; or regularize the original OT problem using various modifications.
The first approach exploits well-known closed-form identities for OT when comparing two univariate
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

