Adapting to Misspecification in Contextual Bandits

Dylan J. Foster?
dylanf@mit.edu

Claudio Gentile†
cgentile@google.com

Mehryar Mohri†‡
mohri@google.com

Julian Zimmert†
zimmert@google.com

Abstract
A major research direction in contextual bandits is to develop algorithms that are
computationally efficient, yet support flexible, general-purpose function approximation. Algorithms based on modeling rewards have shown strong empirical
performance, yet typically require a well-specified model, and can fail when this
assumption does not hold. Can we design algorithms that are efficient and flexible,
yet degrade gracefully in the face of model misspecification? We introduce a
new family of oracle-efficient algorithms for ε-misspecified contextual bandits
that adapt to unknown model misspecification—both for finite and infinite action
settings. Given access to an online oracle for square loss regression, our algorithm
attains optimal regret and—in particular—optimal dependence on the misspecification level, with no prior knowledge. Specializing to linear contextual bandits
with infinite actions
in√d dimensions, we obtain the first algorithm that achieves the
√
optimal Õ(d T + ε dT ) regret bound for unknown ε.
On a conceptual level, our results are enabled by a new optimization-based perspective on the regression oracle reduction framework of Foster and Rakhlin [20],
which we believe will be useful more broadly.

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit (CB) problem is an extension of the standard multi-armed bandit problem that
is relevant to a variety of applications in practice, including health services [42], online advertisement
[34, 4] and recommendation systems [8]. In the contextual bandit setting, at each round, the learner
observes a feature vector (or context) and an action set. The learner must select an action out of that
set and only observes the reward of that action. To make its selection, the learner has access to a
family of hypotheses (or policies), which map contexts to actions. The objective of the learner is to
achieve a cumulative reward that is close to that of the best hypothesis in hindsight for that specific
sequence of contexts and action sets.
A common approach to the contextual bandit problem consists of reducing it to a supervised learning
task such as classification or regression [32, 19, 6, 7, 41, 8, 35]. Recently, Foster and Rakhlin [20]
proposed SquareCB, an efficient reduction from K-armed contextual bandits to square loss regression
under realizability assumptions. One open question that comes up after this work is whether their
approach can be generalized to action spaces with many (or infinite) actions in d-dimensions. Another
open question is whether one can seamlessly shift from realizability to misspecified models without
requiring prior knowledge of the amount of misspecification. This is precisely the setup we study
here, where the action set is large or infinite, but where the learner has a ‘good’ feature representation
available up to some unknown amount of misspecification.
Adequately handling misspecification has been a subject of intense recent interest even for the simple
special case of linear contextual bandits. Du et al. [18] questioned whether “good” is indeed enough,
?

Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Google Research.
‡
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences.
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

