Weak Form Generalized Hamiltonian Learning
Kevin L. Course
University of Toronto
kevin.course@mail.utoronto.ca

Trefor W. Evans
University of Toronto
trefor.evans@mail.utoronto.ca

Prasanth B. Nair
University of Toronto
pbn@utias.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We present a method for learning generalized Hamiltonian decompositions of
ordinary differential equations given a set of noisy time series measurements. Our
method simultaneously learns a continuous time model and a scalar energy function
for a general dynamical system. Learning predictive models in this form allows
one to place strong, high-level, physics inspired priors onto the form of the learnt
governing equations for general dynamical systems. Moreover, having shown how
our method extends and unifies some previous work in deep learning with physics
inspired priors, we present a novel method for learning continuous time models
from the weak form of the governing equations which is less computationally
taxing than standard adjoint methods.

1

Introduction

While the bulk of dynamical system modeling has been
historically limited to autoregressive-style models [1] and
discrete time system identification tools [2, 3], recent years
have seen the development of a diverse set of tools for
directly learning continuous time models for dynamical
systems from data. This includes the development of a rich
set of methods for learning symbolic [4–11] and blackbox [12–21] approximations of continuous-time governing
equations using basis function regression and neural networks, respectively.
In terms of using neural networks to model continuous
time ordinary differential equations (ODEs), a significant
subset of these methods have focused on endowing the
approximation with physics inspired priors. Making use Figure 1: 2D slice of Lorenz ’63 generof such priors allows models in this class to exhibit de- alized Hamiltonian and trajectory
sirable properties by construction, such as being strictly
Hamiltonian [16, 17, 21] or globally stable [15]. While the existing literature presents a powerful
suite of techniques for learning physics inspired parameterizations of ODEs, there remain limitations.
• Methods for leveraging physics inspired prior information on the form of the energy within
the system are not applicable to general odd-dimensional ODEs.
• Methods for endowing ODEs with stability constraints require placing restrictions on the
form of the Lyapunov function without directly placing a prior on the energy function. There
are many systems for which we know a monotonically decreasing energy leads to stability.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

