Your Classifier can Secretly Suffice
Multi-Source Domain Adaptation

Naveen Venkat
Jogendra Nath Kundu
Durgesh Kumar Singh
Ambareesh Revanur
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Corresponding author: nav.naveenvenkat@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-Source Domain Adaptation (MSDA) deals with the transfer of task knowledge from multiple labeled source domains to an unlabeled target domain, under a
domain-shift. Existing methods aim to minimize this domain-shift using auxiliary
distribution alignment objectives. In this work, we present a different perspective
to MSDA wherein deep models are observed to implicitly align the domains under
label supervision. Thus, we aim to utilize implicit alignment without additional
training objectives to perform adaptation. To this end, we use pseudo-labeled target
samples and enforce a classifier agreement on the pseudo-labels, a process called
Self-supervised Implicit Alignment (SImpAl). We find that SImpAl readily works
even under category-shift among the source domains. Further, we propose classifier
agreement as a cue to determine the training convergence, resulting in a simple
training algorithm. We provide a thorough evaluation of our approach on five
benchmarks, along with detailed insights into each component of our approach.

1

Introduction

The task of supervised learning for classification is based on the assumption that the training data and
the testing data are sampled from the same distributions. Thus, supervised learning methods achieve
state-of-the-art results when evaluated on popular benchmarks such as ImageNet [46]. However,
when such models are deployed in real-world, they yield sub-optimal results due to the inherent
distribution-shift (domain-shift [55]) between the training data and the real-world environment (a.k.a.
the target domain). While it is possible to obtain unlabeled samples from the target domain in most
cases, the huge costs of data annotation prohibit the creation of a reliable labeled training dataset. To
this end, Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (DA) methods have been proposed that aim to transfer
knowledge from a labeled "source" dataset to an unlabeled "target" dataset under a domain-shift.
A popular strategy in Unsupervised DA is to learn the task-specific knowledge using supervision from
the labeled source dataset, while learning a domain-invariant latent space where the features across
the source and the target domains align. Such an alignment is enforced using statistical discrepancy
minimization schemes [1, 12, 39, 43, 54] or via an adversarial objective [11, 30, 57, 61, 66], or by
employing domain-specific transformations [6, 26, 44]. This alignment minimizes the domain-shift in
the latent space, and improves the target generalization. However, the performance of Single-Source
Domain Adaptation (SSDA) methods is usually determined by the choice of the source dataset [24].
Recently, Multi-Source Domain Adaptation (MSDA) [35, 67] has garnered interest wherein multiple
labeled source domains are used to transfer the task knowledge to the unlabeled target domain. A
common approach [15, 43, 61] is to learn a shared feature extractor, along with domain-specific
classifier modules (Fig. 1a), which yield an ensemble prediction for the target samples. However,
an additional challenge in MSDA is to tackle the domain-shift and category-shift [61] between each
pair of source-domains (Fig. 1b). To this end, auxiliary losses are enforced encouraging the model to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

