Path Integral Based Convolution and Pooling for
Graph Neural Networks

Zheng Ma∗
Department of Physics
Princeton University
mazhengparnassum@gmail.com

Junyu Xuan∗
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology
University of Technology Sydney
junyu.xuan@uts.edu.au

Yu Guang Wang∗
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences
& School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of New South Wales
yuguang.wang@mis.mpg.de

Ming Li
Department of Educational Technology
Zhejiang Normal University
mingli@zjnu.edu.cn

Pietro Liò
Department of Computer Science and Technology
University of Cambridge
Pietro.Lio@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) extends the functionality of traditional neural
networks to graph-structured data. Similar to CNNs, an optimized design of graph
convolution and pooling is key to success. Borrowing ideas from physics, we
propose a path integral based graph neural networks (PAN) for classification and
regression tasks on graphs. Specifically, we consider a convolution operation
that involves every path linking the message sender and receiver with learnable
weights depending on the path length, which corresponds to the maximal entropy
random walk. It generalizes the graph Laplacian to a new transition matrix we call
maximal entropy transition (MET) matrix derived from a path integral formalism.
Importantly, the diagonal entries of the MET matrix are directly related to the
subgraph centrality, thus lead to a natural and adaptive pooling mechanism. PAN
provides a versatile framework that can be tailored for different graph data with
varying sizes and structures. We can view most existing GNN architectures as
special cases of PAN. Experimental results show that PAN achieves state-of-theart performance on various graph classification/regression tasks, including a new
benchmark dataset from statistical mechanics we propose to boost applications of
GNN in physical sciences.

1

Introduction

The triumph of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has motivated researchers to develop similar
architectures for graph-structured data. The task is challenging due to the absence of regular grids.
One notable proposal is to define convolutions in the Fourier space [12, 11]. This method relies on
1
1
finding the spectrum of the graph Laplacian I − D−1 A or I − D− 2 AD− 2 and then applies filters to
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

