System Identification with Biophysical Constraints:
A Circuit Model of the Inner Retina
Cornelius Schröder∗
University of Tübingen
cornelius.schroeder@uni-tuebingen.de
Sarah Strauss
University of Tübingen
sarah.strauss@uni-tuebingen.de
Matthias Bethge
University of Tübingen
matthias@bethgelab.org

David Klindt∗
University of Tübingen
klindt.david@gmail.com

Katrin Franke
University of Tübingen
katrin.franke@cin.uni-tuebingen.de
Thomas Euler
University of Tübingen
thomas.euler@cin.uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Berens
University of Tübingen
philipp.berens@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Visual processing in the retina has been studied in great detail at all levels such that
a comprehensive picture of the retina’s cell types and the many neural circuits they
form is emerging. However, the currently best performing models of retinal function are black-box CNN models which are agnostic to such biological knowledge.
In particular, these models typically neglect the role of the many inhibitory circuits
involving amacrine cells and the biophysical mechanisms underlying synaptic
release. Here, we present a computational model of temporal processing in the
inner retina, including inhibitory feedback circuits and realistic synaptic release
mechanisms. Fit to the responses of bipolar cells, the model generalized well to
new stimuli including natural movie sequences, performing on par with or better
than a benchmark black-box model. In pharmacology experiments, the model
replicated in silico the effect of blocking specific amacrine cell populations with
high fidelity, indicating that it had learned key circuit functions. Also, more in
depth comparisons showed that connectivity patterns learned by the model were
well matched to connectivity patterns extracted from connectomics data. Thus,
our model provides a biologically interpretable data-driven account of temporal
processing in the inner retina, filling the gap between purely black-box and detailed
biophysical modeling.

1

Introduction

In the retina, light is transduced by the photoreceptors (PRs) and processed in two layers of neuropil
before the signal is sent to the brain (Fig. 1). In the outer plexiform layer, the output of PRs is shaped
by feedback of horizontal cells before it is passed to the bipolar cells (BCs). In mice, 14 types of BC
then relay the signal to the second synaptic layer, the inner plexiform layer (IPL). Here, the signal is
∗

Equal contribution. Code available at https://github.com/berenslab/bc_network.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

