RSKDD-Net: Random Sample-based Keypoint
Detector and Descriptor

Fan Lu
Tongji University
lufan@tongji.edu.cn

Guang Chen∗
Tongji University
guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

Zhongnan Qu
ETH Zurich
quz@ethz.ch

Yinlong Liu
Technische Universität München
Yinlong.Liu@tum.de

Alois Knoll
Technische Universität München
knoll@in.tum.de

Abstract
Keypoint detector and descriptor are two main components of point cloud registration. Previous learning-based keypoint detectors rely on saliency estimation for
each point or farthest point sample (FPS) for candidate points selection, which are
inefficient and not applicable in large scale scenes. This paper proposes Random
Sample-based Keypoint Detector and Descriptor Network (RSKDD-Net) for large
scale point cloud registration. The key idea is using random sampling to efficiently
select candidate points and using a learning-based method to jointly generate keypoints and descriptors. To tackle the information loss of random sampling, we
exploit a novel random dilation cluster strategy to enlarge the receptive field of each
sampled point and an attention mechanism to aggregate the positions and features
of neighbor points. Furthermore, we propose a matching loss to train the descriptor
in a weakly supervised manner. Extensive experiments on two large scale outdoor
LiDAR datasets show that the proposed RSKDD-Net achieves state-of-the-art
performance with more than 15 times faster than existing methods. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ispc-lab/RSKDD-Net.

1

Introduction

Point cloud registration is an important problem in 3D computer vision, which aims to estimate the
optimal rigid transformation between two point clouds. 3D keypoint detection and description are two
fundamental components of point cloud registration. Inspired by numerous handcrafted 2D keypoint
detectors and descriptors [1–3], researchers proposed several handcrafted 3D keypoint detectors
[4–6] and descriptors [7–11] for point cloud. However, additional RGB channels in images contain
richer information than Euclidean coordinates of point cloud without RGB information, which makes
handcrafted 3D keypoint detectors and descriptors less reliable than that in 2D images.
With the rapid development of deep learning, many works have explored learning-based methods
for 3D descriptors in point cloud [12–15]. However, only a few works explore deep learning-based
methods in 3D keypoint detection due to the lack of ground truth dataset for keypoint detector [16].
3DFeatNet[17] and USIP[16] are two pioneering works of learning-based keypoint detectors, however,
they have less efficiency consideration. 3DFeatNet predicts saliency for each input point and select
keypoints based on the predicted saliency. The per-point saliency estimation requires a considerable
time thus is not applicable in practice. USIP relies on FPS to generate keypoint candidates. However,
FPS has a time complexity of O(N 2 ), therefore is inefficient and time-consuming. Hence, both two
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

