Rescuing neural spike train models from bad MLE

Diego M. Arribas1, 2
Yuan Zhao1
Il Memming Park1
1
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior
Center for Neural Circuit Dynamics
Stony Brook University, NY, USA
2
Biomedicine Research Institute of Buenos Aires, Argentina
{diego.arribas,yuan.zhao,memming.park}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
The standard approach to fitting an autoregressive spike train model is to maximize
the likelihood for one-step prediction. This maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
often leads to models that perform poorly when generating samples recursively for
more than one time step. Moreover, the generated spike trains can fail to capture
important features of the data and even show diverging firing rates. To alleviate
this, we propose to directly minimize the divergence between neural recorded
and model generated spike trains using spike train kernels. We develop a method
that stochastically optimizes the maximum mean discrepancy induced by the
kernel. Experiments performed on both real and synthetic neural data validate the
proposed approach, showing that it leads to well-behaving models. Using different
combinations of spike train kernels, we show that we can control the trade-off
between different features which is critical for dealing with model-mismatch.

1

Introduction

Determining the functional relationship between stimuli and neural responses is a central problem
in neuroscience. A standard approach is to build a probabilistic generative model and estimate
its parameters by maximizing the likelihood of the data under the model. This framework has
been applied in diverse scenarios describing the activity of single neurons and coupled populations,
extracting low dimensional latent dynamics underlying the data and decoding stimuli that produces
neural activity. The extracted model parameters are useful as they allow one to gain insights on the
relationship between the observed neural activity, its covariates and the intrinsic dynamics.
However, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) focuses on making the data likely under the
assumed model without really assessing the behavior of the actual samples that the model generates.
MLE often leads to models that are unstable, operate at unphysiological regimes or generate samples
that fail to capture relevant features of the data. This harms model interpretation and it is a big
drawback if the obtained model is intended to be used in simulations.
In machine learning, big improvements in generative modeling were achieved when alternative approaches leading to different loss functions were considered. In their original formulation, Generative
Adversarial Networks [1] minimize an approximation to the Jensen-Shannon divergence by training a
discriminator model that evaluates sample quality. More recent works have proposed to minimize
other loss functions such as the Wasserstein distance [2] and the Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD) [3–5].
While these works have focused on the use of deep neural networks to generate synthetic images,
models in neuroscience are usually autoregressive and they emphasize interpretability. Here we
propose to complement likelihood based approaches with MMD minimization for the autoregressive
models that are typically used in neuroscience. Using spike train kernels, MMD can evaluate different
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

