Inverting Gradients - How easy is it to break privacy
in federated learning?

Jonas Geiping∗

Hartmut Bauermeister ∗

Hannah Dröge ∗

Michael Moeller
Dep. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Siegen
{jonas.geiping, hartmut.bauermeister, hannah.droege,
michael.moeller }@uni-siegen.de

Abstract
The idea of federated learning is to collaboratively train a neural network on a
server. Each user receives the current weights of the network and in turns sends
parameter updates (gradients) based on local data. This protocol has been designed
not only to train neural networks data-efficiently, but also to provide privacy benefits
for users, as their input data remains on device and only parameter gradients are
shared. But how secure is sharing parameter gradients? Previous attacks have
provided a false sense of security, by succeeding only in contrived settings - even
for a single image. However, by exploiting a magnitude-invariant loss along with
optimization strategies based on adversarial attacks, we show that is is actually
possible to faithfully reconstruct images at high resolution from the knowledge of
their parameter gradients, and demonstrate that such a break of privacy is possible
even for trained deep networks. We analyze the effects of architecture as well as
parameters on the difficulty of reconstructing an input image and prove that any
input to a fully connected layer can be reconstructed analytically independent of
the remaining architecture. Finally we discuss settings encountered in practice and
show that even aggregating gradients over several iterations or several images does
not guarantee the user’s privacy in federated learning applications.

1

Introduction

Federated or collaborative learning [6, 28] is a distributed learning paradigm that has recently gained
significant attention as both data requirements and privacy concerns in machine learning continue to
rise [21, 14, 32]. The basic idea is to train a machine learning model, for example a neural network,
by optimizing the parameters θ of the network using a loss function L and exemplary training data
consisting of input images xi and corresponding labels yi in order to solve
min
θ

N
X

Lθ (xi , yi ).

(1)

i=1

We consider a distributed setting in which a server wants to solve (1) with the help of multiple
users that own training data (xi , yi ). The idea of federated learning is to only share the gradients
∇θ Lθ (xi , yi ) instead of the original data (xi , yi ) with the server which it subsequently accumulates to
∗

Authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

