Introducing Routing Uncertainty
in Capsule Networks

Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro∇
∇

Georgios Leontidis†
†

Machine Learning Group
University of Lincoln, UK

{fdesousaribeiro,skollias}@lincoln.ac.uk

Stefanos Kollias∇

Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen, UK
georgios.leontidis@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract
Rather than performing inefficient local iterative routing between adjacent capsule
layers, we propose an alternative global view based on representing the inherent uncertainty in part-object assignment. In our formulation, the local routing iterations
are replaced with variational inference of part-object connections in a probabilistic
capsule network, leading to a significant speedup without sacrificing performance.
In this way, global context is also considered when routing capsules by introducing
global latent variables that have direct influence on the objective function, and
are updated discriminatively in accordance with the minimum description length
(MDL) principle. We focus on enhancing capsule network properties, and perform a
thorough evaluation on pose-aware tasks, observing improvements in performance
over previous approaches whilst being more computationally efficient.

1

Introduction

Although capsule networks (CapsNets) have taken on a few different forms since their inception [1,
2, 3, 4], they are generally built upon the following core assumptions and premises:
(i) Capturing equivariance w.r.t. viewpoints in neural activities, and invariance in the weights;
(ii) High-dimensional coincidences are effective feature detectors;
(iii) Viewpoint changes have nonlinear effects on pixels, but linear effects on object relationships;
(iv) Object parts belong to a single object, and each location contains at most a single object.
In theory, a perfect instantiation of the above premises could yield more sample efficient models, that
leverage robust representations to better generalise to unseen cases. Unlike current methods, humans
can extrapolate object appearance to novel viewpoints after a single observation. Evidence suggests
that this is because we impose coordinate frames on objects [5, 6]. Capsules imitate this concept by
representing neural activities as poses of objects w.r.t. a coordinate frame imposed by an observer,
and attempt to disentangle salient features of objects into their composing parts. This is reminiscent
of inverse graphics [7], but is not explicitly enforced in capsule formulations since the learned pose
matrices are not constrained to interpretable geometric forms. Another argument for CapsNets, is one
that views capsules as an extension to the very successful inductive biases already present in CNNs,
by wiring in some additional complexity to deal with viewpoint changes. One of the desired effects is
to align the learned representations with those perceptually consistent with humans, which would also
make adversarial examples less effective [8]. The additional complexity comes from replacing scalar
neurons with vector valued neural activities, along with a high-dimensional coincidence filtering
algorithm to detect capsule level features, known as capsule routing [2, 3]. This procedure is typically
iterative, local and inefficient which has prompted further research on the topic [9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

