Understanding Double Descent Requires a
Fine-Grained Bias-Variance Decomposition
Ben Adlam⇤ †
Jeffrey Pennington*
Google Brain
{adlam, jpennin}@google.com

Abstract
Classical learning theory suggests that the optimal generalization performance
of a machine learning model should occur at an intermediate model complexity,
with simpler models exhibiting high bias and more complex models exhibiting
high variance of the predictive function. However, such a simple trade-off does
not adequately describe deep learning models that simultaneously attain low bias
and variance in the heavily overparameterized regime. A primary obstacle in
explaining this behavior is that deep learning algorithms typically involve multiple
sources of randomness whose individual contributions are not visible in the total
variance. To enable fine-grained analysis, we describe an interpretable, symmetric
decomposition of the variance into terms associated with the randomness from sampling, initialization, and the labels. Moreover, we compute the high-dimensional
asymptotic behavior of this decomposition for random feature kernel regression,
and analyze the strikingly rich phenomenology that arises. We find that the bias
decreases monotonically with the network width, but the variance terms exhibit
non-monotonic behavior and can diverge at the interpolation boundary, even in
the absence of label noise. The divergence is caused by the interaction between
sampling and initialization and can therefore be eliminated by marginalizing over
samples (i.e. bagging) or over the initial parameters (i.e. ensemble learning).

1

Introduction

It is undeniable that modern neural networks (NNs) are becoming larger and more complex, with
many state-of-the-art models now employing billions of trainable parameters [1–3]. While parameter
count may be a crude way of quantifying complexity, there is little doubt that these models have
enormous capacity, often far more than is needed to perfectly fit the training data, even if the labels
are pure noise [4]. Surprisingly, these same high-capacity models generalize well when trained on
real data.
These observations conflict with classical generalization theory, which contends that models of
intermediate complexity should generalize best, striking a balance between the bias and the variance
of their predictive functions. A paradigm for understanding the observed generalization behavior
of modern methods is known as double descent [5], in which the test error behaves as predicted by
classical theory and follows the standard U-shaped curve until the point where the training set can be
fit exactly, but after this point it begins to descend again, eventually finding its global minimum in the
overparameterized regime.
While double descent has been the focus of significant research, a concrete and interpretable theoretical explanation for the phenomenon has thus far been lacking. One of the challenges in developing
⇤
Both authors contributed equally to this work. † Work done as a member of the Google AI Residency
program (https://g.co/airesidency).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

