A Computational Separation between
Private Learning and Online Learning∗

Mark Bun
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
mbun@bu.edu

Abstract
A recent line of work has shown a qualitative equivalence between differentially
private PAC learning and online learning: A concept class is privately learnable
if and only if it is online learnable with a finite mistake bound. However, both
directions of this equivalence incur significant losses in both sample and computational efficiency. Studying a special case of this connection, Gonen, Hazan, and
Moran (NeurIPS 2019) showed that uniform or highly sample-efficient pure-private
learners can be time-efficiently compiled into online learners. We show that, assuming the existence of one-way functions, such an efficient conversion is impossible
even for general pure-private learners with polynomial sample complexity. This
resolves a question of Neel, Roth, and Wu (FOCS 2019).

1

Introduction

Differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006] offers formal guarantees and a rich algorithmic toolkit
for studying how such analyses can be conducted. To address settings where sensitive data arise
in machine learning, Kasiviswanathan et al. [2011] introduced differentially private PAC learning
as a privacy-preserving version of Valiant’s PAC model for binary classification Valiant [1984]. In
the ensuing decade a number of works (e.g., Beimel et al. [2014], Bun et al. [2015], Feldman and
Xiao [2015], Beimel et al. [2016, 2019], Alon et al. [2019], Kaplan et al. [2020]) have developed
sophisticated algorithms for learning fundamental concept classes while exposing deep connections
to optimization, online learning, and communication complexity along the way.
Despite all of this attention and progress, we are still far from resolving many basic questions about
the private PAC model. As an illustration of the state of affairs, the earliest results in non-private PAC
learning showed that the sample complexity of (i.e., the minimum number of samples sufficient for)
learning a concept class C is tightly characterized by its VC dimension [Vapnik and Chervonenkis,
1974, Blumer et al., 1989]. It is wide open to obtain an analogous characterization for private PAC
learning. In fact, it was only in the last year that a line of work [Bun et al., 2015, Alon et al., 2019,
Bun et al., 2020b] culminated in a characterization of when C is privately learnable using any finite
number of samples whatsoever. The following theorem captures this recent characterization of private
learnability.
Theorem 1 (Informal [Alon et al., 2019, Bun et al., 2020b]). Let C be a concept class with Littlestone
dimension d = L(C). Then 2O(d) samples are sufficient to privately learn C and Ω(log∗ d) samples
are necessary.
The Littlestone dimension is a combinatorial parameter that exactly captures the complexity of learning C in Littlestone’s mistake bound model of online learning [Littlestone, 1987]. Thus, Theorem 1
∗

The full version of this work appears at https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.05665.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

