Network Diffusions via Neural Mean-Field Dynamics

Shushan He
Mathematics & Statistics
Georgia State University
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
she4@gsu.edu

Hongyuan Zha
School of Data Science
Shenzhen Research Institute of
Big Data, CUHK, Shenzhen, China
zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn

Xiaojing Ye
Mathematics & Statistics
Georgia State University
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
xye@gsu.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel learning framework based on neural mean-field dynamics for
simultaneous inference and estimation problems of diffusions on networks. Our
new framework is derived from the Mori-Zwanzig formalism to obtain an exact
evolution of the node infection probabilities, which renders a delay differential
equation with memory integral approximated by learnable time convolution operators, resulting in a highly structured and interpretable RNN. Directly using
cascade data, our framework can jointly learn the structure of the diffusion network
and the evolution of infection probabilities, which are cornerstone to important
downstream applications such as influence maximization. Connections between
parameter learning and optimal control are also established. Empirical study shows
that our approach is versatile and robust to variations of the underlying diffusion
network models, and significantly outperforms existing approaches in accuracy
and efficiency on both synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Continuous-time information diffusion on heterogeneous networks is a prevalent phenomenon [4, 39,
43]. News spreading on social media [13, 15, 49], viral marketing [23, 25, 52], computer malware
propagation, and epidemics of contagious diseases [3, 36, 43, 47] are all examples of diffusion on
networks, among many others. For instance, a piece of information (such as a tweet) can be retweeted
by users (nodes) with followee-follower relationships (edge) on the Twitter network. We call a user
infected if she retweets, and her followers see her retweet and can also become infected if they retweet
in turn, and so on. Such information diffusion mimics the epidemic spread where an infectious virus
can spread to individuals (human, animal, or plant) and then to many others upon their close contact.
In this paper, we are mainly concerned with the estimation of individual node infection probabilities
as well as inference of the underlying diffusion network structures directly using cascade data of
historical diffusion events on the network. For infection probability estimation, our goal is to compute
the evolution of the probability of each node being infected during a diffusion initiated from a set of
source nodes. For network structure inference, we aim at learning the edges as well as the strength of
interactions (through the edges) between the nodes on the diffusion network. Not surprisingly, both
problems are very challenging due to the extremely large scale of modern networks, the heterogeneous
inter-dependencies among the nodes, and the randomness exhibited in cascade data. Most existing
works focus on one problem only, e.g., either to solely infer the network structure from cascade data,
or to estimate influence without providing insights into the underlying network structure.
We propose a novel learning framework, called neural mean-field (NMF) dynamics, to simultaneously
tackle both of the estimation and inference problems mentioned above. Specifically: (i) We develop a
neural mean-field dynamics framework to model the evolution of diffusion on a network. Our new
framework is derived from the Mori-Zwanzig formalism to obtain an exact time evolution of the node
infection probability with dimension linear in the network size; (ii) We show that the memory term of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

