A Universal Approximation Theorem of Deep Neural
Networks for Expressing Probability Distributions

Yulong Lu
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
lu@math.umass.edu

Jianfeng Lu
Mathematics Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
jianfeng@math.duke.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the universal approximation property of deep neural networks
for representing probability distributions. Given a target distribution π and a source
distribution pz both defined on Rd , we prove under some assumptions that there
exists a deep neural network g : Rd →R with ReLU activation such that the pushforward measure (∇g)# pz of pz under the map ∇g is arbitrarily close to the target
measure π. The closeness are measured by three classes of integral probability
metrics between probability distributions: 1-Wasserstein distance, maximum mean
distance (MMD) and kernelized Stein discrepancy (KSD). We prove upper bounds
for the size (width and depth) of the deep neural network in terms of the dimension
d and the approximation error ε with respect to the three discrepancies. In particular,
the size of neural network can grow exponentially in d when 1-Wasserstein distance
is used as the discrepancy, whereas for both MMD and KSD the size of neural
network only depends on d at most polynomially. Our proof relies on convergence
estimates of empirical measures under aforementioned discrepancies and semidiscrete optimal transport.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has achieved unprecedented success in numerous machine learning
problems [29, 51]. The success of deep learning is largely attributed to the usage of deep neural
networks (DNNs) for representing and learning the unknown structures in machine learning tasks,
which are usually modeled by some unknown function mappings or unknown probability distributions.
The effectiveness of using neural networks (NNs) in approximating functions has been justified
rigorously in the last three decades. Specifically, a series of early works [12, 17, 24, 7] on universal
approximation theorems show that a continuous function defined on a bounded domain can be
approximated by a sufficiently large shallow (two-layer) neural network. In particular, the result
by [7] quantifies the approximation error of shallow neural networks in terms of the decay property
of the Fourier transform of the function of interest. Recently, the expressive power of DNNs for
approximating functions have received increasing attention starting from the works by [34] and [56];
see also [57, 45, 47, 41, 48, 14, 40] for more recent developments. The theoretical benefits of using
deep neural networks over shallow neural networks have been demonstrated in a sequence of depth
separation results; see e.g. [16, 52, 54, 13]
Compared to a vast number of theoretical results on neural networks for approximating functions, the
use of neural networks for expressing distributions is far less understood on the theoretical side. The
idea of using neural networks for modeling distributions underpins an important class of unsupervised
learning techniques called generative models, where the goal is to approximate or learn complex
probability distributions from the training samples drawn from the distributions. Typical generative
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

