Causal Imitation Learning
with Unobserved Confounders
Junzhe Zhang
Columbia University
junzhez@cs.columbia.edu

Daniel Kumor
Purdue University
dkumor@purdue.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
One of the common ways children learn is by mimicking adults. Imitation learning focuses on learning policies with suitable performance from demonstrations
generated by an expert, with an unspecified performance measure, and unobserved
reward signal. Popular methods for imitation learning start by either directly
mimicking the behavior policy of an expert (behavior cloning) or by learning a
reward function that prioritizes observed expert trajectories (inverse reinforcement
learning). However, these methods rely on the assumption that covariates used by
the expert to determine her/his actions are fully observed. In this paper, we relax
this assumption and study imitation learning when sensory inputs of the learner
and the expert differ. First, we provide a non-parametric, graphical criterion that is
complete (both necessary and sufficient) for determining the feasibility of imitation
from the combinations of demonstration data and qualitative assumptions about
the underlying environment, represented in the form of a causal model. We then
show that when such a criterion does not hold, imitation could still be feasible by
exploiting quantitative knowledge of the expert trajectories. Finally, we develop an
efficient procedure for learning the imitating policy from experts’ trajectories.

1

Introduction

A unifying theme of Artificial Intelligence is to learn a policy from observations in an unknown
environment such that a suitable level of performance is achieved [33, Ch. 1.1]. Operationally, a
policy is a decision rule that determines an action based on a certain set of covariates; observations
are possibly generated by a human demonstrator following a different behavior policy. The task of
evaluating policies from a combination of observational data and assumptions about the underlying
environment has been studied in the literature of causal inference [29] and reinforcement learning
[37]. Several criteria, algorithms, and estimation methods have been developed to solve this problem
[29, 36, 3, 6, 35, 32, 44]. In many applications, it is not clear which performance measure the
demonstrator is (possibly subconsciously) optimizing. That is, the reward signal is not labeled and
accessible in the observed expert’s trajectories. In such settings, the performance of candidate policies
is not uniquely discernible from the observational data due to latent outcomes, even when infinitely
many samples are gathered, complicating efforts to learn policy with satisfactory performance.
An alternative approach used to circumvent this issue is to find a policy that mimics a demonstrator’s behavior, which leads to the imitation learning paradigm [2, 4, 14, 28]. The expectation
(or rather hope) is that if the demonstrations are generated by an expert with near-optimal reward,
the performance of the imitator would also be satisfactory. Current methods of imitation learning
can be categorized into behavior cloning [45, 31, 23, 24, 22] and inverse reinforcement learning
[25, 1, 38, 46]. The former focuses on learning a nominal expert policy that approximates the conditional distribution mapping observed input covariates of the behavior policy to the action domain.
The latter attempts to learn a reward function that prioritizes observed behaviors of the expert; reinforcement learning methods are then applied using the learned reward function to obtain a nominal
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

