VarGrad: A Low-Variance Gradient Estimator for
Variational Inference
Lorenz Richter∗
Freie Universität Berlin
BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg
dida Datenschmiede GmbH
lorenz.richter@fu-berlin.de

Ayman Boustati∗
University of Warwick
a.boustati@warwick.ac.uk

Nikolas Nüsken
Universität Potsdam
nuesken@uni-potsdam.de

Francisco J. R. Ruiz
DeepMind
franrruiz@google.com

Ömer Deniz Akyildiz
University of Warwick
The Alan Turing Institute
omer.akyildiz@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
We analyse the properties of an unbiased gradient estimator of the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) for variational inference, based on the score function method with
leave-one-out control variates. We show that this gradient estimator can be obtained
using a new loss, defined as the variance of the log-ratio between the exact posterior
and the variational approximation, which we call the log-variance loss. Under
certain conditions, the gradient of the log-variance loss equals the gradient of the
(negative) ELBO. We show theoretically that this gradient estimator, which we call
VarGrad due to its connection to the log-variance loss, exhibits lower variance than
the score function method in certain settings, and that the leave-one-out control
variate coefficients are close to the optimal ones. We empirically demonstrate that
VarGrad offers a favourable variance versus computation trade-off compared to
other state-of-the-art estimators on a discrete variational autoencoder (VAE).

1

Introduction

Estimating the gradient of the expectation of a function is a problem with applications in many areas
of machine learning, ranging from variational inference to reinforcement learning [Mohamed et al.,
2019]. Different gradient estimators lead to different algorithms; two examples of estimators are the
score function gradient [Williams, 1992] and the reparameterisation gradient [Kingma and Welling,
2014, Rezende et al., 2014, Titsias and Lázaro-Gredilla, 2014]. Many recent works develop new
estimators with different properties (such as their variance); see Section 5 for a review.
We focus on variational inference (VI), where the goal is to approximate the posterior distribution
p(z | x) of a model p(x, z), where x denotes the observations and z refers to the latent variables of
the model [Jordan et al., 1999, Blei et al., 2017]. VI approximates the posterior using a parameterised
family of distributions qφ (z), and finds the parameters φ by minimising the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

