Distributed Training with Heterogeneous Data:
Bridging Median- and Mean-Based Algorithms

Xiangyi Chen∗
University of Minnesota
chen5719@umn.edu

Tiancong Chen∗
University of Minnesota
chen6271@umn.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Haoran Sun
University of Minnesota
sun00111@umn.edu

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
Recently, there is a growing interest in the study of median-based algorithms for
distributed non-convex optimization. Two prominent examples include SIGN SGD
with majority vote, an effective approach for communication reduction via 1-bit
compression on the local gradients, and MEDIAN SGD, an algorithm recently proposed to ensure robustness against Byzantine workers. The convergence analyses
for these algorithms critically rely on the assumption that all the distributed data are
drawn iid from the same distribution. However, in applications such as Federated
Learning, the data across different nodes or machines can be inherently heterogeneous, which violates such an iid assumption. This work analyzes SIGN SGD
and MEDIAN SGD in distributed settings with heterogeneous data. We show that
these algorithms are non-convergent whenever there is some disparity between the
expected median and mean over the local gradients. To overcome this gap, we
provide a novel gradient correction mechanism that perturbs the local gradients
with noise, which we show can provably close the gap between mean and median
of the gradients. The proposed methods largely preserve nice properties of these
median-based algorithms, such as the low per-iteration communication complexity
of SIGN SGD, and further enjoy global convergence to stationary solutions. Our
perturbation technique can be of independent interest when one wishes to estimate
mean through a median estimator.

1

Introduction

In the past few years, deep neural networks have achieved great success in many tasks including
computer vision and natural language processing. For many tasks in these fields, it may take weeks
or even months to train a model due to the size of the model and training dataset. One practical
and promising way to reduce the training time of deep neural networks is using distributed training
[8]. A popular and practically successful paradigm for distributed training is the parameter server
framework [16], where most of the computation is offloaded to workers in parallel and a parameter
sever is used for coordinating the training process. Formally, the goal of such distributed optimization
is to minimize the average of M different functions from M nodes,
M
1 X
min f (x) ,

x∈Rd

M

fi (x),

(1)

i=1

where each node i can only access information of its local function fi (·), defined by its local data.
Typically, such local objective takes the form of either a expected loss over local data distribution
∗

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

