Confidence sequences for
sampling without replacement
Ian Waudby-Smith1 and Aaditya Ramdas12
Departments of Statistics1 and Machine Learning2
Carnegie Mellon University
{ianws, aramdas}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Many practical tasks involve sampling sequentially without replacement (WoR)
from a finite population of size N , in an attempt to estimate some parameter θ‹ .
Accurately quantifying uncertainty throughout this process is a nontrivial task,
but is necessary because it often determines when we stop collecting samples and
confidently report a result. We present a suite of tools for designing confidence
sequences (CS) for θ‹ . A CS is a sequence of confidence sets pCn qN
n“1 , that
shrink in size, and all contain θ‹ simultaneously with high probability. We present
a generic approach to constructing a frequentist CS using Bayesian tools, based on
the fact that the ratio of a prior to the posterior at the ground truth is a martingale.
We then present Hoeffding- and empirical-Bernstein-type time-uniform CSs and
fixed-time confidence intervals for sampling WoR, which improve on previous
bounds in the literature and explicitly quantify the benefit of WoR sampling.

1

Introduction

When data are collected sequentially rather than in a single batch with a fixed sample size, many classical statistical tools cannot naively be used to calculate uncertainty as more data become available.
Doing so can quickly lead to overconfident and incorrect results (informally, “peeking, p-hacking”).
For these kinds of situations, the analyst would ideally have access to procedures that allow them to:
(a) Efficiently calculate tight confidence intervals whenever new data become available;
(b) Track the intervals, and use them to decide whether to continue sampling, or when to stop;
(c) Have valid confidence intervals (or p-values) at arbitrary data-dependent stopping times.
The desire for methods satisfying (a), (b), and (c) led to the development of confidence sequences (CS) — sequences of confidence sets which are uniformly valid over a given time horizon
T . Formally, a sequence of sets tCt utPT is a p1 ´ αq-CS for some parameter θ‹ if
Prp@t P T , θ‹ P Ct q ě 1 ´ α

”

PrpDt P T : θ‹ R Ct q ď α.

(1.1)

Critically, (1.1) holds iff Prpθ‹ R Cτ q ď α for arbitrary stopping times τ [1], yielding property (c).
The foundations of CSs were laid by Robbins, Darling, Siegmund & Lai [2, 3, 4, 5]. The multi-armed
bandit literature sometimes calls them ‘anytime’ confidence intervals [6, 7]. CSs have recently been
developed for a variety of nonparametric problems [1, 8, 9].
This paper derives closed-form CSs when samples are drawn without replacement (WoR) from a
finite population. The technical underpinnings are novel (super)martingales for both categorical
(Section 2) and continuous (Section 3) observations. In the latter setting, our results unify and
improve on the time-uniform with-replacement extensions of Hoeffding’s [10] and empirical Bernstein’s inequalities by Maurer and Pontil [11] that have been derived recently [12, 1], with several
related inequalities for sampling WoR by Serfling [13] and extensions by Bardenet and Maillard
[14] and Greene and Wellner [15].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

