Online Learning with Primary and Secondary Losses
Avrim Blum
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
avrim@ttic.edu

Han Shao
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
han@ttic.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of online learning with primary and secondary losses. For
example, a recruiter making decisions of which job applicants to hire might weigh
false positives and false negatives equally (the primary loss) but the applicants
might weigh false negatives much higher (the secondary loss). We consider the
following question: Can we combine “expert advice” to achieve low regret with
respect to the primary loss, while at the same time performing not much worse
than the worst expert with respect to the secondary loss? Unfortunately, we show
that this goal is unachievable without any bounded variance assumption on the
secondary loss. More generally, we consider the goal of minimizing the regret with
respect to the primary loss and bounding the secondary loss by a linear threshold.
On the positive side, we show that running any switching-limited algorithm can
achieve this goal if all experts satisfy the assumption that the secondary loss does
not exceed the linear threshold by o(T ) for any time interval. If not all experts
satisfy this assumption, our algorithms can achieve this goal given access to some
external oracles which determine when to deactivate and reactivate experts.

1

Introduction

The online learning problem has been studied extensively in the literature and used increasingly in
many applications including hiring, advertising and recommender systems. One classical problem in
online learning is prediction with expert advice, in which a decision maker makes a sequence of T
decisions with access to K strategies (also called “experts”). At each time step, the decision maker
observes a scalar-valued loss of each expert. The standard objective is to perform as well as the best
expert in hindsight. For example, a recruiter (the decision maker) sequentially decides which job
applicants to hire with the objective of minimizing errors (of hiring an unqualified applicant and
rejecting a qualified one). However, this may give rise to some social concerns since the decision
receiver has a different objective (getting a job) which does not receive any attention. This problem
can be modeled as an online learning problem with the primary loss (for the decision maker) and
secondary loss (for the decision receiver). Taking the social impact into consideration, we ask the
following question:
Can we achieve low regret with respect to the primary loss, while performing
not much worse than the worst expert with respect to the secondary loss?
Unfortunately, we answer this question negatively. More generally, we consider a bicriteria goal of
minimizing the regret to the best expert with respect to the primary loss while minimizing the regret
to a linear threshold cT with respect to the secondary loss for some c. When the value of c is set to the
average secondary loss of the worst expert with respect to the secondary loss, the objective reduces to
no-regret for the primary loss while performing no worse than the worst expert with respect to the
secondary loss. Other examples, e.g., the average secondary loss of the worst expert with respect
to the secondary loss among the experts with optimal primary loss, lead to different criteria of the
secondary loss. Therefore, with the notion of regret to the linear threshold, we are able to study a
more general goal. Based on this goal, we pose the following two questions:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

