Learning About Objects
by Learning to Interact with Them

Martin Lohmann1 , Jordi Salvador1 , Aniruddha Kembhavi1,2 , Roozbeh Mottaghi1,2
1

PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI 2 University of Washington
{martinl,jordis,anik,roozbehm}@allenai.org
https://prior.allenai.org/projects/learning_from_interaction

Abstract
Much of the remarkable progress in computer vision has been focused around
fully supervised learning mechanisms relying on highly curated datasets for a
variety of tasks. In contrast, humans often learn about their world with little
to no external supervision. Taking inspiration from infants learning from their
environment through play and interaction, we present a computational framework
to discover objects and learn their physical properties along this paradigm of
learning from interaction. Our agent, when placed within the near photo-realistic
and physics-enabled AI2 THOR environment, interacts with its world and learns
about objects, their geometric extents and relative masses, without any external
guidance. Our experiments reveal that this agent learns efficiently and effectively;
not just for objects it has interacted with before, but also for novel instances from
seen categories as well as novel object categories.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, the computer vision community has witnessed remarkable breakthroughs on a
variety of tasks such as image classification [31], object detection [49] and semantic segmentation [9].
Much of this progress can be attributed to the re-emergence of deep learning in an era of tremendous
compute, and importantly, the availability of large annotated datasets that enable models to be trained
in a fully supervised learning paradigm. While recent works [25, 10] have shown an impressive
ability to train visual representation stacks in a self-supervised manner, downstream applications
using these representations continue to be trained with fully supervised methods [23].
In stark contrast, humans often learn about their world with little or even no external supervision.
For instance, infants learn about objects in their physical environment and their behaviors just by
observing [4] and interacting [21] with them. Inspired by these studies, we propose a computational
approach to discover objects and learn their physical properties in a self-supervised setting along this
paradigm of Learning from Interaction.
Learning about objects by interacting entails the following steps: First, given an environment, the
learning agent must pick a location in space, perhaps an object, to interact with. Second, the agent
must determine the nature of this interaction (for instance, pushing, lifting, throwing, etc). Third,
the result of this interaction must be interpreted solely via visual feedback and with no external
supervision. And finally, it must iterate over these steps effectively and efficiently with the goal of
learning about objects and their attributes. For instance, an agent attempting to learn to estimate
the mass of objects based on their appearance may find it beneficial to interact with a diverse set of
objects, pick or push them and finally acquire feedback via a combination of the force applied and
the resultant displacement on the objects.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

