Global Convergence of Deep Networks with One
Wide Layer Followed by Pyramidal Topology

Quynh Nguyen∗
MPI-MIS, Germany
quynh.nguyen@mis.mpg.de

Marco Mondelli
IST Austria
marco.mondelli@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Recent works have shown that gradient descent can find a global minimum for
over-parameterized neural networks where the widths of all the hidden layers scale
polynomially with N (N being the number of training samples). In this paper,
we prove that, for deep networks, a single layer of width N following the input
layer suffices to ensure a similar guarantee. In particular, all the remaining layers
are allowed to have constant widths, and form a pyramidal topology. We show an
application of our result to the widely used LeCun’s initialization and obtain an
over-parameterization requirement for the single wide layer of order N 2 .

1

Introduction

Training a neural network is NP-Hard in the worst case [8], and the optimization problem is nonconvex with many distinct local minima [4, 34, 45]. Yet, in practice neural networks with many more
parameters than training samples can be successfully trained using gradient descent methods [47].
Understanding this phenomenon has recently attracted a lot of interest within the research community.
In [22], it is shown that, for the limiting case of infinitely wide neural networks, the convergence of the
gradient flow trajectory can be studied via the so-called ‘Neural Tangent Kernel’ (NTK). Other recent
works study the convergence properties of gradient descent, but they consider only one-hidden-layer
networks [11, 14, 17, 25, 31, 38, 44], or require all the hidden layers to scale polynomially with the
number of samples [2, 16, 48, 49]. In contrast, neural networks as used in practice are typically only
wide at the first layer(s), after which the width starts to decrease toward the output layer [20, 35].
Motivated by this fact, we study how gradient descent performs under this pyramidal topology. Into
this direction, it has been shown that the loss function of this class of networks is well-behaved, e.g.
all sublevel sets are connected [26], or a weak form of Polyak-Lojasiewicz inequality is (locally)
satisfied [29]. However, no algorithmic guarantees have been provided so far in the literature.
Main contributions. We show that a single wide layer followed by a pyramidal topology suffices
to guarantee linear convergence of gradient descent to a global optimum. More specifically, in our
main result (Theorem 3.2) we identify a set of sufficient conditions on the initialization and the
network topology under which the global convergence of gradient descent is obtained. In Section
3.1, we show that these conditions are satisfied when the network has N neurons in the first layer
and a constant (i.e., independent of N ) number of neurons in the remaining layers, N being the
number of training samples. Section 3.2 shows an application of our theorem to the popular LeCun’s
initialization [19, 21, 24], in which case the width of the first layer scales roughly as N 2 /λ2∗ , where
λ∗ is the smallest eigenvalue of the expected feature output at the first layer. Lastly, in Section 3.3 we
show that λ∗ scales as a constant (i.e., independent of N ) for sub-Gaussian training data.
Comparison with related work. Table 1 summarizes existing results and compares them with ours.
The focus here is on regression problems. For classification problems (with logistic loss) we refer
∗

This work was done partly while the author was at TU Kaiserslautern

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

