Generalized Hindsight for Reinforcement Learning

Alexander C. Li
University of California, Berkeley
alexli1@berkeley.edu

Lerrel Pinto
New York University
lerrel@cs.nyu.edu

Pieter Abbeel
University of California, Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
One of the key reasons for the high sample complexity in reinforcement learning
(RL) is the inability to transfer knowledge from one task to another. In standard
multi-task RL settings, low-reward data collected while trying to solve one task
provides little to no signal for solving that particular task and is hence effectively
wasted. However, we argue that this data, which is uninformative for one task, is
likely a rich source of information for other tasks. To leverage this insight and
efficiently reuse data, we present Generalized Hindsight: an approximate inverse
reinforcement learning technique for relabeling behaviors with the right tasks.
Intuitively, given a behavior generated under one task, Generalized Hindsight
returns a different task that the behavior is better suited for. Then, the behavior
is relabeled with this new task before being used by an off-policy RL optimizer.
Compared to standard relabeling techniques, Generalized Hindsight provides a
substantially more efficient re-use of samples, which we empirically demonstrate
on a suite of multi-task navigation and manipulation tasks. (Website1 )

1

Introduction

Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) combined with powerful function approximators has achieved
remarkable success in games like Atari [43] and Go [64], and control tasks like walking [24] and
flying [33]. However, a key limitation to these methods is their sample complexity. They often
require millions of samples to learn simple locomotion skills, and sometimes even billions of samples
to learn more complex game strategies. Creating general purpose agents will necessitate learning
multiple such skills or strategies, which further exacerbates the inefficiency of these algorithms. On
the other hand, humans (or biological agents) are not only able to learn a multitude of different skills,
but from orders of magnitude fewer samples [32]. So, how do we endow RL agents with this ability
to learn efficiently across multiple tasks?
One key hallmark of biological learning is the ability to learn from mistakes. In RL, mistakes made
while solving a task are only used to guide the learning of that particular task. But data seen while
making these mistakes often contain a lot more information. In fact, extracting and re-using this
information lies at the heart of most efficient RL algorithms. Model-based RL re-uses this information
to learn a dynamics model of the environment. However for several domains, learning a robust model
is often more difficult than directly learning the policy [15], and addressing this challenge continues
to remain an active area of research [46]. Another way to re-use low-reward data is off-policy RL,
where in contrast to on-policy RL, data collected from an older policy is re-used while optimizing
the new policy. But in the context of multi-task learning, this is still inefficient since data generated
1

Website: sites.google.com/view/generalized-hindsight

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

