Private Learning of Halfspaces: Simplifying the
Construction & Reducing the Sample Complexity

Haim Kaplan
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
haimk@tau.ac.il

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Uri Stemmer
Ben-Gurion University and Google Research
u@uri.co.il

Eliad Tsfadia
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
eliadtsfadia@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a differentially private learner for halfspaces over a finite grid G in Rd
∗
with sample complexity ≈ d2.5 · 2log |G| , which improves the state-of-the-art result
of [Beimel et al., COLT 2019] by a d2 factor. The building block for our learner is a
new differentially private algorithm for approximately solving the linear feasibility
problem: Given a feasible collection of m linear constraints of the form Ax ≥ b,
the task is to privately identify a solution x that satisfies most of the constraints.
Our algorithm is iterative, where each iteration determines the next coordinate of
the constructed solution x.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is an extremely beneficial technology, helping us improve upon nearly all aspects of
life. However, while the benefits of this technology are rather self-evident, it is not without risks. In
particular, machine learning models are often trained on sensitive personal information, a fact which
may pose serious privacy threats for the training data. These threats, together with the increasing
awareness and demand for user privacy, motivated a long line of work focused on developing private
learning algorithms that provide rigorous privacy guarantees for their training data.
We can think of a private learner as an algorithm that operates on a database containing labeled
individual information, and outputs a hypothesis that predicts the labels of unseen individuals. For
example, consider a medical database in which every row contains the medical history of one
individual together with a yes/no label indicating whether this individual suffers from some disease.
Given this database, a learning algorithm might try to predict whether a new patient suffers from
this disease given her medical history. The privacy requirement is that, informally, the output of the
learner (the chosen hypothesis) leaks very little information on any particular individual from the
database. Formally,
Definition 1.1 (Dwork et al. [2006]). Let A be a randomized algorithm that operates on databases.
Algorithm A is (ε, δ)-differentially private if for any two databases S, S 0 that differ in one row, and
any event T , we have Pr[A(S) ∈ T ] ≤ eε · Pr[A(S 0 ) ∈ T ] + δ. The definition is referred to as pure
differential privacy when δ = 0, and approximate differential privacy when δ > 0.
When constructing private learners, there is a strong tension between the privacy requirement and the
utility that can be achieved; one very important and natural measure for this tradeoff is the amount of
data required to achieve both goals simultaneously, a.k.a. the sample complexity. This measure is
crucial to the practice as it determines the amount of individual data that must be collected before
starting the analysis in the first place.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

