Learning Guidance Rewards with Trajectory-space
Smoothing

Tanmay Gangwani
Dept. of Computer Science
UIUC
gangwan2@illinois.edu

Yuan Zhou
Dept. of ISE
UIUC
yuanz@illinois.edu

Jian Peng
Dept. of Computer Science
UIUC
jianpeng@illinois.edu

Abstract
Long-term temporal credit assignment is an important challenge in deep reinforcement learning (RL). It refers to the ability of the agent to attribute actions to
consequences that may occur after a long time interval. Existing policy-gradient
and Q-learning algorithms typically rely on dense environmental rewards that
provide rich short-term supervision and help with credit assignment. However,
they struggle to solve tasks with delays between an action and the corresponding
rewarding feedback. To make credit assignment easier, recent works have proposed
algorithms to learn dense guidance rewards that could be used in place of the sparse
or delayed environmental rewards. This paper is in the same vein – starting with a
surrogate RL objective that involves smoothing in the trajectory-space, we arrive
at a new algorithm for learning guidance rewards. We show that the guidance
rewards have an intuitive interpretation, and can be obtained without training any
additional neural networks. Due to the ease of integration, we use the guidance
rewards in a few popular algorithms (Q-learning, Actor-Critic, Distributional-RL)
and present results in single-agent and multi-agent tasks that elucidate the benefit
of our approach when the environmental rewards are sparse or delayed 1 .

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents are tasked with maximization of long-term environmental
rewards. Prevalent algorithms for deep RL typically need to estimate the expected future rewards after
taking an action in a particular state – Actor-critic and Q-learning involve computing the Q-value,
while policy-gradient methods tend to be more stable when using the advantage function. The value
estimation is performed using temporal difference (TD) or Monte-Carlo (MC) learning. Although
deep RL algorithms can achieve remarkable results on a wide variety of tasks, their performance
crucially depends on the meticulously designed reward function, which provides a dense per-timestep
learning signal and facilitates value estimation. In real-world sequential decision-making problems,
however, the rewards are often sparse or delayed. Examples include, to name a few, industrial process
control [9], molecular design [17], and resource allocation [19]. Delayed rewards introduce high
bias in TD-learning and high variance in MC-learning [1], leading to poor value estimates. This
impedes long-term temporal credit assignment [15, 32], which refers to the ability of the agent to
attribute actions to consequences that may occur after a long time interval. As a motivating example
in a simulated domain, Figure 1 shows the performance with Soft-Actor-Critic (SAC) [7], a popular
off-policy RL method, on two MuJoCo locomotion tasks from the Gym suite. For delay=k, the agent
receives no reward for (k − 1) timesteps and is then provided the accumulated rewards at the k th
timestep. Increasing the delay leads to progressively worse performance.
Another class of policy search algorithms, which are particularly handy when rewards are delayed,
1

Code for this paper is available at https://github.com/tgangwani/GuidanceRewards

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

