ISTA-NAS: Efficient and Consistent Neural
Architecture Search by Sparse Coding

1

Yibo Yang1,2 , Hongyang Li2 , Shan You3 , Fei Wang3 , Chen Qian3 , Zhouchen Lin2,∗
Center for Data Science, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3
SenseTime
{ibo, lhy_ustb, zlin}@pku.edu.cn, {youshan, wangfei, qianchen}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) aims to produce the optimal sparse solution from
a high-dimensional space spanned by all candidate connections. Current gradientbased NAS methods commonly ignore the constraint of sparsity in the search phase,
but project the optimized solution onto a sparse one by post-processing. As a result,
the dense super-net for search is inefficient to train and has a gap with the projected
architecture for evaluation. In this paper, we formulate neural architecture search
as a sparse coding problem. We perform the differentiable search on a compressed
lower-dimensional space that has the same validation loss as the original sparse
solution space, and recover an architecture by solving the sparse coding problem.
The differentiable search and architecture recovery are optimized in an alternate
manner. By doing so, our network for search at each update satisfies the sparsity
constraint and is efficient to train. In order to also eliminate the depth and width
gap between the network in search and the target-net in evaluation, we further
propose a method to search and evaluate in one stage under the target-net settings.
When training finishes, architecture variables are absorbed into network weights.
Thus we get the searched architecture and optimized parameters in a single run.
In experiments, our two-stage method on CIFAR-10 requires only 0.05 GPU-day
for search. Our one-stage method produces state-of-the-art performances on both
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet at the cost of only evaluation time1 .

1

Introduction

Current NAS studies can be mainly categorized into reinforcement learning-based [1, 60, 58, 61, 4],
evolution-based [41, 40, 29, 35, 14], Bayesian optimization-based [25, 59], and gradient-based
methods [30, 48, 5, 53]. Most reinforcement learning and evolution-based algorithms suffer from
huge computational cost, while gradient-based methods are simple to implement.
In gradient-based methods, an over-parameterized super-net is constructed to cover all candidate
connections. Different architectures are sub-graphs of the super-net by weight sharing [39]. Thus the
aim of search is to determine a sparse solution from the high-dimensional architecture space. Liu
et al. propose a differentiable search framework, DARTS [30], by introducing a set of architecture
variables jointly optimized with the network weights. After search, the architecture variables are
projected to be sparse by only keeping the top-2 strongest connections for each intermediate node as
the target-net for evaluation. This method is the basis of many follow-up studies [48, 5, 9, 49].
However, we note that the architecture variables do not satisfy the sparsity constraint during search.
There is a gap between the dense super-net in search and the sparse target-net in evaluation (the term
∗
1

Corresponding author.
Code address: https://github.com/iboing/ISTA-NAS.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

