Learning efficient task-dependent
representations with synaptic plasticity

Colin Bredenberg
Center for Neural Science
New York University
cjb617@nyu.edu

Eero P. Simoncelli∗
Center for Neural Science,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
New York University
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu

Cristina Savin∗
Center for Neural Science,
Center for Data Science
New York University
csavin@nyu.edu

Abstract
Neural populations encode the sensory world imperfectly: their capacity is limited by the number of neurons, availability of metabolic and other biophysical
resources, and intrinsic noise. The brain is presumably shaped by these limitations,
improving efficiency by discarding some aspects of incoming sensory streams,
while preferentially preserving commonly occurring, behaviorally-relevant information. Here we construct a stochastic recurrent neural circuit model that can
learn efficient, task-specific sensory codes using a novel form of reward-modulated
Hebbian synaptic plasticity. We illustrate the flexibility of the model by training an
initially unstructured neural network to solve two different tasks: stimulus estimation, and stimulus discrimination. The network achieves high performance in both
tasks by appropriately allocating resources and using its recurrent circuitry to best
compensate for different levels of noise. We also show how the interaction between
stimulus priors and task structure dictates the emergent network representations.

1

Introduction

A variety of forces shape neural representations in the brain. On one side, sensory circuits need to
faithfully represent their inputs, in support of the broad range of tasks an animal may need to perform.
On the other side, the neural ‘wetware’ is intrinsically noisy [1], and computing resources are highly
limited in terms of the number of neurons and metabolic energy. It remains a mystery how local
synaptic learning rules can overcome these limitation to yield robust representations at the circuit
level.
Past work has focused on individual aspects of this problem. Studies of efficient coding have
successfully explained features of early sensory representations [2, 3] in terms of the interaction
between stimulus statistics and resource limitations, and several models have proposed how such
representations could emerge through local unsupervised learning [4, 5, 6]. However, the bulk of
this theoretical work has ignored task constraints. This oversight might seem justified, considering
that we generally think of sensory cortices as performing unsupervised learning, however a growing
body of experimental evidence suggests that behavioral goals shape neural receptive fields in adult
sensory cortices (A1 [7, 8, 9], S1 [10, 11], V1 [12, 13]), usually in the presence of neuromodulation
[14, 15, 16]. This kind of plasticity has been modelled using tri-factor learning rules, which provide
a mechanism for learning task-specific representations using only local information [17, 18, 19, 20].
However, the interaction between the task, input statistics, and biological constraints remains largely
unexplored (but see [21]).
∗

indicates equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

