Simultaneous Preference and Metric Learning from
Paired Comparisons
Austin Xu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
axu@gatech.edu

Mark Davenport
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
mdav@gatech.edu

Abstract
A popular model of preference in the context of recommendation systems is the socalled ideal point model. In this model, a user is represented as a vector u together
with a collection of items x1 , . . . , xN in a common low-dimensional space. The
vector u represents the user’s “ideal point,” or the ideal combination of features
that represents a hypothesized most preferred item. The underlying assumption in
this model is that a smaller distance between u and an item xj indicates a stronger
preference for xj . In the vast majority of the existing work on learning ideal point
models, the underlying distance has been assumed to be Euclidean. However, this
eliminates any possibility of interactions between features and a user’s underlying
preferences. In this paper, we consider the problem of learning an ideal point
representation of a user’s preferences when the distance metric is an unknown
Mahalanobis metric. Specifically, we present a novel approach to estimate the
user’s ideal point u and the Mahalanobis metric from paired comparisons of the
form “item xi is preferred to item xj .” This can be viewed as a special case of
a more general metric learning problem where the location of some points are
unknown a priori. We conduct extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world
datasets to exhibit the effectiveness of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

Personalized recommendation and ranking algorithms have become increasingly important in recent
years, influencing not only the items a user buys and movies he or she watches, but also potentially
influencing which job candidates are interviewed, which college applicants are admitted, and even the
matching behavior of online dating services. While there are a number of approaches to developing
personalized recommendation systems, a particularly common approach uses a classical model for
user preference known as the ideal point model [1]. In this model a user’s preferences are represented
as a point u 2 RD that is embedded in the same space as a set of items x1 , . . . , xN 2 RD (movies,
shoes, food, etc). The key model assumption is that the closer an item xj is to u, the more the user
will prefer item xj . We note that the ideal point is not necessarily a specific item xi , but rather
represents the combination of features that the user most prefers. The ideal point model is an intuitive
and interpretable way to model preferences and has been empirically shown to exhibit superior
performance compared to other models of preference [2, 3].
In a practical system, the main challenge is to learn the latent u that represents a particular user’s
preferences. Given a precise quantification of a user’s preferences for a number of items, one could
infer the distances from u to those items and then easily estimate a good embedding u. In practice,
however, users find paired comparison queries of the form “do you prefer item xi or item xj ” to be
far easier to answer [4, 5]. As a result, a number of approaches to learning to rank from such paired
comparisons have been proposed in recent years [6–16]. In the specific context of ideal point models,
such queries allow the user to reveal which of the two items is closer to their ideal point. There is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

