Efficient semidefinite-programming-based inference
for binary and multi-class MRFs
Chirag Pabbaraju
Carnegie Mellon University
cpabbara@cs.cmu.edu

Po-Wei Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
poweiw@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic inference in pairwise Markov Random Fields (MRFs), i.e. computing
the partition function or computing a MAP estimate of the variables, is a foundational problem in probabilistic graphical models. Semidefinite programming
relaxations have long been a theoretically powerful tool for analyzing properties of
probabilistic inference, but have not been practical owing to the high computational
cost of typical solvers for solving the resulting SDPs. In this paper, we propose
an efficient method for computing the partition function or MAP estimate in a
pairwise MRF by instead exploiting a recently proposed coordinate-descent-based
fast semidefinite solver. We also extend semidefinite relaxations from the typical
binary MRF to the full multi-class setting, and develop a compact semidefinite
relaxation that can again be solved efficiently using the solver. We show that the
method substantially outperforms (both in terms of solution quality and speed) the
existing state of the art in approximate inference, on benchmark problems drawn
from previous work. We also show that our approach can scale to large MRF
domains such as fully-connected pairwise CRF models used in computer vision.

1

Introduction

Undirected graphical models or Markov Random Fields (MRFs) are used in various real-world
applications like computer vision, computational biology, etc. because of their ability to concisely
represent associations amongst variables of interest. A general pairwise MRF over binary random
variables x 2 { 1, 1}n may be characterized by the following joint distribution
p(x) / exp xT Ax + hT x ,

(1)

where A 2 R
denotes the “coupling matrix” and encodes symmetric pairwise correlations, while
h 2 Rn consists of the biases for the variables. In this model, there are three fundamental problems
of interest: (a) estimating the mode of the distribution, otherwise termed as maximum a posteriori
(MAP) inference (b) estimating p(x) for a configuration x or generating samples from the distribution,
and (c) learning the parameters (A, h) given samples from the joint distribution. Since there are an
exponential number of configurations in the support of the MRF, the problem of finding the true
mode of the distribution is in general a hard problem. Similarly, to compute the probability p(x) of
any particular configuration, one has to compute the constant of proportionality in (1) which ensures
that the distribution sums up to 1. This constant, denoted as Z, is called the partition function, where
X
Z=
exp xT Ax + hT x .
n⇥n

x2{ 1,1}n

Computing Z exactly also involves summing up an exponential number of terms and is #P hard
[17, 13] in general. The problem becomes harder still when we go beyond binary random variables
and consider the case of a general multi-class MRF (also termed as a Potts model), where each
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

