Multiscale Deep Equilibrium Models

Shaojie Bai
Carnegie Mellon University

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI

Abstract
We propose a new class of implicit networks, the multiscale deep equilibrium model
(MDEQ), suited to large-scale and highly hierarchical pattern recognition domains.
An MDEQ directly solves for and backpropagates through the equilibrium points of
multiple feature resolutions simultaneously, using implicit differentiation to avoid
storing intermediate states (and thus requiring only O(1) memory consumption).
These simultaneously-learned multi-resolution features allow us to train a single
model on a diverse set of tasks and loss functions, such as using a single MDEQ
to perform both image classification and semantic segmentation. We illustrate the
effectiveness of this approach on two large-scale vision tasks: ImageNet classification and semantic segmentation on high-resolution images from the Cityscapes
dataset. In both settings, MDEQs are able to match or exceed the performance of
recent competitive computer vision models: the first time such performance and
scale have been achieved by an implicit deep learning approach. The code and
pre-trained models are at ❤tt♣s✿✴✴❣✐t❤✉❜✳❝♦♠✴❧♦❝✉s❧❛❜✴♠❞❡q.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art pattern recognition systems in domains such as computer vision and audio processing
are almost universally based on multi-layer hierarchical feature extractors [33, 35, 36]. These models
are structured in stages: the input is processed via a number of consecutive blocks, each operating at
a different resolution [32, 54, 51, 26]. The architectures explicitly express hierarchical structure, with
up- and downsampling layers that transition between consecutive blocks operating at different scales.
An important motivation for such designs is the prominent multiscale structure and extremely high
signal dimensionalities in these domains. A typical image, for instance, contains millions of pixels,
which must be processed coherently by the model.
An alternative approach to differentiable modeling is exemplified by recent progress on implicit deep
networks, such as Neural ODEs (NODEs) [12] and deep equilibrium models (DEQs) [5]. These
constructions replace explicit, deeply stacked layers with analytical conditions that the model must
satisfy, and are able to simulate models with “infinite” depth within a constant memory footprint. A
notable achievement for implicit modeling is its successful application to large-scale sequences in
natural language processing [5].
Is implicit deep learning relevant for general pattern recognition tasks? One clear challenge here is
that implicit networks do away with flexible “layers” and “stages”. It is therefore not clear whether
they can appropriately model multiscale structure, which appears essential to high discriminative
power in some domains. This is the challenge that motivates our work. Can implicit models that
forego deep sequences of layers and stages attain competitive accuracy in domains characterized by
rich multiscale structure, such as computer vision?
To address this challenge, we introduce a new class of implicit networks: the multiscale deep equilibrium model (MDEQ). It is inspired by DEQs, which attained high accuracy in sequence modeling [5].
We expand upon the DEQ construction substantially to introduce simultaneous equilibrium modeling
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

