Diversity Can Be Transferred: Output Diversification
for White- and Black-box Attacks

1

Yusuke Tashiro123* , Yang Song1 , Stefano Ermon1
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
2
Mitsubishi UFJ Trust Investment Technology Institute, Tokyo, Japan
3
Japan Digital Design, Tokyo, Japan
{ytashiro,songyang,ermon}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Adversarial attacks often involve random perturbations of the inputs drawn from
uniform or Gaussian distributions, e.g., to initialize optimization-based whitebox attacks or generate update directions in black-box attacks. These simple
perturbations, however, could be sub-optimal as they are agnostic to the model
being attacked. To improve the efficiency of these attacks, we propose Output
Diversified Sampling (ODS), a novel sampling strategy that attempts to maximize
diversity in the target model’s outputs among the generated samples. While ODS is
a gradient-based strategy, the diversity offered by ODS is transferable and can be
helpful for both white-box and black-box attacks via surrogate models. Empirically,
we demonstrate that ODS significantly improves the performance of existing whitebox and black-box attacks. In particular, ODS reduces the number of queries
needed for state-of-the-art black-box attacks on ImageNet by a factor of two.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved great success in image classification. However, it is known
that they are vulnerable to adversarial examples [1] — small perturbations imperceptible to humans
that cause classifiers to output wrong predictions. Several studies have focused on improving model
robustness against these malicious perturbations. Examples include adversarial training [2, 3], input
purification using generative models [4, 5], regularization of the training loss [6, 7, 8, 9], and certified
defenses [10, 11, 12].
Strong attacking methods are crucial for evaluating the robustness of classifiers and defense mechanisms. Many existing adversarial attacks rely on random sampling, i.e., adding small random noise to
the input. In white-box settings, random sampling is widely used for random restarts [13, 14, 15, 16]
to find a diverse set of starting points for the attacks. Some black-box attack methods also use
random sampling to explore update directions [17, 18] or to estimate gradients of the target models [19, 20, 21]. In these attacks, random perturbations are typically sampled from a naïve uniform or
Gaussian distribution in the input pixel space.
Random sampling in the input space, however, may not sufficiently explore the output (logits) space
of a neural network — diversity in the input space does not directly translate to diversity in the output
space of a deep nonlinear model. We illustrate this phenomenon in the left panel of Figure 1. When
we add random perturbations to an image in the input space (see dashed blue arrows in the first plot
of Figure 1), the corresponding output logits could be very similar to the output for the original image
(as illustrated by the second plot of Figure 1). Empirically, we observe that this phenomenon can
negatively impact the performance of attack methods.
To overcome this issue, we propose a sampling strategy designed to obtain samples that are diverse in
the output space. Our idea is to perturb an input away from the original one as measured directly by
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

