Solver-in-the-Loop: Learning from Differentiable
Physics to Interact with Iterative PDE-Solvers

Kiwon Um1,2
1

Robert Brand1

Yun (Raymond) Fei3

Philipp Holl1

Nils Thuerey1

Technical University of Munich, 2 LTCI, Telecom Paris, IP Paris, 3 Columbia University
kiwon.um@telecom-paris.fr, robert.brand@tum.de
yf2320@columbia.edu, {philipp.holl, nils.thuerey}@tum.de

Abstract
Finding accurate solutions to partial differential equations (PDEs) is a crucial
task in all scientific and engineering disciplines. It has recently been shown that
machine learning methods can improve the solution accuracy by correcting for
effects not captured by the discretized PDE. We target the problem of reducing
numerical errors of iterative PDE solvers and compare different learning approaches
for finding complex correction functions. We find that previously used learning
approaches are significantly outperformed by methods that integrate the solver
into the training loop and thereby allow the model to interact with the PDE during
training. This provides the model with realistic input distributions that take previous
corrections into account, yielding improvements in accuracy with stable rollouts of
several hundred recurrent evaluation steps and surpassing even tailored supervised
variants. We highlight the performance of the differentiable physics networks
for a wide variety of PDEs, from non-linear advection-diffusion systems to threedimensional Navier-Stokes flows.

1

Introduction

Numerical methods are prevalent in science to improve the understanding of our world, with applications ranging from climate modeling [55, 53] over simulating the efficiency of airplane wings [47] to
analyzing blood flow in a human body [27]. These applications are extremely costly to compute due
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
t=0

t=75

t=140

t=200

t=0

t=75

t=140

t=200

t=0

t=75

t=140

t=200

(a) Simulation
Only
MAE w.r.t. reference: 0.167

(b) Simulation
With Learned
Correction
MAE w.r.t. reference: 0.130
0.8

(c) Reference
Simulation

0.4

0.0

Figure 1: A 3D fluid problem (shown in terms of vorticity) for which the regular simulation introduces
numerical errors that deteriorate the resolved dynamics (a). Combining the same solver with a learned
corrector trained via differentiable physics (b) significantly reduces errors w.r.t. the reference (c).

