Interpretable multi-timescale models for predicting
fMRI responses to continuous natural speech

Shailee Jain
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
shailee@cs.utexas.edu

Vy A. Vo
Brain-Inspired Computing Lab
Intel Labs
Hillsboro, OR 97124
vy.vo@intel.com

Shivangi Mahto
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
shivangi@utexas.edu

Amanda LeBel ∗
Department of Neuroscience
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
amanda.lebel@berkeley.edu

Javier S. Turek
Brain-Inspired Computing Lab
Intel Labs
Hillsboro, OR 97124
javier.turek@intel.com

Alexander G. Huth
Computer Science & Neuroscience
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
huth@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Natural language contains information at multiple timescales. To understand how
the human brain represents this information, one approach is to build encoding models that predict fMRI responses to natural language using representations extracted
from neural network language models (LMs). However, these LM-derived representations do not explicitly separate information at different timescales, making it
difficult to interpret the encoding models. In this work we construct interpretable
multi-timescale representations by forcing individual units in an LSTM LM to
integrate information over specific temporal scales. This allows us to explicitly
and directly map the timescale of information encoded by each individual fMRI
voxel. Further, the standard fMRI encoding procedure does not account for varying
temporal properties in the encoding features. We modify the procedure so that
it can capture both short- and long-timescale information. This approach outperforms other encoding models, particularly for voxels that represent long-timescale
information. It also provides a finer-grained map of timescale information in the
human language pathway. This serves as a framework for future work investigating
temporal hierarchies across artificial and biological language systems.

1

Introduction

Natural language contains information at multiple timescales, ranging from phonemes to narratives [1].
The human brain processes language using a hierarchy of representations at different timescales [2, 3].
Early stages represent acoustic and word information at the sub-second scales, while at later stages
information is combined over many seconds to derive meaning [3, 4]. These representations have
∗

Currently: Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

