Walking in the Shadow: A New Perspective on
Descent Directions for Constrained Minimization
Hassan Mortagy
Georgia Institute of Technology
hmortagy@gatech.edu

Swati Gupta
Georgia Institute of Technology
swatig@gatech.edu

Sebastian Pokutta
Zuse Institute Berlin and Technische Universität Berlin
pokutta@zib.de

Abstract
Descent directions such as movement towards Frank-Wolfe vertices, away steps,
in-face away steps and pairwise directions have been an important design consideration in conditional gradient descent (CGD) variants. In this work, we attempt to
demystify the impact of movement in these directions towards attaining constrained
minimizers. The best local direction of descent is the directional derivative of the
projection of the gradient, which we refer to as the shadow of the gradient. We
show that the continuous-time dynamics of moving in the shadow are equivalent to
those of PGD however non-trivial to discretize. By projecting gradients in PGD,
one not only ensures feasibility but also is able to “wrap” around the convex region.
We show that Frank-Wolfe (FW) vertices in fact recover the maximal wrap one can
obtain by projecting gradients, thus providing a new perspective to these steps. We
also claim that the shadow steps give the best direction of descent emanating from
the convex hull of all possible away-vertices. Opening up the PGD movements
in terms of shadow steps gives linear convergence, dependent on the number of
faces. We combine these insights into a novel S HADOW-CG method that uses FW
steps (i.e., wrap around the polytope) and shadow steps (i.e., optimal local descent
direction), while enjoying linear convergence. Our analysis develops properties of
directional derivatives of projections (which may be of independent interest), while
providing a unifying view of various descent directions in the CGD literature.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem minx∈P f (x), where P ⊆ Rn is a polytope with vertex set vert(P ), and
f : P → R is a smooth and strongly convex function. Smooth convex optimization problems
over polytopes are an important class of problems that appear in many settings, such as low-rank
matrix completion [1], structured supervised learning [2, 3], electrical flows over graphs [4], video
co-localization in computer vision [5], traffic assignment problems [6], and submodular function
minimization [7]. First-order methods in convex optimization rely on movement in the best local
direction for descent (e.g., negative gradient), and this is enough to obtain linear convergence for
unconstrained optimization. In constrained settings however, the gradient may no longer be a feasible
direction of descent, and there are two broad classes of methods traditionally: projection-based
methods (i.e., move in direction of negative gradient, but project to ensure feasibility), and conditional
gradient methods (i.e., move in feasible directions that approximate the gradient). Projection-based
methods such as projected gradient descent or mirror descent [8] enjoy dimension independent linear
µ
rates of convergence (assuming no acceleration), i.e., (1 − L
) contraction in the objective per iteration
1
(so that the number of iterations to get an -accurate solution is O( L
µ log  )), for µ-strongly convex
and L-smooth functions, but need to compute an expensive projection step (another constrained
convex optimization) in (almost) every iteration. On the other hand, conditional gradient methods
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

