Discovering Reinforcement Learning Algorithms

Junhyuk Oh∗

Matteo Hessel

Hado van Hasselt

Wojciech M. Czarnecki
Satinder Singh

Zhongwen Xu

David Silver

DeepMind

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms update an agent’s parameters according
to one of several possible rules, discovered manually through years of research.
Automating the discovery of update rules from data could lead to more efficient
algorithms, or algorithms that are better adapted to specific environments. Although
there have been prior attempts at addressing this significant scientific challenge, it
remains an open question whether it is feasible to discover alternatives to fundamental concepts of RL such as value functions and temporal-difference learning. This
paper introduces a new meta-learning approach that discovers an entire update rule
which includes both ‘what to predict’ (e.g. value functions) and ‘how to learn from
it’ (e.g. bootstrapping) by interacting with a set of environments. The output of this
method is an RL algorithm that we call Learned Policy Gradient (LPG). Empirical
results show that our method discovers its own alternative to the concept of value
functions. Furthermore it discovers a bootstrapping mechanism to maintain and use
its predictions. Surprisingly, when trained solely on toy environments, LPG generalises effectively to complex Atari games and achieves non-trivial performance.
This shows the potential to discover general RL algorithms from data.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has a clear objective: to maximise expected cumulative rewards (or
average rewards), which is simple, yet general enough to capture many aspects of intelligence. Even
though the objective of RL is simple, developing efficient algorithms to optimise such objective
typically involves a tremendous research effort, from building theories to empirical investigations.
An appealing alternative approach is to automatically discover RL algorithms from data generated by
interaction with a set of environments, which can be formulated as a meta-learning problem. Recent
work has shown that it is possible to meta-learn a policy update rule when given a value function, and
that the resulting update rule can generalise to similar or unseen tasks (see Table 1).
However, it remains an open question whether it is feasible to discover fundamental concepts of RL
entirely from scratch. In particular, a defining aspect of RL algorithms is their ability to learn and
utilise value functions. Discovering concepts such as value functions requires an understanding of
both ‘what to predict’ and ‘how to make use of the prediction’. This is particularly challenging to
discover from data because predictions only have an indirect effect on the policy over the course of
multiple updates. We hypothesise that a method capable of discovering value functions for itself may
also discover other useful concepts, potentially opening up entirely new approaches to RL.
Motivated by the aforementioned open questions, this paper takes a step towards discovering generalpurpose RL algorithms. We introduce a meta-learning framework that jointly discovers both ‘what
the agent should predict’ and ‘how to use predictions for policy improvement’ from data generated
by interacting with a distribution of environments. Our architecture, Learned Policy Gradient (LPG),
does not enforce any semantics on the agent’s vector-valued outputs but instead allows the update
∗

Corresponding author: junhyuk@google.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

