Hardness of Learning Neural Networks with
Natural Weights

Amit Daniely
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
and Google Research Tel-Aviv
amit.daniely@mail.huji.ac.il
Gal Vardi
Weizmann Institute of Science
gal.vardi@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Neural networks are nowadays highly successful despite strong hardness results.
The existing hardness results focus on the network architecture, and assume that
the network’s weights are arbitrary. A natural approach to settle the discrepancy is
to assume that the network’s weights are “well-behaved" and posses some generic
properties that may allow efficient learning. This approach is supported by the
intuition that the weights in real-world networks are not arbitrary, but exhibit some
”random-like" properties with respect to some ”natural" distributions. We prove
negative results in this regard, and show that for depth-2 networks, and many
“natural" weights distributions such as the normal and the uniform distribution,
most networks are hard to learn. Namely, there is no efficient learning algorithm
that is provably successful for most weights, and every input distribution. It implies
that there is no generic property that holds with high probability in such random
networks and allows efficient learning.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have revolutionized performance in multiple domains, such as computer vision
and natural language processing, and have proven to be a highly effective tool for solving many
challenging problems. This impressive practical success of neural networks is not well understood
from the theoretical point of view. In particular, despite extensive research in recent years, it is not
clear which models are learnable by neural networks algorithms.
Historically, there were many negative results for learning neural networks, and it is now known
that under certain complexity assumptions, it is computationally hard to learn the class of functions
computed by a neural network, even if the architecture is very simple. Indeed, it has been shown that
learning neural networks is hard already for networks of depth 2 [35, 17]. These results hold already
for improper learning, namely where the learning algorithm is allowed to return a hypothesis that
does not belong to the considered hypothesis class.
In recent years, researchers have considered several ways to circumvent the discrepancy between
those hardness results and the empirical success of neural networks. Namely, to understand which
models are still learnable by neural networks algorithms. This effort includes proving learnability of
linear models, including polynomials and kernel spaces [5, 47, 19, 15, 10, 32, 24, 39, 3, 4, 11, 48, 44,
29, 40, 8, 11, 34, 38, 36, 16], making assumptions on the input distribution [37, 9, 22, 23, 21, 31, 43],
the network’s weights [7, 43, 20, 2, 30], or both [33, 45].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

