Near-Optimal Reinforcement Learning with Self-Play

Yu Bai
Salesforce Research
yu.bai@salesforce.com

Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Tiancheng Yu
MIT
yutc@mit.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of designing optimal algorithms for reinforcement learning in two-player zero-sum games. We focus on self-play algorithms
which learn the optimal policy by playing against itself without any direct supervision. In a tabular episodic Markov game with S states, A max-player actions
and B min-player actions, the best existing algorithm for finding an approximate
Nash equilibrium requires Õ(S 2 AB) steps of game playing, when only highlighting the dependency on (S, A, B). In contrast, the best existing lower bound scales
as Ω(S(A + B)) and has a significant gap from the upper bound. This paper
closes this gap for the first time: we propose an optimistic variant of the Nash Qlearning algorithm with sample complexity Õ(SAB), and a new Nash V-learning
algorithm with sample complexity Õ(S(A + B)). The latter result matches the
information-theoretic lower bound in all problem-dependent parameters except
for a polynomial factor of the length of each episode. In addition, we present a
computational hardness result for learning the best responses against a fixed opponent in Markov games—a learning objective different from finding the Nash
equilibrium.

1

Introduction

A wide range of modern artificial intelligence challenges can be cast as a multi-agent reinforcement
learning (multi-agent RL) problem, in which more than one agent performs sequential decision
making in an interactive environment. Multi-agent RL has achieved significant recent success on
traditionally challenging tasks, for example in the game of GO [30, 31], Poker [6], real-time strategy
games [33, 22], decentralized controls or multiagent robotics systems [5], autonomous driving [27],
as well as complex social scenarios such as hide-and-seek [3]. In many scenarios, the learning agents
even outperform the best human experts .
Despite the great empirical success, a major bottleneck for many existing RL algorithms is that they
require a tremendous number of samples. For example, the biggest AlphaGo Zero model is trained
on tens of millions of games and took more than a month to train [31]. While requiring such amount
of samples may be acceptable in simulatable environments such as GO, it is not so in other sampleexpensive real world settings such as robotics and autonomous driving. It is thus important for us
to understand the sample complexity in RL—how can we design algorithms that find a near optimal
policy with a small number of samples, and what is the fundamental limit, i.e. the minimum number
of samples required for any algorithm to find a good policy.
Theoretical understandings on the sample complexity for multi-agent RL are rather limited, especially when compared with single-agent settings. The standard model for a single-agent setting is
an episodic Markov Decision Process (MDP) with S states, and A actions, and H steps per episode.
The best known algorithm can find an  near-optimal policy in Θ̃(poly(H)SA/2 ) episodes, which
matches the lower bound up to a single H factor [1, 8]. In contrast, in multi-agent settings, the optimal sample complexity remains open even in the basic setting of two-player tabular Markov games
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

