HOI Analysis: Integrating and Decomposing
Human-Object Interaction

Yong-Lu Li∗

Xinpeng Liu∗
Xiaoqian Wu
Yizhuo Li
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Cewu Lu†

yonglu_li@sjtu.edu.cn, xinpengliu0907@gmail.com, enlighten@sjtu.edu.cn
liyizhuo@sjtu.edu.cn, lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) consists of human, object and implicit interaction/verb. Different from previous methods that directly map pixels to HOI semantics, we propose a novel perspective for HOI learning in an analytical manner. In
analogy to Harmonic Analysis, whose goal is to study how to represent the signals
with the superposition of basic waves, we propose the HOI Analysis. We argue that
coherent HOI can be decomposed into isolated human and object. Meanwhile, isolated human and object can also be integrated into coherent HOI again. Moreover,
transformations between human-object pairs with the same HOI can also be easier
approached with integration and decomposition. As a result, the implicit verb will
be represented in the transformation function space. In light of this, we propose
an Integration-Decomposition Network (IDN) to implement the above transformations and achieve state-of-the-art performance on widely-used HOI detection benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/DirtyHarryLYL/
HAKE-Action-Torch/tree/IDN-(Integrating-Decomposing-Network).

1

Introduction

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) takes up most of the human activities. As a composition, HOI
consists of three parts: <human, verb, object>. To detect HOI, machines need to simultaneously
locate human and object and classify the verb [4]. Except for the direct thinking that maps pixels to
semantics, in this work we rethink HOI and explore two questions in a novel perspective (Fig. 1):
First, as for the inner structure of HOI, how do isolated human and object compose HOI? Second,
what is the relationship between two human-object pairs with the same HOI?
For the first question, we may find some clues from psychology. The view of Gestalt psychology is
usually summarized as one simple sentence: “The whole is more than the sum of its parts” [14]. This
is also in line with human perception. Baldassano et al. [1] studied the mechanism of how the brain
builds HOI representation and concluded that the encoding of HOI is not the simple sum of human
and object: a higher-level neural representation exists. Specific brain regions, e.g., posterior superior
temporal sulcus (pSTS), are responsible for integrating isolated human and object into coherent
HOI [1]. Hence, to encode HOI, we may need complex nonlinear transformation (integration)
to combine isolated human and object. Also, we argue that a reverse process is also essential to
decompose HOI into isolated human and object (decomposition). Here we use TI (·) and TD (·) to
indicate integration and decomposition functions. According to [1], isolated human and object are
different from coherent HOI pair. Therefore, TI (·) should be able to add interactive relationship to
isolated elements. On the contrary, TD (·) should eliminate this interactive information. Through the
∗

The first two authors contribute equally.
Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of
Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

