Estimating the Effects of Continuous-valued
Interventions using Generative Adversarial Networks
Ioana Bica⇤
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk

James Jordon⇤
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
james.jordon@wolfson.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
While much attention has been given to the problem of estimating the effect of
discrete interventions from observational data, relatively little work has been done
in the setting of continuous-valued interventions, such as treatments associated
with a dosage parameter. In this paper, we tackle this problem by building on a
modification of the generative adversarial networks (GANs) framework. Our model,
SCIGAN, is flexible and capable of simultaneously estimating counterfactual
outcomes for several different continuous interventions. The key idea is to use a
significantly modified GAN model to learn to generate counterfactual outcomes,
which can then be used to learn an inference model, using standard supervised
methods, capable of estimating these counterfactuals for a new sample. To address
the challenges presented by shifting to continuous interventions, we propose a
novel architecture for our discriminator - we build a hierarchical discriminator that
leverages the structure of the continuous intervention setting. Moreover, we provide
theoretical results to support our use of the GAN framework and of the hierarchical
discriminator. In the experiments section, we introduce a new semi-synthetic
data simulation for use in the continuous intervention setting and demonstrate
improvements over the existing benchmark models.

1

Introduction

Estimating the personalised effects of interventions is crucial for decision making in many domains
such as medicine, education, public policy and advertising. Such domains have a wealth of observational data available. Most of the methods developed in the causal inference literature focus on
learning the counterfactual outcomes of discrete interventions, such as binary or categorical treatments2 [1–9]. Unfortunately, in many cases, deciding how to intervene involves not only deciding
which intervention to make (e.g. whether to treat cancer with radiotherapy, chemotherapy or surgery)
but also deciding on the value of some continuous parameter associated with intervening (e.g. the
dosage of radiotherapy to be administered). In medicine there are many examples of treatments
⇤

Equal contribution.
For ease of exposition, we will sometimes refer to interventions as treatments and to the associated
continuous parameter as the dosage throughout the paper.
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

