The Origins and Prevalence of Texture Bias in
Convolutional Neural Networks
Katherine L. Hermann
Stanford University
hermannk@stanford.edu

Ting Chen
Google Research, Toronto

Simon Kornblith
Google Research, Toronto

iamtingchen@google.com

skornblith@google.com

Abstract
Recent work has indicated that, unlike humans, ImageNet-trained CNNs tend to
classify images by texture rather than by shape. How pervasive is this bias, and
where does it come from? We find that, when trained on datasets of images with
conflicting shape and texture, CNNs learn to classify by shape at least as easily
as by texture. What factors, then, produce the texture bias in CNNs trained on
ImageNet? Different unsupervised training objectives and different architectures
have small but significant and largely independent effects on the level of texture
bias. However, all objectives and architectures still lead to models that make texturebased classification decisions a majority of the time, even if shape information
is decodable from their hidden representations. The effect of data augmentation
is much larger. By taking less aggressive random crops at training time and
applying simple, naturalistic augmentation (color distortion, noise, and blur), we
train models that classify ambiguous images by shape a majority of the time,
and outperform baselines on out-of-distribution test sets. Our results indicate
that apparent differences in the way humans and ImageNet-trained CNNs process
images may arise not primarily from differences in their internal workings, but
from differences in the data that they see.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) define state-of the-art-performance in many computer vision
tasks, such as image classification (57), object detection (83; 40), and segmentation (40). Although
their performance in several of these tasks approaches that of humans, recent findings show that
CNNs differ in intriguing ways from human vision, indicating fundamental deficiencies in our
understanding of these models (87; 70; 32; 23; 76; 37; 3; 44; 46; 1; 48). This paper focuses on
one such result, namely that CNNs appear to make classifications based on superficial textural
features (36; 4) rather than on the shape information preferentially used by humans (61; 60). Building
on a long tradition of work in psychology and neuroscience documenting humans’ shape-based
object classification, Geirhos et al. (36) compared humans to ImageNet-trained CNNs on a dataset of
images with conflicting shape and texture information (e.g. an elephant-textured knife) and found that
models tended to classify according to texture (e.g. “elephant”), and humans according to shape (e.g.
“knife”). Following their terminology, we call a learner that prefers texture over shape texture-biased
and one the prefers shape over texture shape-biased.
From the point of view of computer vision, texture bias is an important phenomenon for several
reasons. First, it may be related to the vulnerability of CNNs to adversarial examples (87), which may
exploit features that carry information about the class label but are undetectable to the human visual
system (48). Second, a CNN preference for texture could indicate an inductive bias different than that
of humans, making it difficult for models to learn human-relevant vision tasks in small-data regimes,
and to generalize to different distributions than the distribution on which the model is trained (35).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

