Continuous Meta-Learning without Tasks
James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, Chelsea Finn, Marco Pavone
Stanford University, Stanford, CA
{jharrison, apoorva, cbfinn, pavone}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Meta-learning is a promising strategy for learning to efficiently learn using data
gathered from a distribution of tasks. However, the meta-learning literature thus
far has focused on the task segmented setting, where at train-time, offline data is
assumed to be split according to the underlying task, and at test-time, the algorithms
are optimized to learn in a single task. In this work, we enable the application
of generic meta-learning algorithms to settings where this task segmentation is
unavailable, such as continual online learning with unsegmented time series data.
We present meta-learning via online changepoint analysis (MOCA), an approach
which augments a meta-learning algorithm with a differentiable Bayesian changepoint detection scheme. The framework allows both training and testing directly
on time series data without segmenting it into discrete tasks. We demonstrate the
utility of this approach on three nonlinear meta-regression benchmarks as well as
two meta-image-classification benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning methods have recently shown promise as an effective strategy for enabling efficient
few-shot learning in complex domains from image classification to nonlinear regression [10, 40].
These methods leverage an offline meta-learning phase, in which data from a collection of learning
tasks is used to learn priors and update rules for more efficient learning on new related tasks.
Meta-learning algorithms have thus far solely focused on settings with task segmentation, where the
learning agent knows when the latent task changes. At meta-train time, these algorithms assume
access to a meta-dataset of datasets from individual tasks, and at meta-test time, the learner is evaluated
on a single task. However, there are many applications where task segmentation is unavailable, which
have been under-addressed in the meta-learning literature. For example, environmental factors may
change during a robot’s deployment, and these changes may not be directly observed. Furthermore,
crafting a meta-dataset from an existing stream of experience may require a difficult or expensive
process of detecting switches in the task.
In this work, we aim to enable meta-learning in task-unsegmented settings, operating directly on time
series data in which the latent task undergoes discrete, unobserved switches, rather than requiring
a pre-segmented meta-dataset. Equivalently, from the perspective of online learning, we wish to
optimize an online learning algorithm using past data sequences to perform well in a sequential
prediction setting wherein the underlying data generating process (i.e. the task) may vary with time.
Contributions. Our primary contribution is an algorithmic framework for task unsegmented metalearning which we refer to as meta-learning via online changepoint analysis (MOCA). MOCA
wraps arbitrary meta-learning algorithms in a differentiable Bayesian changepoint estimation scheme,
enabling their application to problems that require continual learning on time series data. By
backpropagating through the changepoint estimation framework, MOCA learns both a rapidly
adaptive underlying predictive model (the meta-learning model), as well as an effective changepoint
detection algorithm, optimized to work together. MOCA is a generic framework which works with
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

