Kernel Alignment Risk Estimator:
Risk Prediction from Training Data

Arthur Jacot
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
arthur.jacot@epfl.ch

Berfin Şimşek
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
berfin.simsek@epfl.ch

Francesco Spadaro
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
francesco.spadaro@epfl.ch

Clément Hongler
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
clement.hongler@epfl.ch

Franck Gabriel
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
franck.gabriel@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the risk (i.e. generalization error) of Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR)
for a kernel K with ridge λ > 0 and i.i.d. observations. For this, we introduce
two objects: the Signal Capture Threshold (SCT) and the Kernel Alignment Risk
Estimator (KARE). The SCT ϑK,λ is a function of the data distribution: it can be
used to identify the components of the data that the KRR predictor captures, and to
approximate the (expected) KRR risk. This then leads to a KRR risk approximation
by the KARE ρK,λ , an explicit function of the training data, agnostic of the true
data distribution. We phrase the regression problem in a functional setting. The
key results then follow from a finite-size analysis of the Stieltjes transform of
general Wishart random matrices. Under a natural universality assumption (that
the KRR moments depend asymptotically on the first two moments of the observations) we capture the mean and variance of the KRR predictor. We numerically
investigate our findings on the Higgs and MNIST datasets for various classical
kernels: the KARE gives an excellent approximation of the risk, thus supporting
our universality assumption. Using the KARE, one can compare choices of Kernels
and hyperparameters directly from the training set. The KARE thus provides a
promising data-dependent procedure to select Kernels that generalize well.

1

Introduction

Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) is a widely used statistical method to learn a function from its
values on a training set [27, 29]. It is a non-parametric generalization of linear regression to infinitedimensional feature spaces. Given a positive-definite kernel function K and (noisy) observations y 
of a true function f ∗ at a list of points X = x1 , . . . , xN , the λ-KRR estimator fˆλ of f ∗ is defined by

−1
1
1
fˆλ (x) = K(x, X)
K(X, X) + λIN
y ,
N
N
where K(x, X) = (K(x, xi ))i=1,..,N ∈ RN and K(X, X) = (K(xi , xj ))i,j=1,..,N ∈ RN ×N .
Despite decades of intense mathematical progress, the rigorous analysis of the generalization of
kernel methods remains a very active and challenging area of research. In recent years, many new
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

