Proximal Mapping for Deep Regularization

Mao Li,
Yingyi Ma,
Xinhua Zhang
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607
{mli206, yma36, zhangx}@uic.edu

Abstract
Underpinning the success of deep learning is effective regularizations that allow
a variety of priors in data to be modeled. For example, robustness to adversarial
perturbations, and correlations between multiple modalities. However, most regularizers are specified in terms of hidden layer outputs, which are not themselves
optimization variables. In contrast to prevalent methods that optimize them indirectly through model weights, we propose inserting proximal mapping as a new
layer to the deep network, which directly and explicitly produces well regularized
hidden layer outputs. The resulting technique is shown well connected to kernel
warping and dropout, and novel algorithms were developed for robust temporal
learning and multiview modeling, both outperforming state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning relies on massive neural networks that often considerably out-scale
the training dataset, defying the conventional learning theory [1, 2]. Regularization has been shown
essential and a variety of forms are available. For example, invariances to transformations such as
rotation [3] have been extended beyond group-based diffeomorphisms to indecipherable transformations that are only exemplified by pairs of views [4], e.g., sentences uttered by the same person.
Prior regularities are also commonly available a) within layers of neural networks, such as sparsity
[5], spatial invariance in convolutional nets, structured gradient that accounts for data covariance [6];
b) between layers of representation, such as stability under dropout and adversarial perturbations
of preceding layers [7], contractivity between layers [8], and correlations in hidden layers among
multiple views [9, 10]; and c) at batch level, e.g., disentangled representation and multiple modalities.
The most prevalent approach to incorporating priors is regularization, which leads to the standard
regularized risk minimization (RRM) for a given dataset D, empirical distribution p̃, and loss `:
X
minf Ex∼p̃ [`(f (x))] + Γ(f ) +
Ωi ({hi (x, f )}x∈D ).
(1)
i

Here f is the predictor (e.g., neural network), and Γ is the data-independent regularizer (e.g., L2
norm), and Ωi is the data-dependent regularizer on the i-th layer output hi under f (e.g., invariance
of hi with respect to the i-th step input xi in an RNN). Note Ωi can involve multiple layers (e.g.,
contractivity), or be decomposed over training examples. Optimization techniques such as end-to-end
training have produced strong performance, along with progresses in the global analysis of the
solution [e.g., 11]. However, all these analyses make assumptions on the landscape of the objective
function, which, although often satisfied by the empirical risk Ex∼p̃ [`(f (x))], are typically violated
or complicated by the addition of data-dependant regularizers Ωi . The nontrivial contention between
accurate prediction and faithful regularization can often confound the optimization of model weights.
A natural question therefore arises: is it possible to further improve the effectiveness of regularization, potentially not only through the development of new solvers and analysis for RRM, but also
through novel mechanisms of incorporating regularization? Although the former approach has been
studied intensively, we hypothesize and will demonstrate empirically that the latter approach can
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

