An Optimal Elimination Algorithm for
Learning a Best Arm

Avinatan Hassidim
Bar-Ilan University and Google
avinatan@cs.biu.ac.il

Ron Kupfer
The Hebrew University of Jerudalem
ron.kupfer@mail.huji.ac.il
Yaron Singer
Harvard University
yaron@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the classic problem of (, δ)-PAC learning a best arm where the goal
is to identify with confidence 1 − δ an arm whose mean is an -approximation to
that of the highest mean arm in a multi-armed bandit setting. This problem is one
of the most fundamental problems in statistics and learning theory, yet somewhat
surprisingly its worst case sample complexity is not well understood. In this paper
we propose a new approach for (, δ)-PAC learning a best arm. This approach leads
to an algorithm whose sample complexity converges to exactly the optimal sample
complexity of (, δ)-learning the mean of n arms separately and we complement
this result with a conditional matching lower bound. More specifically:
• The algorithm’s sample complexity converges to exactly 2n2 log 1δ as n grows
and δ ≥ n1 ;
• We prove that no elimination algorithm obtains sample complexity arbitrarily
lower than 2n2 log 1δ . Elimination algorithms is a broad class of (, δ)-PAC
best arm learning algorithms that includes many algorithms in the literature.
When n is independent of δ our approach yields an algorithm whose sample
1
complexity converges to 2n
2 log δ as n grows. In comparison with the best known
algorithm for this problem our approach improves the sample complexity by a
factor of over 1500 and over 6000 when δ ≥ n1 .

1

INTRODUCTION

In this paper we study the classic problem of (, δ) − PAC learning a best arm. In this problem there
is a set A of n arms and sampling an arm a ∈ A generates a random variable ξ(a) drawn from some
unknown distribution D(a) ⊆ [0, 1]1 . The mean of every arm a is denoted µ(a) and an optimal arm is
a? ∈ arg maxa∈A µ(a). A strategy (, δ)-learns the best arm if it returns a ∈ A s.t. µ(a) ≥ µ(a? ) − 
with confidence at least 1 − δ over the arm distribution and randomization of the strategy. The goal is
to (, δ)-learn the best arm with minimal worst case sample complexity over all distributions in [0, 1].
By the celebrated Hoeffding bound we know that it suffices to sample each arm 212 log 1δ times to
ensure we are -close to its true mean with confidence 1 − δ, and that without additional information
this bound is optimal. A trivial solution is then to estimate the mean of each arm using sufficientlymany samples and take the arm whose empirical mean is largest. A trivial upper bound for learning a
n
best arm using this approach is 2n
2 log δ .
1

All the results in this paper can be generalized for any sub-Gaussian distribution as discuss in Appendix E.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

