Glance and Focus: a Dynamic Approach to Reducing
Spatial Redundancy in Image Classification

Yulin Wang Kangchen Lv Rui Huang Shiji Song Le Yang Gao Huang∗
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
{wang-yl19, lkc17, huangr16, yangle15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The accuracy of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) generally improves
when fueled with high resolution images. However, this often comes at a high
computational cost and high memory footprint. Inspired by the fact that not
all regions in an image are task-relevant, we propose a novel framework that
performs efficient image classification by processing a sequence of relatively small
inputs, which are strategically selected from the original image with reinforcement
learning. Such a dynamic decision process naturally facilitates adaptive inference
at test time, i.e., it can be terminated once the model is sufficiently confident
about its prediction and thus avoids further redundant computation. Notably, our
framework is general and flexible as it is compatible with most of the state-of-theart light-weighted CNNs (such as MobileNets, EfficientNets and RegNets), which
can be conveniently deployed as the backbone feature extractor. Experiments on
ImageNet show that our method consistently improves the computational efficiency
of a wide variety of deep models. For example, it further reduces the average
latency of the highly efficient MobileNet-V3 on an iPhone XS Max by 20%
without sacrificing accuracy. Code and pre-trained models are available at https:
//github.com/blackfeather-wang/GFNet-Pytorch.

1

Introduction

Modern convolutional networks (CNNs) are shown to benefit from training and inferring on highresolution images. For example, state-of-the-art CNNs have achieved super-human-level performance
on the competitive ILSVRC [9] competition with 224×224 or 320×320 images [47, 14, 61, 18, 22].
Recent works [50, 23] scale up the image resolution to 480×480 or even larger for higher accuracy.
However, large images usually come at a high computational cost and high memory footprint, both of
which grow quadratically with respect to the image height (or width) [38]. In real-world applications
like content-based image search [54] or autonomous vehicles [3], computation usually translates into
latency and power consumption, which should be minimized for both safety and economical reasons
[17, 21, 43].
In this paper, we seek to reduce the computational cost introduced by high-resolution inputs in image
classification tasks. Our motivation is that considerable spatial redundancy exists in the process
of recognizing an image. In fact, CNNs are shown to be able to produce correct classification
results with only a few class-discriminative patches, such as the head of a dog or the wings of a
bird [38, 12, 8]. These regions are typically smaller than the whole image, and thus require much
less computational resources. Therefore, if we can dynamically identify the “class-discriminative”
regions of each individual image, and perform efficient inference only on these small inputs, then the
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

