All your loss are belong to Bayes

Christian Walder 1 2

Richard Nock 1 2

1

2

CSIRO Data61, Australia.
The Australian National University.

{first.last}@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Loss functions are a cornerstone of machine learning and the starting point of most
algorithms. Statistics and Bayesian decision theory have contributed, via properness, to elicit over the past decades a wide set of admissible losses in supervised
learning, to which most popular choices belong (logistic, square, Matsushita, etc.).
Rather than making a potentially biased ad hoc choice of the loss, there has recently
been a boost in efforts to fit the loss to the domain at hand while training the model
itself. The key approaches fit a canonical link, a function which monotonically
relates the closed unit interval to R and can provide a proper loss via integration.
In this paper, we rely on a broader view of proper composite losses and a recent
construct from information geometry, source functions, whose fitting alleviates
constraints faced by canonical links. We introduce a trick on squared Gaussian
Processes to obtain a random process whose paths are compliant source functions
with many desirable properties in the context of link estimation. Experimental
results demonstrate substantial improvements over the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning has been an influential framework of machine learning, swayed decades ago
by pioneers who managed to put into equations its nontrivial uncertainties in sampling and model
selection [Val84, Vap98]. One lighthearted but famous videogame-born summary1 comes with
an unexpected technical easter egg: uncertainty grasps the crux of the framework, the loss. All
these works have indeed been predated from the early seventies by a rich literature on admissible
losses for supervised learning, in statistical decision theory [Sav71], and even earlier in foundational
philosophical work [dF49]. The essential criterion for admissibility is properness, the fact that Bayes’
rule is optimal for the loss at hand. Properness is intensional: it does not provide a particular set of
functions to choose a loss from. Over the past decades, a significant body of work has focused on
eliciting the set of admissible losses (see [NM20] and references therein) ; yet in comparison with
the vivid breakthroughs on models that has flourished during the past decade in machine learning,
the decades-long picture of the loss resembles a still life — more often than not, it is fixed from the
start, e.g. by assuming the popular logistic or square loss, or by assuming a restricted parametric
form [Cza97, CM00, NDF00, CR02]. More recent work has aimed to provide machine learning
with greater flexibility in the loss [HT92, KS09, KKSK11, NM20] — yet these works face significant
technical challenges arising from (i) the joint estimation non-parametric loss function along with
the remainder of the model, and (ii) the specific part of a proper loss which is learned, called a link
function, which relates class probability estimation to real-valued prediction [RW10].
1

See https://tinyurl.com/y5jnurau or search for “all your Bayes are belong to us, Vapnik quote”.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

