Second-Order Optimality in Non-Convex
Decentralized Optimization via Perturbed Gradient
Tracking

Isidoros Tziotis, Constantine Caramanis, Aryan Mokhtari
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
{isidoros_13,constantine,mokhtari}@utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper we study the problem of escaping from saddle points and achieving
second-order optimality in a decentralized setting where a group of agents collaborate to minimize their aggregate objective function. We provide a non-asymptotic
(finite-time) analysis and show that by following the idea of perturbed gradient
descent, it is possible to converge to a second-order stationary point in a number of
iterations which depends linearly on dimension and polynomially on the accuracy
of second-order stationary point. Doing this in a communication-efficient manner
requires overcoming several challenges, from identifying (first order) stationary
points in a distributed manner, to adapting the perturbed gradient framework without prohibitive communication complexity. Our proposed Perturbed Decentralized
Gradient Tracking (PDGT) method consists of two major stages: (i) a gradientbased step to find a first-order stationary point and (ii) a perturbed gradient descent
step to escape from a first-order stationary point, if it is a saddle point with sufficient curvature. As a side benefit of our result, in the case that all saddle points are
non-degenerate (strict), the proposed PDGT method finds a local minimum of the
considered decentralized optimization problem in a finite number of iterations.

1

Introduction

Recently, we have witnessed an unprecedented increase in the amount of data that is gathered in a
distributed fashion and stored over multiple agents (machines). Moreover, the advances in data-driven
systems such as Internet of Things, health-care, and multi-agent robotics demand for developing
machine learning frameworks that can be implemented in a distributed manner. Simultaneously,
convex formulations for training machine learning tasks have been replaced by nonconvex representations such as neural networks. These rapid changes call for the development of a class of
communication-efficient algorithms to solve nonconvex decentralized learning problems.
In this paper, we focus on a nonconvex decentralized optimization problem where a group of m
agents collaborate to minimize their aggregate loss function, while they are allowed to exchange
information only with their neighbors. To be more precise, the agents (nodes) aim to solve
m

min f (x) =

x∈Rd

1 X
fi (x),
m i=1

(1)

where fi : Rd → R is the objective function of node i which is possibly nonconvex. Finding the
global minimizer of this problem, even in the centralized setting where all the functions are available
at a single machine, is hard. Given this hardness result, we often settle for finding a stationary
point of Problem (1). There have been several lines of work on finding an approximate first-order
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

