Multimodal Graph Networks for Compositional
Generalization in Visual Question Answering

Raeid Saqur1,2,3∗
University of Toronto Computer Science
2
Princeton University, Computer Science
3
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
raeidsaqur@cs.[toronto|princeton].edu
1

Karthik Narasimhan
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
karthikn@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Compositional generalization is a key challenge in grounding natural language
to visual perception. While deep learning models have achieved great success in
multimodal tasks like visual question answering, recent studies have shown that
they fail to generalize to new inputs that are simply an unseen combination of
those seen in the training distribution [6]. In this paper, we propose to tackle this
challenge by employing neural factor graphs to induce a tighter coupling between
concepts in different modalities (e.g. images and text). Graph representations
are inherently compositional in nature and allow us to capture entities, attributes
and relations in a scalable manner. Our model first creates a multimodal graph,
processes it with a graph neural network to induce a factor correspondence matrix,
and then outputs a symbolic program to predict answers to questions. Empirically,
our model achieves close to perfect scores on a caption truth prediction problem and
state-of-the-art results on the recently introduced CLOSURE dataset, improving on
the mean overall accuracy across seven compositional templates by 4.77% over
previous approaches.2

1

Introduction

In this paper, we explore the problem of systematic generalization to novel questions in the paradigm
of visual question answering (VQA) [4]. Several neural architectures have shown great promise
in learning multimodal representations to solve the task [42, 39, 54]. Recently, neuro-symbolic
methods [55, 38] – a combination of connectionist and symbolic approaches – have pushed these
limits, achieving close to perfect scores on benchmarks like CLEVR [28, 29]. However, these models
lack the ability to generalize to new combinations of linguistic constructs, even if the distribution of
visual inputs remains the same [6]. A key reason behind this is the lack of fine-grained representations
that allow for joint compositional reasoning over both visual and linguistic spaces.
We propose a graph-based approach for multi-modal representation learning – the Multimodal Graph
Network (MGN) – with an explicit focus on enabling better generalization. Our core idea is the
following: representing both text and image as graphs naturally allows for tighter coupling of concepts
between the two modalities and provides a compositional space for reasoning. Specifically, we first
parse both the image and text into individual graphs with object entities and attributes as nodes and
relations as edges. Then, we induce a correspondence factor matrix between pairs of nodes from both
modalities using message passing algorithms similar to the ones used in graph neural networks [16].
The output of our model is a matrix of values that captures the correspondence value of each pair of
∗
2

Work done at Princeton as a Fulbright Scholar.
Code is available at https://github.com/raeidsaqur/mgn

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

