Sharper Generalization Bounds for Pairwise
Learning

1

Yunwen Lei1,2 Antoine Ledent2∗ Marius Kloft2
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom
2
Department of Computer Science, TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern 67653, Germany
y.lei@bham.ac.uk ledent@cs.uni-kl.de kloft@cs.uni-kl.de

Abstract
Pairwise learning refers to learning tasks with loss functions depending on a pair of
training examples, which includes ranking and metric learning as specific examples.
Recently, there has been an increasing amount of attention on the generalization
analysis of pairwise learning to understand its practical behavior. However, the existing stability analysis provides suboptimal high-probability generalization bounds.
In this paper, we provide
√ a refined stability analysis by developing generalization
bounds which can be n-times faster than the existing results, where n is the sample size. This implies excess risk bounds of the order O(n−1/2 ) (up to a logarithmic
factor) for both regularized risk minimization and stochastic gradient descent. We
also introduce a new on-average stability measure to develop optimistic bounds
in a low noise setting. We apply our results to ranking and metric learning, and
clearly show the advantage of our generalization bounds over the existing analysis.

1

Introduction

In modern machine learning, we frequently encounter problems where the performance of a model
depends on pairs of training instances. As examples consider the following. In ranking problems,
our aim is to learn a function that can predict the ordering of examples [13, 44]. In metric learning,
which plays a key role in clustering problems [9, 28], we wish to learn an adequate distance metric
between instances. In AUC maximization, which is deployed to class-imbalanced learning problems,
we aim to find a classifier that maximizes the probability of scoring a positive example higher than
a negative one [14]. Further examples include learning with minimum error entropy loss functions
[27], multiple kernel learning [31], preference learning [22], and gradient learning [41]. All these
so-called pairwise learning problems involve a loss function based on pairs of training examples.
This is in a sharp contrast to classification and regression, where the loss function depends only on a
single instance. Those problems are referred to as pointwise learning problems.
In machine learning, we frequently build predictive models by optimizing their empirical behavior on
training instances, that is, to achieve a small training error. However, a small training error does not
imply that the learnt models will generalize well to test examples. Generalization analysis—which is
a central topic in statistical learning theory (SLT) [40]—studies the generalization gap between the
training and testing errors. There is a large amount of work on the generalization analysis of learning
algorithms, largely based on either algorithmic stability [7, 17], complexity analysis of models [3, 52],
PAC-Bayesian analysis [38], or integral operators [49, 53]. Most of this work focuses on pointwise
learning, while pairwise learning is far less studied. A difficulty occurring in the generalization
analysis of pairwise learning is that the objective function is not a sum of identically and independently
distributed (i.i.d.) random variables [1, 9, 13, 30]—a fundamental assumption in SLT.
∗

The first two authors contributed equally

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

