MRI Banding Removal via Adversarial Training

Aaron Defazio
Tullie Murrell
Facebook AI Research,
Facebook New York

Michael P. Recht
Department of Radiology
NYU Grossman School of Medicine

Abstract
MR images reconstructed from sub-sampled Cartesian data using deep learning
techniques show a characteristic banding (sometimes described as streaking), which
is particularly strong in low signal-to-noise regions of the reconstructed image.
These unnatural artifacts have been identified as one of the largest obstacles preventing the clinical use of machine-learning based MRI reconstructions. In this work,
we propose the use of an adversarial loss that penalizes banding structures without
requiring any human annotation. Our technique greatly reduces the appearance
of banding, without requiring any additional computation or post-processing at
reconstruction time. Our approach is compatible with any existing reconstruction
approach that uses supervised machine learning, including the current state-ofthe-art. We report the results of a blind comparison against a strong baseline by
a group of expert evaluators (board-certified radiologists), where our approach is
ranked superior at banding removal with no statistically significant loss of detail. A
reference implementation of our method is available in the supplementary material.

1

Introduction

The use of deep-learning approaches for accelerating MR imaging has recently shown significant
promise [7, 19, 1], with learning approaches far out-performing classical penalized least squares
approaches for reconstructing images from raw subsampled k-space signals. However, existing
approaches produce images with some unnatural structures that prevent radiologists from accepting the images for clinical use despite the advantages the images have over classical techniques
with respect to reconstruction accuracy metrics such as the structured similarity metric (SSIM).
In this work, we describe a method for removing the primary artifact produced by Cartesian
deep-learning reconstruction systems: banding.
This banding, as illustrated in Figure 1, is characterized by a streaking pattern exactly aligned
with the phase-encoding direction (horizontal
in the figure). This banding is anisotropic and
non-homogenous across the image, and most
visible in high-noise or low-contrast areas. It is
the result of the signal subsampling process used
during Cartesian accelerated MRI, whereby subsampling occurs in one spatial direction only.
At the 2019 Medical Imaging meets NeurIPS
workshop [11], banding artifacts were shown to
occur in reconstructions from each of the top 3 Figure 1: A deep-learning MRI reconstruction that
winning teams in the competition, despite the shows significant horizontal banding artifacts
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

