Convolutional Tensor-Train LSTM for
Spatio-Temporal Learning

Jiahao Su∗12†

Wonmin Byeon∗2

Jean Kossaifi2

jiahaosu@umd.edu, {wbyeon,jkossaifi}@nvidia.com

Furong Huang1

Jan Kautz2

Anima Anandkumar2

furongh@cs.umd.edu, {jkautz,aanandkumar}@nvidia.com
1

University of Maryland, College Park, MD

2

NVIDIA Research, Santa Clara, CA

Abstract
Learning from spatio-temporal data has numerous applications such as humanbehavior analysis, object tracking, video compression, and physics simulation.
However, existing methods still perform poorly on challenging video tasks such
as long-term forecasting. The gap partially is because these kinds of challenging
tasks require learning long-term spatio-temporal correlations in the video sequence.
We propose a higher-order convolutional LSTM model that can efficiently learn
these correlations with a succinct representation of the history. Our model relies on
a novel tensor-train module that performs prediction by combining convolutional
features across time. To make computation and memory requirements feasible,
we develop a novel convolutional tensor-train decomposition of the higher-order
model. This decomposition reduces the model complexity by jointly approximating
a sequence of convolutional kernels as a low-rank tensor-train factorization. As
a result, our model outperforms existing approaches but uses only a fraction of
parameters, including the baseline models. Our results achieve state-of-the-art
performance in a wide range of applications and datasets, including the multi-steps
video prediction on the Moving-MNIST-2 and KTH action datasets as well as early
activity recognition on the Something-Something V2 dataset.

1

Introduction

While computer vision has achieved remarkable successes, e.g., on image classification, many real-life
tasks remain out-of-reach for current deep learning systems, such as prediction from complex spatiotemporal data. Such data naturally arises in a wide range of applications such as autonomous driving,
robot control [1], visual perception tasks such as action recognition [2] or object tracking [3], and even
weather prediction [4]. This kind of video understanding problems is challenging, since they require
learning spatial-temporal representations that capture both content and dynamics simultaneously.
Learning from (video) sequences. Most state-of-the-art video models are based on recurrent neural
networks (RNNs), typically some variations of Convolutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) where spatiotemporal information is encoded explicitly in each cell [4–7]. These RNNs are first-order Markovian
models in nature, meaning that the hidden states are updated using information from the previous
time step only, resulting in an intrinsic difficulty in capturing long-range temporal correlations.
∗
†

Equal contribution
This work was done while the first author was an intern at NVIDIA.
Project page: https://sites.google.com/nvidia.com/conv-tt-lstm

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

