Bridging Imagination and Reality for Model-Based
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Guangxiang Zhu⇤
IIIS
Tsinghua University
guangxiangzhu@outlook.com
Honglak Lee
EECS
University of Michigan
honglak@eecs.umich.edu

Minghao Zhang⇤
School of Software
Tsinghua University
mehoozhang@gmail.com
Chongjie Zhang
IIIS
Tsinghua University
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Sample efficiency has been one of the major challenges for deep reinforcement
learning. Recently, model-based reinforcement learning has been proposed to
address this challenge by performing planning on imaginary trajectories with a
learned world model. However, world model learning may suffer from overfitting
to training trajectories, and thus model-based value estimation and policy search
will be prone to be sucked in an inferior local policy. In this paper, we propose
a novel model-based reinforcement learning algorithm, called BrIdging Reality
and Dream (BIRD). It maximizes the mutual information between imaginary and
real trajectories so that the policy improvement learned from imaginary trajectories
can be easily generalized to real trajectories. We demonstrate that our approach
improves sample efficiency of model-based planning, and achieves state-of-the-art
performance on challenging visual control benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is proposed as a general-purpose learning framework for artificial
intelligence problems, and has led to tremendous progress in a variety of domains [1, 2, 3, 4]. Modelfree RL adopts a trail-and-error paradigm, which directly learns a mapping function from observations
to values or actions through interactions with environments. It has achieved remarkable performance
in certain video games and continuous control tasks because of its simplicity and minimal assumptions
about environments. However, model-free approaches are not yet sample efficient and require several
orders of magnitude more training samples than human learning, which limits its applications on
real-world tasks [5].
A promising direction for improving sample efficiency is to explore model-based RL, which first
builds an action-conditioned world model and then performs planning or policy search based on the
learned model. The world model needs to encode the representations and dynamics of an environment
is then used as a “dreamer” to do multi-step lookaheads for planning or policy search. Recently,
world models based on deep neural networks were developed to handle dynamics in complex highdimensional environments, which offers opportunities for learning model-based polices with visual
observations [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
⇤

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

