Bad Global Minima Exist and SGD Can Reach Them
Shengchao Liu
Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute (Mila)
Université de Montréal
liusheng@mila.quebec

Dimitris Papailiopoulos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
dimitris@papail.io

Dimitris Achlioptas
University of Athens
optas@di.uoa.gr

Abstract
Several works have aimed to explain why overparameterized neural networks
generalize well when trained by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). The consensus
explanation that has emerged credits the randomized nature of SGD for the bias
of the training process towards low-complexity models and, thus, for implicit
regularization. We take a careful look at this explanation in the context of image
classification with common deep neural network architectures. We find that if we
do not regularize explicitly, then SGD can be easily made to converge to poorlygeneralizing, high-complexity models: all it takes is to first train on a random
labeling on the data, before switching to properly training with the correct labels.
In contrast, we find that in the presence of explicit regularization, pretraining with
random labels has no detrimental effect on SGD. We believe that our results give
evidence that explicit regularization plays a far more important role in the success
of overparameterized neural networks than what has been understood until now.
Specifically, by penalizing complicated models independently of their fit to the
data, regularization affects training dynamics also far away from optima, making
simple models that fit the data well discoverable by local methods, such as SGD.

1

Introduction

In [1], Zhang et al. demonstrated that several popular deep neural network architectures for image
classification have enough capacity to perfectly memorize the CIFAR10 training set. That is, they
can achieve zero training error, even after the training examples are relabeled with uniformly random
labels. Moreover, these memorizing models are not even hard to find; they are reached by standard
training methods such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in about as much time as it takes to train
with the correct labels. It would stand to reason that since these architectures have enough capacity
to “fit anything,” models derived by fitting the correctly labeled data, i.e., “yet another anything,”
would fail to generalize. Yet, miraculously, they do not: models trained by SGD on even severely
overparameterized architectures generalize well. Following recent work [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12], our study is motivated by the desire to shed some light onto this miracle which stands at the
center of the recent machine learning revolution.
When the training set is labeled randomly, all models that minimize the corresponding loss function
are equivalent in terms of generalization, in the sense that, we expect none of them to generalize. The
first question we ask is: when the true labels are used, are all minima of the loss function equivalent
in terms of generalization, or are some better than others? As we see—perhaps unsurprisingly—not
all global minima are created equal: there exist bad global minima, i.e., global minima that generalize
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

