Predicting Training Time Without Training

Luca Zancato
Department of Information Engineering
University of Padova
luca.zancato@phd.unipd.it

Alessandro Achille
Amazon Web Services
aachille@amazon.com

Rahul Bhotika
Amazon Web Services
bhotikar@amazon.com

Avinash Ravichandran
Amazon Web Services
ravinash@amazon.com

Stefano Soatto
Amazon Web Services
soattos@amazon.com

Abstract
We tackle the problem of predicting the number of optimization steps that a pretrained deep network needs to converge to a given value of the loss function. To
do so, we leverage the fact that the training dynamics of a deep network during
fine-tuning are well approximated by those of a linearized model. This allows us to
approximate the training loss and accuracy at any point during training by solving
a low-dimensional Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) in function space. Using
this result, we are able to predict the time it takes for Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) to fine-tune a model to a given loss without having to perform any training.
In our experiments, we are able to predict training time of a ResNet within a 20%
error margin on a variety of datasets and hyper-parameters, at a 30 to 45-fold
reduction in cost compared to actual training. We also discuss how to further
reduce the computational and memory cost of our method, and in particular we
show that by exploiting the spectral properties of the gradients’ matrix it is possible
to predict training time on a large dataset while processing only a subset of the
samples.

1

Introduction

Say you are a researcher with many more ideas than available time and compute resources to test
them. You are pondering to launch thousands of experiments but, as the deadline approaches, you
wonder whether they will finish in time, and before your computational budget is exhausted. Could
you predict the time it takes for a network to converge, before even starting to train it?
We look to efficiently estimate the number of training steps a Deep Neural Network (DNN) needs
to converge to a given value of the loss function, without actually having to train the network. This
problem has received little attention thus far, possibly due to the fact that the initial training dynamics
of a randomly initialized DNN are highly non-trivial to characterize and analyze. However, in most
practical applications, it is common to not start from scratch, but from a pre-trained model. This may
simplify the analysis, since the final solution obtained by fine-tuning is typically not too far from the
initial solution obtained after pre-training. In fact, it is known that the dynamics of overparametrized
DNNs [9, 32, 2] during fine-tuning tends to be more predictable and close to convex [25]. Our main
contribution is to introduce the problem of predicting training time in realistic use cases, in particular
how training time depends on the hyper-parameters and, most importantly, on the interaction between
target task and pre-training (which, to the best of our knowledge, is new).
We therefore characterize the training dynamics of a pre-trained network and provide a computationally efficient procedure to estimate the expected profile of the loss curve over time.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

