What went wrong and when?
Instance-wise feature importance for time-series
black-box models
Sana Tonekaboni⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Vector institute
stonekaboni@cs.toronto.edu

Shalmali Joshi⇤†
Harvard University (SEAS)
shalmali@seas.harvard.edu

Kieran R Campbell
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Vector institute
Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute
kieran.campbell@utoronto.ca

David Duvenaud
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Vector institute
duvenaud@cs.toronto.edu

Anna Goldenberg
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Vector institute
The Hospital for Sick Children
anna.goldenberg@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Explanations of time series models are useful for high stakes applications like
healthcare but have received little attention in machine learning literature. We
propose FIT, a framework that evaluates the importance of observations for a
multivariate time-series black-box model by quantifying the shift in the predictive
distribution over time. FIT defines the importance of an observation based on
its contribution to the distributional shift under a KL-divergence that contrasts
the predictive distribution against a counterfactual where the rest of the features
are unobserved. We also demonstrate the need to control for time-dependent
distribution shifts. We compare with state-of-the-art baselines on simulated and
real-world clinical data and demonstrate that our approach is superior in identifying
important time points and observations throughout the time series.

1

Introduction

Understanding what drives machine learning models to output a particular prediction can aid reliable
decision-making for end-users and is critical in high stakes applications like healthcare. This problem
has been particularly overlooked in the context of time series datasets compared to static settings.
Time series domain is unique because the data’s dynamic nature results in the features driving model
prediction changing over time. Explaining time-series machine learning model prediction can be
defined in many ways, with existing works primarily considering two approaches. The first class
uses the notions of instance-level feature importance proposed in the literature for static supervised
⇤
†

Equal author
Work done while at the Vector Institute

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

