Offline Imitation Learning
with a Misspecified Simulator∗

Shengyi Jiang, Jing-Cheng Pang, Yang Yu
State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{jiangsy, pangjc, yuy}@lamda.nju.edu.cn
·

Abstract
In real-world decision-making tasks, learning an optimal policy without a trialand-error process is an appealing challenge. When expert demonstrations are
available, imitation learning that mimics expert actions can learn a good policy
efficiently. Learning in simulators is another commonly adopted approach to avoid
real-world trials-and-errors. However, neither sufficient expert demonstrations
nor high-fidelity simulators are easy to obtain. In this work, we investigate policy
learning in the condition of a few expert demonstrations and a simulator with
misspecified dynamics. Under a mild assumption that local states shall still be
partially aligned under a dynamics mismatch, we propose imitation learning with
horizon-adaptive inverse dynamics (HIDIL) that matches the simulator states with
expert states in a H-step horizon and accurately recovers actions based on inverse
dynamics policies. In the real environment, HIDIL can effectively derive adapted
actions from the matched states. Experiments are conducted in four MuJoCo
locomotion environments with modified friction, gravity, and density configurations.
Experiment results show that HIDIL achieves significant improvement in terms of
performance and stability in all of the real environments, compared with imitation
learning methods and transferring methods in reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1] has achieved remarkable success in virtual environments like
Atari games [2], StarCraft II [3], and Go [4]. The principal commonality shared by these virtual
environments (predefined games or man-made simulators) is the access to unlimited training data.
Such a virtual trial-and-error makes the learning process not only faster but also safer, since execution
failures lead to zero physical damage.
Current approaches to apply RL in real-world decision-making tasks without a costly trial-and-error
process can be divided into two major categories. One is Imitation Learning (IL) that obtains a policy
by mimicking the behavior of human experts from demonstrations. The other is to train a policy
in a simulator and then adapt it to the real world. Both approaches have their own limitations —
collecting sufficient expert demonstrations or building a high-fidelity simulator that perfectly recovers
real environments are both laborious and expensive. A problem naturally arises: How can we relax
the requirements of these two methods yet yield a ready-to-deploy policy. Imagine a feasible scenario
that we have a few expert demonstrations and a simulator with misspecified dynamics.
In this paper, we propose a method that learns to imitate experts with a few demonstrations and
a simulator with misspecified dynamics in a completely offline manner (i.e. no sampling process
∗
This work is supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFB1001903),
NSFC(61876077), and Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization.
Yang Yu is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

