Neural Execution Engines: Learning to Execute
Subroutines
Yujun Yan⇤
The University of Michigan
yujunyan@umich.edu

Kevin Swersky
Google Research
kswersky@google.com

Danai Koutra
The University of Michigan
dkoutra@umich.edu

Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Milad Hashemi
Google Research
{parthas, miladh}@google.com

Abstract
A significant effort has been made to train neural networks that replicate algorithmic reasoning, but they often fail to learn the abstract concepts underlying these
algorithms. This is evidenced by their inability to generalize to data distributions
that are outside of their restricted training sets, namely larger inputs and unseen
data. We study these generalization issues at the level of numerical subroutines that
comprise common algorithms like sorting, shortest paths, and minimum spanning
trees. First, we observe that transformer-based sequence-to-sequence models can
learn subroutines like sorting a list of numbers, but their performance rapidly
degrades as the length of lists grows beyond those found in the training set. We
demonstrate that this is due to attention weights that lose fidelity with longer sequences, particularly when the input numbers are numerically similar. To address
the issue, we propose a learned conditional masking mechanism, which enables
the model to strongly generalize far outside of its training range with near-perfect
accuracy on a variety of algorithms. Second, to generalize to unseen data, we show
that encoding numbers with a binary representation leads to embeddings with rich
structure once trained on downstream tasks like addition or multiplication. This
allows the embedding to handle missing data by faithfully interpolating numbers
not seen during training.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have become the preferred model for pattern recognition and prediction in perceptual
tasks and natural language processing [13, 4] thanks to their flexibility and their ability to learn
complex solutions. Recently, researchers have turned their attention towards imbuing neural networks
with the capability to perform algorithmic reasoning, thereby allowing them to go beyond pattern
recognition and logically solve more complex problems [9, 12, 10, 14]. These are often inspired by
concepts in conventional computer systems (e.g., pointers [29], external memory [22, 9]).
Unlike perceptual tasks, where the model is only expected to perform well on a specific distribution
from which the training set is drawn, in algorithmic reasoning the goal is to learn a robust solution
that performs the task regardless of the input distribution. This ability to generalize to arbitrary
input distributions—as opposed to unseen instances from a fixed data distribution—distinguishes the
concept of strong generalization from ordinary generalization. To date, neural networks still have
difficulty learning algorithmic tasks with strong generalization [28, 8, 12].
⇤

Work completed during an internship at Google.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

