Rewriting History with Inverse RL:
Hindsight Inference for Policy Improvement

Benjamin Eysenbach∗φθ Xinyang Geng∗ψ Sergey Levineψθ Ruslan Salakhutdinovφ
φ
ψ
θ
Carnegie Mellon University
UC Berkeley
Google Brain

Abstract
Multi-task reinforcement learning (RL) aims to simultaneously learn policies for
solving many tasks. Several prior works have found that relabeling past experience
with different reward functions can improve sample efficiency. Relabeling methods
typically pose the question: if, in hindsight, we assume that our experience was
optimal for some task, for what task was it optimal? Inverse RL answers this
question. In this paper we show that inverse RL is a principled mechanism for
reusing experience across tasks. We use this idea to generalize goal-relabeling
techniques from prior work to arbitrary types of reward functions. Our experiments
confirm that relabeling data using inverse RL outperforms prior relabeling methods
on goal-reaching tasks, and accelerates learning on more general multi-task settings
where prior methods are not applicable, such as domains with discrete sets of
rewards and those with linear reward functions.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to acquire control policies that take actions to maximize their
reward, though existing RL algorithms remain data inefficient [11, 26]. Multi-task RL, where many
RL problems are solved in parallel, has the potential to be more sample efficient than single-task RL,
as data can be shared across tasks. Nonetheless, the problem of effectively sharing data across tasks
remains largely unsolved.
The idea of sharing data across tasks has been studied at least since the 1990s [5]. More recently,
a number of works have observed that retroactive relabeling of experience with different tasks can
improve data efficiency [3, 24]. A common theme in prior relabeling methods is to relabel past trials
with whatever goal or task was performed successfully in that trial. For example, in a goal-reaching
task, we might use the state actually reached at the end of the trajectory as the relabeled goal, since
the trajectory corresponds to a successful trial for the goal that was actually reached [3, 38]. However,
prior work on goal relabeling is inapplicable to more general reward functions, such as discrete sets
of reward functions or tasks defined by varying linear combinations of reward terms.
In this paper, we formalize prior relabeling techniques under the umbrella of inverse RL: by inferring
the most likely task for a given trial via inverse RL, we provide a principled formula for relabeling
in arbitrary multi-task problems. Inverse RL is not the same as evaluating a trajectory under all
tasks and choosing whichever task yielded the highest reward. In fact, this strategy would often
result in assigning most trajectories to the easiest task. Rather, inverse RL automatically takes into
account the difficulty of each task by normalizing each reward function by the partition function.
RL and inverse RL can be seen as complementary tools for maximizing reward: RL takes tasks and
produces high-reward trajectories, and inverse RL takes trajectories and produces task labels such
that the trajectories receive high reward. Formally, we prove that maximum entropy (MaxEnt) RL
and MaxEnt inverse RL optimize the same multi-task objective: MaxEnt RL optimizes with respect
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to beysenba@cs.cmu.edu

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

