Neural Networks with Recurrent
Generative Feedback
Yujia Huang1 James Gornet1 Sihui Dai1 Zhiding Yu2 Tan Nguyen3
Doris Y. Tsao1 Anima Anandkumar1,2
1
California Institute of Technology 2 NVIDIA 3 Rice University

Abstract
Neural networks are vulnerable to input perturbations such as additive noise and
adversarial attacks. In contrast, human perception is much more robust to such
perturbations. The Bayesian brain hypothesis states that human brains use an
internal generative model to update the posterior beliefs of the sensory input. This
mechanism can be interpreted as a form of self-consistency between the maximum
a posteriori (MAP) estimation of an internal generative model and the external
environment. Inspired by such hypothesis, we enforce self-consistency in neural
networks by incorporating generative recurrent feedback. We instantiate this design on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The proposed framework, termed
Convolutional Neural Networks with Feedback (CNN-F), introduces a generative
feedback with latent variables to existing CNN architectures, where consistent predictions are made through alternating MAP inference under a Bayesian framework.
In the experiments, CNN-F shows considerably improved adversarial robustness
over conventional feedforward CNNs on standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Vulnerability in feedforward neural networks ConvenInternal Model
tional deep neural networks (DNNs) often contain many
layers of feedforward connections. With the ever-growing
network capacities and representation abilities, they have
achieved great success. For example, recent convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have impressive accuracy on
large scale image classification benchmarks [33]. HowCat
Feedforward
ever, current CNN models also have significant limitations.
For instance, they can suffer significant performance drop
Feedback
from corruptions which barely influence human recognition [3]. Studies also show that CNNs can be misled by
imperceptible noise known as adversarial attacks [32].
Figure 1: An intuitive illustration of reFeedback in the human brain To address the weaknesses current generative feedback in human
of CNNs, we can take inspiration from of how human visual perception system.
visual recognition works, and incorporate certain mechanisms into the CNN design. While human visual cortex has hierarchical feedforward connections,
backward connections from higher level to lower level cortical areas are something that current
artificial networks are lacking [6]. Studies suggest these backward connections carry out top-down
processing which improves the representation of sensory input [15]. In addition, evidence suggests
recurrent feedback in the human visual cortex is crucial for robust object recognition. For example,
humans require recurrent feedback to recognize challenging images [11]. Obfuscated images can
fool humans without recurrent feedback [5]. Figure 1 shows an intuitive example of recovering a
sharpened cat from a blurry cat and achieving consistent predictions after several iterations.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

