Mitigating Forgetting in Online Continual Learning
via Instance-Aware Parameterization
Hung-Jen Chen1 , An-Chieh Cheng1 , Da-Cheng Juan2 , Wei Wei2 , Min Sun134
1
National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
2
Google Research, Mountain View, USA , 3 Appier Inc., Taiwan
4
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare, Taiwan
andyqmongo@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, accheng.tw@gmail.com
{dacheng,wewei}@google.com, sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Online continual learning is a challenging scenario where a model needs to learn
from a continuous stream of data without revisiting any previously encountered
data instances. The phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting is worsened since the
model should not only address the forgetting at the task-level but also at the data
instance-level within the same task. To mitigate this, we leverage the concept of
"instance awareness" in the neural network, where each data instance is classified
by a path in the network searched by the controller from a meta-graph. To preserve
the knowledge we learn from previous instances, we proposed a method to protect
the path by restricting the gradient updates of one instance from overriding past
updates calculated from previous instances if these instances are not similar. On
the other hand, it also encourages fine-tuning the path if the incoming instance
shares the similarity with previous instances. The mechanism of selecting paths
according to instances similarity is naturally determined by the controller, which
is compact and online updated. Experimental results show that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-arts in online continual learning. Furthermore,
the proposed method is evaluated against a realistic setting where the boundaries
between tasks are blurred. Experimental results confirm that the proposed method
outperforms the state-of-the-arts on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and Tiny-ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Continual learning aims at finding the method that will prevent a learning model from forgetting
previously learned tasks when learning the new task, i.e. to overcome the catastrophic forgetting.
From the human perspective, we expect that one may have a better understanding if the task is related
to previously learned knowledge. For deep learning models, however, knowledge learned from a
previous task is often “washed out” by fine-tuning on a different one, making neural networks to
exhibit the behavior of catastrophic forgetting. Mitigating forgetting and transferring knowledge
between tasks are the key components of continual learning. Although there are plenty of experiment
settings proposed by previous works, recent studies such as [1–4] start to solve the more challenging
scenario: online continual learning. Instead of using the entire training set repeatedly within a
task, which is found in the conventional continual learning setting, online continual learning further
restricts that each sample can only be seen once. This setting may emulate scenarios when the learner
cannot get a sufficient amount of data for tasks at the beginning of the training phase or it is not
possible to store the data for the entire task due to privacy issues or memory limitations.
Currently, there are three types of continual learning methods based on how they store the information of previous task: regularization-based, replay-based, and architectural-based. Regularization
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

