Parabolic Approximation Line Search for DNNs

Maximus Mutschler and Andreas Zell
University of Tübingen
Sand 1, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany
{maximus.mutschler, andreas.zell}@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
A major challenge in current optimization research for deep learning is to automatically find optimal step sizes for each update step. The optimal step size is closely
related to the shape of the loss in the update step direction. However, this shape
has not yet been examined in detail. This work shows empirically that the batch
loss over lines in negative gradient direction is mostly convex locally and well
suited for one-dimensional parabolic approximations. By exploiting this parabolic
property we introduce a simple and robust line search approach, which performs
loss-shape dependent update steps. Our approach combines well-known methods
such as parabolic approximation, line search and conjugate gradient, to perform
efficiently. It surpasses other step size estimating methods and competes with
common optimization methods on a large variety of experiments without the need
of hand-designed step size schedules. Thus, it is of interest for objectives where
step-size schedules are unknown or do not perform well. Our extensive evaluation
includes multiple comprehensive hyperparameter grid searches on several datasets
and architectures. Finally, we provide a general investigation of exact line searches
in the context of batch losses and exact losses, including their relation to our line
search approach.

1

Introduction

Automatic determination of optimal step sizes for each update step of stochastic gradient descent is a
major challenge in current optimization research for deep learning [3, 5, 12, 29, 38, 43, 46, 50, 58]. One
default approach to tackle this challenge is to apply line search methods. Several of these have been
introduced for Deep Learning [12, 29, 38, 43, 58]. However, these approaches have not analyzed the
shape of the loss functions in update step direction in detail, which is important, since the optimal
step size stands in strong relation to this shape. To shed light on this, our work empirically analyses
the shape of the loss function in update step direction for deep learning scenarios often considered in
optimization. We further elaborate the properties found to define a simple, competitive, empirically
justified optimizer.
Our contributions are as follows: 1: Empirical analysis suggests that the loss function in negative
gradient direction mostly shows locally convex shapes. Furthermore, we show that parabolic approximations are well suited to estimate the minima in these directions (Section 3). 2: Exploiting the
parabolic property, we build a simple line search optimizer which constructs its own loss function dependent learning rate schedule. The performance of our optimization method is extensively analyzed,
including a comprehensive comparison to other optimization methods (Sections 4,5). 3: We provide
a convergence analysis which backs our empirical results, under strong assumptions (Section 4.4). 4:
We provide a general investigation of exact line searches on batch losses and their relation to line
searches on the exact loss as well as their relation to our line search approach (Section 6) and, finally,
analyze the relation of our approach to interpolation (Section 7).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

