Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
with Model Uncertainty

Kaiqing Zhang∗ \ Tao Sun† \ Yunzhe Tao† Sahika Genc† Sunil Mallya† Tamer Başar∗
∗
Department of ECE and CSL, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
†
Amazon Web Services
{kzhang66, basar1}@illinois.edu
{suntao, yunzhet, sahika, smallya}@amazon.com

Abstract
In this work, we study the problem of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
with model uncertainty, which is referred to as robust MARL. This is naturally motivated by some multi-agent applications where each agent may not have perfectly
accurate knowledge of the model, e.g., all the reward functions of other agents.
Little a priori work on MARL has accounted for such uncertainties, neither in
problem formulation nor in algorithm design. In contrast, we model the problem
as a robust Markov game, where the goal of all agents is to find policies such that
no agent has the incentive to deviate, i.e., reach some equilibrium point, which
is also robust to the possible uncertainty of the MARL model. We first introduce
the solution concept of robust Nash equilibrium in our setting, and develop a Qlearning algorithm to find such equilibrium policies, with convergence guarantees
under certain conditions. In order to handle possibly enormous state-action spaces
in practice, we then derive the policy gradients for robust MARL, and develop an
actor-critic algorithm with function approximation. Our experiments demonstrate
that the proposed algorithm outperforms several baseline MARL methods that do
not account for the model uncertainty, in several standard but uncertain cooperative
and competitive MARL environments.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has recently achieved tremendous successes in many sequential
decision-making problems, varying from robotics [1, 2] and autonomous driving [3] to game playing
[4, 5]. In fact, many of these important applications involve more than one agent or player [6, 7],
naturally leading to the setting of multi-agent RL (MARL). MARL addresses the decision-making
problem of multiple agents in a common environment, where the goal of each agent is to optimize its
own long-term return by interacting with the environment and other agents; see [8, 9] for detailed
reviews, and [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] for some recent advances. MARL problems are usually modeled
under the framework of Markov games, stemming from the seminal work [16].
In real-world applications, the agents, especially those trained in simulations, may not have perfectly
accurate knowledge of the actual model, i.e., the reward functions of all agents and the transition
probability model. In particular, the solution obtained from the simulation without uncertainty
may have poor performance in practice, known as the sim-to-real gap. Such an issue has been
reported quite common in the autonomous-car racing application [17], which initially motivates the
present work. In single-agent RL, such an uncertainty has been nicely handled through the lens
of robust Markov decision processes (MDPs) [18, 19, 20] and robust (adversarial) RL [21, 22]. In
comparison, such an uncertainty has not been fully explored in the multi-agent RL regime. In light
\

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

