Hierarchical Gaussian Process Priors for Bayesian
Neural Network Weights

Theofanis Karaletsos∗
Facebook
theokara@fb.com

Thang D. Bui∗
Uber AI and University of Sydney
thang.bui@uber.com

Abstract
Probabilistic neural networks are typically modeled with independent weight priors,
which do not capture weight correlations in the prior and do not provide a parsimonious interface to express properties in function space. A desirable class of priors
would represent weights compactly, capture correlations between weights, facilitate
calibrated reasoning about uncertainty, and allow inclusion of prior knowledge
about the function space such as periodicity or dependence on contexts such as
inputs. To this end, this paper introduces two innovations: (i) a Gaussian processbased hierarchical model for network weights based on unit priors that can flexibly
encode correlated weight structures, and (ii) input-dependent versions of these
weight priors that can provide convenient ways to regularize the function space
through the use of kernels defined on contextual inputs. We show these models
provide desirable test-time uncertainty estimates on out-of-distribution data and
demonstrate cases of modeling inductive biases for neural networks with kernels
which help both interpolation and extrapolation from training data.

1

Introduction

Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) [see e.g. MacKay, 1992, Neal, 1993, Ghahramani, 2016] are one
of the research frontiers on combining Bayesian inference and deep learning, potentially offering
flexible modelling power with calibrated predictive performance. In essence, applying probabilistic
inference to neural networks allows all plausible network parameters, not just the most likely, to be
used for predictions. Despite the strong interest in the community for the exploration of BNNs, there
remain unanswered questions: (i) how can we model neural network functions to encourage behaviors
such as interpolation between signals and extrapolation from data in meaningful ways, for instance
by encoding prior knowledge, or how to specify priors which facilitate uncertainty quantification,
and (ii) many scalable approximate inference methods are not rich enough to capture complicated
posterior correlations in large networks, resulting in undesirable predictive performance at test time.
This paper attempts to tackle some of the aforementioned limitations by taking inspiration from the
Gaussian Process (GP) literature. First, we propose a hierarchical GP prior over weights to achieve
a compact non-parametric representation of neural networks weights by utilizing unit-level latent
variables. Second, we propose to utilize this non-parametric GP prior on weights to overcome a key
limitation of current weight priors: their global nature. We explore the use of product kernels to
implement input-dependence as a variation of the proposed prior, yielding models that have local (perdatapoint or per-layer) priors. We explore what effects these per-datapoint priors have in comparison
to global priors on the network’s ability to generalize. A structured variational inference approach is
employed that side-steps the need to do inference in the weight space and amortizes per-datapoint
weight inference. A consequence of our model setup and usage of approximate inference is that
our model is parametrized compactly by inducing points akin to GPs, but in our case those are
∗

Both authors contributed equally. Work done while TK was at Uber AI

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

