Advances in Black-Box VI: Normalizing Flows,
Importance Weighting, and Optimization
Abhinav Agrawal1 , Daniel Sheldon1,2 , and Justin Domke1
1

College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Department of Computer Science, Mount Holyoke College
{aagrawal, sheldon, domke}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Recent research has seen several advances relevant to black-box variational inference (VI), but the current state of automatic posterior inference is unclear. One
such advance is the use of normalizing flows to define flexible posterior densities
for deep latent variable models. Another direction is the integration of Monte-Carlo
methods to serve two purposes; first, to obtain tighter variational objectives for
optimization, and second, to define enriched variational families through sampling. However, both flows and variational Monte-Carlo methods remain relatively
unexplored for black-box VI. Moreover, on a pragmatic front, there are several
optimization considerations like step-size scheme, parameter initialization, and
choice of gradient estimators, for which there is no clear guidance in the literature.
In this paper, we postulate that black-box VI is best addressed through a careful
combination of numerous algorithmic components. We evaluate components relating to optimization, flows, and Monte-Carlo methods on a benchmark of 30 models
from the Stan model library. The combination of these algorithmic components
significantly advances the state-of-the-art "out of the box" variational inference.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of automatic posterior inference. A scientist or expert creates a model
p(z, x) for latent variables z and observed variables x. For example, z might be population-level
preferences for a political candidate in each district in a country, while x is an observed set of polls.
Then, we wish to approximate the posterior p(z|x), i.e., determine what the observed data say about
the latent variables under the specified model. The ultimate aim of automatic inference is that a
domain expert can create a model and get answers without manually tinkering with inference details.
In practice, one often resorts to approximate inference. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
are widely applicable and are asymptotically exact, but sometimes slow. Variational inference (VI)
approximates the posterior within a tractable family. This can be much faster but is not asymptotically
exact. Recent developments led to “black-box VI” methods that, like MCMC, apply to a broad class
of models [30, 15, 2].
However, to date, black-box VI is not widely adopted for posterior inference. Moreover, there have
been several advances that are relevant to black-box VI, but have been little evaluated in that context.
One such advance is normalizing flows, which define flexible densities through a composition of
invertible transformations [31, 26]. Surprisingly, normalizing flows have seen almost no investigation
for black-box VI; instead, they have been used either to directlyRlearn a density [8, 9, 27, 19] or to
bound the likelihood of a deep latent variable model pθ (x) = pθ (z, x)dz [31, 20, 13]. In both
cases, there is no mechanistic model and little or no focus on posterior queries.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

