Optimal and Practical Algorithms for Smooth and
Strongly Convex Decentralized Optimization

Dmitry Kovalev

Adil Salim

Peter Richtárik

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
We consider the task of decentralized minimization of the sum of smooth strongly
convex functions stored across the nodes of a network. For this problem, lower
bounds on the number of gradient computations and the number of communication
rounds required to achieve ε accuracy have recently been proven. We propose two
new algorithms for this decentralized optimization problem and equip them with
complexity guarantees. We show that our first method is optimal both in terms
of the number of communication rounds and in terms of the number of gradient
computations. Unlike existing optimal algorithms, our algorithm does not rely on
the expensive evaluation of dual gradients. Our second algorithm is optimal in
terms of the number of communication rounds, without a logarithmic factor. Our
approach relies on viewing the two proposed algorithms as accelerated variants of
the Forward Backward algorithm to solve monotone inclusions associated with the
decentralized optimization problem. We also verify the efficacy of our methods
against state-of-the-art algorithms through numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

In this paper we are concerned with the design and analysis of new efficient algorithms for solving
optimization problems in a decentralized storage and computation regime. In this regime, a network of
agents/devices/workers, such as mobile devices, hospitals, wireless sensors, or smart home appliances,
collaborates to solve a single optimization problem whose description is stored across the nodes of
the network. Each node can perform computations using its local state and data, and is only allowed
to communicate with its neighbors.
Problems of this form have been traditionally studied in the signal processing community (Xu et al.,
2020), but are attracting increasing interest from the machine learning and optimization community as
well (Scaman et al., 2017). Indeed, the training of supervised machine learning models via empirical
risk minimization from training data stored across a network is most naturally cast as a decentralized
optimization problem. Finally, while current federated learning (Konečný et al., 2016; McMahan
et al., 2017) systems rely on a star network topology, with a trusted server performing aggregation
and coordination placed at the center of the network, advances in decentralized optimization could
be useful in new generation federated learning formulations that would rely on fully decentralized
computation (Li et al., 2019). In summary, decentralized optimization is of direct relevance to
machine learning, present and future.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

