Manifold GPLVMs for discovering non-Euclidean
latent structure in neural data
Ta-Chu Kao
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
tck29@cam.ac.uk

Kristopher T. Jensen
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
ktj21@cam.ac.uk
Marco Tripodi
Neurobiology Division
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
mtripodi@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Guillaume Hennequin
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
g.hennequin@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
A common problem in neuroscience is to elucidate the collective neural representations of behaviorally important variables such as head direction, spatial location,
upcoming movements, or mental spatial transformations. Often, these latent variables are internal constructs not directly accessible to the experimenter. Here,
we propose a new probabilistic latent variable model to simultaneously identify
the latent state and the way each neuron contributes to its representation in an
unsupervised way. In contrast to previous models which assume Euclidean latent
spaces, we embrace the fact that latent states often belong to symmetric manifolds
such as spheres, tori, or rotation groups of various dimensions. We therefore
propose the manifold Gaussian process latent variable model (mGPLVM), where
neural responses arise from (i) a shared latent variable living on a specific manifold,
and (ii) a set of non-parametric tuning curves determining how each neuron contributes to the representation. Cross-validated comparisons of models with different
topologies can be used to distinguish between candidate manifolds, and variational
inference enables quantification of uncertainty. We demonstrate the validity of the
approach on several synthetic datasets, as well as on calcium recordings from the
ellipsoid body of Drosophila melanogaster and extracellular recordings from the
mouse anterodorsal thalamic nucleus. These circuits are both known to encode
head direction, and mGPLVM correctly recovers the ring topology expected from
neural populations representing a single angular variable.

1

Introduction

The brain uses large neural populations to represent low-dimensional quantities of behavioural
relevance such as location in physical or mental spaces, orientation of the body, or motor plans. It
is therefore common to project neural data into smaller latent spaces as a first step towards linking
neural activity to behaviour (Cunningham and Byron, 2014). This can be done using a variety of
linear methods such as PCA or factor analysis (Cunningham and Ghahramani, 2015), or non-linear
dimensionality reduction techniques such as tSNE (Maaten and Hinton, 2008). Many of these
methods are explicitly probabilistic, with notable examples including GPFA (Yu et al., 2009) and
LFADS (Pandarinath et al., 2018). However, all these models project data into Euclidean latent
spaces, thus failing to capture the inherent non-Euclidean nature of variables such as head direction
or rotational motor plans (Chaudhuri et al., 2019; Finkelstein et al., 2015; Seelig and Jayaraman,
2015; Wilson et al., 2018).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

