ICAM: Interpretable Classification via Disentangled
Representations and Feature Attribution Mapping

Cher Bass
Kings College London
London, UK, WC2R 2LS
cher.bass@kcl.ac.uk

Mariana da Silva
Kings College London
London, UK, WC2R 2LS

Petru-Daniel Tudosiu
Kings College London
London, UK, WC2R 2LS

Stephen M. Smith
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK, OX1 2JD

Carole Sudre
Kings College London
London, UK, WC2R 2LS

Emma C. Robinson
Kings College London
London, UK, WC2R 2LS
emma.robinson@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Feature attribution (FA), or the assignment of class-relevance to different locations
in an image, is important for many classification problems but is particularly crucial
within the neuroscience domain, where accurate mechanistic models of behaviours,
or disease, require knowledge of all features discriminative of a trait. At the same
time, predicting class relevance from brain images is challenging as phenotypes
are typically heterogeneous, and changes occur against a background of significant
natural variation. Here, we present a novel framework for creating class specific
FA maps through image-to-image translation. We propose the use of a VAE-GAN
to explicitly disentangle class relevance from background features for improved
interpretability properties, which results in meaningful FA maps. We validate our
method on 2D and 3D brain image datasets of dementia (ADNI dataset), ageing
(UK Biobank), and (simulated) lesion detection. We show that FA maps generated
by our method outperform baseline FA methods when validated against ground
truth. More significantly, our approach is the first to use latent space sampling to
support exploration of phenotype variation.

1

Introduction

Brain images present a significant resource in the development of mechanistic models of behaviour and
neurological/psychiatric disease as they reflect measurable neuroanatomical traits that are heritable,
present in unaffected siblings and detectable prior to disease onset [10]. Nevertheless, for complex
disorders, features of disease remain subtle, variable [21, 38] and occur against a back-drop of
significant natural variation in shape and appearance [16, 27].
Traditional approaches for brain image analysis compare data in a global average template space,
estimated via smooth (and ideally diffeomorphic) deformations [2, 11, 12, 14, 16, 37]. This, however,
typically ignores cortical heterogeneity and may smooth out sources of variation [11, 16] in ways
which limit interpretation [7]. Tools are still required to distinguish between features of population
variability and specific discriminative phenotypic features.
Deep learning is state-of-the-art for many image processing tasks [17] and has shown strong promise
for brain imaging applications such as healthy tissue and lesion segmentation [8, 13, 25, 36]. However,
there is growing need for greater accountability of networks, especially within the medical domain.
Several approaches for feature attribution (FA) [3, 30, 33, 40, 43] have been proposed which return
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

