FLAMBE: Structural Complexity and
Representation Learning of Low Rank MDPs
Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research, Redmond
alekha@microsoft.com

Sham Kakade
Microsoft Research, NYC
sham@cs.washington.edu

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research, NYC
akshaykr@microsoft.com

Wen Sun
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Abstract
In order to deal with the curse of dimensionality in reinforcement learning (RL),
it is common practice to make parametric assumptions where values or policies
are functions of some low dimensional feature space. This work focuses on the
representation learning question: how can we learn such features? Under the
assumption that the underlying (unknown) dynamics correspond to a low rank
transition matrix, we show how the representation learning question is related
to a particular non-linear matrix decomposition problem. Structurally, we make
precise connections between these low rank MDPs and latent variable models,
showing how they significantly generalize prior formulations, such as block MDPs,
for representation learning in RL. Algorithmically, we develop F LAMBE, which
engages in exploration and representation learning for provably efficient RL in low
rank transition models. On a technical level, our analysis eliminates reachability
assumptions that appear in prior results on the simpler block MDP model and may
be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

The ability to learn effective transformations of complex data sources, sometimes called representation
learning, is an essential primitive in modern machine learning. Advances in this area have led to
remarkable achievements in language modeling, vision, and serve as a partial explanation for the
success of deep learning more broadly (Bengio et al., 2013). In Reinforcement Learning (RL),
several works have shown empirically that learning succinct representations of perceptual inputs can
accelerate the search for decision-making policies (Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Tang
et al., 2017; Oord et al., 2018; Srinivas et al., 2020). However, representation learning for RL is far
more subtle than it is for supervised learning (Du et al., 2019a; Van Roy and Dong, 2019; Lattimore
and Szepesvari, 2020), and the theoretical foundations of representation learning for RL are nascent.
The first question that arises in this context is: what is a good representation? Intuitively, a good
representation should help us achieve greater sample efficiency on downstream tasks. For supervised
learning, several theoretical works adopt the perspective that a good representation should permit
simple models to achieve high accuracy on tasks of interest (Baxter, 2000; Maurer et al., 2016; Arora
et al., 2019; Tosh et al., 2020). Lifting this perspective to reinforcement learning, it is natural to expect
that we can express value functions and policies as simple functions of our representation. This may
allow us to leverage recent work on sample efficient RL with parametric function approximation.
The second question is: how do we learn such a representation when it is not provided in advance?
This question is particularly challenging because representation learning is intimately tied to explo34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

