Optimization and Generalization Analysis of
Transduction through Gradient Boosting and
Application to Multi-scale Graph Neural Networks

Kenta Oono
The University of Tokyo
Preferred Networks, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
kenta_oono@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Taiji Suzuki
The University of Tokyo
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
Tokyo, Japan
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
It is known that the current graph neural networks (GNNs) are difficult to make
themselves deep due to the problem known as over-smoothing. Multi-scale GNNs
are a promising approach for mitigating the over-smoothing problem. However,
there is little explanation of why it works empirically from the viewpoint of learning
theory. In this study, we derive the optimization and generalization guarantees of
transductive learning algorithms that include multi-scale GNNs. Using the boosting
theory, we prove the convergence of the training error under weak learning-type
conditions. By combining it with generalization gap bounds in terms of transductive
Rademacher complexity, we show that a test error bound of a specific type of multiscale GNNs that decreases corresponding to the number of node aggregations under
some conditions. Our results offer theoretical explanations for the effectiveness of
the multi-scale structure against the over-smoothing problem. We apply boosting
algorithms to the training of multi-scale GNNs for real-world node prediction
tasks. We confirm that its performance is comparable to existing GNNs, and the
practical behaviors are consistent with theoretical observations. Code is available
at https://github.com/delta2323/GB-GNN.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [27, 52] are an emerging deep learning model for analyzing graph
structured-data. They have achieved state-of-the-art performances in node prediction tasks on a graph
in various fields such as biochemistry [17], computer vision [69], and knowledge graph analysis [57].
While they are promising, the current design of GNNs has witnessed a challenge known as oversmoothing [38, 48]. Typically, a GNN iteratively aggregates and mixes node representations of a
graph [26, 36, 64]. Although it can capture the subgraph information using local operations only, it
smoothens the representations and makes them become indistinguishable (over-smoothen) between
nodes as we stack too many layers, leading to underfitting of the model. Several studies suspected
that this is the cause of the performance degradation of deep GNNs and devised methods to mitigate
it [51, 70]. Among others, multi-scale GNNs [39, 45, 68] are a promising approach as a solution for
the over-smoothing problem. These models are designed to combine the subgraph information at
various scales, for example, by bypassing the output of the middle layers of a GNN to the final layer.
Although multi-scale GNNs empirically have resolved the over-smoothing problem to some extent,
little is known how it works theoretically. To justify the empirical performance from the viewpoint
of statistical learning theory, we need to analyze two factors: generalization gap and optimization.
There are several studies to guarantee the generalization gaps [15, 24, 33, 53, 65]. However, to the
best of our knowledge, few studies have provided optimization guarantees. The difficulty partly
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

