Disentangling Human Error from
the Ground Truth in Segmentation of Medical Images

Le Zhang1,2∗, Ryutaro Tanno2,3∗ , Mou-Cheng Xu2 , Chen Jin2 ,
Joseph Jacob2 , Olga Ciccarelli1 , Frederik Barkhof1,2 and Daniel C. Alexander2
1

Queen Square Multiple Sclerosis Centre, Department of Neuroinflammation,
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, Faculty of Brain Sciences,
University College London, London, UK.
2
Centre for Medical Image Computing, Department of Computer Science,
University College London, London, UK.
3
Healthcare Intelligence, Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
le.zhang@ucl.ac.uk
rytanno@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent years have seen increasing use of supervised learning methods for
segmentation tasks. However, the predictive performance of these algorithms
depends on the quality of labels. This problem is particularly pertinent in the
medical image domain, where both the annotation cost and inter-observer variability
are high. In a typical label acquisition process, different human experts provide their
estimates of the “true” segmentation labels under the influence of their own biases
and competence levels. Treating these noisy labels blindly as the ground truth limits
the performance that automatic segmentation algorithms can achieve. In this work,
we present a method for jointly learning, from purely noisy observations alone, the
reliability of individual annotators and the true segmentation label distributions,
using two coupled CNNs. The separation of the two is achieved by encouraging the
estimated annotators to be maximally unreliable while achieving high fidelity with
the noisy training data. We first define a toy segmentation dataset based on MNIST
and study the properties of the proposed algorithm. We then demonstrate the utility
of the method on three public medical imaging segmentation datasets with simulated
(when necessary) and real diverse annotations: 1) MSLSC (multiple-sclerosis
lesions); 2) BraTS (brain tumours); 3) LIDC-IDRI (lung abnormalities). In all cases,
our method outperforms competing methods and relevant baselines particularly
in cases where the number of annotations is small and the amount of disagreement
is large. The experiments also show strong ability to capture the complex
spatial characteristics of annotators’ mistakes. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/moucheng2017/Learn_Noisy_Labels_Medical_Images.

1

Introduction

Segmentation of anatomical structures in medical images is known to suffer from high inter-reader
variability [1–5], influencing the performance of downstream supervised machine learning models.
This problem is particularly prominent in the medical domain where the labelled data is commonly
scarce due to the high cost of annotations. For instance, accurate identification of multiple sclerosis
(MS) lesions in MRIs is difficult even for experienced experts due to variability in lesion location,
size, shape and anatomical variability across patients [6]. Another example [4] reports the average
∗

These authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

