A Causal View on Robustness of Neural Networks
Cheng Zhang ∗
Kun Zhang
Microsoft Research
Carnegie Mellon University
Cheng.Zhang@microsoft.com
kunz1@cmu.edu

Yingzhen Li ∗
Microsoft Research
Yingzhen.Li@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a causal view on the robustness of neural networks against input manipulations, which applies not only to traditional classification tasks but also to general
measurement data. Based on this view, we design a deep causal manipulation
augmented model (deep CAMA) which explicitly models possible manipulations
on certain causes leading to changes in the observed effect. We further develop
data augmentation and test-time fine-tuning methods to improve deep CAMA’s robustness. When compared with discriminative deep neural networks, our proposed
model shows superior robustness against unseen manipulations. As a by-product,
our model achieves disentangled representation which separates the representation
of manipulations from those of other latent causes.

1

Introduction

∗

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Train Clean Test Ver
0.6
Train Hor Test Ver
0.5
Train Ver test Ver
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.10.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

Vertical shift range

(a) Test Vertical shift

Accuracy

On the other hand, human perception is
robust to such perturbations thanks to the
capability of causal reasoning [36, 18]. After learning the concept of an “elephant”, a
child can identify the elephant in a photo
taken under any lighting condition, location, etc. In the causal view, the lighting
condition and the location are causes of the
presented scene, which can be intervened
without changing the presence of the elephant. However, discriminative DNNs do
not take such possible interventions into
account, and cannot adapt the predictor for
new data gathered with unseen manipulation.

Accuracy

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have great success in many real-life applications; however, they are
easily fooled even by a tiny amount of perturbation [47, 17, 6, 4]. Lack of robustness hinders the
application of DNNs to critical decision making tasks such as uses in healthcare. To address this,
one may suggest training DNNs with diverse datasets. Indeed, data augmentation and adversarial
training have shown improvements in both the generalization and robustness of DNNs [25, 37, 30].
Unfortunately, this does not address the vulnerability of DNNs to unseen manipulations, e.g. as
shown in Figure 1, a DNN trained on clean MNIST digits fails to properly classify shifted digits.
Although observing perturbations of clean data in training improves robustness against that particular
manipulation (the green line), the DNN is still fragile when unseen manipulations are present (orange
line). As it is unrealistic to augment the training data towards all possible manipulations that might
occur, a principled method that fundamentally improves the robustness is much needed.
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Train Clean Test Hor
0.6
Train Ver Test Hor
0.5
Train Hor Test Hor
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.10.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

Horizontal shift range

(b) Test Horizontal shift

Figure 1: Robustness of DNNs on shifted MNIST. Panels (a)
and (b) show the accuracy on classifying noisy test data generated by shifting the digits vertically (Ver) and horizontally
(Hor). It shows that data augmentation during training makes
generalization to unseen shifts worse (orange vs blue lines).

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

