Consistency Regularization for Certified Robustness
of Smoothed Classifiers
Jongheon Jeong1
Jinwoo Shin2,1
School of Electrical Engineering 2 Graduate School of AI
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, South Korea
{jongheonj, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
1

Abstract
A recent technique of randomized smoothing has shown that the worst-case (adversarial) `2 -robustness can be transformed into the average-case Gaussian-robustness
by “smoothing” a classifier, i.e., by considering the averaged prediction over Gaussian noise. In this paradigm, one should rethink the notion of adversarial robustness
in terms of generalization ability of a classifier under noisy observations. We found
that the trade-off between accuracy and certified robustness of smoothed classifiers
can be greatly controlled by simply regularizing the prediction consistency over
noise. This relationship allows us to design a robust training objective without
approximating a non-existing smoothed classifier, e.g., via soft smoothing. Our
experiments under various deep neural network architectures and datasets show
that the “certified” `2 -robustness can be dramatically improved with the proposed
regularization, even achieving better or comparable results to the state-of-the-art
approaches with significantly less training costs and hyperparameters.

1

Introduction

Despite achieving even super-human level performance on i.i.d. datasets [16, 33, 11], deep neural
network (DNN) classifiers usually make substantially fragile predictions than humans on the samples
not from the data-generating distribution. The broad existence of adversarial examples [35, 15] are
arguably the most crucial instance of this phenomenon: a small, adversarially-crafted perturbation on
input can easily change the prediction of a classifier, even when the perturbation does not affect the
semantic information perceived by humans at all.
This intriguing weakness of DNNs has encouraged many researchers to develop robust neural
networks, along with a parallel attempt to break them with stronger attacks [6, 38, 2]. Currently, the
community has agreed that adversarial training [15, 24, 45], i.e., augmenting the training dataset
with adversarial examples, is an effective defense method, but the “scalability” of the method is often
questionable in several aspects: (a) it is generally hard to guarantee that an adversarially-trained
classifier is indeed robust, (b) generalizing the robustness beyond the training threat model is still
challenging [36, 19], and (c) the network capacity required for robust representation seems to be
much larger than practice, e.g., a recent observation shows empirical robustness does not saturate
even at ResNet-638 on ImageNet dataset [41].
Alternatively, a growing body of the research has developed methods that can provide certified
robustness [34, 39, 46]. Randomized smoothing [22, 10] is a recent idea in this direction, which
shows that any classifier (e.g., a neural network) that performs well under Gaussian noise can be
“smoothed” into a certifiably robust classifier. This opens a new, scalable notion of adversarial
robustness: a neural network may not have to be perfectly smooth, as a proxy of another classifier.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

