A Scalable MIP-based Method for Learning
Optimal Multivariate Decision Trees

Haoran Zhu, Pavankumar Murali, Dzung T. Phan, Lam M. Nguyen, Jayant R. Kalagnanam
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
haoran@ibm.com, pavanm@us.ibm.com, phandu@us.ibm.com,
LamNguyen.MLTD@ibm.com, jayant@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Several recent publications report advances in training optimal decision trees
(ODT) using mixed-integer programs (MIP), due to algorithmic advances in integer
programming and a growing interest in addressing the inherent suboptimality of
heuristic approaches such as CART. In this paper, we propose a novel MIP formulation, based on a 1-norm support vector machine model, to train a multivariate
ODT for classification problems. We provide cutting plane techniques that tighten
the linear relaxation of the MIP formulation, in order to improve run times to reach
optimality. Using 36 data-sets from the University of California Irvine Machine
Learning Repository, we demonstrate that our formulation outperforms its counterparts in the literature by an average of about 10% in terms of mean out-of-sample
testing accuracy across the data-sets. We provide a scalable framework to train
multivariate ODT on large data-sets by introducing a novel linear programming
(LP) based data selection method to choose a subset of the data for training. Our
method is able to routinely handle large data-sets with more than 7,000 sample
points and outperform heuristics methods and other MIP based techniques. We
present results on data-sets containing up to 245,000 samples. Existing MIP-based
methods do not scale well on training data-sets beyond 5,500 samples.

1

Introduction

Decision tree models have been used extensively in machine learning (ML), mainly due to their
transparency which allows users to derive interpretation on the results. Standard heuristics, such as
CART [6], ID3 [17] and C4.5 [18], help balance gains in accuracy with training times for large-scale
problems. However, these greedy top-down approaches determine the split at each node one-at-a-time
without considering future splits at subsequent nodes. This means that splits at nodes further down
in the tree might affect generalizability due to weak performance. Pruning is typically employed to
address this issue, but this means that the training happens in two steps – first, top-down training
and then pruning to identify better (stronger) splits. A better approach would be a one-shot training
of the entire tree that determines splits at each node with full knowledge of all future splits, while
optimizing, say, the misclassification rate [4]. The obtained decision tree is usually referred to as an
optimal decision tree (ODT) in the literature.
The discrete nature of decisions involved in training a decision tree has inspired researchers in the field
of Operations Research to encode the process using a mixed-integer programming (MIP) framework
[5, 12, 19, 22, 23]. This has been further motivated by algorithmic advances in integer optimization
[4]. An MIP-based ODT training method is able to learn the entire decision tree in a single step,
allowing each branching rule to be determined with full knowledge of all the remaining rules. Papers
on ODT have used optimality criteria such as the average testing length [14], training accuracy, the
combination of training accuracy and model interpretability [4, 13], and the combination of training
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

