Implicit Bias in Deep Linear Classification:
Initialization Scale vs Training Accuracy

Edward Moroshko
edward.moroshko@gmail.com
Technion
Jason D. Lee
jasonlee@princeton.edu
Princeton University

Blake Woodworth
blake@ttic.edu
TTI Chicago
Nathan Srebro
nati@ttic.edu
TTI Chicago

Suriya Gunasekar
suriya@ttic.edu
Microsoft Research

Daniel Soudry
daniel.soudry@gmail.com
Technion

Abstract
We provide a detailed asymptotic study of gradient flow trajectories and their
implicit optimization bias when minimizing the exponential loss over “diagonal
linear networks”. This is the simplest model displaying a transition between
“kernel” and non-kernel (“rich” or “active”) regimes. We show how the transition is
controlled by the relationship between the initialization scale and how accurately
we minimize the training loss. Our results indicate that some limit behaviors
of gradient descent only kick in at ridiculous training accuracies (well beyond
10−100 ). Moreover, the implicit bias at reasonable initialization scales and training
accuracies is more complex and not captured by these limits.

1

Introduction

The optimization trajectory, and in particular the “implicit bias” determining which predictor the
optimization algorithm leads to, plays a crucial role in learning with massively under-determined
models, including deep networks, where many zero-error predictors are possible [e.g., 22, 23, 29, 31].
Indeed, in several models we now understand how rich and natural implicit bias, often inducing
sparsity of some form, can arise when training a multi-layer network with gradient descent [3, 11, 13,
16, 18–20, 29]. This includes low `1 norm [30], sparsity in the frequency domain [13], low nuclear
norm [11, 18], low rank [3, 25], and low higher-order total variations [6]. A different line of works
focuses on how, in a certain regime, the optimization trajectory of neural networks, and hence also
the implicit bias, stays near the initialization and mimics that of a kernelized linear predictor (with the
kernel given by the tangent kernel) [1, 2, 4, 5, 7–9, 14, 17, 32]. In such a “kernel regime” the implicit
bias corresponds to minimizing the norm in some Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS), and
cannot yield the rich sparsity-inducing1 inductive biases discussed above, and is perhaps not as
“adaptive” as one might hope. It is therefore important to understand when and how learning is in the
kernel regime, what hyper-parameters (e.g., initialization, width, etc.) control the transition out and
away from the kernel regime, and how the implicit bias (and thus the inductive bias driving learning)
changes in different regimes and as a function of different hyper-parameters.
Initial work identified the width as a relevant hyper-parameter, where the kernel regime is reached
when the width grows towards infinity [2, 8, 9, 14, 17, 32]. But subsequent work by Chizat et al.
[7] pointed to the initialization scale as the relevant hyper-parameter, showing that models of any
1

Sparsity in an implicit space can also be understood as feature search or “adaptation”. E.g. eigenvalue
sparsity is equivalent to finding features which are linear combinations of input features, and sparsity in the
space of ReLU units [e.g., 26] corresponds to finding new non-linear features.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

