Learning Multi-Agent Communication
through Structured Attentive Reasoning
Murtaza Rangwala
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24060
murtazar@vt.edu

Ryan Williams
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24060
rywilli1@vt.edu

Abstract
Learning communication via deep reinforcement learning has recently been shown
to be an effective way to solve cooperative multi-agent tasks. However, learning
which communicated information is beneficial for each agent’s decision-making
process remains a challenging task. In order to address this problem, we explore
relational reinforcement learning which leverages attention-based networks to learn
efficient and interpretable relations between entities. On the foundation of relations,
we introduce a novel communication architecture that exploits a memory-based
attention network that selectively reasons about the value of information received
from other agents while considering its past experiences. Specifically, the model
communicates by first computing the relevance of messages received from other
agents and then extracts task-relevant information from memories given the newly
received information. We empirically demonstrate the strength of our model in
cooperative and competitive multi-agent tasks, where inter-agent communication
and reasoning over prior information substantially improves performance compared
to baselines. We further show in the accompanying videos and experimental results
that the agents learn a sophisticated and diverse set of cooperative behaviors to
solve challenging tasks, both for discrete and continuous action spaces using onpolicy and off-policy gradient methods. By developing an explicit architecture
that is targeted towards communication, our work aims to open new directions
to overcome important challenges in multi-agent cooperation through learned
communication.
Code available at: https://github.com/caslab-vt/SARNet

1

Introduction

Communication is one of the fundamental building blocks for cooperation in multi-agent systems. Indeed, the ability to effectively represent and communicate information valuable to a task is especially
important in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL). Apart from learning what to communicate, it is critical that agents learn to effectively reason based on the information communicated
to them by their teammates. Such a capability enables agents to develop sophisticated coordination
strategies that would be invaluable in application scenarios such as search-and-rescue for multi-robot
systems [1], swarming and flocking with adversaries [2], multiplayer games such as StarCraft [3] and
DoTA [4], and autonomous vehicle planning [5].
In this work, we explore the concept of building agents that can solve complex cooperative tasks
by answering the question: how do agents learn to effectively communicate and reason in support
of intelligent cooperation? Humans naturally inspire such a question as they exhibit complex
collaboration strategies through a structured reasoning process [6–8], allowing them to recognize,
communicate, and exploit important task information. In the context of multi-agent cooperation,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

