Improving Natural Language Processing Tasks with
Human Gaze-Guided Neural Attention

1

Ekta Sood1 , Simon Tannert2 , Philipp Müller1 , Andreas Bulling1
University of Stuttgart, Institute for Visualization and Interactive Systems (VIS), Germany
2
University of Stuttgart, Institute for Natural Language Processing (IMS), Germany
{ekta.sood, philipp.mueller, andreas.bulling}@vis.uni-stuttgart.de
simon.tannert@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract
A lack of corpora has so far limited advances in integrating human gaze data as a
supervisory signal in neural attention mechanisms for natural language processing
(NLP). We propose a novel hybrid text saliency model (TSM) that, for the first
time, combines a cognitive model of reading with explicit human gaze supervision
in a single machine learning framework. On four different corpora we demonstrate
that our hybrid TSM duration predictions are highly correlated with human gaze
ground truth. We further propose a novel joint modeling approach to integrate TSM
predictions into the attention layer of a network designed for a specific upstream
NLP task without the need for any task-specific human gaze data. We demonstrate
that our joint model outperforms the state of the art in paraphrase generation on
the Quora Question Pairs corpus by more than 10% in BLEU-4 and achieves
state of the art performance for sentence compression on the challenging Google
Sentence Compression corpus. As such, our work introduces a practical approach
for bridging between data-driven and cognitive models and demonstrates a new
way to integrate human gaze-guided neural attention into NLP tasks.

1

Introduction

Neural attention mechanisms have been widely applied in computer vision and have been shown to
enable neural networks to only focus on those aspects of their input that are important for a given
task [48, 81]. While neural networks are able to learn meaningful attention mechanisms using only
supervision received for the target task, the addition of human gaze information has been shown
to be beneficial in many cases [32, 58, 80, 84]. An especially interesting way of leveraging gaze
information was demonstrated by works incorporating human gaze into neural attention mechanisms,
for example for image and video captioning [71, 83] or visual question answering [58].
While attention is at least as important for reading text as it is for viewing images [13, 78], integration
of human gaze into neural attention mechanisms for natural language processing (NLP) tasks remains
under-explored. A major obstacle to studying such integration is data scarcity: Existing corpora of
human gaze during reading consist of too few samples to provide effective supervision for modern
data-intensive architectures and human gaze data is only available for a small number of NLP tasks.
For paraphrase generation and sentence compression, which play an important role for tasks such as
reading comprehension systems [23, 28, 54], no human gaze data is available.
We address this data scarcity in two novel ways: First, to overcome the low number of human
gaze samples for reading, we propose a novel hybrid text saliency model (TSM) in which we
combine a cognitive model of reading behavior with human gaze supervision in a single machine
learning framework. More specifically, we use the E-Z Reader model of attention allocation during
reading [60] to obtain a large number of synthetic training examples. We use these examples to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

