Generating Correct Answers for
Progressive Matrices Intelligence Tests

Niv Pekar
Tel Aviv University

Yaniv Benny
Tel Aviv University

nivpekar@mail.tau.ac.il

yanivbenny@mail.tau.ac.il

Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research
and Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Raven’s Progressive Matrices are multiple-choice intelligence tests, where one
tries to complete the missing location in a 3 × 3 grid of abstract images. Previous
attempts to address this test have focused solely on selecting the right answer out
of the multiple choices. In this work, we focus, instead, on generating a correct
answer given the grid, without seeing the choices, which is a harder task, by
definition. The proposed neural model combines multiple advances in generative
models, including employing multiple pathways through the same network, using
the reparameterization trick along two pathways to make their encoding compatible,
a dynamic application of variational losses, and a complex perceptual loss that is
coupled with a selective backpropagation procedure. Our algorithm is able not only
to generate a set of plausible answers, but also to be competitive to the state of the
art methods in multiple-choice tests.

1

Introduction

Multiple choice questions provide the examinee with the ability to compare the answers, in order to
eliminate some choices, or even guess the correct one. Even when validating the choices one by one,
the examinee can benefit from comparing each choice with the query and infer patterns that would
have been missed otherwise. Indeed, it is the ability to synthesize de-novo answers from the space of
correct answers that is the ultimate test for the understanding of the question.
In this work, we consider the task of generating a correct answer to a Raven Progressive Matrix
(RPM) type of intelligence test [8, 2]. Each query (a single problem) consists of eight images placed
on a grid of size 3 × 3. The task is to generate the missing ninth image, which is on the third row of
the third column, such that it matches the patterns of the rows and columns of the grid.
The method we developed has some similarities to previous methods that recognize the correct answer
out of eight possible choices. These include encoding each image and aggregating these encodings
along rows and columns. However, the synthesis problem demands a new set of solutions.
Our architecture combines three different pathways: reconstruction, recognition, and generation. The
reconstruction pathway provides supervision, that is more accessible to the network when starting
to train, than the other two pathways, which are much more semantic. The recognition pathway
shapes the representation in a way that makes the semantic information more explicit. The generation
pathway, which is the most challenging one, relies on the embedding of the visual representation
from the first task, and on the semantic embedding obtained with the assistance of the second, and
maps the semantic representation of a given query to an image.
In the intersection of the reconstruction and the generation pathways, two embedding distributions
need to become compatible. This is done through variational loss terms on the two paths. Since
there are many different answers for every query, the variational formulation is also used to introduce
randomness. However, since the representation obtained from the generation task is conditioned on a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

