Calibrating Deep Neural Networks using Focal Loss

Jishnu Mukhoti∗
University of Oxford
FiveAI Ltd.
Amartya Sanyal
University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute

Viveka Kulharia∗
University of Oxford

Stuart Golodetz
FiveAI Ltd.

Philip H. S. Torr
University of Oxford
FiveAI Ltd.

Puneet K. Dokania
University of Oxford
FiveAI Ltd.

Abstract
Miscalibration – a mismatch between a model’s confidence and its correctness – of
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) makes their predictions hard to rely on. Ideally,
we want networks to be accurate, calibrated and confident. We show that, as
opposed to the standard cross-entropy loss, focal loss [19] allows us to learn
models that are already very well calibrated. When combined with temperature
scaling, whilst preserving accuracy, it yields state-of-the-art calibrated models.
We provide a thorough analysis of the factors causing miscalibration, and use
the insights we glean from this to justify the empirically excellent performance
of focal loss. To facilitate the use of focal loss in practice, we also provide a
principled approach to automatically select the hyperparameter involved in the loss
function. We perform extensive experiments on a variety of computer vision and
NLP datasets, and with a wide variety of network architectures, and show that our
approach achieves state-of-the-art calibration without compromising on accuracy in
almost all cases. Code is available at https://github.com/torrvision/
focal_calibration.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have dominated computer vision and machine learning in recent years, and
this has led to their widespread deployment in real-world systems [2, 3, 11, 12, 38]. However, many
current multi-class classification networks in particular are poorly calibrated, in the sense that the
probability values that they associate with the class labels they predict overestimate the likelihoods
of those class labels being correct in the real world. This is a major problem, since if networks are
routinely overconfident, then downstream components cannot trust their predictions. The underlying
cause is hypothesised to be that these networks’ high capacity leaves them vulnerable to overfitting
on the negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss they conventionally use during training [7].
Given the importance of this problem, numerous suggestions for how to address it have been proposed.
Much work has been inspired by approaches that were not originally formulated in a deep learning
context, such as Platt scaling [30], histogram binning [40], isotonic regression [41], and Bayesian
binning and averaging [22, 21]. As deep learning has become more dominant, however, various
works have begun to directly target the calibration of deep networks. For example, Guo et al. [7]
have popularised a modern variant of Platt scaling known as temperature scaling, which works by
dividing a network’s logits by a scalar T > 0 (learnt on a validation subset) prior to performing
softmax. Temperature scaling has the desirable property that it can improve the calibration of a
network without in any way affecting its accuracy. However, whilst its simplicity and effectiveness
∗
Joint first authors, order decided by coin flip. Contact: {jishnu, viveka, puneet, phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk,
amartya.sanyal@cs.ox.ac.uk, sgolodetz@gxstudios.net

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

