Measuring Systematic Generalization
in Neural Proof Generation with Transformers
Nicolas Gontier
Quebec Artifical Intelligence Institute (Mila),
Polytechnique Montréal
gontiern@mila.quebec

Koustuv Sinha
Quebec Artifical Intelligence Institute (Mila),
McGill University
Facebook AI Research

Siva Reddy
Quebec Artifical Intelligence Institute (Mila),
McGill University
Facebook CIFAR AI Chair

Christopher Pal
Quebec Artifical Intelligence Institute (Mila),
Polytechnique Montréal
ElementAI
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
We are interested in understanding how well Transformer language models (TLMs)
can perform reasoning tasks when trained on knowledge encoded in the form of
natural language. We investigate their systematic generalization abilities on a logical reasoning task in natural language, which involves reasoning over relationships
between entities grounded in first-order logical proofs. Specifically, we perform
soft theorem-proving by leveraging TLMs to generate natural language proofs.
We test the generated proofs for logical consistency, along with the accuracy of
the final inference. We observe length-generalization issues when evaluated on
longer-than-trained sequences. However, we observe TLMs improve their generalization performance after being exposed to longer, exhaustive proofs. In addition,
we discover that TLMs are able to generalize better using backward-chaining
proofs compared to their forward-chaining counterparts, while they find it easier
to generate forward chaining proofs. We observe that models that are not trained
to generate proofs are better at generalizing to problems based on longer proofs.
This suggests that Transformers have efficient internal reasoning strategies that are
harder to interpret. These results highlight the systematic generalization behavior
of TLMs in the context of logical reasoning, and we believe this work motivates
deeper inspection of their underlying reasoning strategies.

1

Introduction

Systematic Generalization has been characterized as the capacity to understand and produce a potentially infinite number of novel combinations from known components (Chomsky, 1957; Montague,
1970). For example, in Figure 1, a model could be exposed to a set of facts (e.g., “Nat is the granddaughter of Betty”, “Greg is the brother of Nat”, “Flo is the sister of Greg”), but not to all the possible
facts that can be inferred by combination of the known components (e.g., “Flo is the granddaughter
of Betty”). More recent work has examined systematic generalization in terms of the ability of “a
model to manipulate concepts in new combinations after being trained on all concepts, but only on a
limited set of their combinations” (Bahdanau et al., 2019a). This view of systematic generalization
shifts emphasis from reasoning to learning. Here we examine systematic generalization through
measuring the ability of a model to reason about new inference step combinations despite being
trained on a limited subset of them.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

