Uncovering the Topology of Time-Varying fMRI Data
using Cubical Persistence

Bastian Rieck∗
Dept. Biosystems (D-BSSE)
ETH Zurich & Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics, Switzerland

Tristan Yates∗
Dept. of Psychology
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA

bastian.rieck@bsse.ethz.ch

tristan.yates@yale.edu

Christian Bock
Dept. Biosystems (D-BSSE)
ETH Zurich & Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics, Switzerland

Karsten Borgwardt
Dept. Biosystems (D-BSSE)
ETH Zurich & Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics, Switzerland

Guy Wolf
Dept. of Math. and Stat.
Univ. de Montréal; Mila
Montreal, QC, Canada

christian.bock@bsse.ethz.ch

karsten.borgwardt@bsse.ethz.ch

guy.wolf@umontreal.ca

Nicholas Turk-Browne†
Dept. of Psychology
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA

Smita Krishnaswamy†
Depts. of Gene. & Comp. Sci.
Yale University
New Haven, CT, USA

nicholas.turk-browne@yale.edu

smita.krishnaswamy@yale.edu

Abstract
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a crucial technology for gaining
insights into cognitive processes in humans. Data amassed from fMRI measurements result in volumetric data sets that vary over time. However, analysing such
data presents a challenge due to the large degree of noise and person-to-person variation in how information is represented in the brain. To address this challenge, we
present a novel topological approach that encodes each time point in an fMRI data
set as a persistence diagram of topological features, i.e. high-dimensional voids
present in the data. This representation naturally does not rely on voxel-by-voxel
correspondence and is robust to noise. We show that these time-varying persistence diagrams can be clustered to find meaningful groupings between participants,
and that they are also useful in studying within-subject brain state trajectories
of subjects performing a particular task. Here, we apply both clustering and trajectory analysis techniques to a group of participants watching the movie ‘Partly
Cloudy’. We observe significant differences in both brain state trajectories and
overall topological activity between adults and children watching the same movie.

1

Introduction

Human cognitive processes are commonly studied using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), amassing highly complex, well-structured, and time-varying data sets across multiple
individual subjects. fMRI uses blood oxygen measurements of 3D brain volumes divided into voxels,
i.e. 3D pixels with dimensions in the mm range. Voxels are measured over time while participants
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
These authors jointly supervised this work; corresponding authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

