Smoothed Analysis of Online and Differentially
Private Learning

Nika Haghtalab
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
nika@cs.cornell.edu

Tim Roughgarden
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
tr@cs.columbia.edu

Abhishek Shetty
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
shetty@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Practical and pervasive needs for robustness and privacy in algorithms have inspired
the design of online adversarial and differentially private learning algorithms. The
primary quantity that characterizes learnability in these settings is the Littlestone
dimension of the class of hypotheses [Alon et al., 2019, Ben-David et al., 2009].
This characterization is often interpreted as an impossibility result because classes
such as linear thresholds and neural networks have infinite Littlestone dimension.
In this paper, we apply the framework of smoothed analysis [Spielman and Teng,
2004], in which adversarially chosen inputs are perturbed slightly by nature. We
show that fundamentally stronger regret and error guarantees are possible with
smoothed adversaries than with worst-case adversaries. In particular, we obtain
regret and privacy error bounds that depend only on the VC dimension and the
bracketing number of a hypothesis class, and on the magnitudes of the perturbations.

1

Introduction

Robustness to changes in the data and protecting the privacy of data are two of the main challenges
faced by machine learning and have led to the design of online and differentially private learning
algorithms. While offline PAC learnability is characterized by the finiteness of VC dimension,
online and differentially private learnability are both characterized by the finiteness of the Littlestone
dimension [Alon et al., 2019, Ben-David et al., 2009, Bun et al., 2020]. This latter characterization
is often interpreted as an impossibility result for achieving robustness and privacy on worst-case
instances, especially in classification where even simple hypothesis classes such as 1-dimensional
thresholds have constant VC dimension but infinite Littlestone dimension.
Impossibility results for worst-case adversaries do not invalidate the original goals of robust and
private learning with respect to practically relevant hypothesis classes; rather, they indicate that a
new model is required to provide rigorous guidance on the design of online and differentially private
learning algorithms. In this work, we go beyond worst-case analysis and design online learning
algorithms and differentially private learning algorithms as good as their offline and non-private
PAC learning counterparts in a realistic semi-random model of data.
Inspired by smoothed analysis [Spielman and Teng, 2004], we introduce frameworks for online and
differentially private learning in which adversarially chosen inputs are perturbed slightly by nature
(reflecting, e.g., measurement errors or uncertainty). Equivalently, we consider an adversary restricted
to choose an input distribution that is not overly concentrated, with the realized input then drawn
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

