Neural Mesh Flow: 3D Manifold Mesh Generation
via Diffeomorphic Flows

Kunal Gupta Manmohan Chandraker
University of California, San Diego
{k5gupta, mkchandraker}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Meshes are important representations of physical 3D entities in the virtual world.
Applications like rendering, simulations and 3D printing require meshes to be
manifold so that they can interact with the world like the real objects they represent.
Prior methods generate meshes with great geometric accuracy but poor manifoldness. In this work we propose Neural Mesh Flow (NMF) to generate two-manifold
meshes for genus-0 shapes. Specifically, NMF is a shape auto-encoder consisting
of several Neural Ordinary Differential Equation (NODE)[1] blocks that learn
accurate mesh geometry by progressively deforming a spherical mesh. Training
NMF is simpler compared to state-of-the-art methods since it does not require any
explicit mesh-based regularization. Our experiments demonstrate that NMF faciliates several applications such as single-view mesh reconstruction, global shape
parameterization, texture mapping, shape deformation and correspondence. Importantly, we demonstrate that manifold meshes generated using NMF are better-suited
for physically-based rendering and simulation. Code and data are released.1

1

Introduction

Polygon meshes allow an efficient virtual representation of 3D objects, enabling applications in
graphics rendering, simulations, modeling and manufacturing. Consequently, mesh generation or
reconstruction from images or point sets has received significant recent attention. While prior
approaches have primarily focused on obtaining geometrically accurate reconstructions, we posit that
physically-based applications require meshes to also satisfy manifold properties. Intuitively, a mesh
is manifold if it can be physically realized, for example, by 3D printing. Typically, reconstructed
meshes are post-processed with humans in the loop for manifoldness, in order to enable ray tracing,
slicing or Boolean operations. In contrast, we propose a novel deep network that directly generates
manifold meshes (Fig. 1), alleviating the need for manual post-processing.
A manifold is a topological space that locally resembles Euclidean space in the neighbourhood of each
point. A manifold mesh is a discretization of the manifold using a disjoint set of simple 2D polygons,
such as triangles, which allows designing simulations, rendering and other manifold calculations.
While a mesh data structure can simply be defined as a set (V, E, F) of vertices V and corresponding
edges E or face F, not every mesh (V, E, F) is manifold. Mathematically, we list various constraints
on a singly connected mesh with the set (V, E, F) that enables manifoldness2 .
• Each edge e ∈ E is common to exactly 2 faces in F (Fig. 2a)
• Each vertex v ∈ V is shared by exactly one group of connected faces (Fig. 2b)
• Adjacent faces Fi , Fj have normals oriented in same direction (Fig. 2c)
1

https://kunalmgupta.github.io/projects/NeuralMeshflow.html and try our colab notebook.
In the scope of this work, meshes do not exhibit defects like duplicate elements, isolated vertices, degenerate
faces and inner surfaces that can also cause a mesh to be non-manifold.
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

