Stochastic Segmentation Networks:
Modelling Spatially Correlated Aleatoric Uncertainty

Miguel Monteiro
Imperial College London
mm6818@ic.ac.uk

Loïc Le Folgoc
Imperial College London
llefolgo@ic.ac.uk

Daniel Coelho de Castro
Imperial College London
dc315@ic.ac.uk

Nick Pawlowski
Imperial College London
np716@ic.ac.uk

Bernardo Marques
Imperial College London
bgmarque@ic.ac.uk

Konstantinos Kamnitsas
Imperial College London
kk2412@ic.ac.uk

Mark van der Wilk
Imperial College London
m.vdwilk@ic.ac.uk

Ben Glocker
Imperial College London
b.glocker@ic.ac.uk

Abstract
In image segmentation, there is often more than one plausible solution for a given
input. In medical imaging, for example, experts will often disagree about the
exact location of object boundaries. Estimating this inherent uncertainty and
predicting multiple plausible hypotheses is of great interest in many applications,
yet this ability is lacking in most current deep learning methods. In this paper,
we introduce stochastic segmentation networks (SSNs), an efficient probabilistic
method for modelling aleatoric uncertainty with any image segmentation network
architecture. In contrast to approaches that produce pixel-wise estimates, SSNs
model joint distributions over entire label maps and thus can generate multiple
spatially coherent hypotheses for a single image. By using a low-rank multivariate
normal distribution over the logit space to model the probability of the label map
given the image, we obtain a spatially consistent probability distribution that can
be efficiently computed by a neural network without any changes to the underlying
architecture. We tested our method on the segmentation of real-world medical
data, including lung nodules in 2D CT and brain tumours in 3D multimodal MRI
scans. SSNs outperform state-of-the-art for modelling correlated uncertainty in
ambiguous images while being much simpler, more flexible, and more efficient.1

1

Introduction

The task of semantic image segmentation is a highly structured prediction problem where the output
label maps should capture the spatial consistency of the objects to be segmented. While casting
image segmentation as a dense pixel-wise classification task is at the heart of most machine learning
approaches [1–3], this paradigm largely ignores the underlying spatial structure. Methods will often
rely on inductive biases to capture structure as opposed to modelling it directly. While this approach
may yield reasonable, single deterministic predictions, it is insufficient to model the underlying
distribution over multiple plausible outputs. In image segmentation, there is often more than one
plausible solution for a given input. The exact location of object boundaries is often ambiguous, and
ideally, the model should be able to capture this inherent uncertainty.
1

Code available at: https://github.com/biomedia-mira/stochastic_segmentation_networks

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

