BayReL: Bayesian Relational Learning for
Multi-omics Data Integration

Ehsan Hajiramezanali∗, Arman Hasanzadeh∗ , Nick Duffield, Krishna Narayanan,
Xiaoning Qian
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University
{ehsanr, armanihm, duffieldng, krn, xqian}@tamu.edu

Abstract
High-throughput molecular profiling technologies have produced high-dimensional
multi-omics data, enabling systematic understanding of living systems at the
genome scale. Studying molecular interactions across different data types helps
reveal signal transduction mechanisms across different classes of molecules. In
this paper, we develop a novel Bayesian representation learning method that infers
the relational interactions across multi-omics data types. Our method, Bayesian
Relational Learning (BayReL) for multi-omics data integration, takes advantage
of a priori known relationships among the same class of molecules, modeled as a
graph at each corresponding view, to learn view-specific latent variables as well as
a multi-partite graph that encodes the interactions across views. Our experiments
on several real-world datasets demonstrate enhanced performance of BayReL in
inferring meaningful interactions compared to existing baselines.

1

Introduction

Modern high-throughput molecular profiling technologies have produced rich high-dimensional data
for different bio-molecules at the genome, constituting genome, transcriptome, translatome, proteome,
metabolome, epigenome, and interactome scales [Huang et al., 2017, Hajiramezanali et al., 2018b,
2019b, Karimi et al., 2020, Pakbin et al., 2018]. Although such multi-view (multi-omics) data span a
diverse range of cellular activities, developing an understanding of how these data types quantitatively
relate to each other and to phenotypic characteristics remains elusive. Life and disease systems
are highly non-linear, dynamic, and heterogeneous due to complex interactions not only within the
same classes of molecules but also across different classes [Andrés-León et al., 2017]. One of the
most important bioinformatics tasks when analyzing such multi-omics data is how we may integrate
multiple data types for deriving better insights into the underlying biological mechanisms. Due to the
heterogeneity and high-dimensional nature of multi-omics data, it is necessary to develop effective
and affordable learning methods for their integration and analysis [Huang et al., 2017, Hajiramezanali
et al., 2018a].
Modeling data across two views with the goal of extracting shared components has been typically
performed by canonical correlation analysis (CCA). Given two random vectors, CCA aims to find
the linear projections into a shared latent space for which the projected vectors are maximally
correlated, which can help understand the overall dependency structure between these two random
vectors [Thompson, 1984]. However, it is well known that the classical CCA suffers from a lack of
probabilistic interpretation when applied to high dimensional data [Klami et al., 2013] and it also
cannot handle non-linearity [Andrew et al., 2013]. To address these issues, probabilistic CCA (PCCA)
has been proposed and extended to non-linear settings using kernel methods and neural networks
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

