Learning from Label Proportions:
A Mutual Contamination Framework
Clayton Scott and Jianxin Zhang
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{clayscot,jianxinz}@umich.edu

Abstract
Learning from label proportions (LLP) is a weakly supervised setting for classification in which unlabeled training instances are grouped into bags, and each bag
is annotated with the proportion of each class occurring in that bag. Prior work
on LLP has yet to establish a consistent learning procedure, nor does there exist a
theoretically justified, general purpose training criterion. In this work we address
these two issues by posing LLP in terms of mutual contamination models (MCMs),
which have recently been applied successfully to study various other weak supervision settings. In the process, we establish several novel technical results for MCMs,
including unbiased losses and generalization error bounds under non-iid sampling
plans. We also point out the limitations of a common experimental setting for LLP,
and propose a new one based on our MCM framework.

1

Introduction

Learning from label proportions (LLP) is a weak supervision setting for classification in which
training data come in the form of bags. Each bag contains unlabeled instances and is annotated with
the proportion of instances arising from each class. Various methods for LLP have been developed,
including those based on support vector machines and related models [28, 39, 38, 26, 8, 18, 32],
Bayesian and graphical models [17, 14, 35, 25, 15], deep learning [19, 1, 12, 20, 36], clustering
[6, 34], and random forests [33]. In addition, LLP has found various applications including image
and video analysis [7, 18], high energy physics [9], vote prediction [35], remote sensing [19, 10],
medical image analysis [4], activity recognition [25], and reproductive medicine [15].
Despite the emergence of LLP as a prominent weak learning paradigm, the theoretical underpinnings
of LLP have been slow to develop. In particular, prior work has not established an algorithm for LLP
that is consistent with respect to a classification performance measure. Furthermore, there does not
even exist a general-purpose, theoretically grounded empirical objective for training LLP classifiers.
We propose a statistical framework for LLP based on mutual contamination models (MCMs), which
have been used previously as models for classification with noisy labels and other weak supervision
problems [30, 2, 21, 3, 16]. We use this framework to motivate a principled empirical objective for
LLP, prove generalization error bounds associated to two bag generation models, and establish universal consistency with respect to the balanced error rate (BER). The MCM framework further motivates
a novel experimental setting that overcomes a limitation of earlier experimental comparisons.
Related Work. Quadrianto et al. [27] study an exponential family model for labels given features,
and show that the model is characterized by a certain “mean map" parameter that can be estimated
in the LLP setting. They also provide Rademacher complexity bounds for the mean map and the
associated log-posterior, but do not address a classification performance measure. Patrini et al. [24]
extend the work of [27] in several ways, including a generalization error bound on the risk of a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

