MultiON: Benchmarking Semantic Map Memory
using Multi-Object Navigation

Saim Wani1∗ Shivansh Patel1,3∗ Unnat Jain2∗ Angel X. Chang3
1

IIT Kanpur

2

UIUC

3

Manolis Savva3

Simon Fraser University

https://shivanshpatel35.github.io/multi-ON/

Abstract
Navigation tasks in photorealistic 3D environments are challenging because they
require perception and effective planning under partial observability. Recent
work shows that map-like memory is useful for long-horizon navigation tasks.
However, a focused investigation of the impact of maps on navigation tasks of
varying complexity has not yet been performed. We propose the multiON task,
which requires navigation to an episode-specific sequence of objects in a realistic
environment. MultiON generalizes the ObjectGoal navigation task [2, 52] and
explicitly tests the ability of navigation agents to locate previously observed goal
objects. We perform a set of multiON experiments to examine how a variety of
agent models perform across a spectrum of navigation task complexities. Our
experiments show that: i) navigation performance degrades dramatically with
escalating task complexity; ii) a simple semantic map agent performs surprisingly
well relative to more complex neural image feature map agents; and iii) even oracle
map agents achieve relatively low performance, indicating the potential for future
work in training embodied navigation agents using maps.

1

Introduction

Recent work on embodied AI agents has made tremendous progress on tasks such as visual navigation [25, 39, 52], embodied question answering [20, 44], and natural language instruction following [3]. This progress has been enabled by the availability of realistic 3D environments and software
platforms that simulate navigation tasks within such data [32, 38, 39, 47]. Large-scale training has led
to near-perfect agent performance for basic visual navigation tasks under certain assumptions [45].
At the same time, memory has emerged as a key bottleneck for further progress in longer-horizon
tasks. Embodied navigation agents are surprisingly brittle, with complete failure being common when
the path to be navigated and number of locations to be visited is modestly increased [3, 39, 45]. In
response, much prior work has incorporated some form of map-like memory to aid performance in
longer-horizon tasks [8, 15, 22, 25–27, 35, 37, 51]. This prior work has mostly focused on proposing
approaches for constructing the maps from partial observations of the environment, and architectures
for leveraging the map representation. Though map-like memory structures need not be optimal
for learning-based agents, they bring the advantage of a widely-used spatial abstraction and human
interpretability. They also impose inductive bias tied to the structure of interiors that have been shown
to outperform implicit memory architectures in a variety of navigation tasks [7, 13–15].
We focus on studying what information is useful in maps, under perfect agent localization and map
aggregation. This is in contrast with prior work which focuses on how to aggregate information under
∗

denotes equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

