Robust Recursive Partitioning for Heterogeneous
Treatment Effects with Uncertainty Quantification

Hyun-Suk Lee∗
Sejong University
hyunsuk@sejong.ac.kr
Cong Shen
University of Virginia
cong@virginia.edu

Yao Zhang∗
University of Cambridge
yz555@cam.ac.uk
Jang-Won Lee
Yonsei University
jangwon@yonsei.ac.kr

William R. Zame
UCLA
zame@econ.ucla.edu
Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
UCLA
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Subgroup analysis of treatment effects plays an important role in applications
from medicine to public policy to recommender systems. It allows physicians
(for example) to identify groups of patients for whom a given drug or treatment is
likely to be effective and groups of patients for which it is not. Most of the current
methods of subgroup analysis begin with a particular algorithm for estimating
individualized treatment effects (ITE) and identify subgroups by maximizing the
differences across subgroups of the average treatment effect in each subgroup.
These approaches have several weaknesses: they rely on a particular algorithm
for estimating ITE, they ignore (in)homogeneity within identified subgroups, and
they do not produce good confidence estimates. This paper develops a new method
for subgroup analysis, R2P, that addresses all these weaknesses. R2P uses an
arbitrary, exogenously prescribed algorithm for estimating ITE and quantifies the
uncertainty of the ITE estimation, using a construction that is more robust than
other methods. Experiments using synthetic and semi-synthetic datasets (based
on real data) demonstrate that R2P constructs partitions that are simultaneously
more homogeneous within groups and more heterogeneous across groups than the
partitions produced by other methods. Moreover, because R2P can employ any ITE
estimator, it also produces much narrower confidence intervals with a prescribed
coverage guarantee than other methods.

1

Introduction

The understanding of treatment effects plays an important role – especially in shaping interventions
and treatments – in areas from clinical trials [1, 2] to recommender systems [3] to public policy [4].
In many settings, the relevant population is diverse, and different parts of the population display
different reactions to treatment. In such settings, heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE) analysis – also
called subgroup analysis– is used to find subgroups consisting of subjects who have similar covariates
and display similar treatment responses [5, 6]. The identification of subgroups is informative of
itself; it also improves the interpretation of treatment effects across the entire population and makes it
possible to develop more effective interventions and treatments and to improve the design of further
experiments. In a clinical trial, for example, HTE analysis can identify subgroups of the population
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

