Agree to Disagree: Adaptive Ensemble Knowledge
Distillation in Gradient Space

Shangchen Du1∗ Shan You2,3∗† Xiaojie Li2 Jianlong Wu4,5† ,
Fei Wang2 Chen Qian2 Changshui Zhang3,6,7
1
School of EECS, Peking University 2 SenseTime
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University 5 Zhejiang Laboratory
6
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI)
7
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
dushangchen@pku.edu.cn, {youshan,lixiaojie,wangfei,qianchen}@sensetime.com,
jlwu1992@sdu.edu.cn, zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Distilling knowledge from an ensemble of teacher models is expected to have a
more promising performance than that from a single one. Current methods mainly
adopt a vanilla average rule, i.e., to simply take the average of all teacher losses
for training the student network. However, this approach treats teachers equally
and ignores the diversity among them. When conflicts or competitions exist among
teachers, which is common, the inner compromise might hurt the distillation
performance. In this paper, we examine the diversity of teacher models in the
gradient space and regard the ensemble knowledge distillation as a multi-objective
optimization problem so that we can determine a better optimization direction for
the training of student network. Besides, we also introduce a tolerance parameter
to accommodate disagreement among teachers. In this way, our method can be
seen as a dynamic weighting method for each teacher in the ensemble. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness of our method for both logits-based and
feature-based cases.

1

Introduction

Recently, deploying deep neural networks on edge devices has appealed much attention due to their
achieved success in various tasks [32, 19, 36, 34, 13, 35, 33, 15, 38]. For the sake of the limited
computational budget, light yet promising networks are thus favored. With this aim, efforts have
been made to design more compact networks, compress or prune a pretrained model [28, 29] or even
search for a tiny backbone network [37, 39]. Inspired by the teacher-student paradigm [17, 40, 42] in
human education, knowledge distillation (KD) [9] serves as a complementary method to further boost
the performance of a small student network by distilling the knowledge from a large teacher network.
Concretely, (softened) logits of the student network are usually encouraged to mimic those of the
teacher network. Besides, some approaches also implement distillation on the intermediate features
via various manners, such as hints [22], distribution of features [10] and local correlations [14].
Two heads are better than one. Instead of leveraging a single teacher network, distilling knowledge
from an ensemble of teacher networks is supposed to achieve more promising performance. In real
life, students can learn better following multiple teachers, which is also true for ensemble learning
∗
†

Equal contributions. Work was done during Du’s internship at SenseTime.
Corresponding authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

