Self-Adaptively Learning to Demoiré from Focused
and Defocused Image Pairs

Lin Liu1,2 Shanxin Yuan2∗ Jianzhuang Liu2 Liping Bao1 Gregory Slabaugh2 Qi Tian3
1

EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
Huawei Cloud BU

2

{ll0825,baoliping}mail.ustc.edu.cn {shanxin.yuan, liu.jianzhuang, gregory.slabaugh, tian.qi1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Moiré artifacts are common in digital photography, resulting from the interference
between high-frequency scene content and the color filter array of the camera.
Existing deep learning-based demoiréing methods trained on large scale datasets
are limited in handling various complex moiré patterns, and mainly focus on
demoiréing of photos taken of digital displays. Moreover, obtaining moiré-free
ground-truth in natural scenes is difficult but needed for training. In this paper, we
propose a self-adaptive learning method for demoiréing a high-frequency image,
with the help of an additional defocused moiré-free blur image. Given an image
degraded with moiré artifacts and a moiré-free blur image, our network predicts
a moiré-free clean image and a blur kernel with a self-adaptive strategy that does
not require an explicit training stage, instead performing test-time adaptation.
Our model has two sub-networks and works iteratively. During each iteration,
one sub-network takes the moiré image as input, removing moiré patterns and
restoring image details, and the other sub-network estimates the blur kernel from
the blur image. The two sub-networks are jointly optimized. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods and can produce
high-quality demoiréd results. It can generalize well to the task of removing moiré
artifacts caused by display screens. In addition, we build a new moiré dataset,
including images with screen and texture moiré artifacts. As far as we know, this is
the first dataset with real texture moiré patterns.

1

Introduction

Image demoiréing is the task of removing moiré patterns from images, taken by digital cameras
from screens or from natural images with high-frequency patterns. Moiré artifacts are caused by the
interference between the color filter array (CFA) of a camera and high-frequency repetitive signals,
which can result from an LCD screen’s subpixel layout or a natural scene’s high-frequency repetitive
patterns (e.g., textures on clothes). Image demoiréing is challenging as the moiré patterns vary in
shape, color, and frequency. Existing deep learning based demoiréing models [39, 20, 12, 50, 24] rely
heavily on training with large amounts of annotated clean and moiré image pairs in order to obtain
good performance. However, the models are still limited in handling various complex moiré patterns.
Moreover, these models are restricted to perform demoiréing of images captured from screens, having
difficulty in removing moiré artifacts from natural images.
Lack of high-quality training data also limits the performance of supervised methods. There are two
public datasets for screen image demoiréing, which are TIP2018 dataset [39] and LCDMoire dataset
[46, 47]. TIP2018 is a real dataset with slight misalignment between each image pair and LCDMoire
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

