A Novel Approach for Constrained Optimization in
Graphical Models

Sara Rouhani, Tahrima Rahman and Vibhav Gogate
The University of Texas at Dallas
{sara.rouhani,tahrima.rahman,vibhav.gogate}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
We consider the following constrained maximization problem in discrete probabilistic graphical models (PGMs). Given two (possibly identical) PGMs M1 and
M2 defined over the same set of variables and a real number q, find an assignment
of values to all variables such that the probability of the assignment is maximized
w.r.t. M1 and is smaller than q w.r.t. M2 . We show that several explanation and
robust estimation queries over graphical models are special cases of this problem.
We propose a class of approximate algorithms for solving this problem. Our algorithms are based on a graph concept called k-separator and heuristic algorithms for
multiple choice knapsack and subset-sum problems. Our experiments show that
our algorithms are superior to the following approach: encode the problem as a
mixed integer linear program (MILP) and solve the latter using a state-of-the-art
MILP solver such as SCIP.

1

Introduction

This paper is about solving the following combinatorial optimization problem: given a set of discrete
random variables X and two possibly identical probabilistic graphical models (cf. [7, 20]) or log-linear
models defined over X, find the most likely assignment to all variables w.r.t. one of the log-linear
models such that the weight (or probability) of the assignment is smaller than a real number q w.r.t.
the second model. We call this task constrained most probable explanation (CMPE) problem. CMPE
is NP-hard in the strong sense and thus it cannot have a fully polynomial time approximation scheme
(or FPTAS) unless P = NP. However, it is only weakly NP-hard when the log-linear models exhibit
certain properties such as their features are conditionally independent of each other (e.g., Naive Bayes,
Logistic Regression, etc.) or all connected components in the two models have bounded number of
variables (e.g., small-world graphs [33]) or both given a small subset of variables. We exploit this
weak NP-hardness property to develop approximation algorithms for CMPE.
We are interested in solving the CMPE problem because several estimation, prediction and explanation
tasks can be reduced to CMPE. For example, the nearest assignment problem (NAP) [30]—a problem
that is related to the nearest neighbors problem—which requires us to find an assignment of values
to all variables such that the probability of the assignment is as close as possible to an input value
q, can be reduced to CMPE. Similarly, the problem of computing the most likely assignment to all
unobserved variables given evidence such that a log-linear model makes a particular (single class or
multi-label) classification decision can be reduced to CMPE. This problem is the optimization analog
of the same decision probability problem [5, 6, 29]. Other problems that reduce to CMPE include
finding diverse m-best most probable explanations [1, 12], the order statistics problem [32] and the
adversarial most probable explanation problem.
We propose a novel approach that combines graph-based partitioning techniques with approximation
algorithms developed in the multiple choice knapsack problem (MCKP) literature [22, 27, 31] for
solving CMPE. MCKP is a generalization of the 0/1 knapsack problem in which you are given a
knapsack with capacity q and several items which are partitioned into bins such that each item is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

