Convex optimization based on global lower
second-order models
Nikita Doikov∗
Catholic University of Louvain,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
Nikita.Doikov@uclouvain.be

Yurii Nesterov†
Catholic University of Louvain,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
Yurii.Nesterov@uclouvain.be

Abstract
In this paper, we present new second-order algorithms for composite convex
optimization, called Contracting-domain Newton methods. These algorithms are
affine-invariant and based on global second-order lower approximation for the
smooth component of the objective. Our approach has an interpretation both as a
second-order generalization of the conditional gradient method, or as a variant of
trust-region scheme. Under the assumption, that the problem domain is bounded,
we prove O(1/k 2 ) global rate of convergence in functional residual, where k is the
iteration counter, minimizing convex functions with Lipschitz continuous Hessian.
This significantly improves the previously known bound O(1/k) for this type of
algorithms. Additionally, we propose a stochastic extension of our method, and
present computational results for solving empirical risk minimization problem.

1

Introduction

Classical Newton method is one of the most popular optimization schemes for solving ill-conditioned
problems. The method has very fast quadratic convergence, provided that the starting point is
sufficiently close to the optimum [3, 22, 31]. However, the questions related to its global behaviour
for a wide class of functions are still open, being in the area of active research.
The significant progress in this direction was made after [33], where Cubic regularization of Newton
method with its global complexity bounds were justified. The main idea of [33] is to use a global upper
approximation model of the objective, which is the second-order Taylor’s polynomial augmented
by a cubic term. The next point in the iteration process is defined as the minimizer of this model.
Cubic Newton attains global convergence for convex functions with Lipschitz continuous Hessian.
The rate of convergence in functional residual is of the order O(1/k 2 ) (here and later on, k is the
iteration counter). This is much faster than the classical O(1/k) rate of the Gradient Method [31].
Later on, accelerated [27], adaptive [7, 8] and universal [17, 12, 18] second-order schemes based on
cubic regularization were developed. Randomized versions of Cubic Newton, suitable for solving
high-dimensional problems were proposed in [13, 19].
Another line of results on global convergence of Newton method is mainly related to the framework
of self-concordant functions [32, 31]. This class is affine-invariant. From the global perspective,
it provides us with an upper second-order approximation of the objective, which naturally leads
to the Damped Newton Method. Several new results are related to its analysis for generalized
self-concordant functions [2, 38], and the notion of Hessian stability [23]. However, for more
refined problem classes, we can often obtain much better complexity estimates, by using the cubic
regularization technique [14].
∗
†

Institute of Information and Communication Technologies, Electronics and Applied Mathematics (ICTEAM)
Center for Operations Research and Econometrics (CORE)

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

