GAIT-prop: A biologically plausible learning rule
derived from backpropagation of error

Nasir Ahmad Marcel van Gerven Luca Ambrogioni
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
{n.ahmad,m.vangerven,l.ambrogioni}@donders.ru.nl

Abstract
Traditional backpropagation of error, though a highly successful algorithm for
learning in artificial neural network models, includes features which are biologically implausible for learning in real neural circuits. An alternative called target
propagation proposes to solve this implausibility by using a top-down model of
neural activity to convert an error at the output of a neural network into layer-wise
and plausible ‘targets’ for every unit. These targets can then be used to produce
weight updates for network training. However, thus far, target propagation has been
heuristically proposed without demonstrable equivalence to backpropagation. Here,
we derive an exact correspondence between backpropagation and a modified form
of target propagation (GAIT-prop) where the target is a small perturbation of the
forward pass. Specifically, backpropagation and GAIT-prop give identical updates
when synaptic weight matrices are orthogonal. In a series of simple computer
vision experiments, we show near-identical performance between backpropagation
and GAIT-prop with a soft orthogonality-inducing regularizer.

1

Introduction

One of the fundamental tenets of modern systems neuroscience is that the brain learns by selectively
strengthening and weakening synaptic connections. Much research in theoretical neuroscience was
guided by the Hebbian principle of strengthening connections between co-active neurons [1–3]. However, it appears that purely Hebbian learning rules may not be effective at learning complex behavioral
tasks. In the last fifteen years, the fields of machine learning and AI have been revolutionized by
the large-scale adoption of deep networks trained by backpropagation (BP) [4–6]. Deep networks
have been shown to mimic the hierarchy of cortical representations [7–9], suggesting a connection
between deep learning and the brain. However, BP has since long been considered as biologically
implausible [10], based in part on its use of non-local information at individual synapses which carry
out weight updates. How such information could be stored, transmitted and leveraged has been a
cause for concern [10, 11].
To overcome these implausible aspects of the BP algorithm, approaches have been proposed to
approximate or replace implausible computations with more realistic and plausible elements [12–
16]. Alternatively methods which approximate backpropagation through energy-based models have
also been proposed [17–20]. Among those methods, contrastive Hebbian learning, and generalized
recirculation have been shown to produce BP-equivalent updates under specific regimes [18, 21],
though these methods require a, rather artificial, alternation between positive and negative phases in
order to compute updates.
Target Propagation (TP) is a simpler and more scalable approach which proposes that the loss function
at the output layer be replaced with layer-wise, local target activities for individual neurons [22, 23],
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

