A Generalized Neural Tangent Kernel Analysis for
Two-layer Neural Networks

Zixiang Chen
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
chenzx19@cs.ucla.edu
Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Yuan Cao
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
yuancao@cs.ucla.edu
Tong Zhang
Dept. of Computer Science & Mathematics
Hong Kong Univ. of Science & Technology
Hong Kong, China
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
A recent breakthrough in deep learning theory shows that the training of overparameterized deep neural networks can be characterized by a kernel function
called neural tangent kernel (NTK). However, it is known that this type of results
does not perfectly match the practice, as NTK-based analysis requires the network
weights to stay very close to their initialization throughout training, and cannot
handle regularizers or gradient noises. In this paper, we provide a generalized
neural tangent kernel analysis and show that noisy gradient descent with weight
decay can still exhibit a “kernel-like” behavior. This implies that the training loss
converges linearly up to a certain accuracy. We also establish a novel generalization
error bound for two-layer neural networks trained by noisy gradient descent with
weight decay.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved tremendous practical success in a wide range of machine learning tasks
[21, 19, 34]. However, due to the nonconvex and over-parameterized nature of modern neural
networks, the success of deep learning cannot be fully explained by conventional optimization and
machine learning theory.
A recent line of work studies the learning of over-parameterized neural networks in the so-called
“neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime” [20]. It has been shown that the training of over-parameterized
deep neural networks can be characterized by the training dynamics of kernel regression with
the neural tangent kernel (NTK). Based on this, fast convergence rates can be proved for overparameterized neural networks trained with randomly initialized (stochastic) gradient descent [16, 2,
15, 39, 40]. Moreover, it has also been shown that target functions in the NTK-induced reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) can be learned by wide enough neural networks with good generalization
error [3, 4, 10].
Despite having beautiful theoretical results, the NTK-based results are known to have their limitations,
for not perfectly matching the empirical observations in many aspects. Specifically, NTK-based
analysis requires that the network weights stay very close to their initialization in the “node-wise”
`2 distance throughout the training. Moreover, due to this requirement, NTK-based analysis cannot
handle regularizers such as weight decay, or large additive noises in the noisy gradient descent.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

