An analytic theory of shallow networks dynamics for
hinge loss classification

Franco Pellegrini
Laboratoire de Physique de l’École normale supérieure, ENS,
Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris
F-75005 Paris, France
franco.pellegrini@phys.ens.fr
Giulio Biroli
Laboratoire de Physique de l’École normale supérieure, ENS,
Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris
F-75005 Paris, France

Abstract
Neural networks have been shown to perform incredibly well in classification tasks
over structured high-dimensional datasets. However, the learning dynamics of such
networks is still poorly understood. In this paper we study in detail the training
dynamics of a simple type of neural network: a single hidden layer trained to
perform a classification task. We show that in a suitable mean-field limit this case
maps to a single-node learning problem with a time-dependent dataset determined
self-consistently from the average nodes population. We specialize our theory to
the prototypical case of a linearly separable data and a linear hinge loss, for which
the dynamics can be explicitly solved in the infinite dataset limit. This allows us to
address in a simple setting several phenomena appearing in modern networks such
as slowing down of training dynamics, crossover between rich and lazy learning,
and overfitting. Finally, we assess the limitations of mean-field theory by studying
the case of large but finite number of nodes and of training samples.

1

Introduction

Despite their proven ability to tackle a large class of complex problems [1], neural networks are
still poorly understood from a theoretical point of view. While general theorems prove them to be
universal approximators [2], their ability to obtain generalizing solutions given a finite set of examples
remains largely unexplained. This behavior has been observed in multiple settings. The huge number
of parameters and the optimization algorithms employed to optimize them (gradient descent and its
variations) are thought to play key roles in it [3–5].
In consequence, a large research effort has been devoted in recent years to understanding the training
dynamics of neural networks with a very large number of nodes [6–8]. Much theoretical insight has
been gained in the training dynamics of linear [9, 10] and nonlinear networks for regression problems,
often with quadratic loss and in a teacher-student setting [11–14], highlighting the evolution of
correlations between data and network outputs. More generally, the input-output correlation and its
effect on the landscape has been used to show the effectiveness of gradient descent [15, 16]. Other
approaches have focused on infinitely wide networks to perform a mean-field analysis of the weights
dynamics [17–22], or study its neural tangent kernel (NTK, or “lazy”) limit [23–26].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

