Curriculum Learning by Dynamic Instance Hardness
Tianyi Zhou1⇤, Shengjie Wang1⇤, Jeff A. Bilmes2
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering1 ,
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering2 , University of Washington, Seattle
{tianyizh, wangsj, bilmes}@uw.edu

Abstract
A good teacher can adjust a curriculum based on students’ learning history. By
analogy, in this paper, we study the dynamics of a deep neural network’s (DNN)
performance on individual samples during its learning process. The observed
properties allow us to develop an adaptive curriculum that leads to faster learning
of more accurate models. We introduce dynamic instance hardness (DIH), the
exponential moving average of a sample’s instantaneous hardness (e.g., a loss, or
a change in output) over the training history. A low DIH indicates that a model
retains knowledge about a sample over time. For DNNs, we find that a sample’s
DIH early in training predicts its DIH in later stages. Hence, we can train a model
using samples mostly with higher DIH and safely deprioritize those with lower
DIH. This motivates a DIH guided curriculum learning (DIHCL) procedure.
Compared to existing CL methods: (1) DIH is more stable over time than using
only instantaneous hardness, which is noisy due to stochastic training and DNN’s
non-smoothness; (2) DIHCL is computationally inexpensive since it uses only
a byproduct of back-propagation and thus does not require extra inference. On
11 datasets, DIHCL significantly outperforms random mini-batch SGD and recent
CL methods in terms of efficiency and final performance. The code of DIHCL
is available at https://github.com/tianyizhou/DIHCL.

1

Introduction

A curriculum plays an important role in human learning. Given different curricula of the same
training materials, students’ learning efficiency and performance can vary drastically. A good teacher
is able to choose the contents of the next stage of learning according to a student’s past performance.
Analogously, in machine learning, instead of training the model with a random sequence of data,
recent work in curriculum learning (CL) [4, 25, 17, 52, 13] shows that manipulating the sequence of
training data can improve both training efficiency and model accuracy. In each epoch, CL selects a
subset of training samples based on the difficulty and/or the informativeness of each sample — this is
usually measured using instantaneous feedback from the model (e.g., the loss). CL then uses only
these samples to update the model. Inspired by human learning curricula, a schedule of training
samples is constructed (e.g., usually from easy to hard), sometimes combining with other criteria
(e.g., diversity). As exhibited in previous work, CL can help to avoid local minima, improve the
training efficiency, and can lead to better generalization performance.
Instantaneous hardness, however, does not take the training history of each sample into account.
When applied to deep neural network (DNNs) training, and due to the non-smooth/non-convex nature
of the loss and the randomness of stochastic gradient descent (SGD), the instantaneous hardness of
each sample can change dramatically between consecutive epochs, so it is not reflective of the utility
of each sample in the future. This results in a large difference between training sets selected over
successive epochs, leading to an inconsistency of optimization objectives and gradients, and making
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

