Bayesian Robust Optimization for Imitation Learning

Daniel S. Brown∗
UC Berkeley
dsbrown@berkeley.edu

Scott Niekum
University of Texas at Austin
sniekum@cs.utexas.edu

Marek Petrik
University of New Hampshire
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Abstract
One of the main challenges in imitation learning is determining what action an
agent should take when outside the state distribution of the demonstrations. Inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL) can enable generalization to new states by learning
a parameterized reward function, but these approaches still face uncertainty over
the true reward function and corresponding optimal policy. Existing safe imitation
learning approaches based on IRL deal with this uncertainty using a maxmin
framework that optimizes a policy under the assumption of an adversarial reward
function, whereas risk-neutral IRL approaches either optimize a policy for the
mean or MAP reward function. While completely ignoring risk can lead to overly
aggressive and unsafe policies, optimizing in a fully adversarial sense is also
problematic as it can lead to overly conservative policies that perform poorly in
practice. To provide a bridge between these two extremes, we propose Bayesian
Robust Optimization for Imitation Learning (BROIL). BROIL leverages Bayesian
reward function inference and a user specific risk tolerance to efficiently optimize
a robust policy that balances expected return and conditional value at risk. Our
empirical results show that BROIL provides a natural way to interpolate between
return-maximizing and risk-minimizing behaviors and outperforms existing risksensitive and risk-neutral inverse reinforcement learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning [40] aims to train an agent without hand-specifying a reward function by providing
demonstrations. One of the main challenges in imitation learning is determining what action an agent
should take when outside the states contained in the demonstrations. Inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) [38] is an approach to imitation learning in which the learning agent seeks to recover the
reward function of the demonstrator. Learning a parameterized reward function provides a compact
representation of the demonstrator’s preferences and enables generalization to new states unseen in
the demonstrations via policy optimization. However, IRL approaches still result in uncertainty over
the true reward function and this uncertainty can have negative consequences if the learning agent
infers a reward function that leads it to learn an incorrect policy. In this paper we propose that an
imitation learning agent should learn a policy that is robust with respect to its uncertainty over the
true objective of a task, but also be able to effectively trade-off epistemic risk with expected return.
For example, consider two scenarios: (1) an autonomous car detects a novel object lying in the road
ahead of the car and (2) a domestic service robot tasked with vacuuming encounters a pattern on
the floor it has never seen before. The first example concerns autonomous driving where the car’s
decisions have potentially catastrophic consequences. Thus, the car should treat the novel object as a
hazard and either slow down or safely change lanes to avoid running into it. In the second example,
vacuuming the floors of a house has certain risks, but the consequences of optimizing the wrong
reward function are arguably much less significant. Thus, when the vacuuming robot encounters a
novel floor pattern it does not need to worry as much about negative side-effects.
∗

Work done while at UT Austin.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

