Regularizing Black-box Models for Improved
Interpretability
Gregory Plumb
Carnegie Mellon University
gdplumb@andrew.cmu.edu
Adam Perer
Carnegie Mellon University
adamperer@cmu.edu

Maruan Al-Shedivat
Carnegie Mellon University
alshedivat@cs.cmu.edu
Eric Xing
CMU, Petuum Inc
epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Ángel Alexander Cabrera
Carnegie Mellon University
cabrera@cmu.edu
Ameet Talwalkar
CMU, Determined AI
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
Most of the work on interpretable machine learning has focused on designing
either inherently interpretable models, which typically trade-off accuracy for interpretability, or post-hoc explanation systems, whose explanation quality can be
unpredictable. Our method, E XP O, is a hybridization of these approaches that
regularizes a model for explanation quality at training time. Importantly, these
regularizers are differentiable, model agnostic, and require no domain knowledge
to define. We demonstrate that post-hoc explanations for E XP O-regularized models
have better explanation quality, as measured by the common fidelity and stability
metrics. We verify that improving these metrics leads to significantly more useful
explanations with a user study on a realistic task.

1

Introduction

Complex learning-based systems are increasingly shaping our daily lives. To monitor and understand
these systems, we require clear explanations of model behavior. Although model interpretability has
many definitions and is often application specific [Lipton, 2016], local explanations are a popular and
powerful tool [Ribeiro et al., 2016] and will be the focus of this work.
Recent techniques in interpretable machine learning range from models that are interpretable bydesign [e.g., Wang and Rudin, 2015, Caruana et al., 2015] to model-agnostic post-hoc systems for
explaining black-box models such as ensembles and deep neural networks [e.g., Ribeiro et al., 2016,
Lei et al., 2016, Lundberg and Lee, 2017, Selvaraju et al., 2017, Kim et al., 2018]. Despite the variety
of technical approaches, the underlying goal of these methods is to develop an interpretable predictive
system that produces two outputs: a prediction and its explanation.
Both by-design and post-hoc approaches have limitations. On the one hand, by-design approaches
are restricted to working with model families that are inherently interpretable, potentially at the cost
of accuracy. On the other hand, post-hoc approaches applied to an arbitrary model usually offer no
recourse if their explanations are not of suitable quality. Moreover, recent methods that claim to
overcome this apparent trade-off between prediction accuracy and explanation quality are in fact
by-design approaches that impose constraints on the model families they consider [e.g., Al-Shedivat
et al., 2017, Plumb et al., 2018, Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2018a].
In this work, we propose a strategy called Explanation-based Optimization (E XP O) that allows us to
interpolate between these two paradigms by adding an interpretability regularizer to the loss function
used to train the model. E XP O uses regularizers based on the fidelity [Ribeiro et al., 2016, Plumb
et al., 2018] or stability [Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola, 2018a] metrics. See Section 2 for definitions.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

