Classification with Valid and Adaptive Coverage

Yaniv Romano∗
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
yromano@stanford.edu

Matteo Sesia∗
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
sesia@marshall.usc.edu

Emmanuel J. Candès
Departments of Mathematics and of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, USA
candes@stanford.edu

Abstract
Conformal inference, cross-validation+, and the jackknife+ are hold-out methods
that can be combined with virtually any machine learning algorithm to construct
prediction sets with guaranteed marginal coverage. In this paper, we develop
specialized versions of these techniques for categorical and unordered response
labels that, in addition to providing marginal coverage, are also fully adaptive to
complex data distributions, in the sense that they perform favorably in terms of
approximate conditional coverage compared to alternative methods. The heart of
our contribution is a novel conformity score, which we explicitly demonstrate to be
powerful and intuitive for classification problems, but whose underlying principle
is potentially far more general. Experiments on synthetic and real data demonstrate
the practical value of our theoretical guarantees, as well as the statistical advantages
of the proposed methods over the existing alternatives.

1

Introduction

Imagine we have n data samples {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 with features Xi ∈ Rp and a discrete label Yi ∈
Y = {1, 2, . . . , C}. The samples are drawn exchangeably (e.g., i.i.d., although exchangeability alone
is sufficient) from some unknown distribution PXY . Given such data and a desired coverage level
1 − α ∈ (0, 1), we seek to construct a prediction set Cˆn,α ⊆ Y for the unseen label of a new data point
(Xn+1 , Yn+1 ), also drawn exchangeably from PXY , achieving marginal coverage; that is, obeying
h
i
P Yn+1 ∈ Cˆn,α (Xn+1 ) ≥ 1 − α.
(1)
The probability above is taken over all n + 1 data points, and we ask that (1) holds for any fixed
α, n, and PXY . While marginal coverage has the advantage of being both desirable and practically
achievable, it unfortunately does not imply the stronger notion of conditional coverage:
h
i
P Yn+1 ∈ Cˆn,α (x) | Xn+1 = x ≥ 1 − α.
(2)
The latter asks for valid coverage conditional on a specific observed value of the features X. It
is already known that conditional coverage cannot be achieved in theory without strong modeling
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

