Towards Theoretically Understanding Why S GD
Generalizes Better Than A DAM in Deep Learning

Pan Zhou∗ , Jiashi Feng† , Chao Ma‡ , Caiming Xiong∗ , Steven HOI∗ , Weinan E‡
∗
Salesforce Research, † National University of Singapore, ‡ Princeton University
{pzhou,shoi,cxiong}@salesforce.com elefjia@nus.edu.sg {chaom@, weinan@math.}princeton.edu

Abstract
It is not clear yet why A DAM-alike adaptive gradient algorithms suffer from worse
generalization performance than S GD despite their faster training speed. This
work aims to provide understandings on this generalization gap by analyzing their
local convergence behaviors. Specifically, we observe the heavy tails of gradient
noise in these algorithms. This motivates us to analyze these algorithms through
their Lévy-driven stochastic differential equations (SDEs) because of the similar
convergence behaviors of an algorithm and its SDE. Then we establish the escaping
time of these SDEs from a local basin. The result shows that (1) the escaping time
of both S GD and A DAM depends on the Radon measure of the basin positively
and the heaviness of gradient noise negatively; (2) for the same basin, S GD enjoys
smaller escaping time than A DAM, mainly because (a) the geometry adaptation
in A DAM via adaptively scaling each gradient coordinate well diminishes the
anisotropic structure in gradient noise and results in larger Radon measure of a
basin; (b) the exponential gradient average in A DAM smooths its gradient and
leads to lighter gradient noise tails than S GD. So S GD is more locally unstable
than A DAM at sharp minima defined as the minima whose local basins have small
Radon measure, and can better escape from them to flatter ones with larger Radon
measure. As flat minima here which often refer to the minima at flat or asymmetric
basins/valleys often generalize better than sharp ones [1, 2], our result explains the
better generalization performance of S GD over A DAM. Finally, experimental results
confirm our heavy-tailed gradient noise assumption and theoretical affirmation.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (S GD) [3, 4] has become one of the most popular algorithms for training
deep neural networks [5–11]. In spite of its simplicity and effectiveness, S GD uses one learning rate
for all gradient coordinates and could suffer from unsatisfactory convergence performance, especially
for ill-conditioned problems [12]. To avoid this issue, a variety of adaptive gradient algorithms
have been developed that adjust learning rate for each gradient coordinate according to the current
geometry curvature of the objective function [13–16]. These algorithms, especially for A DAM, have
achieved much faster convergence speed than vanilla S GD in practice.
Despite their faster convergence behaviors, these adaptive gradient algorithms usually suffer from
worse generalization performance than S GD [12, 17, 18]. Specifically, adaptive gradient algorithms
often show faster progress in the training phase but their performance quickly reaches a plateaus on
test data. Differently, S GD usually improves model performance slowly but could achieve higher
test performance. One empirical explanation [1, 19–21] for this generalization gap is that adaptive
gradient algorithms tend to converge to sharp minima whose local basin has large curvature and
usually generalize poorly, while S GD prefers to find flat minima and thus generalizes better. However,
recent evidence [2, 22] shows that (1) for deep neural networks, the minima at the asymmetric
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

