Deep Rao-Blackwellised Particle Filters for Time
Series Forecasting

Richard Kurle∗ † 2 Syama Sundar Rangapuram1 Emmanuel de Bezenac† 3
Stephan Günnemann2
Jan Gasthaus1
1

AWS AI Labs

2

Technical University of Munich

3

Sorbonne Université

Abstract
This work addresses efficient inference and learning in switching Gaussian linear
dynamical systems using a Rao-Blackwellised particle filter and a corresponding
Monte Carlo objective. To improve the forecasting capabilities, we extend this
classical model by conditionally linear state-to-switch dynamics, while leaving
the partial tractability of the conditional Gaussian linear part intact. Furthermore,
we use an auxiliary variable approach with a decoder-type neural network that
allows for more complex non-linear emission models and multivariate observations.
We propose a Monte Carlo objective that leverages the conditional linearity by
computing the corresponding conditional expectations in closed-form and a suitable
proposal distribution that is factorised similarly to the optimal proposal distribution.
We evaluate our approach on several popular time series forecasting datasets as
well as image streams of simulated physical systems. Our results show improved
forecasting performance compared to other deep state-space model approaches.

1

Introduction

The Gaussian linear dynamical system (GLS) [4, 38, 31] is one of the most well-studied dynamical
models with wide-ranging applications in many domains, including control, navigation, and timeseries forecasting. This state-space model (SSM) is described by a (typically Markovian) latent linear
process that generates a sequence of observations. The assumption of Gaussian noise and linear state
transitions and measurements allows for exact inference of the latent variables—such as filtering
and smoothing—and computation of the marginal likelihood for system identification (learning).
However, most systems of practical interest are non-linear, requiring more complex models.
Many approximate inference methods have been developed for non-linear dynamical systems: Deterministic methods approximate the filtering and smoothing distributions e.g. by using a Taylor series
expansion of the non-linear functions (known as extended Kalman filter (EKF) and second-order
EKF) or by directly approximating these marginal distributions by a Gaussian using moment matching
techniques [26, 27, 2, 3, 36]. Stochastic methods such as particle filters or smoothers approximate
the filtering and smoothing distributions by a set of weighted samples (particles) using sequential
Monte Carlo (SMC) [13, 16]. Furthermore, system identification with deep neural networks has been
proposed using stochastic variational inference [17, 15] and variational SMC [23, 29, 20].
A common challenge with both types of approximations is that predictions/forecasts over long forecast
horizons suffer from accumulated errors resulting from insufficient approximations at every time step.
Switching Gaussian linear systems (SGLS) [1, 12]—which use additional latent variables to switch
between different linear dynamics—provide a way to alleviate this problem: the conditional linearity
can be exploited by approximate inference algorithms to reduce approximation errors. Unfortunately,
this comes at the cost of reduced modelling flexibility compared to more general non-linear dynamical
systems. Specifically, we identify the following two weaknesses of the SGLS: i) the switch transition
∗

Correspondence to richard.kurle@tum.de. † Work done while at AWS AI Labs.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

