On the linearity of large non-linear models: when and
why the tangent kernel is constant

Chaoyue Liu
CSE
Ohio State University
liu.2656@osu.edu

Libin Zhu
CSE and HDSI
UC San Diego
l5zhu@ucsd.edu

Mikhail Belkin
HDSI
UC San Diego
mbelkin@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The goal of this work is to shed light on the remarkable phenomenon of “transition
to linearity” of certain neural networks as their width approaches infinity. We show
that the “transition to linearity” of the model and, equivalently, constancy of the
(neural) tangent kernel (NTK) result from the scaling properties of the norm of
the Hessian matrix of the network as a function of the network width. We present
a general framework for understanding the constancy of the tangent kernel via
Hessian scaling applicable to the standard classes of neural networks. Our analysis
provides a new perspective on the phenomenon of constant tangent kernel, which is
different from the widely accepted “lazy training”. Furthermore, we show that the
“transition to linearity” is not a general property of wide neural networks and does
not hold when the last layer of the network is non-linear. It is also not necessary
for successful optimization by gradient descent.

1

Introduction 1

As the width of certain non-linear neural networks increases, they become linear functions of their
parameters. This remarkable property of large models was first identified in [10] where it was stated
in terms of the constancy of the (neural) tangent kernel during the training process. More precisely,
consider a neural network or, generally, a machine learning model f (w; x), which takes x as input
and has w as its (trainable) parameters. Its tangent kernel K(x,z) (w) is defined as follows:
K(x,z) (w) := ∇w f (w; x)T ∇w f (w; z),

for fixed inputs x, z ∈ Rd .

(1)

The key finding of [10] was the fact that for some wide neural networks the kernel K(x,z) (w) is
a constant function of the weight w during training. While in the literature, including [10], this
phenomenon is described in terms of the (linear) training dynamics, it is important to note that the
tangent kernel is associated to the model itself. As such, it does not depend on the optimization
algorithm or the choice of a loss function.
The goal of this work is to clarify a number of issues related to the constancy of the tangent kernel, to
provide specific conditions when the kernel is constant, i.e., when non-linear models in the limit, as
their width approach infinity, become linear, and also to explicate the regimes when they do not. One
important conclusion of our analysis is that the “transition to linearity” phenomenon discussed in this
work (equivalent to constancy of tangent kernel) cannot be explained by “lazy training” [5] (often
described as small change of parameters from the initialization point), which is widely held to be the
reason for constancy of the tangent kernel, e.g., [17, 2, 9]. The “transition to linearity” is neither due
to a choice of a scaling of the model (see Appendix A), nor is a universal property of large models
1
After this NeurIPS submission, we developed a more general and more principled mathematical analysis of
the transition to linearity phenomenon. Please see the details in: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.01092

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

