Self-Supervised Relationship Probing

Jiuxiang Gu1 , Jason Kuen1 , Shafiq Joty2 , Jianfei Cai3 ,
Vlad I. Morariu1 , Handong Zhao1 , Tong Sun1
1
Adobe Research, 2 Nanyang Technological University, 3 Monash University
{jigu,kuen,morariu,hazhao,tsun}@adobe.com,
srjoty@ntu.edu.sg, jianfei.cai@monash.edu

Abstract
Structured representations of images that model visual relationships are beneficial for many vision and vision-language applications. However, current humanannotated visual relationship datasets suffer from the long-tailed predicate distribution problem which limits the potential of visual relationship models. In this work,
we introduce a self-supervised method that implicitly learns the visual relationships
without relying on any ground-truth visual relationship annotations. Our method
relies on 1) intra- and inter-modality encodings to respectively model relationships within each modality separately and jointly, and 2) relationship probing,
which seeks to discover the graph structure within each modality. By leveraging
masked language modeling, contrastive learning, and dependency tree distances
for self-supervision, our method learns better object features as well as implicit
visual relationships. We verify the effectiveness of our proposed method on various
vision-language tasks that benefit from improved visual relationship understanding.

1

Introduction

Visual relationships that describe object relationships in images have become more and more important
for high-level computer vision (CV) tasks that need complex reasoning [1, 2, 3, 4]. They are often
organized in a structured graph representation called scene graph, where nodes represent objects and
edges represent relationships between objects. In recent years, we have witnessed great progress with
visual relationship datasets such as Visual Genome [5] and the application of scene graphs to various
CV reasoning tasks such as image captioning [6, 7], image retrieval [8], and visual reasoning [9].
Despite this, current visual relationship models still rely on human-annotated relationship labels.
Due to the combinatorics involved — two objects and one relationship between them, where objects
and relationships each have different types — relationships are numerous and have a long-tailed
distribution and, thus, it is difficult to collect enough annotations to sufficiently represent important
but less frequently observed relationships. Consequently, current visual relationship models tend to
focus on modeling only a few relationships that have a large number of human annotations [10], and
they ignore relationship categories with few annotations. We have seen some research attempts that
use external knowledge databases to help enrich visual relationships, however, the total number of
relationships modeled is still relatively small [11].
On the other hand, in the past few years, we have seen significant progress in natural language
processing (NLP) towards building contextualized language models with self-supervised pretraining
objectives [12, 13]. The removal of human annotators from the training loop has enabled training on
massive unlabeled datasets, leading to significant advances in NLP performance [14, 15]. These trends
have also brought significant advances in vision-language (VL) pretraining tasks [16, 17, 18, 19, 20].
Most existing VL pretraining methods concatenate visual objects and the corresponding sentences as
one input and adopt the Transformer [21] as the core module to learn contextualized multi-modal
representations in a self-supervised manner via self- and cross-attentions. These models rely heavily
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

