Regularizing Towards Permutation Invariance in
Recurrent Models
Edo Cohen-Karlik
Tel Aviv University, Israel
edocohen@mail.tau.ac.il

Avichai Ben David
Tel Aviv University, Israel
avichaib@mail.tau.ac.il

Amir Globerson
Tel Aviv University, Israel
and Google Research
gamir@post.tau.ac.il

Abstract
In many machine learning problems the output should not depend on the order of
the input. Such “permutation invariant” functions have been studied extensively
recently. Here we argue that temporal architectures such as RNNs are highly
relevant for such problems, despite the inherent dependence of RNNs on order.
We show that RNNs can be regularized towards permutation invariance, and that
this can result in compact models, as compared to non-recurrent architectures. We
implement this idea via a novel form of stochastic regularization.
Existing solutions mostly suggest restricting the learning problem to hypothesis classes which are permutation invariant by design [Zaheer et al., 2017, Lee
et al., 2019, Murphy et al., 2018]. Our approach of enforcing permutation invariance via regularization gives rise to models which are semi permutation invariant
(e.g. invariant to some permutations and not to others). We show that our method
outperforms other permutation invariant approaches on synthetic and real world
datasets.

1

Introduction

In recent years deep learning has shown remarkable performance in a vast range of applications
from natural language processing to autonomous vehicles.
One of the most successful models of the current deep-learning Renaissance are convolutional neural
nets (CNN) [Krizhevsky et al., 2012], which utilize domain specific properties such as invariance of
images to specific spatial transformations. Such inductive bias is common in other domains where
it is necessary to learn from limited amounts of data.
In this work we consider the setting where learned functions are such that the order of the inputs
does not affect the output value. These problems are commonly referred to as permutation invariant,
and typical solutions aim to restrict the learned models to functions that are permutation invariant
by design. One such work is DeepSets [Zaheer et al., 2017], which provided a characterization of
permutation invariant functions. Specifically, given a set of objects tx1 , . . . , xn u and a permutation
invariant function f px1 , . . . , xn q they showed that f can be expressed as follows: there exist two
networks ϕp¨q and ρp¨q such that f is a result of applying ϕ to all inputs, sum-aggregating and then
applying ρ. Namely:
˜
¸
n
ÿ
f px1 , . . . , xn q “ ρ
ϕpxi q
(1.1)
i“1

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

