Faster Wasserstein Distance Estimation
with the Sinkhorn Divergence

Lénaïc Chizat1∗, Pierre Roussillon2 , Flavien Léger2 ,
François-Xavier Vialard3 ,
Gabriel Peyré2
1: Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
2: ENS, PSL University, Paris, France
3: Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, ESIEE Paris, Marne-la-Vallée, France

Abstract
The squared Wasserstein distance is a natural quantity to compare probability
distributions in a non-parametric setting. This quantity is usually estimated with
the plug-in estimator, defined via a discrete optimal transport problem which can be
solved to ε-accuracy by adding an entropic regularization of order ε and using for
instance Sinkhorn’s algorithm. In this work, we propose instead to estimate it with
the Sinkhorn divergence, which is also built on entropic regularization but includes
debiasing terms. We show that, for smooth densities, this estimator has a comparable sample complexity but allows higher regularization levels, of order ε1/2 ,
which leads to improved computational complexity bounds and a strong speedup
in practice. Our theoretical analysis covers the case of both randomly sampled
densities and deterministic discretizations on uniform grids. We also propose and
analyze an estimator based on Richardson extrapolation of the Sinkhorn divergence
which enjoys improved statistical and computational efficiency guarantees, under a
condition on the regularity of the approximation error, which is in particular satisfied for Gaussian densities. We finally demonstrate the efficiency of the proposed
estimators with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Certain tasks in machine learning (implicit generative modeling [41], two-sample testing [50],
structured prediction [25]) and imaging sciences (shape matching [31], computer graphics [9])
require to quantify how much two probability densities µ, ν ∈ P(Rd ) differ. The squared Wasserstein
distance W22 (µ, ν) (defined below) is often well suited for this purpose because of its appealing
geometrical properties [57, 52, 46] but it also raises important statistical and computational challenges.
Indeed, in many practical settings, µ and ν are only accessed via empirical or discretized measures
µ̂n , ν̂n composed of n atoms. A standard workaround is to use the plug-in estimator W22 (µ̂n , ν̂n ),
but although it is efficient when µ and ν are discrete [55, 56], this estimator suffers from the curse
of dimensionality when µ and ν have densities [59, Cor. 2], with an estimation error that scales
as n−2/d as we show in Section 3. Moreover, solving the discrete optimal transport problem is
computationally demanding when n is large, with a time complexity bound scaling as n2 log(n)/ε2
to reach ε-accuracy with Sinkhorn’s algorithm [20, 2]. These drawbacks give a strong motivation to
define and study alternative estimators for W22 (µ, ν) when µ and ν admit smooth densities.
Entropic regularization of optimal transport. In this paper, we consider instead estimators based
on the idea of entropic regularization of optimal transport [61, 21, 36, 16]. When µ and ν have finite
∗

Corresponding author: lenaic.chizat@universite-paris-saclay.fr

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

