Movement Pruning:
Adaptive Sparsity by Fine-Tuning

Victor Sanh1 , Thomas Wolf1 , Alexander M. Rush1,2
1
Hugging Face, 2 Cornell University
{victor,thomas}@huggingface.co ; arush@cornell.edu

Abstract
Magnitude pruning is a widely used strategy for reducing model size in pure
supervised learning; however, it is less effective in the transfer learning regime that
has become standard for state-of-the-art natural language processing applications.
We propose the use of movement pruning, a simple, deterministic first-order weight
pruning method that is more adaptive to pretrained model fine-tuning. We give
mathematical foundations to the method and compare it to existing zeroth- and
first-order pruning methods. Experiments show that when pruning large pretrained
language models, movement pruning shows significant improvements in highsparsity regimes. When combined with distillation, the approach achieves minimal
accuracy loss with down to only 3% of the model parameters.

1

Introduction

Large-scale transfer learning has become ubiquitous in deep learning and achieves state-of-the-art
performance in applications in natural language processing and related fields. In this setup, a large
model pretrained on a massive generic dataset is then fine-tuned on a smaller annotated dataset to
perform a specific end-task. Model accuracy has been shown to scale with the pretrained model and
dataset size [Raffel et al., 2019]. However, significant resources are required to ship and deploy these
large models, and training the models have high environmental costs [Strubell et al., 2019].
Sparsity induction is a widely used approach to reduce the memory footprint of neural networks at
only a small cost of accuracy. Pruning methods, which remove weights based on their importance,
are a particularly simple and effective method for compressing models. Smaller models are easier to
sent on edge devices such as mobile phones but are also significantly less energy greedy: the majority
of the energy consumption comes from fetching the model parameters from the long term storage of
the mobile device to its volatile memory [Han et al., 2016a, Horowitz, 2014].
Magnitude pruning [Han et al., 2015, 2016b], which preserves weights with high absolute values, is
the most widely used method for weight pruning. It has been applied to a large variety of architectures
in computer vision [Guo et al., 2016], in language processing [Gale et al., 2019], and more recently
has been leveraged as a core component in the lottery ticket hypothesis [Frankle et al., 2020].
While magnitude pruning is highly effective for standard supervised learning, it is inherently less
useful in the transfer learning regime. In supervised learning, weight values are primarily determined
by the end-task training data. In transfer learning, weight values are mostly predetermined by the
original model and are only fine-tuned on the end task. This prevents these methods from learning to
prune based on the fine-tuning step, or “fine-pruning.”
In this work, we argue that to effectively reduce the size of models for transfer learning, one should
instead use movement pruning, i.e., pruning approaches that consider the changes in weights during
fine-tuning. Movement pruning differs from magnitude pruning in that both weights with low and
high values can be pruned if they shrink during training. This strategy moves the selection criteria
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

