Implicit Regularization and Convergence for
Weight Normalization

Xiaoxia Wu∗

Edgar Dobriban∗

University of Texas at Austin

University of Pennsylvania

Tongzhenng Ren∗

Shanshan Wu∗

Zhiyuan Li

University of Texas at Austin

Google Research

Princeton University

Suriya Gunasekar

Rachel Ward

Qiang Liu

Microsoft Research

University of Texas at Austin

University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Normalization methods such as batch [Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015], weight [Salimans
and Kingma, 2016], instance [Ulyanov et al., 2016], and layer normalization [Ba
et al., 2016] have been widely used in modern machine learning. Here, we study
the weight normalization (WN) method [Salimans and Kingma, 2016] and a variant
called reparametrized projected gradient descent (rPGD) for overparametrized least
squares regression. WN and rPGD reparametrize the weights with a scale g and
a unit vector w and thus the objective function becomes non-convex. We show
that this non-convex formulation has beneficial regularization effects compared to
gradient descent on the original objective. These methods adaptively regularize
the weights and converge close to the minimum `2 norm solution, even for initializations far from zero. For certain stepsizes of g and w, we show that they can
converge close to the minimum norm solution. This is different from the behavior
of gradient descent, which converges to the minimum norm solution only when
started at a point in the range space of the feature matrix, and is thus more sensitive
to initialization.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models often have more parameters than data points, allowing a finegrained adaptation to the data, but also suffering from the risk of over-fitting. To alleviate this, various
explicit and implicit regularization methods are used. For instance, weight decay can control the
model complexity by shrinking the norm of the weights, and dropout can reduce the model capacity
by sub-sampling features during training [Gal and Ghahramani, 2016, Mianjy et al., 2018, Arora
et al., 2020]. Recent state-of-the-art techniques such as batch, weight, and layer normalization [Ioffe
and Szegedy, 2015, Salimans and Kingma, 2016, Ba et al., 2016], empirically have a regularization
effect, e.g., as described in Ioffe and Szegedy [2015], "batch normalisation acts as a regularizer, in
some cases eliminating the need for dropout".
While normalization methods are practically popular and successful, their theoretical understanding
has only started to emerge recently. For instance, normalization methods make learning more robust
to hyperparameters such as the learning rate [Wu et al., 2018, Arora et al., 2019]. Moreover, it has
∗
Equal Contribution, xwu@math.utexas.edu, dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu, tongzheng@utexas.edu, shanshanw@google.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

