Reinforcement Learning with Augmented Data
Michael Laskin⇤
UC Berkeley

Kimin Lee⇤
UC Berkeley

Adam Stooke
UC Berkeley

Lerrel Pinto
New York University

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley

Aravind Srinivas
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Learning from visual observations is a fundamental yet challenging problem in
Reinforcement Learning (RL). Although algorithmic advances combined with
convolutional neural networks have proved to be a recipe for success, current
methods are still lacking on two fronts: (a) data-efficiency of learning and (b) generalization to new environments. To this end, we present Reinforcement Learning
with Augmented Data (RAD), a simple plug-and-play module that can enhance
most RL algorithms. We perform the first extensive study of general data augmentations for RL on both pixel-based and state-based inputs, and introduce two
new data augmentations - random translate and random amplitude scale. We
show that augmentations such as random translate, crop, color jitter, patch cutout,
random convolutions, and amplitude scale can enable simple RL algorithms to
outperform complex state-of-the-art methods across common benchmarks. RAD
sets a new state-of-the-art in terms of data-efficiency and final performance on
the DeepMind Control Suite benchmark for pixel-based control as well as OpenAI Gym benchmark for state-based control. We further demonstrate that RAD
significantly improves test-time generalization over existing methods on several
OpenAI ProcGen benchmarks. Our RAD module and training code are available at
https://www.github.com/MishaLaskin/rad.

1

Introduction

Learning from visual observations is a fundamental problem in reinforcement learning (RL). Current
success stories build on two key ideas: (a) using expressive convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1]
that provide strong spatial inductive bias; (b) better credit assignment [2–4] techniques that are
crucial for sequential decision making. This combination of CNNs with modern RL algorithms has
led to impressive success with human-level performance in Atari [2], super-human Go players [5],
continuous control from pixels [3, 4] and learning policies for real-world robot grasping [6].
While these achievements are truly impressive, RL is notoriously plagued with poor data-efficiency
and generalization capabilities [7, 8]. Real-world successes of reinforcement learning often require
months of data-collection and (or) training [6, 9]. On the other hand, biological agents have the
remarkable ability to learn quickly [10, 11], while being able to generalize to a wide variety of unseen
tasks [12]. These challenges associated with RL are further exacerbated when we operate on pixels
due to high-dimensional and partially-observable inputs. Bridging the gap of data-efficiency and
generalization is hence pivotal to the real-world applicability of RL.
Supervised learning, in the context of computer vision, has addressed the problems of data-efficiency
and generalization by injecting useful priors. One such often ignored prior is Data Augmentation. It
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

