Baxter Permutation Process
Masahiro Nakano
Akisato Kimura Takeshi Yamada Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{masahiro.nakano.pr,akisato.kimura.xn,takeshi.yamada.bc,naonori.ueda.fr}
@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
In this paper, a Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) model for Baxter permutations
(BPs), termed BP process (BPP) is proposed and applied to relational data analysis.
The BPs are a well-studied class of permutations, and it has been demonstrated that
there is one-to-one correspondence between BPs and several interesting objects
including floorplan partitioning (FP), which constitutes a subset of rectangular
partitioning (RP). Accordingly, the BPP can be used as an FP model. We combine
the BPP with a multi-dimensional extension of the stick-breaking process called the
block-breaking process to fill the gap between FP and RP, and obtain a stochastic
process on arbitrary RPs. Compared with conventional BNP models for arbitrary
RPs, the proposed model is simpler and has a high affinity with Bayesian inference.

1

Introduction

Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) methods can overcome the model complexity problem of machine
learning tasks, as they can be regarded as an analysis of finite subsets of potentially infinite data using
infinite-dimensional probabilistic models, i.e., stochastic processes. Indeed, a variety of stochastic
processes have been proposed and applied to various real-world tasks. However, in general, it is not
easy to define and control new BNP models, because they should satisfy certain stringent conditions,1
such as projectivity [10, 43, 44, 45, 16], exchangeability [6, 7, 31, 32], and conditional projectivity
[44, 45]. In this paper, we develop a BNP model of Baxter permutations (BPs). This model involves
new stochastic processes and is applied to relational data analysis.
Currently, there are a variety of BNP models for relational data analysis. Recent excellent surveys can
be found in [20, 46]. Conventional models are broadly classified into three categories: (a) clustering
through rectangular partitioning (RP), (b) factor analysis (extraction of multiple clusters) [14, 47,
52, 40, 30, 13], and (c) analysis using more flexible structures [5, 21, 24, 37, 38, 26, 19, 23, 22].
This paper focuses on the first category. Its advantage is that all clusters are disjoint rectangles
characterized by products of subsets of each dimension of the relational data, which can be easily
interpreted. For RP models, the infinite relational model (IRM) [33] and the Mondrian process (MP)
[49, 48] have been widely studied and applied to real world applications. However, these models
cannot represent arbitrary RPs. That is, their supports are limited to some subsets of all possible RPs
(Figure 1, second and third). In contrast, the Gilbert tessellation (GT) [27, 39] and the rectangular
tiling process (RTP) [42] have been proposed for arbitrary RPs with no restrictions (Figure 1, fourth).
However, for the GT, it is known that the statistical behavior of it is notoriously difficult to analyze
[12]. For the RTP, it constructs a probabilistic generative model that directly generates a RP of grids
with infinite size. However, it has too complicated procedures for the model construction due to its
projectivity property, and is not well-suited for Bayesian inference.
Contributions - The aim of this paper is to construct a new BNP model for arbitrary RPs, so that
it has a simple description and high affinity with Bayesian inference. We first discuss RPs and
1

Plainly, these conditions are fundamental assumptions for dealing with infinity, that is, for BNP models to
analyze finite subsets of potentially infinite data via infinite-dimensional probabilistic models.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

