Improving Online Rent-or-Buy Algorithms with
Sequential Decision Making and ML Predictions

Soumya Banerjee
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Minnesota State University
Mankato, MN 56001
banerjee.soumyadipta@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work we study online rent-buy problems as a sequential decision making
problem. We show how one can integrate predictions, typically coming from a
machine learning (ML) setup, into this framework. Specifically, we consider the
ski-rental problem and the dynamic TCP acknowledgment problem. We present
new online algorithms with or without predictions and obtain explicit performance
bounds in-terms of the accuracy of the prediction. Our algorithms are close to
optimal with accurate predictions while hedging against less accurate predictions.

1

Introduction

Online algorithms embody decision making in an environment with uncertainty. By design, such
algorithms disregard special features of the input and aim to provide robust performance guarantees
on all possible inputs. Such algorithms have been successfully used in many real world problems,
see [2] for a thorough discussion.
Machine learning (ML) paradigm aims to identify statistically significant features of the input and
leverage these features to generate precise future predictions at the cost of increased error in worst
case scenario (cf. the no free lunch theorem). Typically, ML systems are trained by minimizing
some expected loss function and such system may have large error on outliers. ML systems are
also sensitive to training and test data and they can perform badly due to adversarial examples or
distribution drift.
A natural question is: Is it possible to enhance an online algorithm with a predictor that leverages
good input predictions while hedging against bad predictions?
It is reasonable to expect that performance is proportional to the exactness of the prediction. But,
naively following predictions, even if a good predictor is available, can lead to substandard performance, see [15, §2.1] for an example. It is important to quantitatively relate the performance to the
precision of the prediction. This has important practical implications, e.g. performance gains from a
ML setup may not justify the the additional cost of implementing it.
The metric that is commonly used to evaluate the performance of an online algorithm is called
competitive ratio (see [2]). The competitive ratio of an online algorithm A is the smallest number c,
where c ≥ 1, such that the (expected) cost of the (possibly randomized) algorithm is bounded by the
expected cost of the optimal offline algorithm over all possible inputs
E(Cost(A)) ≤ c E(Costopt ) + α,

where α is a fixed constant.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

