AOT: Appearance Optimal Transport Based Identity
Swapping for Forgery Detection

Hao Zhu 1,2∗, Chaoyou Fu 1,3,∗ , Qianyi Wu 4 , Wayne Wu 4 , Chen Qian 4 , Ran He 1,3†
1
NLPR & CEBSIT & CRIPAC, CASIA 2 Anhui University
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 SenseTime Research
haozhu96@gmail.com {chaoyou.fu,rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{wuqianyi,wuwenyan,qianchen}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that the performance of forgery detection can be improved with diverse and challenging Deepfakes datasets. However, due to the
lack of Deepfakes datasets with large variance in appearance, which can be hardly
produced by recent identity swapping methods, the detection algorithm may fail
in this situation. In this work, we provide a new identity swapping algorithm with
large differences in appearance for face forgery detection. The appearance gaps
mainly arise from the large discrepancies in illuminations and skin colors that
widely exist in real-world scenarios. However, due to the difficulties of modeling
the complex appearance mapping, it is challenging to transfer fine-grained appearances adaptively while preserving identity traits. This paper formulates appearance
mapping as an optimal transport problem and proposes an Appearance Optimal
Transport model (AOT) to formulate it in both latent and pixel space. Specifically,
a relighting generator is designed to simulate the optimal transport plan. It is solved
via minimizing the Wasserstein distance of the learned features in the latent space,
enabling better performance and less computation than conventional optimization.
To further refine the solution of the optimal transport plan, we develop a segmentation game to minimize the Wasserstein distance in the pixel space. A discriminator
is introduced to distinguish the fake parts from a mix of real and fake image patches.
Extensive experiments reveal that the superiority of our method when compared
with state-of-the-art methods and the ability of our generated data to improve the
performance of face forgery detection.

1

Introduction

Face forgery detection refers to detect whether a given image has been altered. However, recent
detection baselines are data-driven [42, 39, 34, 11, 1], and the lack of Deepfake datasets with large
differences in appearance may render these detection algorithms ineffective in this situation. In this
work, we provide a new identity swapping algorithm with large differences in appearance to improve
the robustness of face forgery detection methods.
Recently, many identity swapping works have been devoted to addressing the recombination difficulty
of identities and attributes in the source and the target faces. Earlier works either directly warp a
source face to a target pose [16] or leverage 3D models to flexibly align the source face with a target
video [10, 36, 43]. More recently, benefiting from the success of deep learning, further identity
swapping progress has been achieved [30, 41, 44, 32].
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

