Probabilistic Circuits for Variational Inference in
Discrete Graphical Models
Andy Shih
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
andyshih@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Inference in discrete graphical models with variational methods is difficult because
of the inability to re-parameterize gradients of the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO).
Many sampling-based methods have been proposed for estimating these gradients,
but they suffer from high bias or variance. In this paper, we propose a new approach
that leverages the tractability of probabilistic circuit models, such as Sum Product
Networks (SPN), to compute ELBO gradients exactly (without sampling) for a
certain class of densities. In particular, we show that selective-SPNs are suitable
as an expressive variational distribution, and prove that when the log-density
of the target model is a polynomial the corresponding ELBO can be computed
analytically. To scale to graphical models with thousands of variables, we develop
an efficient and effective construction of selective-SPNs with size O(kn), where n
is the number of variables and k is an adjustable hyperparameter. We demonstrate
our approach on three types of graphical models – Ising models, Latent Dirichlet
Allocation, and factor graphs from the UAI Inference Competition. SelectiveSPNs give a better lower bound than mean-field and structured mean-field, and is
competitive with approximations that do not provide a lower bound, such as Loopy
Belief Propagation and Tree-Reweighted Belief Propagation. Our results show
that probabilistic circuits are promising tools for variational inference in discrete
graphical models as they combine tractability and expressivity.

1

Introduction

Variational methods for inference have seen a rise in popularity due to advancements in Monte
Carlo methods for gradient estimation and optimization [11]. The advent of black box variational
inference [35] and the re-parameterization trick [18, 36, 39] have enabled the training of complex
models with automatic differentiation tools [21], and provided a low-variance gradient estimate of
the ELBO for continuous variables.
We are interested in extending the success of variational methods to inference in discrete graphical
models. Discrete graphical models are used in numerous applications, including physics, statistics,
and machine learning tasks such as topic modelling and image segmentation. One of the central
problems of probabilistic inference in these graphical models is computation of the log partition
function [14, 20]. Exploring richer variational families beyond fully factored mean-field would enable
a tighter bound of the log partition function, and in turn bound the probability of evidence.
Optimization of expressive variational families in discrete settings, however, is difficult because the
re-parameterization trick for computing gradients does not extend naturally to discrete variables.
Roughly speaking, the re-parameterization trick pushes away the randomness of sampling inputs, and
instead applies a differentiable transformation onto a base distribution containing the randomness.
Unfortunately, this cannot easily be extended to discrete variables because there is no differentiable
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

