Auxiliary Task Reweighting for
Minimum-data Learning

Baifeng Shi
Peking University
bfshi@pku.edu.cn

Judy Hoffman
Georgia Institute of Technology
judy@gatech.edu

Kate Saenko
Boston University & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
saenko@bu.edu
Trevor Darrell, Huijuan Xu
University of California, Berkeley
{trevor, huijuan}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Supervised learning requires a large amount of training data, limiting its application where labeled data is scarce. To compensate for data scarcity, one possible method is to utilize auxiliary tasks to provide additional supervision for
the main task. Assigning and optimizing the importance weights for different
auxiliary tasks remains an crucial and largely understudied research question.
In this work, we propose a method to automatically reweight auxiliary tasks in
order to reduce the data requirement on the main task. Specifically, we formulate the weighted likelihood function of auxiliary tasks as a surrogate prior for
the main task. By adjusting the auxiliary task weights to minimize the divergence between the surrogate prior and the true prior of the main task, we obtain
a more accurate prior estimation, achieving the goal of minimizing the required
amount of training data for the main task and avoiding a costly grid search. In
multiple experimental settings (e.g. semi-supervised learning, multi-label classification), we demonstrate that our algorithm can effectively utilize limited labeled
data of the main task with the benefit of auxiliary tasks compared with previous
task reweighting methods. We also show that under extreme cases with only a
few extra examples (e.g. few-shot domain adaptation), our algorithm results in
significant improvement over the baseline. Our code and video is available at
https://sites.google.com/view/auxiliary-task-reweighting.

1

Introduction

Supervised deep learning methods typically require an enormous amount of labeled data, which for
many applications, is difficult, time-consuming, expensive, or even impossible to collect. As a result,
there is a significant amount of research effort devoted to efficient learning with limited labeled data,
including semi-supervised learning [41, 47], transfer learning [48], few-shot learning [9], domain
adaptation [49], and representation learning [42].
Among these different approaches, auxiliary tasks are widely used to alleviate the lack of data by
providing additional supervision, i.e. using the same data or auxiliary data for a different learning task
during the training procedure. Auxiliary tasks are usually collected from related tasks or domains
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

