AutoPrivacy: Automated Layer-wise Parameter
Selection for Secure Neural Network Inference
Qian Lou
Indiana University Bloomington

Song Bian
Kyoto University

louqian@iu.edu

sbian@easter.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Lei Jiang
Indiana University Bloomington
jiang60@iu.edu

Abstract
Hybrid Privacy-Preserving Neural Network (HPPNN) implementing linear layers
by Homomorphic Encryption (HE) and nonlinear layers by Garbled Circuit (GC)
is one of the most promising secure solutions to emerging Machine Learning as
a Service (MLaaS). Unfortunately, a HPPNN suffers from long inference latency,
e.g., ∼ 100 seconds per image, which makes MLaaS unsatisfactory. Because
HE-based linear layers of a HPPNN cost 93% inference latency, it is critical to
select a set of HE parameters to minimize computational overhead of linear layers.
Prior HPPNNs over-pessimistically select huge HE parameters to maintain large
noise budgets, since they use the same set of HE parameters for an entire network
and ignore the error tolerance capability of a network.
In this paper, for fast and accurate secure neural network inference, we propose
an automated layer-wise parameter selector, AutoPrivacy, that leverages deep
reinforcement learning to automatically determine a set of HE parameters for
each linear layer in a HPPNN. The learning-based HE parameter selection policy
outperforms conventional rule-based HE parameter selection policy. Compared
to prior HPPNNs, AutoPrivacy-optimized HPPNNs reduce inference latency by
53% ∼ 70% with negligible loss of accuracy.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) is an emerging computing paradigm that uses powerful
cloud infrastructures to provide machine learning inference services to clients. However, in the setting
of MLaaS, cloud servers can arbitrarily access input and output data of clients, thereby introducing
privacy risks. Privacy is important when clients upload their sensitive information, e.g., healthcare
records and financial data, to cloud servers. Recent works [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] create Hybrid PrivacyPreserving Neural Networks (HPPNNs) to achieve both low inference latency and high accuracy
using a combination of Homomorphic Encryption (HE) and Garbled Circuit (GC). Particularly,
DELPHI [5] obtains the state-of-the-art inference latency and accuracy through implementing linear
layers by HE, and computing activation layers by GC. However, HPPNNs still suffer from long
inference latency. For instance, inferring one single CIFAR-10 image by DELPHI ResNet-32 [5]
costs ∼ 100 seconds and has to exchange 2GB data. Particularly, the HE-based linear layers of
DELPHI cost 93% of its inference latency, thereby becoming its performance bottleneck.
The computational overhead of HE-based linear layers in prior HPPNNs is decided by their HE
parameters including the plaintext modulus p, the ciphertext modulus q, and the polynomial degree n.
HE enables homomorphic additions and multiplications on ciphertexts by manipulating polynomials
whose total term number and coefficients are defined by p, q and n. Each HE operation introduces
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

