General Control Functions for Causal Effect
Estimation from Instrumental Variables
Aahlad Puli
Computer Science
New York University
aahlad@nyu.edu

Rajesh Ranganath
Computer Science, Center for Data Science
New York University
rajeshr@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Causal effect estimation relies on separating the variation in the outcome into
parts due to the treatment and due to the confounders. To achieve this separation,
practitioners often use external sources of randomness that only influence the
treatment called instrumental variables (IVs). We study variables constructed
from treatment and IV that help estimate effects, called control functions. We
characterize general control functions for effect estimation in a meta-identification
result. Then, we show that structural assumptions on the treatment process allow
the construction of general control functions, thereby guaranteeing identification.
To construct general control functions and estimate effects, we develop the general
control function method (GCFN). GCFN’s first stage called variational decoupling
(VDE) constructs general control functions by recovering the residual variation in
the treatment given the IV. Using VDE’s control function, GCFN’s second stage
estimates effects via regression. Further, we develop semi-supervised GCFN to
construct general control functions using subsets of data that have both IV and
confounders observed as supervision; this needs no structural treatment process
assumptions. We evaluate GCFN on low and high dimensional simulated data and
on recovering the causal effect of slave export on modern community trust [30].

1

Introduction

Many disciplines use observational data to estimate causal effects: economics [5], sociology [23],
psychology [26], epidemiology [35], and medicine [40]. Estimating causal effects with observational
data requires care due to the presence of confounders that influence both treatment and outcome.
Observational causal estimators deal with confounders in one of two ways. One, they assume that all
confounders are observed; an assumption called ignorability. Two, they assume a source of external
randomness that has a direct influence only on the treatment. Such a source is called an instrumental
variable (IV) [4, 19]. An example is college proximity as an IV to study effects of education [8].
Two common IV-based causal effect estimation methods are the two-stage least-squares method
(2SLS) [21, 2, 3] and the traditional control function method (CFN) [19, 45, 43, 12]. Both methods
have a common first stage: learn a distribution over the treatment conditioned on the IV. In the
second stage, 2SLS regresses the outcome on simulated treatments from the first stage, while CFN’s
second stage regresses the outcome on the true treatment and the error in the prediction of treatment
from the first stage. The prediction error can be used to control for confounding and is thus called a
control function. Though widely used, both 2SLS and CFN breakdown under certain conditions like,
for example, when the outcome depends on multiplicative interactions of treatment and confounders.
Further, CFN requires an additional assumption about the correlations between noise and outcome.
We study causal estimation with control functions. To estimate effects, control functions must
satisfy ignorability. Our meta-identification result (theorem 1) shows that a control function satisfies
ignorability if 1) the control function and IV together reconstruct the treatment, and 2) the confounder
and control function together are jointly independent of the IV. We will refer to such control functions
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

