Explainable Voting
Dominik Peters
Harvard University
dpeters@seas.harvard.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Alexandros Psomas
Purdue University
apsomas@cs.purdue.edu

Zixin Zhou
CFCS, Peking University
zhouzixin1998@gmail.com

Abstract
The design of voting rules is traditionally guided by desirable axioms. Recent work
shows that, surprisingly, the axiomatic approach can also support the generation
of explanations for voting outcomes. However, no bounds on the size of these
explanations is given; for all we know, they may be unbearably tedious. We prove,
however, that outcomes of the important Borda rule can be explained using O(m2 )
steps, where m is the number of alternatives. Our main technical result is a general
lower bound that, in particular, implies that the foregoing bound is asymptotically
tight. We discuss the significance of our results for AI and machine learning,
including their potential to bolster an emerging paradigm of automated decision
making called virtual democracy.

1

Introduction

Voting plays a foundational role in many settings and guises, such as when electing leaders, when aggregating expert recommendations, or when merging the outputs of statistical models. Unfortunately,
the voting method that is the most popular is also the worst: plurality voting, which simply selects
the alternative that is the favorite of the highest number of voters (or experts, models). This method
is bad because it routinely selects low-quality options [Merrill, 1984, Bordley, 1983] and because
it distorts incentives [e.g., Tideman, 1987]. This makes it the least popular rule in surveys among
voting theorists [Laslier, 2012].
Researchers and practitioners have developed alternative voting schemes that produce higher-quality
decisions, by eliciting not just each voter’s top choice, but a ranking of all options. While theoretically
superior, these methods have seen limited uptake in user-facing systems. One reason is that these
rules can be opaque and abstract. Rules are typically “explained” to users through pseudocode, and
often, the only explanation of the voting outcome that is provided to users (if any!) is a trace of the
algorithm’s execution. Sure, this allows voters to verify that the algorithm was applied correctly, but
it is unlikely to fill them with confidence in the quality of the public decision. Our aim is to develop
methods that can provide an explanation of the decision that is not merely procedural, but based on
intuitively compelling principles that characterize good decision making.
Applications Voting is often a component of machine learning systems, such as in ensemble
learning (where a combination rule is used to merge the labels of different models) or in the emerging
paradigm of virtual democracy, an approach to automated decision making. The idea of the latter
approach is to collect preference data from a group of voters, and use it to learn models of their
preferences over a (possibly infinite) set of alternatives. At runtime, when a specific set of alternatives
is presented, the system makes a decision by applying a voting rule to the predicted preferences
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

