Deep Statistical Solvers
Balthazar Donon
RTE R&D, INRIA, Université Paris-Saclay
balthazar.donon@rte-france.com

Zhengying Liu
Université Paris-Saclay, INRIA
zhengying.liu@inria.fr

Wenzhuo Liu
IRT SystemX
wenzhuo.liu@irt-systemx.fr

Isabelle Guyon
Université Paris-Saclay, INRIA, Chalearn
guyon@chalearn.org

Antoine Marot
RTE R&D
antoine.marot@rte-france.com

Marc Schoenauer
INRIA, Université Paris-Saclay
marc.schoenauer@inria.fr

Abstract
This paper introduces Deep Statistical Solvers (DSS), a new class of trainable
solvers for optimization problems, arising e.g., from system simulations. The
key idea is to learn a solver that generalizes to a given distribution of problem
instances. This is achieved by directly using as loss the objective function of
the problem, as opposed to most previous Machine Learning based approaches,
which mimic the solutions attained by an existing solver. Though both types of
approaches outperform classical solvers with respect to speed for a given accuracy,
a distinctive advantage of DSS is that they can be trained without a training
set of sample solutions. Focusing on use cases of systems of interacting and
interchangeable entities (e.g. molecular dynamics, power systems, discretized
PDEs), the proposed approach is instantiated within a class of Graph Neural
Networks. Under sufficient conditions, we prove that the corresponding set of
functions contains approximations to any arbitrary precision of the actual solution
of the optimization problem. The proposed approach is experimentally validated
on large linear problems, demonstrating super-generalisation properties; And on
AC power grid simulations, on which the predictions of the trained model have a
correlation higher than 99.99% with the outputs of the classical Newton-Raphson
method (known for its accuracy), while being 2 to 3 orders of magnitude faster.

1

Introduction

In many domains of physics and engineering, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have sped up simulations and optimizations by orders of magnitude, replacing some computational bricks based
on first principles with data-driven numerical models – see e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, in general,
such data-driven approaches consist in training a proxy in a supervised way, to imitate solutions
provided by some numerical solver. This is sometimes infeasible due to the high computational cost
of existing simulators (e.g., molecular dynamics, car crash simulations, computational fluid dynamics,
and power grid simulation). Furthermore, such approaches ignore problem-specific considerations
and may end up providing inconsistent solutions, failing to satisfy physical laws such as energy
conservation (which can only be a posteriori checked, see e.g. [4]). In order to bypass this weakness,
a growing body of work pushes towards an interplay between physics and Machine Learning [5, 6],
e.g., incorporating physical knowledge in the loss function during learning [7, 8].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

