Learning to Learn Variational Semantic Memory

Xiantong Zhen1,2∗ , Yingjun Du1∗, Huan Xiong3,4 , Qiang Qiu5 , Cees G. M. Snoek1 , Ling Shao2,4
1
AIM Lab, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
4
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
5
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, USA
{x.zhen,y.du,cgmsnoek}@uva.nl

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce variational semantic memory into meta-learning to
acquire long-term knowledge for few-shot learning. The variational semantic
memory accrues and stores semantic information for the probabilistic inference of
class prototypes in a hierarchical Bayesian framework. The semantic memory is
grown from scratch and gradually consolidated by absorbing information from tasks
it experiences. By doing so, it is able to accumulate long-term, general knowledge
that enables it to learn new concepts of objects. We formulate memory recall as the
variational inference of a latent memory variable from addressed contents, which
offers a principled way to adapt the knowledge to individual tasks. Our variational
semantic memory, as a new long-term memory module, confers principled recall
and update mechanisms that enable semantic information to be efficiently accrued
and adapted for few-shot learning. Experiments demonstrate that the probabilistic
modelling of prototypes achieves a more informative representation of object
classes compared to deterministic vectors. The consistent new state-of-the-art
performance on four benchmarks shows the benefit of variational semantic memory
in boosting few-shot recognition.

1

Introduction

Memory plays an essential role in human intelligence, especially for aiding learning and reasoning
in the present. In machine intelligence, neural memory [22, 73, 23] has been shown to enhance
neural networks by augmentation with an external memory module. For instance, episodic memory
storing past experiences helps reinforcement learning agents adapt more quickly and improve sample
efficiency [7, 55, 24]. Memory is well-suited for few-shot learning by meta-learning in that it offers
an effective mechanism to extract inductive bias [21] by accumulating prior knowledge from a set of
previously observed tasks. One of the primary issues when designing a memory module is deciding
what information should be memorized, which usually depends on the problems to solve. Though
being highly promising, it is non-trivial to learn to store useful information in previous experience,
which should be as non-redundant as possible. Existing few-shot learning works with external
memory typically store the information from the support set of the current task [41, 70, 57, 40, 30],
focusing on learning the access mechanism, which is assumed to be shared across tasks. The memory
used in these works is short-term with limited capacity [18, 39] in that long-term information is not
well retained, despite the importance for efficiently learning new tasks.
Semantic memory, also known as conceptual knowledge [43, 67, 59], refers to general facts and
common world knowledge gathered throughout our lives [52]. It enables humans to quickly learn
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

