Kalman Filtering Attention for User Behavior
Modeling in CTR Prediction

Hu Liu, Jing Lu, Xiwei Zhao, Sulong Xu, Hao Peng, Yutong Liu,
Zehua Zhang, Jian Li, Junsheng Jin, Yongjun Bao, Weipeng Yan
Business Growth BU, JD.com
{liuhu1,lvjing12,zhaoxiwei,xusulong,penghao5,liuyutong,
zhangzehua,lijian21,jinjunsheng1,baoyongjun,paul.yan}@jd.com

Abstract
Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is one of the fundamental tasks for e-commerce
search engines. As search becomes more personalized, it is necessary to capture the
user interest from rich behavior data. Existing user behavior modeling algorithms
develop different attention mechanisms to emphasize query-relevant behaviors and
suppress irrelevant ones. Despite being extensively studied, these attentions still
suffer from two limitations. First, conventional attentions mostly limit the attention
field only to a single user’s behaviors, which is not suitable in e-commerce where
users often hunt for new demands that are irrelevant to any historical behaviors.
Second, these attentions are usually biased towards frequent behaviors, which is
unreasonable since high frequency does not necessarily indicate great importance.
To tackle the two limitations, we propose a novel attention mechanism, termed
Kalman Filtering Attention (KFAtt), that considers the weighted pooling in attention as a maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation. By incorporating a priori,
KFAtt resorts to global statistics when few user behaviors are relevant. Moreover, a
frequency capping mechanism is incorporated to correct the bias towards frequent
behaviors. Offline experiments on both benchmark and a 10 billion scale real
production dataset, together with an Online A/B test, show that KFAtt outperforms
all compared state-of-the-arts. KFAtt has been deployed in the ranking system of
JD.com, one of the largest B2C e-commerce websites in China, serving the main
traffic of hundreds of millions of active users.

1

Introduction

CTR prediction is one of the fundamental tasks for e-commerce search engines. In contrast to
early systems which only consider query keywords, modern search engines have become more
personalized with the goal to “understand exactly what you mean and give you exactly what you
want” [21]. Consequently, user behavior modeling, i.e. extracting users’ hidden interest from
historical behaviors, has been considered as one of the key components in CTR prediction for
e-commerce search engines.
Nowadays, a popular user behavior modeling strategy is to estimate a user’s hidden interest using
the weighted pooling over one’s historical behaviors. And these pooling weights are calculated by
various attention mechanisms to emphasize query-relevant behaviors and suppress query-irrelevant
ones. Despite being extensively studied, existing attention mechanisms for user behavior modeling
still suffer from two limitations:
• Conventional attentions mostly assume that a user’s interest under the current query keywords must be covered by one’s historical behaviors. This assumption however, usually
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

