Improved Variational Bayesian Phylogenetic
Inference with Normalizing Flows

Cheng Zhang
School of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Statistical Science
Peking University, Beijing, China
chengzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Variational Bayesian phylogenetic inference (VBPI) provides a promising general
variational framework for efficient estimation of phylogenetic posteriors. However,
the current diagonal Lognormal branch length approximation would significantly
restrict the quality of the approximating distributions. In this paper, we propose
a new type of VBPI, VBPI-NF, as a first step to empower phylogenetic posterior
estimation with deep learning techniques. By handling the non-Euclidean branch
length space of phylogenetic models with carefully designed permutation equivariant transformations, VBPI-NF uses normalizing flows to provide a rich family of
flexible branch length distributions that generalize across different tree topologies.
We show that VBPI-NF significantly improves upon the vanilla VBPI on a benchmark of challenging real data Bayesian phylogenetic inference problems. Further
investigation also reveals that the structured parameterization in those permutation
equivariant transformations can provide additional amortization benefit.

1

Introduction

As a powerful statistical tool that has revolutionized modern molecular evolutionary analysis, Bayesian
phylogenetic inference has been widely used for tasks ranging from genomic epidemiology (Neher
and Bedford, 2015; Sun et al., 2020) to conservation genetics (DeSalle and Amato, 2004). Given
properly aligned sequence data (e.g., DNA, RNA or protein sequences) and a model of evolution,
Bayesian phylogenetics provides principled approaches to quantify the uncertainty of the evolutionary
process in terms of the posterior probabilities of phylogenetic trees (Huelsenbeck et al., 2001). A
commonly used Bayesian phylogenetic inference method is random-walk Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC), which was introduced to the community in the late 1990’s (Yang and Rannala,
1997; Mau et al., 1999; Huelsenbeck and Ronquist, 2001). However, random-walk MCMC has been
fundamentally limited as it often exhibits low exploration efficiency and requires long runs to deliver
accurate posterior estimates due to the complexity of tree space. Although many advanced methods
for posterior sampling have been proposed recently, including Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (Duane
et al., 1987; Neal, 2011), it is not straightforward to extend these methods to phylogenetic models due
to the composite structure of tree space, i.e., a combination of discrete variables (e.g., tree topologies)
and continuous variables (e.g., branch lengths) (Dinh et al., 2017b).
Variational inference (VI) (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright and Jordan, 2008; Blei et al., 2017) is an
alternative approximate Bayesian inference method that is growing in popularity. Unlike MCMC
methods, VI seeks the best approximation to the true posterior from a family of tractable distributions.
By transforming the inference problem into an optimization problem, VI tends to be faster and easier
to scale to large data (Blei et al., 2017). In recent years, many efforts have been made to harness
VI for phylogenetic inference (Zhang and Matsen IV, 2019; Dang and Kishino, 2019; Fourment
and Darling, 2019), among which variational Bayesian phylogenetic inference (VBPI) proposed by
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

