Efficient Exploration of Reward Functions in Inverse
Reinforcement Learning via Bayesian Optimization

Sreejith Balakrishnan, Quoc Phong Nguyen, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Harold Soh
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
{sreejith,qphong,lowkh,harold}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The problem of inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is relevant to a variety of
tasks including value alignment and robot learning from demonstration. Despite
significant algorithmic contributions in recent years, IRL remains an ill-posed
problem at its core; multiple reward functions coincide with the observed behavior
and the actual reward function is not identifiable without prior knowledge or
supplementary information. This paper presents an IRL framework called Bayesian
optimization-IRL (BO-IRL) which identifies multiple solutions that are consistent
with the expert demonstrations by efficiently exploring the reward function space.
BO-IRL achieves this by utilizing Bayesian Optimization along with our newly
proposed kernel that (a) projects the parameters of policy invariant reward functions
to a single point in a latent space and (b) ensures nearby points in the latent space
correspond to reward functions yielding similar likelihoods. This projection allows
the use of standard stationary kernels in the latent space to capture the correlations
present across the reward function space. Empirical results on synthetic and realworld environments (model-free and model-based) show that BO-IRL discovers
multiple reward functions while minimizing the number of expensive exact policy
optimizations.

1

Introduction

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is the problem of inferring the reward function of a reinforcement
learning (RL) agent from its observed behavior [1]. Despite wide-spread application (e.g., [1, 4,
5, 27]), IRL remains a challenging problem. A key difficulty is that IRL is ill-posed; typically,
there exist many solutions (reward functions) for which a given behavior is optimal [2, 3, 29] and
it is not possible to infer the true reward function from among these alternatives without additional
information, such as prior knowledge or more informative demonstrations [9, 15].
Given the ill-posed nature of IRL, we adopt the perspective that an IRL algorithm should characterize
the space of solutions rather than output a single answer. Indeed, there is often no one correct solution.
Although this approach differs from traditional gradient-based IRL methods [38] and modern deep
incarnations that converge to specific solutions in the reward function space (e.g., [12, 14]), it is not
entirely unconventional. Previous approaches, notably Bayesian IRL (BIRL) [32], share this view
and return a posterior distribution over possible reward functions. However, BIRL and other similar
methods [25] are computationally expensive (often due to exact policy optimization steps) or suffer
from issues such as overfitting [8].
In this paper, we pursue a novel approach to IRL by using Bayesian optimization (BO) [26] to
minimize the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of the expert demonstrations with respect to reward
functions. BO is specifically designed for optimizing expensive functions by strategically picking
inputs to evaluate and appears to be a natural fit for this task. In addition to the samples procured, the
Gaussian process (GP) regression used in BO returns additional information about the discovered
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

