General Transportability of Soft Interventions:
Completeness Results

Juan D. Correa
Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Columbia University
{jdcorrea,eb}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
The challenge of generalizing causal knowledge across different environments is
pervasive in scientific explorations, including in AI, ML, and Data Science. Experiments are usually performed in one environment (e.g., in a lab, on Earth) with the
intent, almost invariably, of being used elsewhere (e.g., outside the lab, on Mars),
where the conditions are likely to be different. In the causal inference literature,
this generalization task has been formalized under the rubric of transportability
(Pearl and Bareinboim, 2011), where a number of criteria and algorithms have
been developed for various settings. Despite the generality of such results, transportability theory has been confined to atomic, do()-interventions. In practice,
many real-world applications require more complex, stochastic interventions; for
instance, in reinforcement learning, agents need to continuously adapt to the changing conditions of an uncertain and unknown environment. In this paper, we extend
transportability theory to encompass these more complex types of interventions,
which are known as “soft,” both relative to the input as well as the target distribution
of the analysis. Specifically, we develop a graphical condition that is both necessary
and sufficient for deciding soft-transportability. Second, we develop an algorithm
to determine whether a non-atomic intervention is computable from a combination
of the distributions available across domains. As a corollary, we show that the
σ-calculus is complete for the task of soft-transportability.

1

Introduction

Generalizing causal knowledge across disparate domains (i.e., populations, settings, environments)
is at the heart of many inferences across the empirical sciences as well as AI [26, 33, 29]. In
economics, for example, the Nobel Prize of 2019 was awarded to Duflo, Banerjee, and Kremer “for
their experimental approach to alleviating global poverty”. Their work is in fact about systematically
performing experiments on the effect of complex policies related to poverty, and then carefully trying
to extrapolate the gathered evidence to other populations [1, 12].1 The same need to generalize across
disparate conditions is present in Reinforcement Learning. For instance, consider a rover trained in
the California desert for digging rocks. After exhaustive months of training, NASA wants to deploy
the vehicle on Mars, where the environment is not exactly the same, but somewhat similar to Earth.
The expectation is that the rover will need minimal “experimentation” (i.e., trial-and-error) on Mars
by leveraging the knowledge acquired here, operating more surgically and effectively there.
1

They acknowledge and discuss the challenges of pursuing such task [12]: “the number of possible variations
on a given program is potentially infinite, and a theoretical framework is definitely needed to understand which
variations are important to replicate and which are not.” Some typical question they try to answer include: “If a
program worked for poor rural women in Africa, will it work for middle-income urban men in South Asia?”

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

