Self-Supervised Graph Transformer on Large-Scale
Molecular Data
Yu Rong1∗, Yatao Bian1∗, Tingyang Xu1 , Weiyang Xie1 , Ying Wei1 ,
Wenbing Huang2†, Junzhou Huang1
1
Tencent AI Lab
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
yu.rong@hotmail.com, yatao.bian@gmail.com, {tingyangxu, weiyangxie}@tencent.com
judyweiying@gmail.com, hwenbing@126.com, jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
How to obtain informative representations of molecules is a crucial prerequisite
in AI-driven drug design and discovery. Recent researches abstract molecules as
graphs and employ Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for molecular representation
learning. Nevertheless, two issues impede the usage of GNNs in real scenarios:
(1) insufficient labeled molecules for supervised training; (2) poor generalization
capability to new-synthesized molecules. To address them both, we propose a
novel framework, GROVER, which stands for Graph Representation frOm selfsuperVised mEssage passing tRansformer. With carefully designed self-supervised
tasks in node-, edge- and graph-level, GROVER can learn rich structural and semantic information of molecules from enormous unlabelled molecular data. Rather, to
encode such complex information, GROVER integrates Message Passing Networks
into the Transformer-style architecture to deliver a class of more expressive encoders of molecules. The flexibility of GROVER allows it to be trained efficiently
on large-scale molecular dataset without requiring any supervision, thus being
immunized to the two issues mentioned above. We pre-train GROVER with 100
million parameters on 10 million unlabelled molecules—the biggest GNN and the
largest training dataset in molecular representation learning. We then leverage the
pre-trained GROVER for molecular property prediction followed by task-specific
fine-tuning, where we observe a huge improvement (more than 6% on average)
from current state-of-the-art methods on 11 challenging benchmarks. The insights
we gained are that well-designed self-supervision losses and largely-expressive
pre-trained models enjoy the significant potential on performance boosting.

1

Introduction

Inspired by the remarkable achievements of deep learning in many scientific domains, such as computer vision [57, 19], natural language processing [53, 51], and social networks [31, 3], researchers
are exploiting deep learning approaches to accelerate the process of drug discovery and reduce costs
by facilitating the rapid identification of molecules [5]. Molecules can be naturally represented by
molecular graphs which preserve rich structural information. Therefore, supervised deep learning of
graphs, especially with Graph Neural Networks(GNNs) [46, 25] have shown promising results in
many tasks, such as molecular property prediction [13, 23] and virtual screening [56, 64].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Wenbing Huang is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

