Neuronal Gaussian Process Regression

Johannes Friedrich
Center for Computational Neuroscience
Flatiron Institute
New York, NY 10010
jfriedrich@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
The brain takes uncertainty intrinsic to our world into account. For example,
associating spatial locations with rewards requires to predict not only expected
reward at new spatial locations but also its uncertainty to avoid catastrophic events
and forage safely. A powerful and flexible framework for nonlinear regression
that takes uncertainty into account in a principled Bayesian manner is Gaussian
process (GP) regression. Here I propose that the brain implements GP regression
and present neural networks (NNs) for it. First layer neurons, e.g. hippocampal
place cells, have tuning curves that correspond to evaluations of the GP kernel.
Output neurons explicitly and distinctively encode predictive mean and variance, as
observed in orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) for the case of reward prediction. Because
the weights of a NN implementing exact GP regression do not arise with biological
plasticity rules, I present approximations to obtain local (anti-)Hebbian synaptic
learning rules. The resulting neuronal network approximates the full GP well
compared to popular sparse GP approximations and achieves comparable predictive
performance.

1

Introduction

Predictive processing represents one of the fundamental principles of neural computations [1]. In the
motor domain the brain employs predictive forward models [2], and a fundamental aspect of learned
behavior is the ability to form associations between predictive environmental events and rewarding
outcomes. These are just two examples of the general task of regression, to predict a dependent target
variable given explanatory input variable(s), that the brain has to solve. The brain does not only
predict point estimates but takes uncertainty into account, which led to coinage of the term “Bayesian
brain” [3]. On the behavioral level, sensory and motor uncertainty have been shown to be integrated
in a Bayesian optimal way [4]. There is also neurophysiological evidence, e.g. in the case of reward
learning individual neurons in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) encode (average) value [5], while others
explicitly encode the variance or ‘risk’ of the reward [6].
Above experimental findings lead to the corollary that the brain performs (non)linear regression while
taking uncertainty into account. A principled framework to do so is a Gaussian process (GP) that has
enjoyed prominent success in the machine learning community [7]. Furthermore, behavioral work in
cognitive science suggests that people indeed use GPs for function learning [8, 9, 10]. In this paper I
propose how the brain can implement (sparse) GP regression ((S)GPR).
Contributions While the correspondence between infinitely wide Bayesian neural networks (NN)
and GPs is well known [11], I show how the equations for the GP’s predictive mean and variance can
be mapped onto a specific NN of finite size. Further training its weights using standard deep learning
techniques, it outperforms Probabilistic Back-propagation [12] and Monte Carlo Dropout [13].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

