Monotone operator equilibrium networks
Ezra Winston
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, United States
ewinston@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
& Bosch Center for AI
Pittsburgh, United States
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Implicit-depth models such as Deep Equilibrium Networks have recently been
shown to match or exceed the performance of traditional deep networks while
being much more memory efficient. However, these models suffer from unstable convergence to a solution and lack guarantees that a solution exists. On the
other hand, Neural ODEs, another class of implicit-depth models, do guarantee
existence of a unique solution but perform poorly compared with traditional networks. In this paper, we develop a new class of implicit-depth model based on
the theory of monotone operators, the Monotone Operator Equilibrium Network
(monDEQ). We show the close connection between finding the equilibrium point
of an implicit network and solving a form of monotone operator splitting problem,
which admits efficient solvers with guaranteed, stable convergence. We then develop a parameterization of the network which ensures that all operators remain
monotone, which guarantees the existence of a unique equilibrium point. Finally, we show how to instantiate several versions of these models, and implement
the resulting iterative solvers, for structured linear operators such as multi-scale
convolutions. The resulting models vastly outperform the Neural ODE-based
models while also being more computationally efficient. Code is available at
http://github.com/locuslab/monotone_op_net.

1

Introduction

Recent work in deep learning has demonstrated the power of implicit-depth networks, models where
features are created not by explicitly iterating some number of nonlinear layers, but by finding a
solution to some implicitly defined equation. Instances of such models include the Neural ODE
[8], which computes hidden layers as the solution to a continuous-time dynamical system, and the
Deep Equilibrium (DEQ) Model [5], which finds a fixed point of a nonlinear dynamical system
corresponding to an effectively infinite-depth weight-tied network. These models, which trace back
to some of the original work on recurrent backpropagation [2, 23], have recently regained attention
since they have been shown to match or even exceed to performance of traditional deep networks in
domains such as sequence modeling [5]. At the same time, these models show drastically improved
memory efficiency over traditional networks since backpropagation is typically done analytically
using the implicit function theorem, without needing to store the intermediate hidden layers.
However, implict-depth models that perform well require extensive tuning in order to achieve
stable convergence to a solution. Obtaining convergence in DEQs requires careful initialization and
regularization, which has proven difficult in practice [21]. Moreover, solutions to these models are
not guaranteed to exist or be unique, making the output of the models potentially ill-defined. While
Neural ODEs [8] do guarantee existence of a unique solution, training remains unstable since the
ODE problems can become severely ill-posed [10]. Augmented Neural ODEs [10] improve the
stability of Neural ODEs by learning ODEs with simpler flows, but neither model achieves efficient
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

