RD2: Reward Decomposition
with Representation Disentanglement

Zichuan Lin∗
Tsinghua University
lzcthu12@gmail.com

Derek Yang∗
UC San Diego
dyang1206@gmail.com

Li Zhao
Microsoft Research
lizo@microsoft.com

Tao Qin
Microsoft Research
taoqin@microsoft.com

Guangwen Yang
Tsinghua University
ygw@tsinghua.edu.cn

Tieyan Liu
Microsoft Research
tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Reward decomposition, which aims to decompose the full reward into multiple
sub-rewards, has been proven beneficial for improving sample efficiency in reinforcement learning. Existing works on discovering reward decomposition are
mostly policy dependent, which constrains diversified or disentangled behavior between different policies induced by different sub-rewards. In this work, we propose
a set of novel policy-independent reward decomposition principles by constraining
uniqueness and compactness of different state representations relevant to different
sub-rewards. Our principles encourage sub-rewards with minimal relevant features,
while maintaining the uniqueness of each sub-reward. We derive a deep learning
algorithm based on our principle, and refer to our method as RD2 , since we learn
reward decomposition and disentangled representation jointly. RD2 is evaluated on
a toy case, where we have the true reward structure, and chosen Atari environments
where the reward structure exists but is unknown to the agent to demonstrate the
effectiveness of RD2 against existing reward decomposition methods.

1

Introduction

Since deep Q-learning was proposed by Mnih et al. [2015], reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved
great success in decision making problems. While general RL algorithms have been extensively
studied, here we focus on those RL tasks with multiple reward channels. In those tasks, we are
aware of the existence of multiple reward channels, but only have access to the full reward. Reward
decomposition has been proposed for such tasks to decompose the reward into sub-rewards, which
can be used to train RL agent with improved sample efficiency.
Existing works mostly perform reward decomposition by constraining the behavior of different
policies induced by different sub-rewards. Grimm and Singh [2019] propose encouraging each policy
to obtain only its corresponding sub-rewards. However, their work requires that the environment
be reset to arbitrary state and cannot be applied to general RL settings. Lin et al. [2019] propose
encouraging the diversified behavior between such policies, but their method only obtains sub-rewards
on transition data generated by their own policy, therefore it cannot decompose rewards for arbitrary
state-action pairs.
In this paper, we propose a set of novel principles for reward decomposition by exploring the relation
between sub-rewards and their relevant features. We demonstrate our principles based on a toy
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

