Neural Bridge Sampling for Evaluating
Safety-Critical Autonomous Systems
Aman Sinha⇤
Stanford University
amans@stanford.edu

Matthew O’Kelly⇤
University of Pennsylvania
mokelly@seas.upenn.edu

Russ Tedrake
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
russt@mit.edu

John Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Abstract
Learning-based methodologies increasingly find applications in safety-critical domains like autonomous driving and medical robotics. Due to the rare nature of
dangerous events, real-world testing is prohibitively expensive and unscalable. In
this work, we employ a probabilistic approach to safety evaluation in simulation,
where we are concerned with computing the probability of dangerous events. We
develop a novel rare-event simulation method that combines exploration, exploitation, and optimization techniques to find failure modes and estimate their rate of
occurrence. We provide rigorous guarantees for the performance of our method
in terms of both statistical and computational efficiency. Finally, we demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach on a variety of scenarios, illustrating its usefulness
as a tool for rapid sensitivity analysis and model comparison that are essential to
developing and testing safety-critical autonomous systems.

1

Introduction

Data-driven and learning-based approaches have the potential to enable robots and autonomous
systems that intelligently interact with unstructured environments. Unfortunately, evaluating the
performance of the closed-loop system is challenging, limiting the success of such methods in safetycritical settings. Even if we produce a deep reinforcement learning agent better than a human at
driving, flying a plane, or performing surgery, we have no tractable way to certify the system’s quality.
Thus, currently deployed safety-critical autonomous systems are limited to structured environments
that allow mechanisms such as PID control, simple verifiable protocols, or convex optimization to
enable guarantees for properties like stability, consensus, or recursive feasibility (see e.g. [33, 69, 14]).
The stylized settings of these problems and the limited expressivity of guaranteeable properties are
barriers to solving unstructured, real-world tasks such as autonomous navigation, locomotion, and
manipulation.
The goal of this paper is to efficiently evaluate complex systems that lack safety guarantees and/or
operate in unstructured environments. We assume access to a simulator to test the system’s performance. Given a distribution X ⇠ P0 of simulation parameters that describe typical environments for
the system under test, our governing problem is to estimate the probability of an adverse event
p := P0 (f (X)  ).
(1)
The parameter is a threshold defining an adverse event, and f : X ! R measures the safety of a
realization x of the agent and environment (higher values are safer). In this work, we assume P0 is
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

