Analysis and Design of Thompson Sampling
for Stochastic Partial Monitoring
Taira Tsuchiya
The University of Tokyo
RIKEN AIP
tsuchiya@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Junya Honda
The University of Tokyo
RIKEN AIP
honda@edu.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Masashi Sugiyama
RIKEN AIP
The University of Tokyo
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We investigate finite stochastic partial monitoring, which is a general model for
sequential learning with limited feedback. While Thompson sampling is one of the
most promising algorithms on a variety of online decision-making problems, its
properties for stochastic partial monitoring have not been theoretically investigated,
and the existing algorithm relies on a heuristic approximation of the posterior
distribution. To mitigate these problems, we present a novel Thompson-samplingbased algorithm, which enables us to exactly sample the target parameter from
the posterior distribution. Besides, we prove that the new algorithm achieves the
logarithmic problem-dependent expected pseudo-regret O(log T ) for a linearized
variant of the problem with local observability. This result is the first regret bound of
Thompson sampling for partial monitoring, which also becomes the first logarithmic
regret bound of Thompson sampling for linear bandits.

1

Introduction

Partial monitoring (PM) is a general sequential decision-making problem with limited feedback (Rustichini, 1999; Piccolboni and Schindelhauer, 2001). PM is attracting broad interest because it includes
a wide range of problems such as the multi-armed bandit problem (Lai and Robbins, 1985), a linear
optimization problem with full or bandit feedback (Zinkevich, 2003; Dani et al., 2008), dynamic
pricing (Kleinberg and Leighton, 2003), and label efficient prediction (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2005).
A PM game can be seen as a sequential game that is played by two players: a learner and an opponent.
At every round, the learner chooses an action, while the opponent chooses an outcome. Then, the
learner suffers an unobserved loss and receives a feedback symbol, both of which are determined
from the selected action and outcome. The main characteristic of this game is that the learner cannot
directly observe the outcome and loss. The goal of the learner is to minimize his/her cumulative loss
over all rounds. The performance of the learner is evaluated by the regret, which is defined as the
difference between the cumulative losses of the learner and the optimal action (i.e., the action whose
expected loss is the smallest).
There are mainly two types of PM games, which are the stochastic and adversarial settings (Piccolboni
and Schindelhauer, 2001; Bartók et al., 2011). In the stochastic setting, the outcome at each round is
determined from the opponent’s strategy, which is a probability vector over the opponent’s possible
choices. On the other hand, in the adversarial setting, the outcomes are arbitrarily decided by the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

