Follow the Perturbed Leader: Optimism and Fast
Parallel Algorithms for Smooth Minimax Games
Arun Sai Suggala
Carnegie Mellon University
asuggala@cs.cmu.edu

Praneeth Netrapalli
Microsoft Research, India
praneeth@microsoft.com

Abstract

1

We consider the problem of online learning and its application to solving minimax
games. For the online learning problem, Follow the Perturbed
`
˘ Leader (FTPL) is
a widely studied algorithm which enjoys the optimal O T 1{2 worst case regret
guarantee for both convex and nonconvex losses. In this work, we show that when
the sequence of loss functions is predictable, a simple modification of FTPL which
incorporates optimism can achieve better regret guarantees, while retaining the
optimal worst case regret guarantee for unpredictable sequences. A key challenge
in obtaining these tighter regret bounds is the stochasticity and optimism in the
algorithm, which requires different analysis techniques than those commonly used
in the analysis of FTPL. The key ingredient we utilize in our analysis is the dual
view of perturbation as regularization. While our algorithm has several applications,
we consider the specific application of minimax games. For solving smooth convexconcave games, our algorithm only requires access to a linear optimization oracle.
For Lipschitz and smooth nonconvex-nonconcave games, our algorithm requires
access to an optimization oracle which computes the perturbed best response.
In˘
`
both these settings, our algorithm solves the game up to an accuracy of O T ´1{2
using T calls to the optimization oracle. An important feature of our algorithm
is that it is highly parallelizable
and requires only OpT 1{2 q iterations, with each
` 1{2 ˘
iteration making O T
parallel calls to the optimization oracle.

Introduction

In this work, we consider the problem of online learning, where in each iteration, the learner chooses
an action and observes a loss function. The goal of the learner is to choose a sequence of actions
which minimizes the cumulative loss suffered over the course of learning. The paradigm of online
learning has many theoretical and practical applications and has been widely studied in a number of
fields, including game theory and machine learning. One of the popular applications of online learning
is in solving minimax games arising in various contexts such as boosting [1], robust optimization [2],
Generative Adversarial Networks [3].
In recent years, a number of efficient algorithms have been developed for regret minimization. These
algorithms fall into two broad categories, namely, Follow the Regularized Leader (FTRL) [4] and
FTPL [5] style algorithms. When the sequence of loss functions
by the learner are convex,
` encountered
˘
both these algorithms are known to achieve the optimal O T 1{2 worst case regret [6, 7]. While
these algorithms have similar regret guarantees, they differ in computational aspects. Each iteration
of FTRL involves optimization of a non-linear convex function over the action space (also called the
projection step). In contrast, each step of FTPL involves solving a linear optimization problem, which
can be implemented efficiently for many problems of interest [8, 9, 10]. For example, if the action
space is an `p ball for some p R t1, 2, 8u, then projecting onto this set is much more computationally
expensive than performing linear optimization over this set. As another example, consider the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

