Preference learning along multiple criteria:
A game-theoretic perspective

Kush Bhatia
EECS, UC Berkeley
kush@cs.berkeley.edu
Peter L. Bartlett
EECS and Statistics, UC Berkeley
peter@berkeley.edu

Ashwin Pananjady
Simons Institute, UC Berkeley
ashwinpm@berkeley.edu

Anca D. Dragan
Martin J. Wainwright
EECS, UC Berkeley EECS and Statistics, UC Berkeley
anca@berkeley.edu
wainwrig@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The literature on ranking from ordinal data is vast, and there are several ways to
aggregate overall preferences from pairwise comparisons between objects. In particular, it is well-known that any Nash equilibrium of the zero-sum game induced
by the preference matrix defines a natural solution concept (winning distribution
over objects) known as a von Neumann winner. Many real-world problems, however, are inevitably multi-criteria, with different pairwise preferences governing the
different criteria. In this work, we generalize the notion of a von Neumann winner
to the multi-criteria setting by taking inspiration from Blackwell’s approachability.
Our framework allows for non-linear aggregation of preferences across criteria, and
generalizes the linearization-based approach from multi-objective optimization.
From a theoretical standpoint, we show that the Blackwell winner of a multi-criteria
problem instance can be computed as the solution to a convex optimization problem.
Furthermore, given random samples of pairwise comparisons, we show that a
simple, “plug-in” estimator achieves (near-)optimal minimax sample complexity.
Finally, we showcase the practical utility of our framework in a user study on
autonomous driving, where we find that the Blackwell winner outperforms the von
Neumann winner for the overall preferences.

1

Introduction

Economists, social scientists, engineers, and computer scientists have long studied models for
human preferences, under the broad umbrella of social choice theory [10, 7]. Learning from human
preferences has found applications in interactive robotics for learning reward functions [45, 39],
in medical domains for personalizing assistive devices [59, 9], and in recommender systems for
optimizing search engines [15, 28]. The recent focus on safety in AI has popularized human-in-theloop learning methods that use human preferences in order to promote value alignment [16, 46, 6].
The most popular form of preference elicitation is to make pairwise comparisons [51, 13, 33].
Eliciting such feedback involves showing users a pair of objects and asking them a query: Do you
prefer object A or object B? Depending on the application, an object could correspond to a product in
a search query, or a policy or reward function in reinforcement learning. A vast body of classical work
dating back to Condorcet and Borda [17, 12] has focused on defining and producing a “winning"
object from the result of a set of pairwise comparisons.
In relatively recent work, Dudik et al. [22] proposed the concept of a von Neumann winner, corresponding to a distribution over objects that beats or ties every other object in the collection. They
showed that under an expected utility assumption, such a randomized winner always exists and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

