Benchmarking Deep Learning Interpretability in
Time Series Predictions
Aya Abdelsalam Ismail, Mohamed Gunady, Héctor Corrada Bravo∗ , Soheil Feizi ∗
{asalam,mgunady,sfeizi}@cs.umd.edu, hcorrada@umiacs.umd.edu
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland

Abstract
Saliency methods are used extensively to highlight the importance of input features
in model predictions. These methods are mostly used in vision and language
tasks, and their applications to time series data is relatively unexplored. In this
paper, we set out to extensively compare the performance of various saliency-based
interpretability methods across diverse neural architectures, including Recurrent
Neural Network, Temporal Convolutional Networks, and Transformers in a new
benchmark † of synthetic time series data. We propose and report multiple metrics
to empirically evaluate the performance of saliency methods for detecting feature
importance over time using both precision (i.e., whether identified features contain
meaningful signals) and recall (i.e., the number of features with signal identified
as important). Through several experiments, we show that (i) in general, network
architectures and saliency methods fail to reliably and accurately identify feature
importance over time in time series data, (ii) this failure is mainly due to the
conflation of time and feature domains, and (iii) the quality of saliency maps
can be improved substantially by using our proposed two-step temporal saliency
rescaling (TSR) approach that first calculates the importance of each time step
before calculating the importance of each feature at a time step.

1

Introduction

As the use of Machine Learning models increases in various domains [1, 2], the need for reliable model
explanations is crucial [3, 4]. This need has resulted in the development of numerous interpretability
methods that estimate feature importance [5–13]. As opposed to the task of understanding the
prediction performance of a model, measuring and understanding the performance of interpretability
methods is challenging [14–18] since there is no ground truth to use for such comparisons. For
instance, while one could identify sets of informative features for a specific task a priori, models
may not necessarily have to draw information from these features to make accurate predictions. In
multivariate time series data, these challenges are even more profound since we cannot rely on human
perception as one would when visualizing interpretations by overlaying saliency maps over images or
when highlighting relevant words in a sentence.
In this work, we compare the performance of different interpretability methods both perturbationbased and gradient-based methods, across diverse neural architectures including Recurrent Neural
Network, Temporal Convolutional Networks, and Transformers when applied to the classification
of multivariate time series. We quantify the performance of every (architectures, estimator) pair for
time series data in a systematic way. We design and generate multiple synthetic datasets to capture
different temporal-spatial aspects (e.g., Figure 1). Saliency methods must be able to distinguish
important and non-important features at a given time, and capture changes in the importance of
∗

Authors contributed equally
Code: https://github.com/ayaabdelsalam91/TS-Interpretability-Benchmark

†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

