Exact expressions for double descent and implicit
regularization via surrogate random design
Michał Dereziński
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mderezin@berkeley.edu

Feynman Liang
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
feynman@berkeley.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Double descent refers to the phase transition that is exhibited by the generalization
error of unregularized learning models when varying the ratio between the number
of parameters and the number of training samples. The recent success of highly
over-parameterized machine learning models such as deep neural networks has motivated a theoretical analysis of the double descent phenomenon in classical models
such as linear regression which can also generalize well in the over-parameterized
regime. We provide the first exact non-asymptotic expressions for double descent
of the minimum norm linear estimator. Our approach involves constructing a special determinantal point process which we call surrogate random design, to replace
the standard i.i.d. design of the training sample. This surrogate design admits exact
expressions for the mean squared error of the estimator while preserving the key
properties of the standard design. We also establish an exact implicit regularization
result for over-parameterized training samples. In particular, we show that, for the
surrogate design, the implicit bias of the unregularized minimum norm estimator
precisely corresponds to solving a ridge-regularized least squares problem on the
population distribution. In our analysis we introduce a new mathematical tool of independent interest: the class of random matrices for which determinant commutes
with expectation.

1

Introduction

Classical statistical learning theory asserts that to achieve generalization one must use training sample
size that sufficiently exceeds the complexity of the learning model, where the latter is typically
represented by the number of parameters [or some related structural parameter; see FHT01]. In
particular, this seems to suggest the conventional wisdom that one should not use models that fit the
training data exactly. However, modern machine learning practice often seems to go against this
intuition, using models with so many parameters that the training data can be perfectly interpolated,
in which case the training error vanishes. It has been shown that models such as deep neural networks,
as well as certain so-called interpolating kernels and decision trees, can generalize well in this regime.
In particular, [BHMM19] empirically demonstrated a phase transition in generalization performance
of learning models which occurs at an interpolation thershold, i.e., a point where training error goes
to zero (as one varies the ratio between the model complexity and the sample size). Moving away
from this threshold in either direction tends to reduce the generalization error, leading to the so-called
double descent curve.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

