One Ring to Rule Them All: Certifiably Robust
Geometric Perception with Outliers

Heng Yang and Luca Carlone
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems (LIDS)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{hankyang,lcarlone}@mit.edu

Abstract
We propose the first general and practical framework to design certifiable algorithms for robust geometric perception in the presence of a large amount of outliers.
We investigate the use of a truncated least squares (TLS) cost function, which
is known to be robust to outliers, but leads to hard, nonconvex, and nonsmooth
optimization problems. Our first contribution is to show that –for a broad class of
geometric perception problems– TLS estimation can be reformulated as an optimization over the ring of polynomials and Lasserre’s hierarchy of convex moment
relaxations is empirically tight at the minimum relaxation order (i.e., certifiably obtains the global minimum of the nonconvex TLS problem). Our second contribution
is to exploit the structural sparsity of the objective and constraint polynomials and
leverage basis reduction to significantly reduce the size of the semidefinite program
(SDP) resulting from the moment relaxation, without compromising its tightness.
Our third contribution is to develop scalable dual optimality certifiers from the
lens of sums-of-squares (SOS) relaxation, that can compute the suboptimality gap
and possibly certify global optimality of any candidate solution (e.g., returned by
fast heuristics such as RANSAC or graduated non-convexity). Our dual certifiers
leverage Douglas-Rachford Splitting to solve a convex feasibility SDP. Numerical
experiments across different perception problems, including single rotation averaging, shape alignment, 3D point cloud and mesh registration, and high-integrity
satellite pose estimation, demonstrate the tightness of our relaxations, the correctness of the certification, and the scalability of the proposed dual certifiers to large
problems, beyond the reach of current SDP solvers.1

1

Introduction

Geometric perception, estimating unknown geometric models (e.g., rotations, poses, 3D structure)
from visual measurements (e.g., images and point clouds), is a fundamental problem in computer
vision, robotics, and graphics. It finds extensive applications to object detection and localization [95,
98], motion estimation and 3D reconstruction [30, 104], simultaneous localization and mapping [23,
84], shape analysis [71, 78], virtual and augmented reality [58], and medical imaging [8].
A common formulation for geometric perception resorts to optimization to perform estimation:
PN
min
(1)
i=1 ρ (r (x, yi )) ,
x∈X

where yi ∈ Y, i = 1, . . . , N, are the visual measurements, x ∈ X ⊆ Rn is the to-be-estimated
geometric model, r : X × Y → R + is the residual function that quantifies the disagreement between
each measurement yi and the geometric model x, and ρ : R + → R + is the cost function that
determines how residuals are penalized. When the distribution of the measurement noise is known,
maximum likelihood estimation provides a systematic way to design ρ; for instance, assuming
1

Code available at https://github.com/MIT-SPARK/CertifiablyRobustPerception.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

