Avoiding Side Effects By Considering Future Tasks

Victoria Krakovna∗
DeepMind

Laurent Orseau
DeepMind

Richard Ngo
DeepMind

Miljan Martic
DeepMind

Shane Legg
DeepMind

Abstract
Designing reward functions is difficult: the designer has to specify what to do
(what it means to complete the task) as well as what not to do (side effects that
should be avoided while completing the task). To alleviate the burden on the reward
designer, we propose an algorithm to automatically generate an auxiliary reward
function that penalizes side effects. This auxiliary objective rewards the ability
to complete possible future tasks, which decreases if the agent causes side effects
during the current task. The future task reward can also give the agent an incentive
to interfere with events in the environment that make future tasks less achievable,
such as irreversible actions by other agents. To avoid this interference incentive, we
introduce a baseline policy that represents a default course of action (such as doing
nothing), and use it to filter out future tasks that are not achievable by default. We
formally define interference incentives and show that the future task approach with
a baseline policy avoids these incentives in the deterministic case. Using gridworld
environments that test for side effects and interference, we show that our method
avoids interference and is more effective for avoiding side effects than the common
approach of penalizing irreversible actions.

1

Introduction

Designing reward functions for a reinforcement learning agent is often a difficult task. One of the
most challenging aspects of this process is that in addition to specifying what to do to complete a
task, the reward function also needs to specify what not to do. For example, if an agent’s task is to
carry a box across the room, we want it to do so without breaking a vase in its path, while an agent
tasked with eliminating a computer virus should avoid unnecessarily deleting files.
This is known as the side effects problem [2], which is related to the frame problem in classical
AI [15]. The frame problem asks how to specify the ways an action does not change the environment,
and poses the challenge of specifying all possible non-effects. The side effects problem is about
avoiding unnecessary changes to the environment, and poses the same challenge of considering all the
aspects of the environment that the agent should not affect. Thus, developing an extensive definition
of side effects is difficult at best.
The usual way to deal with side effects is for the designer to manually and incrementally modify
the reward function to steer the agent away from undesirable behaviours. However, this can be a
tedious process and this approach does not avoid side effects that were not foreseen or observed
by the designer. To alleviate the burden on the designer, we propose an algorithm to generate an
auxiliary reward function that penalizes side effects, which computes the reward automatically as the
agent learns about the environment.
A commonly used auxiliary reward function is reversibility [16, 6], which rewards the ability to return
to the starting state, thus giving the agent an incentive to avoid irreversible actions. However, if the
task requires irreversible actions (e.g. making an omelette requires breaking some eggs), an auxiliary
∗

Corresponding author: vkrakovna@google.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

