Learning Physical Graph Representations from
Visual Scenes
Daniel M. Bear1,3,† , Chaofei Fan1,2 , Damian Mrowca2 , Yunzhu Li4 , Seth Alter5 , Aran Nayebi6 ,
Jeremy Schwartz5 , Li Fei-Fei2,1 , Jiajun Wu2 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum5,4 , and Daniel L.K. Yamins1,2,3
1
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
3
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University
4
MIT CSAIL
5
MIT Brain and Cognitive Sciences
6
Neurosciences Ph.D. Program, Stanford University
†
Correspondence: dbear@stanford.edu

2

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have proved exceptional at learning representations for visual object categorization. However, CNNs do not explicitly encode
objects, parts, and their physical properties, which has limited CNNs’ success on
tasks that require structured understanding of visual scenes. To overcome these limitations, we introduce the idea of “Physical Scene Graphs” (PSGs), which represent
scenes as hierarchical graphs, with nodes in the hierarchy corresponding intuitively
to object parts at different scales, and edges to physical connections between parts.
Bound to each node is a vector of latent attributes that intuitively represent object properties such as surface shape and texture. We also describe PSGNet, a
network architecture that learns to extract PSGs by reconstructing scenes through
a PSG-structured bottleneck. PSGNet augments standard CNNs by including:
recurrent feedback connections to combine low and high-level image information;
graph pooling and vectorization operations that convert spatially-uniform feature
maps into object-centric graph structures; and perceptual grouping principles to
encourage the identification of meaningful scene elements. We show that PSGNet
outperforms alternative self-supervised scene representation algorithms at scene
segmentation tasks, especially on complex real-world images, and generalizes well
to unseen object types and scene arrangements. PSGNet is also able learn from
physical motion, enhancing scene estimates even for static images. We present a
series of ablation studies illustrating the importance of each component of the PSGNet architecture, analyses showing that learned latent attributes capture intuitive
scene properties, and illustrate the use of PSGs for compositional scene inference.

1

Introduction

To make sense of their visual environment, intelligent agents must construct an internal representation
of the complex visual scenes in which they operate. Recently, one class of computer vision algorithms –
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) – has shown an impressive ability to extract useful categorical
information from visual scenes. However, human perception (and the aim of computer vision) is
not only about image classification. Humans also group scenes into object-centric representations
in which information about objects, their constituent parts, positions, poses, 3D geometric and
physical material properties, and their relationships to other objects, are explicitly available. Such
object-centric, geometrically-rich representations natively build in key cognitive concepts such as
object permanence, and naturally support high-level visual planning and inference tasks.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

