Fourier Features Let Networks Learn
High Frequency Functions in Low Dimensional Domains

Matthew Tancik1∗
Nithin Raghavan1
1

Pratul P. Srinivasan1,2∗
Utkarsh Singhal1

University of California, Berkeley

Ben Mildenhall1∗

Ravi Ramamoorthi3
2

Google Research

3

Sara Fridovich-Keil1

Jonathan T. Barron2

Ren Ng1

University of California, San Diego

Abstract
We show that passing input points through a simple Fourier feature mapping
enables a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to learn high-frequency functions in lowdimensional problem domains. These results shed light on recent advances in
computer vision and graphics that achieve state-of-the-art results by using MLPs
to represent complex 3D objects and scenes. Using tools from the neural tangent
kernel (NTK) literature, we show that a standard MLP has impractically slow
convergence to high frequency signal components. To overcome this spectral
bias, we use a Fourier feature mapping to transform the effective NTK into a
stationary kernel with a tunable bandwidth. We suggest an approach for selecting
problem-specific Fourier features that greatly improves the performance of MLPs
for low-dimensional regression tasks relevant to the computer vision and graphics
communities.

1

Introduction

A recent line of research in computer vision and graphics replaces traditional discrete representations
of objects, scene geometry, and appearance (e.g. meshes and voxel grids) with continuous functions
parameterized by deep fully-connected networks (also called multilayer perceptrons or MLPs). These
MLPs, which we will call “coordinate-based” MLPs, take low-dimensional coordinates as inputs
(typically points in R3 ) and are trained to output a representation of shape, density, and/or color at
each input location (see Figure 1). This strategy is compelling since coordinate-based MLPs are
amenable to gradient-based optimization and machine learning, and can be orders of magnitude more
compact than grid-sampled representations. Coordinate-based MLPs have been used to represent
images [31, 42] (referred to as “compositional pattern producing networks”), volume density [30],
occupancy [27], and signed distance [35], and have achieved state-of-the-art results across a variety
of tasks such as shape representation [9, 11, 13, 14, 19, 29, 35], texture synthesis [17, 34], shape
inference from images [24, 25], and novel view synthesis [30, 32, 38, 41].
We leverage recent progress in modeling the behavior of deep networks using kernel regression with
a neural tangent kernel (NTK) [18] to theoretically and experimentally show that standard MLPs are
poorly suited for these low-dimensional coordinate-based vision and graphics tasks. In particular,
MLPs have difficulty learning high frequency functions, a phenomenon referred to in the literature as
“spectral bias” [3, 36]. NTK theory suggests that this is because standard coordinate-based MLPs
correspond to kernels with a rapid frequency falloff, which effectively prevents them from being able
to represent the high-frequency content present in natural images and scenes.
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS
2020), Vancouver, Canada.

