Fewer is More: A Deep Graph Metric Learning
Perspective Using Fewer Proxies

1

Yuehua Zhu1 Muli Yang1 Cheng Deng1∗ Wei Liu2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{yuehuazhu, mlyang}@stu.xidian.edu.cn,
chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
Deep metric learning plays a key role in various machine learning tasks. Most
of the previous works have been confined to sampling from a mini-batch, which
cannot precisely characterize the global geometry of the embedding space. Although researchers have developed proxy- and classification-based methods to
tackle the sampling issue, those methods inevitably incur a redundant computational cost. In this paper, we propose a novel Proxy-based deep Graph Metric
Learning (ProxyGML) approach from the perspective of graph classification, which
uses fewer proxies yet achieves better comprehensive performance. Specifically,
multiple global proxies are leveraged to collectively approximate the original data
points for each class. To efficiently capture local neighbor relationships, a small
number of such proxies are adaptively selected to construct similarity subgraphs
between these proxies and each data point. Further, we design a novel reverse label
propagation algorithm, by which the neighbor relationships are adjusted according to ground-truth labels, so that a discriminative metric space can be learned
during the process of subgraph classification. Extensive experiments carried out
on widely-used CUB-200-2011, Cars196, and Stanford Online Products datasets
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed ProxyGML over the state-of-the-art
methods in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency. The source code is publicly
available at https://github.com/YuehuaZhu/ProxyGML.

1

Introduction

Deep metric learning (DML) has been extensively studied in the past decade due to its broad applications, e.g., zero-shot classification [37, 41, 36], image retrieval [35, 3], person re-identification [7, 48],
and face recognition [38]. The core idea of DML is to learn an embedding space, where the embedded
vectors of similar samples are close to each other while those of dissimilar ones are far apart from
each other.
An embedding space with such a desired property is typically learned by metric losses, such as
contrastive loss [19, 38] and triplet loss [8]. However, these losses rely on pairs or triplets constructed
from samples in a mini-batch, empirically suffering from the sampling issue [7, 23] and leading to a
polynomial growth with respect to the number of training examples. It thus turns out that the previous
metric losses are highly redundant and less informative. In light of this, many efforts have been
devoted to developing efficient hard/semi-hard negative sample mining strategies [7, 39] for handling
the sampling issue. Essentially, these strategies still select hard samples from a subset (mini-batch) of
the whole training data set, which fail to characterize the global geometry of the embedding space
precisely.
∗

The corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

