A biologically plausible neural network for
Slow Feature Analysis
David Lipshutz⇤1

Charlie Windolf⇤1,2
1

Siavash Golkar 1

Dmitri B. Chklovskii 1,3

Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
2
Department of Statistics, Columbia University
3
Neuroscience Institute, NYU Medical Center

{dlipshutz,sgolkar,dchklovskii}@flatironinstitute.org
c.windolf@columbia.edu

Abstract
Learning latent features from time series data is an important problem in both
machine learning and brain function. One approach, called Slow Feature Analysis (SFA), leverages the slowness of many salient features relative to the rapidly
varying input signals. Furthermore, when trained on naturalistic stimuli, SFA reproduces interesting properties of cells in the primary visual cortex and hippocampus,
suggesting that the brain uses temporal slowness as a computational principle
for learning latent features. However, despite the potential relevance of SFA for
modeling brain function, there is currently no SFA algorithm with a biologically
plausible neural network implementation, by which we mean an algorithm operates
in the online setting and can be mapped onto a neural network with local synaptic
updates. In this work, starting from an SFA objective, we derive an SFA algorithm,
called Bio-SFA, with a biologically plausible neural network implementation. We
validate Bio-SFA on naturalistic stimuli.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning of meaningful latent features from noisy, high-dimensional data is a fundamental problem for both machine learning and brain function. Often, the relevant features in an
environment (e.g., objects) vary on relatively slow timescales when compared to noisy sensory data
(e.g., the light intensity measured by a single receptor in the retina). Therefore, temporal slowness
has been proposed as a computational principle for extracting relevant latent features [8, 19, 31].
A popular approach for extracting slow features, introduced by Wiskott and Sejnowski [31], is
Slow Feature Analysis (SFA). SFA is an unsupervised learning algorithm that extracts the slowest
projection, in terms of discrete time derivative, from a nonlinear expansion of the input signal. When
trained on natural image sequences, SFA extracts features that resemble response properties of
complex cells in early visual processing [2]. Impressively, hierarchical networks of SFA trained on
simulated rat visual streams learn representations of position and orientation similar to representations
encoded in the hippocampus [9].
The relevance of SFA is strengthened by its close relationship to information theoretic objectives
and its equivalence to other successful algorithms under certain assumptions. When the time series
is reversible and Gaussian, (Linear) SFA is equivalent to maximizing mutual information between
the current output of the system and the next input [7, 5]. Moreover, features extracted by several
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

