Tight last-iterate convergence rates for no-regret
learning in multi-player games
Noah Golowich
MIT CSAIL
nzg@mit.edu

Sarath Pattathil
MIT EECS
sarathp@mit.edu

Constantinos Daskalakis
MIT CSAIL
costis@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We study the question of obtaining last-iterate convergence rates for no-regret
learning algorithms in multi-player games. We show that the optimistic gradient
(OG) algorithm
p with a constant step-size, which is no-regret, achieves a last-iterate
rate of O(1/ T ) with respect to the gap function in smooth monotone games.
This result addresses a question of Mertikopoulos & Zhou (2018), who asked
whether extra-gradient approaches (such as OG) can be applied to achieve improved
guarantees in the multi-agent learning setting. The proof of our upper bound uses
a new technique centered around an adaptive
choice of potential function at each
p
iteration. We also show that the O(1/ T ) rate is tight for all p-SCLI algorithms,
which includes OG as a special case. As a byproduct of our lower bound analysis
we additionally present a proof of a conjecture of Arjevani et al. (2015) which is
more direct than previous approaches.

1

Introduction

In the setting of multi-agent online learning ([SS11, CBL06]), K players interact with each other over
(t)
(t)
time. At each time step t, each player k 2 {1, . . . , K} chooses an action zk ; zk may represent,
(t)
for instance, the bidding strategy of an advertiser at time t. Player k then suffers a loss `t (zk )
(t)
that depends on both player k’s action zk and the actions of all other players at time t (which are
absorbed into the loss function `t (·)). Finally, player k receives some feedback informing them of
how to improve their actions in future iterations. In this paper we study gradient-based feedback,
(t)
(t)
meaning that the feedback is the vector gk = rzk `t (zk ).

A fundamental quantity used to measure the performance of an online learning algorithm is the
regret of player k, which is the difference between the total loss of player k over T time steps and
PT
(t)
the loss of the best possible action in hindsight: formally, the regret at time T is t=1 `t (zk )
PT
minzk t=1 `t (zk ). An algorithm is said to be no-regret if its regret at time T grows sub-linearly
with T for an adversarial choice of the loss functions `t . If all agents playing a game follow no-regret
learning algorithms to choose their actions, then it is well-known that the empirical frequency of
their actions converges to a coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE) ([MV78, CBL06]). In turn, a
substantial body of work (e.g., [CBL06, DP09, EDMN09, CD11, VZ13, KKDB15, BTHK15, MP17,
MZ18, KBTB18]) has focused on establishing for which classes of games or learning algorithms this
convergence to a CCE can be strengthened, such as to convergence to a Nash equilibrium (NE).
However, the type of convergence guaranteed in these works generally either applies only to the
time-average of the joint action profiles, or else requires the sequence of learning rates to converge to
0. Such guarantees leave substantial room for improvement: a statement about the average of the joint
action profiles fails to capture the game dynamics over time ([MPP17]), and both types of guarantees
use newly acquired information with decreasing weight, which, as remarked by [LZMJ20], is very
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

