Generative Neurosymbolic Machines

Sungjin Ahn
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
sjn.ahn@gmail.com

Jindong Jiang
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
jindong.jiang@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Reconciling symbolic and distributed representations is a crucial challenge that can
potentially resolve the limitations of current deep learning. Remarkable advances in
this direction have been achieved recently via generative object-centric representation models. While learning a recognition model that infers object-centric symbolic
representations like bounding boxes from raw images in an unsupervised way,
no such model can provide another important ability of a generative model, i.e.,
generating (sampling) according to the structure of learned world density. In this
paper, we propose Generative Neurosymbolic Machines, a generative model that
combines the benefits of distributed and symbolic representations to support both
structured representations of symbolic components and density-based generation.
These two crucial properties are achieved by a two-layer latent hierarchy with the
global distributed latent for flexible density modeling and the structured symbolic
latent map. To increase the model flexibility in this hierarchical structure, we also
propose the StructDRAW prior. In experiments, we show that the proposed model
significantly outperforms the previous structured representation models as well
as the state-of-the-art non-structured generative models in terms of both structure
accuracy and image generation quality.

1

Introduction

Two central abilities in human and machine intelligence are to learn abstract representations of the
world and to generate imaginations in such a way to reflect the causal structure of the world. Deep
latent variable models like variational autoencoders (VAEs) [28, 36] offer an elegant probabilistic
framework to learn both these abilities in an unsupervised and end-to-end trainable fashion. However,
the single distributed vector representations used in most VAEs provide in practice only a weak or
implicit form of structure induced by the independence prior. Therefore, in representing complex,
high-dimensional, and structured observations such as a scene image containing various objects, the
representation is rather difficult to express useful structural properties such as modularity, compositionality, and interpretability. These properties, however, are believed to be crucial in resolving
limitations of current deep learning in various System 2 [26] related abilities such as reasoning [4],
causal learning [37, 34], accountability [11], and systematic out-of-distribution generalization [2, 42].
There have been remarkable recent advances in resolving this challenge by learning to represent an
observation as a composition of its entity representations, particularly in an object-centric fashion
for scene images [13, 29, 16, 41, 6, 15, 12, 10, 30, 9, 24, 44]. Equipped with more explicit inductive
biases such as spatial locality of objects, symbolic representations, and compositional scene modeling,
these models provide a way to recognize and generate a given observation via the composition of
interacting entity-based representations. However, most of these models do not support the other
crucial ability of a generative model: generating imaginary observations by learning the density of
the observed data. Although this ability to imagine according to the density of the possible worlds
plays a crucial role, e.g., in world models required for planning and model-based reinforcement
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

