Marginal Utility for Planning
in Continuous or Large Discrete Action Spaces

Zaheen Farraz Ahmad
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
zfahmad@ualberta.ca

Levi H. S. Lelis
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
levi.lelis@ualberta.ca

Michael Bowling
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
mbowling@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Sample-based planning is a powerful family of algorithms for generating intelligent
behavior from a model of the environment. Generating good candidate actions
is critical to the success of sample-based planners, particularly in continuous or
large action spaces. Typically, candidate action generation exhausts the action
space, uses domain knowledge, or more recently, involves learning a stochastic
policy to provide such search guidance. In this paper we explore explicitly learning
a candidate action generator by optimizing a novel objective, marginal utility.
The marginal utility of an action generator measures the increase in value of an
action over previously generated actions. We validate our approach in both curling,
a challenging stochastic domain with continuous state and action spaces, and a
location game with a discrete but large action space. We show that a generator
trained with the marginal utility objective outperforms hand-coded schemes built
on substantial domain knowledge, trained stochastic policies, and other natural
objectives for generating actions for sample-based planners.

1

Introduction

Sample-based planning is a powerful family of algorithms used in decision-making settings where the
objective is to find the best action from among a number of possibilities. These algorithms involve
an agent repeatedly sampling actions for evaluation in order to find an optimal action. In domains
with large (possibly continuous) action spaces, the number of samples needed to identify optimal
actions renders an exhaustive search intractable. In many domains, such as sequential games, the
outcome of an action can be stochastic, which further inflates the search space. In this paper, we
consider problem domains with continuous or very large discrete action spaces.
Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) methods such as UCT [8] performs search in discrete action spaces
by balancing between sampling promising actions to improve the estimates of their outcomes and
exploring other candidate actions. MCTS algorithms, though, might fail to encounter effective actions
if the action space is very large, as the algorithm is unable to consider all available actions during
search [11]. Search algorithms such as MCTS can thus benefit from an action candidate generator,
that given a state, returns a set of promising actions to be executed at that state.
For search in a continuous action setting, Yee et. al [18] introduced Kernel Regression UCT (KRUCT), an MCTS algorithm for continuous spaces and stochastic outcomes that requires an action
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

