Graph Meta Learning via Local Subgraphs
Kexin Huang
Harvard University
kexinhuang@hsph.harvard.edu

Marinka Zitnik
Harvard University
marinka@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Prevailing methods for graphs require abundant label and edge information for
learning. When data for a new task are scarce, meta learning can learn from
prior experiences and form much-needed inductive biases for fast adaption to new
tasks. Here, we introduce G-M ETA, a novel meta-learning algorithm for graphs.
G-M ETA uses local subgraphs to transfer subgraph-specific information and learn
transferable knowledge faster via meta gradients. G-M ETA learns how to quickly
adapt to a new task using only a handful of nodes or edges in the new task and does
so by learning from data points in other graphs or related, albeit disjoint, label sets.
G-M ETA is theoretically justified as we show that the evidence for a prediction can
be found in the local subgraph surrounding the target node or edge. Experiments on
seven datasets and nine baseline methods show that G-M ETA outperforms existing
methods by up to 16.3%. Unlike previous methods, G-M ETA successfully learns
in challenging, few-shot learning settings that require generalization to completely
new graphs and never-before-seen labels. Finally, G-M ETA scales to large graphs,
which we demonstrate on a new Tree-of-Life dataset comprising 1,840 graphs, a
two-orders of magnitude increase in the number of graphs used in prior work.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable results in domains such as recommender
systems [56], molecular biology [65, 19], and knowledge graphs [49, 18]. Performance is typically
evaluated after extensive training on datasets where majority of labels are available [52, 54]. In
contrast, many problems require rapid learning from only a few labeled nodes or edges in the
graph. Such flexible adaptation, known as meta learning, has been extensively studied for images
and language, e.g., [39, 51, 27]. However, meta learning on graphs has received considerably less
research attention and has remained a problem beyond the reach of prevailing GNN models.
Meta learning on graphs generally refers to a scenario in which a model learns at two levels. In the
first level, rapid learning occurs within a task. For example, when a GNN learns to classify nodes in a
particular graph accurately. In the second level, this learning is guided by knowledge accumulated
gradually across tasks to capture how the task structure changes across target domains [35, 4, 34]. A
powerful GNN trained to meta-learn can quickly learn never-before-seen labels and relations using
only a handful of labeled data points. As an example, a key problem in biology is to translate insights
from non-human organisms (such as yeast, zebrafish, and mouse) to humans [66]. How to train a
GNN to effectively meta-learn on a large number of incomplete and scarcely labeled protein-protein
interaction (PPI) graphs from various organisms, transfer the accrued knowledge to humans, and
use it to predict the roles of protein nodes in the human PPI graph? While this is a hard task, it is
only an instance of a particular graph meta-learning problem (Figure 1C). In this problem, the GNN
needs to learn on a large number of graphs, each scarcely labeled with a unique label set. Then, it
needs to quickly adapt to a never-before-seen graph (e.g., a PPI graph from a new organism) and
never-before-seen labels (e.g., newly discovered roles of proteins). Current methods are specialized
techniques specifically designed for a particular problem and a particular task [63, 3, 24, 7, 53].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

