Online Decision Based Visual Tracking via
Reinforcement Learning

Ke Song Wei Zhang∗ Ran Song Yibin Li
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, China
songke_vsislab@mail.sdu.edu.cn
{davidzhang,ransong,liyb}@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
A deep visual tracker is typically based on either object detection or template
matching while each of them is only suitable for a particular group of scenes.
It is straightforward to consider fusing them together to pursue more reliable
tracking. However, this is not wise as they follow different tracking principles.
Unlike previous fusion-based methods, we propose a novel ensemble framework,
named DTNet, with an online decision mechanism for visual tracking based on
hierarchical reinforcement learning. The decision mechanism substantiates an
intelligent switching strategy where the detection and the template trackers have to
compete with each other to conduct tracking within different scenes that they are
adept in. Besides, we present a novel detection tracker which avoids the common
issue of incorrect proposal. Extensive results show that our DTNet achieves stateof-the-art tracking performance as well as a good balance between accuracy and
efficiency. The project website is available at https://vsislab.github.
io/DTNet/.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental task in computer vision, visual tracking aims to estimate the trajectory of a specified
object in a sequence of images. Inspired by the success of deep learning in general computer vision
tasks, recent visual tracking algorithms mostly used deep networks, particularly CNNs which extract
deep representations for various scenes. Among these deep trackers are two dominant tracking
schemes. The first one treats tracking as a detection task, which typically builds a deep network to
distinguish the foreground target from the background [5, 25, 39]. The second one regards tracking as
a template matching task and addresses it via a matching network such as Siamese network, which
learns a general similarity function to obtain the image patch best matching the target [11, 15, 29].
The detection tracker continuously updates the network online with the image patch detected as the
target by itself. The diverse appearances of the patches lead to a good adaptability of the tracker while
the continuous update is inefficient for real-world tracking. Also, albeit occasionally, an incorrect
detection in a frame which represents a noisy appearance of the target could mislead the tracker.
The template tracker utilizes the initial appearance of the target as a fixed template to conduct the
matching operation, which runs efficiently at the cost of adaptability.
Either the detection or the template tracker is merely suitable for a particular group of scenes. For
instance, as shown in the top row of Fig. 1, due to the temporal occlusion within a frame, the detection
tracker incorrectly captures the bicycle as the target in that frame and cannot recover from it in the
succeeding frame. By contrast, the template tracker is robust to the temporal occlusion as it always
looks back to the real target in the initial frame for delivering the matching. On the other hand, it
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

