Fourier-transform-based attribution priors improve
the interpretability and stability of deep learning
models for genomics

Alex M. Tseng1
Avanti Shrikumar1
Anshul Kundaje1,2
1
2
Department of Computer Science, Department of Genetics
Stanford University
{amtseng, avanti, akundaje}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models can accurately map genomic DNA sequences to associated
functional molecular readouts such as protein–DNA binding data. Base-resolution
importance (i.e. "attribution") scores inferred from these models can highlight
predictive sequence motifs and syntax. Unfortunately, these models are prone
to overfitting and are sensitive to random initializations, often resulting in noisy
and irreproducible attributions that obfuscate underlying motifs. To address these
shortcomings, we propose a novel attribution prior, where the Fourier transform of
input-level attribution scores are computed at training-time, and high-frequency
components of the Fourier spectrum are penalized. We evaluate different model
architectures with and without our attribution prior, training on genome-wide binary
labels or continuous molecular profiles. We show that our attribution prior significantly improves models’ stability, interpretability, and performance on held-out
data, especially when training data is severely limited. Our attribution prior also
allows models to identify biologically meaningful sequence motifs more sensitively and precisely within individual regulatory elements. The prior is agnostic
to the model architecture or predicted experimental assay, yet provides similar
gains across all experiments. This work represents an important advancement in
improving the reliability of deep learning models for deciphering the regulatory
code of the genome.

1

Introduction

Transcription factors (TFs) are proteins that regulate gene activity with extraordinary specificity
by recognizing and binding to short DNA sequence patterns—or "motifs"—in regulatory elements
of the genome. High-throughput experiments have been used to profile genome-wide regulatory
activity in diverse cell types and tissues [1]. For example, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
experiments (e.g. ChIP-seq, ChIP-exo, and ChIP-nexus) provide binding readouts of specific targeted
TFs, and chromatin accessibility experiments (e.g. DNase-seq and ATAC-seq) provide aggregate
readouts of all protein–DNA contacts, for each base (DNA letter) in the genome [1]. Deep neural
networks—particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs)—have achieved state-of-the-art performance in mapping DNA sequence to TF binding and chromatin accessibility profiles [2, 3, 4].
These models accept fixed-length DNA sequence segments of the genome as an input, and—through
a series of convolutional layers—predict molecular labels as measured by a regulatory profiling
experiment. A common goal of these genomic deep learning models is to ultimately identify the
regulatory sequence code (i.e. motifs and their syntax) underpinning genomic regulation, and this
has motivated the development of a wide suite of tools to infer base-pair-resolution importance (i.e.
"attribution") scores in the input DNA sequences to reveal the regulatory code [4, 5, 6, 7].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

