Multi-agent active perception with prediction rewards

Mikko Lauri
Department of Computer Science
Universität Hamburg
Hamburg, Germany
lauri@informatik.uni-hamburg.de

Frans A. Oliehoek
Department of Computer Science
TU Delft
Delft, the Netherlands
f.a.oliehoek@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Multi-agent active perception is a task where a team of agents cooperatively gathers observations to compute a joint estimate of a hidden variable. The task is
decentralized and the joint estimate can only be computed after the task ends by
fusing observations of all agents. The objective is to maximize the accuracy of the
estimate. The accuracy is quantified by a centralized prediction reward determined
by a centralized decision-maker who perceives the observations gathered by all
agents after the task ends. In this paper, we model multi-agent active perception as
a decentralized partially observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) with
a convex centralized prediction reward. We prove that by introducing individual
prediction actions for each agent, the problem is converted into a standard DecPOMDP with a decentralized prediction reward. The loss due to decentralization is
bounded, and we give a sufficient condition for when it is zero. Our results allow
application of any Dec-POMDP solution algorithm to multi-agent active perception
problems, and enable planning to reduce uncertainty without explicit computation
of joint estimates. We demonstrate the empirical usefulness of our results by applying a standard Dec-POMDP algorithm to multi-agent active perception problems,
showing increased scalability in the planning horizon.

1

Introduction

Active perception, collecting observations to reduce uncertainty about a hidden variable, is one of
the fundamental capabilities of an intelligent agent [2]. In multi-agent active perception a team
of autonomous agents cooperatively gathers observations to infer the value of a hidden variable.
Application domains include search and rescue robotics, sensor networks, and distributed hypothesis
testing. A multi-agent active perception task often has a finite duration: after observations have
been gathered, they are collected to a central database for inference. While the inference phase is
centralized, the observation gathering phase is decentralized: each agent acts independently, without
knowing the observations collected by the other agents nor guaranteed communication to the other
agents.
The key problem in multi-agent active perception is to determine how each agent should act during
the decentralized phase to maximize the informativeness of the collected observations, evaluated
afterwards during the centralized inference phase. The problem can be formalized as a decentralized
partially observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) [3, 15], a general model of sequential
multi-agent decision-making under uncertainty. At each time step in a Dec-POMDP, each agent
in the team takes an individual action. The next state is determined according to a Markov chain
conditional on the current hidden state and all individual actions. Each agent then perceives an
individual observation correlated with the next state and the individual actions. The agents should act
so as to maximize the expected sum of shared rewards, accumulated at each time step over a finite
horizon.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

