Interventional Few-Shot Learning
Zhongqi Yue1,3 ,
1

Hanwang Zhang1 ,

Qianru Sun2 ,

Xian-Sheng Hua3

Nanyang Technological University, 2 Singapore Management University, 3 Alibaba Group
yuez0003@ntu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg,
qianrusun@smu.edu.sg,
xiansheng.hxs@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
We uncover an ever-overlooked deficiency in the prevailing Few-Shot Learning
(FSL) methods: the pre-trained knowledge is indeed a confounder that limits the
performance. This finding is rooted from our causal assumption: a Structural Causal
Model (SCM) for the causalities among the pre-trained knowledge, sample features,
and labels. Thanks to it, we propose a novel FSL paradigm: Interventional FewShot Learning (IFSL). Specifically, we develop three effective IFSL algorithmic
implementations based on the backdoor adjustment, which is essentially a causal
intervention towards the SCM of many-shot learning: the upper-bound of FSL
in a causal view. It is worth noting that the contribution of IFSL is orthogonal
to existing fine-tuning and meta-learning based FSL methods, hence IFSL can
improve all of them, achieving a new 1-/5-shot state-of-the-art on miniImageNet,
tieredImageNet, and cross-domain CUB. Code is released at https://github.
com/yue-zhongqi/ifsl.

1

Introduction

Few-Shot Learning (FSL) — the task of training a model using very few samples — is nothing short
of a panacea for any scenario that requires fast model adaptation to new tasks [64], such as minimizing
the need for expensive trials in reinforcement learning [29] and saving computation resource for
light-weight neural networks [26, 24]. Although we knew that, more than a decade ago, the crux
of FSL is to imitate the human ability of transferring prior knowledge to new tasks [17], not until
the recent advances in pre-training techniques, had we yet reached a consensus on “what & how to
transfer”: a powerful neural network Ω pre-trained on a large dataset D. In fact, the prior knowledge
learned from pre-training prospers today’s deep learning era, e.g., D = ImageNet, Ω = ResNet in
visual recognition [23, 22]; D = Wikipedia, Ω = BERT in natural language processing [61, 15].
In the context of pre-trained knowledge, we denote the original FSL training set as support
Meta-Learning Ωφ Fine-Tuning
set S and the test set as query set Q, where
Ω {Fine-tune(Si , Qi )}
(S, Q)
the classes in (S, Q) are unseen (or new) in
Pre-Training
D. Then, we can use Ω as a backbone (fixed
or
D
or partially trainable) for extracting sample representations x, and thus FSL can be achieved
Fine-Tuning
Ω
(S, Q)
simply by fine-tuning the target model on S and
test it on Q [11, 16]. However, the fine-tuning
only exploits the D’s knowledge on “what to
transfer”, but neglects “how to transfer”. Fortu- Figure 1: The relationships among different FSL
nately, the latter can be addressed by applying paradigms (color green and orange). Our goal is to
a post-pre-training and pre-fine-tuning strategy: remove the deficiency introduced by Pre-Training.
meta-learning [52]. Different from fine-tuning
whose goal is the “model” trained on S and tested on Q, meta-learning aims to learn the “meta-model”
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

