Improved Techniques for Training Score-Based
Generative Models
Stefano Ermon
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Yang Song
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
yangsong@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Score-based generative models can produce high quality image samples comparable
to GANs, without requiring adversarial optimization. However, existing training
procedures are limited to images of low resolution (typically below 32 × 32),
and can be unstable under some settings. We provide a new theoretical analysis
of learning and sampling from score-based models in high dimensional spaces,
explaining existing failure modes and motivating new solutions that generalize
across datasets. To enhance stability, we also propose to maintain an exponential
moving average of model weights. With these improvements, we can scale scorebased generative models to various image datasets, with diverse resolutions ranging
from 64 × 64 to 256 × 256. Our score-based models can generate high-fidelity
samples that rival best-in-class GANs on various image datasets, including CelebA,
FFHQ, and several LSUN categories.

1

Introduction

Score-based generative models [1] represent probability distributions through score—a vector field
pointing in the direction where the likelihood of data increases most rapidly. Remarkably, these
score functions can be learned from data without requiring adversarial optimization, and can produce
realistic image samples that rival GANs on simple datasets such as CIFAR-10 [2].
Despite this success, existing score-based generative models only work on low resolution images
(32 × 32) due to several limiting factors. First, the score function is learned via denoising score
matching [3, 4, 5]. Intuitively, this means a neural network (named the score network) is trained
to denoise images blurred with Gaussian noise. A key insight from [1] is to perturb the data using
multiple noise scales so that the score network captures both coarse and fine-grained image features.
However, it is an open question how these noise scales should be chosen. The recommended settings
in [1] work well for 32 × 32 images, but perform poorly when the resolution gets higher. Second,
samples are generated by running Langevin dynamics [6, 7]. This method starts from white noise
and progressively denoises it into an image using the score network. This procedure, however, might
fail or take an extremely long time to converge when used in high-dimensions and with a necessarily
imperfect (learned) score network.
We propose a set of techniques to scale score-based generative models to high resolution images.
Based on a new theoretical analysis on a simplified mixture model, we provide a method to analytically
compute an effective set of Gaussian noise scales from training data. Additionally, we propose an
efficient architecture to amortize the score estimation task across a large (possibly infinite) number
of noise scales with a single neural network. Based on a simplified analysis of the convergence
properties of the underlying Langevin dynamics sampling procedure, we also derive a technique to
approximately optimize its performance as a function of the noise scales. Combining these techniques
with an exponential moving average (EMA) of model parameters, we are able to significantly improve
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

