A Ranking-based, Balanced Loss Function Unifying
Classification and Localisation in Object Detection

Kemal Oksuz, Baris Can Cam, Emre Akbas∗ , Sinan Kalkan∗
Dept. of Computer Engineering, Middle East Technical University
Ankara, Turkey
{kemal.oksuz, can.cam, eakbas, skalkan}@metu.edu.tr

Abstract
We propose average Localisation-Recall-Precision (aLRP), a unified, bounded,
balanced and ranking-based loss function for both classification and localisation
tasks in object detection. aLRP extends the Localisation-Recall-Precision (LRP)
performance metric (Oksuz et al., 2018) inspired from how Average Precision (AP)
Loss extends precision to a ranking-based loss function for classification (Chen et
al., 2020). aLRP has the following distinct advantages: (i) aLRP is the first rankingbased loss function for both classification and localisation tasks. (ii) Thanks to
using ranking for both tasks, aLRP naturally enforces high-quality localisation
for high-precision classification. (iii) aLRP provides provable balance between
positives and negatives. (iv) Compared to on average ∼6 hyperparameters in the
loss functions of state-of-the-art detectors, aLRP Loss has only one hyperparameter,
which we did not tune in practice. On the COCO dataset, aLRP Loss improves
its ranking-based predecessor, AP Loss, up to around 5 AP points, achieves 48.9
AP without test time augmentation and outperforms all one-stage detectors. Code
available at: https://github.com/kemaloksuz/aLRPLoss.

1

Introduction

Object detection requires jointly optimizing a classification objective (Lc ) and a localisation objective
(Lr ) combined conventionally with a balancing hyperparameter (wr ) as follows:
L = Lc + wr Lr .

(1)

Optimizing L in this manner has three critical drawbacks: (D1) It does not correlate the two tasks,
and hence, does not guarantee high-quality localisation for high-precision examples (Fig. 1). (D2) It
requires a careful tuning of wr [8, 26, 33], which is prohibitive since a single training may last on the
order of days, and ends up with a sub-optimal constant wr [4, 11]. (D3) It is adversely impeded by
the positive-negative imbalance in Lc and inlier-outlier imbalance in Lr , thus it requires sampling
strategies [13, 14] or specialized loss functions [9, 22], introducing more hyperparameters (Table 1).
A recent solution for D3 is to directly maximize Average Precision (AP) with a loss function called
AP Loss [7]. AP Loss is a ranking-based loss function to optimize the ranking of the classification
outputs and provides balanced training between positives and negatives.
In this paper, we extend AP Loss to address all three drawbacks (D1-D3) with one, unified loss
function called average Localisation Recall Precision (aLRP) Loss. In analogy with the link between
precision and AP Loss, we formulate aLRP Loss as the average of LRP values [19] over the positive
examples on the Recall-Precision (RP) curve. aLRP has the following benefits: (i) It exploits ranking
for both classification and localisation, enforcing high-precision detections to have high-quality
∗

Equal contribution for senior authorship.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

