FleXOR: Trainable Fractional Quantization
Dongsoo Lee∗
Se Jung Kwon∗
Byeongwook Kim
Yongkweon Jeon
Baeseong Park
Jeongin Yun
Samsung Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{dongsoo3.lee, sejung0.kwon, byeonguk.kim,
dragwon.jeon, bpbs.park, ji6373.yun}@samsung.com

Abstract
Quantization based on the binary codes is gaining attention because each quantized bit can be directly utilized for computations without dequantization using
look-up tables. Previous attempts, however, only allow for integer numbers of
quantization bits, which ends up restricting the search space for compression ratio
and accuracy. In this paper, we propose an encryption algorithm/architecture to
compress quantized weights so as to achieve fractional numbers of bits per weight.
Decryption during inference is implemented by digital XOR-gate networks added
into the neural network model while XOR gates are described by utilizing tanh(x)
for backward propagation to enable gradient calculations. We perform experiments
using MNIST, CIFAR-10, and ImageNet to show that inserting XOR gates learns
quantization/encrypted bit decisions through training and obtains high accuracy
even for fractional sub 1-bit weights. As a result, our proposed method yields
smaller size and higher model accuracy compared to binary neural networks.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) demand a larger number of parameters and more computations to
support various task descriptions all while adhering to ever-increasing model accuracy requirements.
Because of abundant redundancy in DNN models [9, 5, 3], numerous model compression techniques
are being studied to expedite the inference of DNNs [19, 16]. As a practical model compression
scheme, parameter quantization is a popular choice because of the high compression ratio and regular
formats after compression so as to enable full memory bandwidth utilization.
Quantization schemes based on binary codes are gaining increasing attention since quantized weights
follow specific constraints to allow simpler P
computations during inference. Specifically, using the
q
binary codes, a weight vector is represented as i=1 (αi bi ), where q is the number of quantization
bits, α is a scaling factor (α ∈ R), and each element
a vector bi is a binary ∈ {−1, +1}. Then,
Pq of P
v
a dot product with activations is conducted as i=1 (αi j=1 aj bi,j ), where aj is a full-precision
activation and v is the vector size. Note that the number of multiplications is reduced from v to q
(expensive floating-point multipliers are less required for inference). Moreover, even though we do
not discuss a new activation quantization method in this paper, if activations are also quantized by
using binary codes, then most computations are replaced with bit-wise operations (using XNOR
logic and population counts) [25, 20]. Consequently, even though representation space is constrained
compared with quantization methods based on look-up tables, various inference accelerators can
be designed to exploit the advantages of binary codes [20, 25]. Since a successful 1-bit weight
quantization method has been demonstrated in BinaryConnect [3], advances in compression-aware
training algorithms in the form of binary codes (e.g., binary weight networks [20] and LQ-Nets
[27]) produce 1-3 bits for quantization while accuracy drop is modest or negligible. Fundamental
∗

Equal Contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

