Dual Instrumental Variable Regression
Krikamol Muandet
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
krikamol@tuebingen.mpg.de
Si Kai Lee
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago, USA
sikai.lee@chicagobooth.edu

Arash Mehrjou
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
arash.mehrjou@inf.ethz.ch
Anant Raj
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
anant.raj@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
We present a novel algorithm for non-linear instrumental variable (IV) regression,
DualIV, which simplifies traditional two-stage methods via a dual formulation.
Inspired by problems in stochastic programming, we show that two-stage procedures for non-linear IV regression can be reformulated as a convex-concave
saddle-point problem. Our formulation enables us to circumvent the first-stage
regression which is a potential bottleneck in real-world applications. We develop
a simple kernel-based algorithm with an analytic solution based on this formulation. Empirical results show that we are competitive to existing, more complicated
algorithms for non-linear instrumental variable regression.

1

Introduction

Inferring causal relationships under the influence of unobserved confounders remains one of the
most challenging problems in economics, health care, and social sciences [1, 2]. A typical example
in economics is the study of returns from schooling [3], which attempts to measure the causal effect
of education on labor market earnings. For each individual, the treatment variable X represents
the level of education and the outcome Y represents how much they earn. However, one’s level
of education and income is likely confounded by the socioeconomic status or other unobserved
confounding factors H [1, Ch. 4].
Since randomized control trials are often infeasible in most economic studies, economists have
turned to instrumental variables (IVs) or instruments derived from naturally occurring random experiments to overcome unobserved confounding. Informally, instrumental variables Z are defined
as variables that are associated with the treatment X, affect the outcome Y only through X and do
not share common causes with Y . For instance, the season-of-birth was used as an instrument in
[4] to estimate the impact of compulsory schooling on earnings. Because of the compulsory school
attendance laws, an individual’s season-of-birth, which is likely to be random, affects how long they
actually remain in school, but not their earnings. Figure 1 illustrates this example. Finding valid
instruments for specific problems is an essential task in econometrics [1] and epidemiology [5].
Although IV analysis is widely used, the statistical tools employed for estimating causal effect are
fairly rudimentary. Most applications of instrumental variables utilise a two-stage procedure [1, 6–
8]. For instance, the two-stage least squares (2SLS) relies on the assumption that the relationship
between X and Y is linear [9]. It first estimates the conditional mean E[X|Z = z] via linear
regression and then regresses Y on the estimate of E[X|Z = z] to obtain an estimate of the causal
effect. Since the first-stage estimate is by construction independent from confounders, the resultant
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

