Coded Sequential Matrix Multiplication For
Straggler Mitigation

M. Nikhil Krishnan
University of Toronto
nikhilkrishnan.m@gmail.com

Erfan Hosseini
University of Toronto
ehosseini2108@gmail.com

Ashish Khisti
University of Toronto
akhisti@ece.utoronto.ca

Abstract
In this work, we consider a sequence of J matrix multiplication jobs which needs
to be distributed by a master across multiple worker nodes. For i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , J},
job-i begins in round-i and has to be completed by round-(i + T ). Previous works
consider only the special case of T = 0 and focus on coding across workers. We
propose here two schemes with T > 0, which feature coding across workers as
well as the dimension of time. Our first scheme is a modification of the polynomial
coding scheme introduced by Yu et al. and places no assumptions on the straggler
model. Exploitation of the temporal dimension helps the scheme handle a larger set
of straggler patterns than the polynomial coding scheme, for a given computational
load per worker per round. The second scheme assumes a particular straggler
model to further improve performance (in terms of encoding/decoding complexity).
We develop theoretical results establishing (i) optimality of our proposed schemes
for a certain class of straggler patterns and (ii) improved performance for the case of
i.i.d. stragglers. These are further validated by experiments, where we implement
our schemes to train neural networks.

1

Introduction

The sheer scale of data in present day applications necessitates distributing the computation across
multiple nodes (will also be referred to as workers). One of the key issues faced in distributing the
computation across multiple workers is that slow workers (will be referred to as stragglers) act as
bottlenecks. A naive approach for straggler mitigation is to replicate computation across multiple
workers. Clearly, this is wasteful of resources and calls for the need of a systematic approach to
introduce redundancy in computational systems. It is in this context that coded computation has been
developed, with the goal of introducing redundancy in computation in a resource-efficient manner.
In this paper, we focus on coded computation for distributing matrix multiplication, which is a key
building block for linear regression, principal component analysis, training of deep neural networks
etc. The idea of introducing redundancy in matrix operations appears in an early paper by Huang and
Abraham [1]. The paper [1] considers a multi-processor system and proposes a product-code-based
coding scheme to detect and correct errors caused within a single processor. In the distributed matrix
multiplication setting, the use of coded computation to provide resiliency against stragglers, has been
explored initially in [2]. Coded computation for distributed matrix multiplication (or simply, coded
matrix multiplication) has since been actively pursued in the literature. For instance, see [3–15] and
references therein. In [16], the authors provide a survey on coded matrix multiplication.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

