Minimax Dynamics of Optimally Balanced Spiking
Networks of Excitatory and Inhibitory Neurons
Qianyi Li
Biophysics Graduate Program
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
qianyi_li@g.harvard.edu

Cengiz Pehlevan
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Excitation-inhibition balance is ubiquitously observed in the cortex. Recent studies
suggest an intriguing link between balance on fast timescales, tight balance, and
efficient information coding with spikes. We further this connection by taking a
principled approach to optimal balanced networks of excitatory (E) and inhibitory
(I) neurons. By deriving E-I spiking neural networks from greedy spike-based
optimizations of constrained minimax objectives, we show that tight balance arises
from correcting for deviations from the minimax optima. We predict specific neuron
firing rates in the networks by solving minimax problems, going beyond statistical
theories of balanced networks. We design minimax objectives for reconstruction
of an input signal, associative memory, and storage of manifold attractors, and
derive from them E-I networks that perform the computation. Overall, we present
a novel normative modeling approach for spiking E-I networks, going beyond the
widely-used energy-minimizing networks that violate Dale’s law. Our networks
can be used to model cortical circuits and computations.

1

Introduction

While spiking neural networks empower our brains, a thorough understanding of how spikes accurately represent and transmit information is lacking. Any explanation should address a striking and
widely observed property of cortical spiking networks that excitatory (E) and inhibitory (I) currents
for individual neurons are balanced (detailed balance), and spikes are only generated during the brief
occasions when inhibition fails to track spontaneous fluctuations in excitation (tight balance) [1–8].
In this work, we show that tight and detailed balance could arise from correcting for deviations from a
minimax optimum that governs the dynamics of E-I balanced networks. Having access to an objective
allows us to design spiking E-I networks that perform various biologically relevant functions.
While the theory of balanced networks goes further back [9–11], the idea that tight and detailed
balance is related to the efficiency of spike coding was proposed in recent influential theoretical
work [6, 12, 13]. These results are typically limited to spiking dynamics performing a greedyminimization of a reconstruction error loss function without considering more diverse computations
carried out in the cortex. Moreover, minimizing an energy function leads to symmetric connection
weights [14] that violate, among other biological constraints, Dale’s law: a neuron’s influence on its
post-synaptic neurons are either all excitatory or all inhibitory. This violation has been addressed by
introducing separate reconstruction error cost functions for E and I neurons [12, 15]. While E neurons
reconstruct an input signal, I neurons reconstruct the non-Dalian part of recurrent E interactions,
assuming that I neuron dynamics equilibrates faster than E neurons. Our work extends these previous
accounts in two ways.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

