Understanding Global Feature Contributions With
Additive Importance Measures

Ian C. Covert
University of Washington
Seattle, WA
icovert@uw.edu

Scott Lundberg
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
scott.lundberg@microsoft.com

Su-In Lee
University of Washington
Seattle, WA
suinlee@uw.edu

Abstract
Understanding the inner workings of complex machine learning models is a longstanding problem and most recent research has focused on local interpretability.
To assess the role of individual input features in a global sense, we explore the
perspective of defining feature importance through the predictive power associated
with each feature. We introduce two notions of predictive power (model-based and
universal) and formalize this approach with a framework of additive importance
measures, which unifies numerous methods in the literature. We then propose
SAGE, a model-agnostic method that quantifies predictive power while accounting
for feature interactions. Our experiments show that SAGE can be calculated
efficiently and that it assigns more accurate importance values than other methods.

1

Introduction

Our limited understanding of the inner workings of complex models is a long-standing problem that
impedes machine learning adoption in many domains. Most recent research has addressed this by
focusing on local interpretability, which explains a model’s individual predictions (e.g., the role
of each feature in a patient’s diagnosis) [25, 30, 34, 38]. However, in some cases users require
knowledge of a feature’s global importance to understand its role across an entire dataset.
In this work we seek to understand how much models rely on each feature overall, which is often
referred to as the problem of global feature importance. The problem is open to many interpretations
[5, 16, 22, 24, 27], and we present the idea of defining feature importance as the amount of predictive
power that a feature contributes. This raises the challenge of handling feature interactions, because
features contribute different amounts of information when introduced in isolation versus into a larger
set of features. We aim to provide a solution that accounts for these complex interactions.
We begin by presenting the framework of additive importance measures, a view that unifies numerous
methods that define feature importance in terms of predictive power (Section 2). We then present
a new tool for calculating feature importance, SAGE,1 a model-agnostic approach to summarizing
a model’s dependence on each feature while accounting for complex interactions (Section 3). Our
work makes the following contributions:
1. We derive SAGE by applying the Shapley value to a function that represents the predictive power
contained in subsets of features. Many desirable properties result from this approach, including
invariance to invertible feature transformations and a relationship with SHAP [25].
2. We introduce a framework of additive importance measures that lets us unify many existing
methods in the literature. We show that these methods all define feature importance in terms of
predictive power, but that only SAGE does so while properly accounting for feature interactions.
1

http://github.com/iancovert/sage/

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

