Multi-label Contrastive Predictive Coding

Jiaming Song
Stanford University
tsong@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Variational mutual information (MI) estimators are widely used in unsupervised
representation learning methods such as contrastive predictive coding (CPC). A
lower bound on MI can be obtained from a multi-class classification problem,
where a critic attempts to distinguish a positive sample drawn from the underlying
joint distribution from (m − 1) negative samples drawn from a suitable proposal
distribution. Using this approach, MI estimates are bounded above by log m,
and could thus severely underestimate unless m is very large. To overcome this
limitation, we introduce a novel estimator based on a multi-label classification
problem, where the critic needs to jointly identify multiple positive samples at the
same time. We show that using the same amount of negative samples, multi-label
CPC is able to exceed the log m bound, while still being a valid lower bound of
mutual information. We demonstrate that the proposed approach is able to lead to
better mutual information estimation, gain empirical improvements in unsupervised
representation learning, and beat a current state-of-the-art knowledge distillation
method over 10 out of 13 tasks.

1

Introduction

Learning efficient representations from data with minimal supervision is a critical problem in machine
learning with significant practical impact [37, 12, 38, 41, 6]. Representations obtained using large
amounts of unlabeled data can boost performance on downstream tasks where labeled data is scarce.
This paradigm is already successful in a variety of domains; for example, representations trained on
large amounts of unlabeled images can be used to improve performance on detection [55, 18, 9].
In the context of learning visual representations, contrastive objectives based on variational mutual
information (MI) estimation are among the most successful ones [49, 3, 13, 40, 47]. One such
approach, named Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC, [49]), obtains a lower bound to MI via a
multi-class classification problem. In CPC, a critic is generally trained to distinguish a pair of
representations from two augmentations of the same image (positive), apart from (m − 1) pairs
of representations from different images (negative). The representation network is then trained to
increase the MI estimates given by the critic. This brings together the two representations from the
positive pair and pushes apart the two representations from the negative pairs.
It has been empirically observed that factors leading to better MI estimates, such as training for more
iterations and increasing the complexity of the critic [9, 10], can generally result in improvements
over downstream tasks. In the context of CPC, increasing the number of negative samples per positive
sample (i.e. increasing m) also helps with downstream performance [53, 18, 9, 47]. This can be
explained from a mutual information estimation perspective that CPC estimates are upper bounded
by log m, so increasing m could reduce bias when the actual mutual information is much higher [35].
However, due to constraints over compute, memory and data, there is a limit to how many negative
samples we can obtain per positive sample.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

