Minibatch vs Local SGD for
Heterogeneous Distributed Learning

Blake Woodworth
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
blake@ttic.edu

Kumar Kshitij Patel
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
kkpatel@ttic.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We analyze Local SGD (aka parallel or federated SGD) and Minibatch SGD in
the heterogeneous distributed setting, where each machine has access to stochastic
gradient estimates for a different, machine-specific, convex objective; the goal is to
optimize w.r.t. the average objective; and machines can only communicate intermittently. We argue that, (i) Minibatch SGD (even without acceleration) dominates
all existing analysis of Local SGD in this setting, (ii) accelerated Minibatch SGD
is optimal when the heterogeneity is high, and (iii) present the first upper bound for
Local SGD that improves over Minibatch SGD in a non-homogeneous regime.

1

Introduction

Given the massive scale of many modern machine learning models and datasets, it has become
important to develop better methods for distributed training. A particularly important setting for
distributed stochastic optimization/learning, and the one we will consider in this work is characterized
by, (1) training data that is distributed across many parallel devices rather than centralized in a single
node; (2) this data is distributed heterogeneously, meaning that each individual machine has data
drawn from a different distribution; and (3) the frequency of communication between the devices is
limited. The goal is to find a single consensus predictor that performs well on all the local distributions
simultaneously [3, 4]. The heterogeneity of the data significantly increases the difficulty of distributed
learning because the machines’ local objectives may be completely different, so a perfect model for
one distribution might be terrible for all the others. Limited communication between devices can
make it even more challenging to find a good consensus.
One possible approach is using Minibatch Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). Between communications, each machine computes one large minibatch stochastic gradient using its local data; then
the machines average their local minibatch gradients, yielding one extra-large minibatch gradient
comprising data from all the machines’ local distributions, which is used for a single SGD update.
Minibatch SGD can also be accelerated to improve its convergence rate [8, 9]. This algorithm is
simple, ubiquitous, and performs very successfully in a variety of settings.
However, there has recently been great interest in another algorithm, Local SGD (also known as
Parallel SGD or Federated SGD) [14, 20, 27], which has been suggested as an improvement over the
naïve approach of Minibatch SGD. For Local SGD, each machine independently runs SGD on its local
objective and, each time they communicate, the machines average together their local iterates. Local
SGD is a very appealing approach—unlike Minibatch SGD, each machine is constantly improving its
local model’s performance on the local objective, even when the machines are not communicating with
each other, so the number of updates is decoupled from the number of communications. In addition
to the intuitive benefits, Local SGD has also performed well in many applications [13, 25, 26].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

