Quantized Variational Inference

Amir Dib
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay, Centre Borelli, SNCF, ITNOVEM.
91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

amir.dib@ens-paris-saclay.fr

Abstract
We present Quantized Variational Inference, a new algorithm for Evidence Lower
Bound maximization. We show how Optimal Voronoi Tesselation produces
variance free gradients for Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) optimization at the
cost of introducing asymptotically decaying bias. Subsequently, we propose a
Richardson extrapolation type method to improve the asymptotic bound. We
show that using the Quantized Variational Inference framework leads to fast
convergence for both score function and the reparametrized gradient estimator
at a comparable computational cost. Finally, we propose several experiments to
assess the performance of our method and its limitations.

1 Introduction
Given data y and latent variables z, we consider a model p(y, z) representing our view of the
studied phenomenon through the choice of p(y|z) and p(z). The goal of the Bayesian statistician
is to find the best latent variable that fits the data, hence the likelihood p(z|y). These quantities are
p(z)p(y|z)
linked by the bayes formula which gives that p(z|y) = p(y) where p(y) is the prior predictive
distribution (also named marginal distribution or normalizing factor) which is a constant. Given a
variational distribution q λ , the following decomposition can be obtained [36]
¸
·
¡
¢
p(z, y)
+ KL q λ (z)kp(z|y) .
log p(y) = E log
(1)
z∼q λ
q λ (z)
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
KL-divergence
ELBO(λ)

It follows that maximazing the ELBO with respect to q λ leads to find the best approximation
of p(z|y) for the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. Intuitively, this procedure minimizes the
information loss subsequent to the replacement of the likelihood by q λ but other distances can be
used [2].
The reason for the popularity of such techniques is due to the fact that finding a closed-form for
p(z|y) requires to evaluate the prior predictive distribution and thus to integrate over all latent
variables which lead to intractable computation (except in the prior conjugate case) even for
simple models [12]. A common approach is to use methods such as Gibbs Sampling, Monte
Carlo Markov Chain or Hamilton Monte Carlo [3, 17, 6] which rely solely on the unnormalized
posterior distribution (freeing us from the need to compute p(y)) and the ability to sample
from the posterior. These methods are consistent but associated with heavy computation, high
sensitivity to hyperparameters and potential slow to converge to the true target distribution. On
the other hand, optimization techniques such as Variational Inference (VI) are generally cheaper to
compute, tend to converge faster but are often a crude estimate of the true posterior distribution.
Recent work proposes to combine these two strategies to allow for an explicit choice between
accuracy and computational time [35].
Thanks to approaches such as Black Box Variational Inference (BBVI) [31, 20] (which opens
the possibility of the generic use of VI), Automatic Variational Inference (AVI) [22] and modern
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

