Simple and Scalable Sparse k-means Clustering via
Feature Ranking

Zhiyue Zhang1
Kenneth Lange2
Jason Xu1,‡
1
Department of Statistical Science, Duke University
2
Departments of Computational Medicine, Statistics, and Human Genetics, UCLA
‡
Correspondence to jason.q.xu@duke.edu

Abstract
Clustering, a fundamental activity in unsupervised learning, is notoriously difficult
when the feature space is high-dimensional. Fortunately, in many realistic scenarios, only a handful of features may be relevant in distinguishing clusters. This
has motivated the development of sparse clustering techniques that typically rely
on k-means within outer algorithms of high computational complexity. Current
techniques also require careful tuning of shrinkage parameters, further limiting
their scalability. In this paper, we propose a novel framework for sparse k-means
clustering that is intuitive, simple to implement, and competitive with state-of-theart algorithms. We show that our algorithm enjoys consistency and convergence
guarantees. Our core method readily generalizes to several task-specific algorithms
such as clustering on subsets of attributes and in partially observed data settings.
We showcase these contributions thoroughly via simulated experiments and real
data benchmarks, including a case study on protein expression in trisomic mice.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a ubiquitous task in unsupervised learning and exploratory data analysis. First proposed
by Steinhaus [1], k-means clustering is one of the most widely used approaches owing to its conceptual
simplicity, speed, and familiarity. The method aims to partition n data points into k clusters, with
each data point assigned to the cluster with nearest center (mean). More recently, variants and
extensions of k-means continue to be developed from a number of perspectives including Bayesian
and nonparametric approaches [2–4], subspace clustering [5, 6], and continuous optimization [7–9].
After decades of refinements and generalizations, Lloyd’s algorithm [10] remains the most popular
algorithm to perform k-means clustering.
Lloyd’s algorithm Consider a dataset X ∈ Rn×p comprised of n samples and p features. Without
loss of generality, assume each feature is centered at the origin. To put features on the same footing,
it is also recommended to standardize each of them to have unit variance [11]. Given a fixed number
of k clusters, k-means assigns each row xti of X to a cluster label Cj represented by optimal cluster
centers θ j that minimize the objective
k
X
X
j=1 xi ∈Cj

kxi − θ j k22 =

n
X
i=1

min kxi − θ j k22 .

1≤j≤k

(1)

Although the objective function is simple and intuitive, finding its optimal value is NP-hard, even
when k = 2 or p = 2 [12–14]. A greedy algorithm, Lloyd’s k-means algorithm alternates between
two steps until cluster assignments stabilize and no further changes occur in the objective function:
1) The algorithm assigns each row xti of X to the cluster
PCj whose center θ j is closest. 2) It then
redefines each center θ j as the center of mass θ j = |C1j | i∈Cj xi . While guaranteed to converge in
finite iterations, Lloyd’s algorithm may stop short at a poor local minimum, rendering it extremely
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

