Fully Convolutional Mesh Autoencoder using
Efficient Spatially Varying Kernels

Yi Zhou∗
Adobe Research
Zimo Li
University of Southern California
Jason Saragih
Facebook Reality Labs

Chenglei Wu
Facebook Reality Labs
Chen Cao
Facebook Reality Labs
Hao Li
Pinscreen

Yuting Ye
Facebook Reality Labs

Yaser Sheikh
Facebook Reality Labs

Abstract
Learning latent representations of registered meshes is useful for many 3D tasks.
Techniques have recently shifted to neural mesh autoencoders. Although they
demonstrate higher precision than traditional methods, they remain unable to
capture fine-grained deformations. Furthermore, these methods can only be applied
to a template-specific surface mesh, and is not applicable to more general meshes,
like tetrahedrons and non-manifold meshes. While more general graph convolution
methods can be employed, they lack performance in reconstruction precision and
require higher memory usage. In this paper, we propose a non-template-specific
fully convolutional mesh autoencoder for arbitrary registered mesh data. It is
enabled by our novel convolution and (un)pooling operators learned with globally
shared weights and locally varying coefficients which can efficiently capture the
spatially varying contents presented by irregular mesh connections. Our model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on reconstruction accuracy. In addition, the
latent codes of our network are fully localized thanks to the fully convolutional
structure, and thus have much higher interpolation capability than many traditional
3D mesh generation models.

1

Introduction

Learning latent representations for registered meshes 2 , either from performance capture or physical
simulation, is a core component for many 3D tasks, ranging from compressing and reconstruction to
animation and simulation. While in the past, principal component analysis (PCA) models [1, 21, 30,
35] or manually defined blendshapes [31, 6, 20] have been employed to construct a linear latent space
for 3D mesh data, recent works tend towards deep learning models. These models are able to produce
more descriptive latent spaces, useful for capturing details like cloth wrinkles or facial expressions.
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are widely used to capture the spatial features in regular grids,
but due to the irregular sampling and connections in the mesh data, spatially-shared convolution kernels cannot be directly applied on meshes as in regular 2D or 3D grid data. A common compromised
approach is to first map the 3D mesh data to a predefined UV space, and then train a classic 2D CNN
to learn features in the UV space. However, this will inevitably suffer from the parameterization
∗
2

Work partially done during an internship at Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh.
Registered meshes are deformable meshes with a fixed topology.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

