FracTrain: Fractionally Squeezing Bit Savings Both
Temporally and Spatially for Efficient DNN Training
†

†

†

†

†

Yonggan Fu , Haoran You , Yang Zhao , Yue Wang , Chaojian Li ,
⋄
‡
†
Kailash Gopalakrishnan , Zhangyang Wang , and Yingyan Lin
†

‡

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin
⋄
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
†
{yf22, hy34, zy34, yw68, cl114, yingyan.lin}@rice.edu
‡
⋄
atlaswang@utexas.edu, kailash@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in deep neural networks (DNNs) have fueled a tremendous
demand for intelligent edge devices featuring on-site learning, while the practical
realization of such systems remains a challenge due to the limited resources available at the edge and the required massive training costs for state-of-the-art (SOTA)
DNNs. As reducing precision is one of the most effective knobs for boosting training time/energy efficiency, there has been a growing interest in low-precision DNN
training. In this paper, we explore from an orthogonal direction: how to fractionally
squeeze out more training cost savings from the most redundant bit level, progressively along the training trajectory and dynamically per input. Specifically, we
propose FracTrain that integrates (i) progressive fractional quantization which
gradually increases the precision of activations, weights, and gradients that will not
reach the precision of SOTA static quantized DNN training until the final training
stage, and (ii) dynamic fractional quantization which assigns precisions to both
the activations and gradients of each layer in an input-adaptive manner, for only
“fractionally” updating layer parameters. Extensive simulations and ablation studies
(six models, four datasets, and three training settings including standard, adaptation,
and fine-tuning) validate the effectiveness of FracTrain in reducing computational
cost and hardware-quantified energy/latency of DNN training while achieving a
comparable or better (-0.12% ∼ +1.87%) accuracy. For example, when training
ResNet-74 on CIFAR-10, FracTrain achieves 77.6% and 53.5% computational
cost and training latency savings, respectively, compared with the best SOTA baseline, while achieving a comparable (-0.07%) accuracy. Our codes are available at:
https://github.com/RICE-EIC/FracTrain.

1

Introduction

Recent breakthroughs in deep neural networks (DNNs) have motivated an explosive demand for
intelligent edge devices. Many of them, such as autonomous vehicles and healthcare wearables,
require real-time and on-site learning to enable them to proactively learn from new data and adapt
to dynamic environments. The challenge for such on-site learning is that the massive and growing
cost of state-of-the-art (SOTA) DNNs stands at odds with the limited resources available at the edge
devices, raising a major concern even when training in cloud using powerful GPUs/CPUs [1, 2].
To address the above challenge towards efficient DNN training, low-precision training have been
developed recognizing that the training time/energy efficiency is a quadratic function of DNNs’
adopted precision [3]. While they have showed promising training efficiency, they all adopt (i)
a static quantization strategy, i.e., the precisions are fixed during the whole training process; (ii)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

