One Solution is Not All You Need:
Few-Shot Extrapolation via Structured MaxEnt RL

Saurabh Kumar1 , Aviral Kumar2 , Sergey Levine2 , Chelsea Finn1 ,
Stanford University1 , UC Berkeley2
szk@stanford.edu

Abstract
While reinforcement learning algorithms can learn effective policies for complex
tasks, these policies are often brittle to even minor task variations, especially when
variations are not explicitly provided during training. One natural approach to this
problem is to train agents with manually specified variation in the training task or
environment. However, this may be infeasible in practical situations, either because
making perturbations is not possible, or because it is unclear how to choose suitable
perturbation strategies without sacrificing performance. The key insight of this
work is that learning diverse behaviors for accomplishing a task can directly lead
to behavior that generalizes to varying environments, without needing to perform
explicit perturbations during training. By identifying multiple solutions for the
task in a single environment during training, our approach can generalize to new
situations by abandoning solutions that are no longer effective and adopting those
that are. We theoretically characterize a robustness set of environments that arises
from our algorithm and empirically find that our diversity-driven approach can
extrapolate to various changes in the environment and task.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have demonstrated promising results on a variety
of complex tasks, such as robotic manipulation [22, 13] and strategy games [27, 38]. Yet, these
reinforcement learning agents are typically trained in just one environment, leading to performant but
narrowly-specialized policies — policies that are optimal under the training conditions, but brittle to
even small environment variations [46]. A natural approach to resolving this issue is to simply train
the agent on a distribution of environments that correspond to variations of the training environment
[4, 9, 18, 33]. These methods assume access to a set of user-specified training environments that
capture the properties of the situations that the trained agent will encounter during evaluation.
However, this assumption places a significant burden on the user to hand-specify all degrees of
variation, or may produce poor generalization along the axes that are not varied sufficiently [46].
Further, varying the environment may not even be possible in the real world.
One way of resolving this problem is to design algorithms that can automatically construct many
variants of its training environment and optimize a policy over these variants. One can do so, for
example, by training an adversary to perturb the agent [32, 31]. While promising, adversarial optimizations can be brittle, overly pessimistic about the test distribution, and compromise performance.
In contrast to both generalization and robustness approaches, humans do not need to practice a task
under explicit perturbations in order to adapt to new situations. As a concrete example, consider
the task of navigating through a forest with multiple possible paths. Traditional RL approaches
may optimize for and memorize the shortest possible path, whereas a person will encounter, and
remember many different paths during the learning process, including suboptimal paths that still
reach the end of the forest. While a single optimal policy would fail if the shortest path becomes
unavailable, a repertoire of diverse policies would be robust even when a particular path is no longer
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

