On Adaptive Distance Estimation
Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
yeshwanth@berkeley.edu

Jelani Nelson
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
minilek@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We provide a static data structure for distance estimation which supports adaptive
queries. Concretely, given a dataset X = {xi }ni=1 of n points in Rd and 0 < p  2,
we construct a randomized data structure with low memory consumption and
query time which, when later given any query point q 2 Rd , outputs a (1 + ")approximation of kq xi kp with high probability for all i 2 [n]. The main novelty is
our data structure’s correctness guarantee holds even when the sequence of queries
can be chosen adaptively: an adversary is allowed to choose the jth query point qj
in a way that depends on the answers reported by the data structure for q1 , . . . , qj 1 .
Previous randomized Monte Carlo methods do not provide error guarantees in
the setting of adaptively chosen queries [JL84, Ind06, TZ12, IW18]. Our memory
consumption is Õ((n + d)d/"2 ), slightly more than the O(nd) required to store X
in memory explicitly, but with the benefit that our time to answer queries is only
Õ(" 2 (n + d)), much faster than the naive ⇥(nd) time obtained from a linear scan
in the case of n and d very large. Here Õ hides log(nd/") factors. We discuss
applications to nearest neighbor search and nonparametric estimation.
Our method is simple and likely to be applicable to other domains: we describe a
generic approach for transforming randomized Monte Carlo data structures which
do not support adaptive queries to ones that do, and show that for the problem at
hand, it can be applied to standard nonadaptive solutions to `p norm estimation
with negligible overhead in query time and a factor d overhead in memory.

1

Introduction

In recent years, much research attention has been directed towards understanding the performance of
machine learning algorithms in adaptive or adversarial environments. In diverse application domains
ranging from malware and network intrusion detection [BCM+ 17, CBK09] to strategic classification
[HMPW16] to autonomous navigation [PMG16, LCLS17, PMG+ 17], the vulnerability of machine
learning algorithms to malicious manipulation of input data has been well documented. Motivated
by such considerations, we study the problem of designing efficient data structures for distance
estimation, a basic primitive in algorithms for nonparametric estimation and exploratory data analysis,
in the adaptive setting where the sequence of queries made to the data structure may be adversarially
chosen. Concretely, the distance estimation problem is defined as follows:
Problem 1.1 (Approximate Distance Estimation (ADE)). For a known norm k·k we are given a set
of vectors X = {xi }ni=1 ⇢ Rd and an accuracy parameter " 2 (0, 1), and we must produce some
data structure D. Then later, given only D stored in memory with no direct access to X, we must
respond to queries that specify q 2 Rd by reporting distance estimates d˜1 , . . . , d˜n satisfying
8i 2 [n], (1

")kq

xi k  d˜i  (1 + ")kq

xi k.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

