Bayesian Attention Modules

Xinjie Fan∗,1 , Shujian Zhang∗,1 , Bo Chen2 , and Mingyuan Zhou1
1
The University of Texas at Austin and 2 Xidian University
xfan@utexas.edu, szhang19@utexas.edu,
bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn, mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Attention modules, as simple and effective tools, have not only enabled deep neural
networks to achieve state-of-the-art results in many domains, but also enhanced
their interpretability. Most current models use deterministic attention modules
due to their simplicity and ease of optimization. Stochastic counterparts, on the
other hand, are less popular despite their potential benefits. The main reason is
that stochastic attention often introduces optimization issues or requires significant
model changes. In this paper, we propose a scalable stochastic version of attention
that is easy to implement and optimize. We construct simplex-constrained attention
distributions by normalizing reparameterizable distributions, making the training
process differentiable. We learn their parameters in a Bayesian framework where
a data-dependent prior is introduced for regularization. We apply the proposed
stochastic attention modules to various attention-based models, with applications
to graph node classification, visual question answering, image captioning, machine
translation, and language understanding. Our experiments show the proposed
method brings consistent improvements over the corresponding baselines.

1

Introduction

Attention modules, aggregating features with weights obtained by aligning latent states, have become
critical components for state-of-the-art neural network models in various applications, such as natural
language processing [1–4], computer vision [5, 6], graph analysis [7, 8], and multi-modal learning
[9–12]. They have been proven to be effective in not only being combined with other types of neural
network components, such as recurrent [1, 9] and convolutional units [5, 13], but also being used to
build a stand-alone architecture [2, 6, 14]. Besides boosting the performance, using them also often
helps aid model visualization and enhance interpretability [1, 9].
While the attention mechanism provides useful inductive bias, attention weights are often treated
as deterministic rather than random variables. Consequently, the only source of randomness lies at
the model output layer. For example, in classification models, the randomness is in the final logistic
regression layer, while in discrete sequence generation, it is in the conditional categorical output layer.
However, a single stochastic output layer is often insufficient in modeling complex dependencies [15].
The idea of augmenting deterministic neural networks with latent random variables has achieved
success in many fields to model highly structured data, such as texts [16, 17], speeches [15, 18, 19],
natural language sequences [20–23], and images [24–26]. Such modification may not only boost the
performance, but also provide better uncertainty estimation [27, 28].
As attention weights can be interpreted as alignment weights, it is intuitive to connect the attention
module with latent alignment models [9, 29, 30], where latent alignment variables are stochastic and
the objective becomes a lower bound of the log marginal likelihood. Making the attention weights
stochastic and learning the alignment distribution in a probabilistic manner brings several potential
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding to: mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

