CoSE: Compositional Stroke Embeddings

Thomas Deselaers∗
Apple Switzerland
deselaers@gmail.com

Emre Aksan
ETH Zurich
eaksan@inf.ethz.ch
Andrea Tagliasacchi
Google Research
atagliasacchi@google.com

Otmar Hilliges
ETH Zurich
otmar.hilliges@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We present a generative model for complex free-form structures such as strokebased drawing tasks. While previous approaches rely on sequence-based models
for drawings of basic objects or handwritten text, we propose a model that treats
drawings as a collection of strokes that can be composed into complex structures
such as diagrams (e.g., flow-charts). At the core of the approach lies a novel autoencoder that projects variable-length strokes into a latent space of fixed dimension.
This representation space allows a relational model, operating in latent space, to
better capture the relationship between strokes and to predict subsequent strokes.
We demonstrate qualitatively and quantitatively that our proposed approach is
able to model the appearance of individual strokes, as well as the compositional
structure of larger diagram drawings. Our approach is suitable for interactive use
cases such as auto-completing diagrams. We make code and models publicly
available at https://eth-ait.github.io/cose.

1

Introduction

Sketches and drawings have been at the heart of human
civilization for millennia. While free-form sketching is a
powerful and flexible tool for humans, it is a surprisingly
hard task for machines, especially if interpreted in the
generative sense. Consider Figure 1: “when given only
a sparse set of strokes (in black), what is the most likely
continuation of a sketch or diagram (colored strokes are
predicted)?” The answer to this question is highly context
sensitive and requires reasoning at the local (i.e., stroke)
and global (i.e., the diagram or sketch) level.
Existing work has been focused on the recognition [1–3]
and generation of handwritten text [4, 5] or the modelling
of entire drawings [6–9] from the Quick, Draw! dataset
[10]. However, the more recent DiDi dataset introduced
by Gervais et al. [11], consisting of much more realistic
and challenging complex structures such as diagrams and
flow-charts, has been shown to be challenging for existing
methods [12], due to the combinatorially many ways individual strokes can be combined into a complex drawing
(see Fig. 7).
∗

Figure 1: Teaser – We model complex drawings as a collections of strokes. Given only
sparse strokes as input (black) the model predicts the most likely next strokes and their
starting positions (heatmap), each color corresponds to one prediction step. This functional
decomposition allows for generative modelling of varied and complex structures such
as flow-charts (top), or freehand sketches
(bottom). The drawings are model outputs.

Work done while at Google. Unrelated to affiliation with Apple

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

