Softmax Deep Double Deterministic Policy Gradients

1

Ling Pan1 , Qingpeng Cai2 , Longbo Huang1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
pl17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Alibaba Group
qingpeng.cqp@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
A widely-used actor-critic reinforcement learning algorithm for continuous control,
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG), suffers from the overestimation
problem, which can negatively affect the performance. Although the state-of-theart Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) algorithm mitigates
the overestimation issue, it can lead to a large underestimation bias. In this paper,
we propose to use the Boltzmann softmax operator for value function estimation in
continuous control. We first theoretically analyze the softmax operator in continuous action space. Then, we uncover an important property of the softmax operator
in actor-critic algorithms, i.e., it helps to smooth the optimization landscape, which
sheds new light on the benefits of the operator. We also design two new algorithms,
Softmax Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (SD2) and Softmax Deep Double
Deterministic Policy Gradients (SD3), by building the softmax operator upon single
and double estimators, which can effectively improve the overestimation and underestimation bias. We conduct extensive experiments on challenging continuous
control tasks, and results show that SD3 outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG) [24] is a widely-used reinforcement learning [26, 30,
24, 29] algorithm for continuous control, which learns a deterministic policy using the actor-critic
method. In DDPG, the parameterized actor network learns to determine the best action with highest
value estimates according to the critic network by policy gradient descent. However, as shown
recently in [15], one of the dominant concerns for DDPG is that it suffers from the overestimation
problem as in the value-based Q-learning [37] method, which can negatively affect the performance
with function approximation [34]. Therefore, it is of vital importance to have good value estimates,
as a better estimation of the value function for the critic can drive the actor to learn a better policy.
To address the problem of overestimation in actor-critic, Fujimoto et al. propose the Twin Delayed
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) method [15] leveraging double estimators [20] for the
critic. However, directly applying the Double Q-learning [20] algorithm, though being a promising
method for avoiding overestimation in value-based approaches, cannot fully alleviate the problem
in actor-critic methods. A key component in TD3 [15] is the Clipped Double Q-learning algorithm,
which takes the minimum of two Q-networks for value estimation. In this way, TD3 significantly
improves the performance of DDPG by reducing the overestimation. Nevertheless, TD3 can lead to a
large underestimation bias, which also impacts performance [10].
The Boltzmann softmax distribution has been widely adopted in reinforcement learning. The softmax
function can be used as a simple but effective action selection strategy, i.e., Boltzmann exploration
[33, 9], to trade-off exploration and exploitation. In fact, the optimal policy in entropy-regularized
reinforcement learning [18, 19] is also in the form of softmax. Although it has been long believed
that the softmax operator is not a non-expansion and can be problematic when used to update value
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

