Joint Contrastive Learning with Infinite Possibilities

Qi Cai1∗

Yu Wang2∗ Yingwei Pan2

Ting Yao2

Tao Mei2

1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
{cqcaiqi, feather1014, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, tmei@live.com

Abstract
This paper explores useful modifications of the recent development in contrastive
learning via novel probabilistic modeling. We derive a particular form of contrastive loss named Joint Contrastive Learning (JCL). JCL implicitly involves the
simultaneous learning of an infinite number of query-key pairs, which poses tighter
constraints when searching for invariant features. We derive an upper bound on
this formulation that allows analytical solutions in an end-to-end training manner. While JCL is practically effective in numerous computer vision applications,
we also theoretically unveil the certain mechanisms that govern the behavior of
JCL. We demonstrate that the proposed formulation harbors an innate agency
that strongly favors similarity within each instance-specific class, and therefore
remains advantageous when searching for discriminative features among distinct
instances. We evaluate these proposals on multiple benchmarks, demonstrating
considerable improvements over existing algorithms. Code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/caiqi/Joint-Contrastive-Learning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, supervised learning has seen tremendous progress and made great success in numerous
real-world applications. By heavily relying on human annotations, supervised learning allows for
convenient end-to-end training of deep neural networks, and has made human-crafted features the
least popular in the machine learning community. However, the underlying feature behind the data
potentially has a much richer structure than what the sparse labels or rewards describe, while label
acquisition is also time-consuming and economically expensive. In contrast, unsupervised learning
uses no manually labeled annotations, and aims to characterize the underlying feature distribution
completely depending on the data itself. This overcomes several disadvantages that the supervised
learning encounters, including overfitting of the specific tasks-led features that cannot be readily
transferred to other objectives. Unsupervised learning therefore is an important stepping stone towards
more robust and generic representation learning.
Contrastive learning is at the core of several advances in unsupervised learning. The use of contrastive
loss dates back to [17]. In brief, the loss function in [17] runs over pairs of samples, returning low
values for similar pairs and high values for dissimilar pairs, which encourages invariant features on the
low dimensional manifold. The seminal work Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) [16] then builds
up the foundation of the contemporary contrastive learning, as NCE provides rigorous theoretical
justification by posing the contrastive learning problem into the “two-class” problem. InfoNCE [36]
roots in the principles of NCE and links the contrastive formulation with mutual information.
However, most existing contrastive learning methods only consider independently penalizing the
incompatibility of each single positive query-key pair at a time. This does not fully leverage the
assumption that all augmentations corresponding to a specific image are statistically dependent on
∗

Qi Cai and Yu Wang contributed equally to this work. This work was performed at JD AI Research.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

