Erdős Goes Neural: an Unsupervised Learning
Framework for Combinatorial Optimization on
Graphs

Nikolaos Karalias
EPFL
nikolaos.karalias@epfl.ch

Andreas Loukas
EPFL
andreas.loukas@epfl.ch

Abstract
Combinatorial optimization (CO) problems are notoriously challenging for neural
networks, especially in the absence of labeled instances. This work proposes an
unsupervised learning framework for CO problems on graphs that can provide
integral solutions of certified quality. Inspired by Erdős’ probabilistic method, we
use a neural network to parametrize a probability distribution over sets. Crucially,
we show that when the network is optimized w.r.t. a suitably chosen loss, the learned
distribution contains, with controlled probability, a low-cost integral solution that
obeys the constraints of the combinatorial problem. The probabilistic proof of
existence is then derandomized to decode the desired solutions. We demonstrate the
efficacy of this approach to obtain valid solutions to the maximum clique problem
and to perform local graph clustering. Our method achieves competitive results on
both real datasets and synthetic hard instances.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization (CO) includes a wide range of computationally hard problems that are
omnipresent in scientific and engineering fields. Among the viable strategies to solve such problems
are neural networks, which were proposed as a potential solution by Hopfield and Tank [30]. Neural
approaches aspire to circumvent the worst-case complexity of NP-hard problems by only focusing on
instances that appear in the data distribution.
Since Hopfield and Tank, the advent of deep learning has brought new powerful learning models,
reviving interest in neural approaches for combinatorial optimization. A prominent example is that of
graph neural networks (GNNs) [28, 60], whose success has motivated researchers to work on CO
problems that involve graphs [35, 87, 39, 27, 43, 53, 7, 56] or that can otherwise benefit from utilizing
a graph structure in the problem formulation [69] or the solution strategy [27]. The expressive
power of graph neural networks has been the subject of extensive research [82, 47, 17, 59, 58, 8, 26].
Encouragingly, GNNs can be Turing universal in the limit [46], which motivates their use as generalpurpose solvers.
Yet, despite recent progress, CO problems still pose a significant challenge to neural networks.
Successful models often rely on supervision, either in the form of labeled instances [45, 62, 35]
or of expert demonstrations [27]. This success comes with drawbacks: obtaining labels for hard
problem instances can be computationally infeasible [86], and direct supervision can lead to poor
generalization [36]. Reinforcement learning (RL) approaches have also been used for both classical
CO problems [16, 87, 85, 41, 20, 38, 7] as well as for games with large discrete action spaces, like
Starcraft [75] and Go [64]. However, not being fully-differentiable, they tend to be harder and more
time consuming to train.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

