Mitigating Manipulation in Peer Review
via Randomized Reviewer Assignments

Steven Jecmen
Carnegie Mellon University
sjecmen@cs.cmu.edu

Hanrui Zhang
Duke University
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu

Ryan Liu
Carnegie Mellon University
ryanliu@andrew.cmu.edu

Nihar B. Shah
Carnegie Mellon University
nihars@cs.cmu.edu

Vincent Conitzer
Duke University
conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Fei Fang
Carnegie Mellon University
feif@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider three important challenges in conference peer review: (i) reviewers
maliciously attempting to get assigned to certain papers to provide positive reviews,
possibly as part of quid-pro-quo arrangements with the authors; (ii) “torpedo
reviewing,” where reviewers deliberately attempt to get assigned to certain papers
that they dislike in order to reject them; (iii) reviewer de-anonymization on release
of the similarities and the reviewer-assignment code. On the conceptual front,
we identify connections between these three problems and present a framework
that brings all these challenges under a common umbrella. We then present a
(randomized) algorithm for reviewer assignment that can optimally solve the
reviewer-assignment problem under any given constraints on the probability of
assignment for any reviewer-paper pair. We further consider the problem of
restricting the joint probability that certain suspect pairs of reviewers are assigned
to certain papers, and show that this problem is NP-hard for arbitrary constraints on
these joint probabilities but efficiently solvable for a practical special case. Finally,
we experimentally evaluate our algorithms on datasets from past conferences,
where we observe that they can limit the chance that any malicious reviewer gets
assigned to their desired paper to 50% while producing assignments with over 90%
of the total optimal similarity.

1

Introduction

Peer review, the evaluation of work by others working in the same field as the producer of the work
or with similar competencies, is a critical component of scientific research. It is regarded favorably
by a significant majority of researchers and is seen as being essential to both improving the quality
of published research and validating the legitimacy of research publications [1–3]. Due to the wide
adoption of peer review in the publication process in academia, the peer-review process can be very
high-stakes for authors, and the integrity of the process can significantly influence the careers of the
authors (especially due to the prominence of a “rich get richer” effect in academia [4]).
However, there are several challenges that arise in peer review relating to the integrity of the review
process. In this work, we address three such challenges for peer review in academic conferences
where a number of papers need to be assigned to reviewers at the same time.
(1) Untruthful favorable reviews. In order to achieve a good reviewer assignment, peer review
systems must solicit some information about their reviewers’ knowledge and interests (e.g., through
bidding). This can be manipulated, and in fact this is known to have happened in at least one ACM
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

