Optimally Deceiving a Learning Leader in
Stackelberg Games
Georgios Birmpas
Sapienza University of Rome
gebirbas@gmail.com

Jiarui Gan
University of Oxford
jiarui.gan@cs.ox.ac.uk

Francisco J. Marmolejo-Cossío
University of Oxford
francisco.marmolejo@cs.ox.ac.uk

Alexandros Hollender
University of Oxford
alexandros.hollender@cs.ox.ac.uk
Ninad Rajgopal
University of Oxford
ninad.rajgopal@cs.ox.ac.uk

Alexandros A. Voudouris
University of Essex
alexandros.voudouris@essex.ac.uk

Abstract
Recent results in the ML community have revealed that learning algorithms used
to compute the optimal strategy for the leader to commit to in a Stackelberg game,
are susceptible to manipulation by the follower. Such a learning algorithm operates
by querying the best responses or the payoffs of the follower, who consequently
can deceive the algorithm by responding as if their payoffs were much different
than what they actually are. For this strategic behavior to be successful, the main
challenge faced by the follower is to pinpoint the payoffs that would make the
learning algorithm compute a commitment so that best responding to it maximizes
the follower’s utility, according to the true payoffs. While this problem has been
considered before, the related literature only focused on the simplified scenario in
which the payoff space is finite, thus leaving the general version of the problem
unanswered. In this paper, we fill this gap by showing that it is always possible for
the follower to efficiently compute (near-)optimal payoffs for various scenarios of
learning interaction between the leader and the follower.

1

Introduction

Stackelberg games are a simple yet powerful model for sequential interaction among strategic agents.
In such games there are two players: a leader and a follower. The leader commits to an action, and the
follower acts upon observing the leader’s commitment. The simple sequential structure of the game
permits modeling a multitude of important scenarios. Indicative applications include the competition
between a large and a small firm [43], the allocation of defensive resources [42], and the competition
among mining pools in the Bitcoin network [32, 41].
In Stackelberg games, the leader is interested in finding the best commitment she can make, assuming
that the follower behaves rationally. The combination of such a commitment by the leader and the
follower’s rational best response to it leads to a strong Stackelberg equilibrium (SSE). In general, the
utility that the leader obtains in an SSE is larger than what she would obtain in a Nash equilibrium of
the corresponding one-shot game [40], implying that the leader prefers to commit than to engage in a
simultaneous game with the follower.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

