Inference Stage Optimization for Cross-scenario 3D
Human Pose Estimation
Jianfeng Zhang Xuecheng Nie Jiashi Feng
Department of ECE, National University of Singapore
zhangjianfeng@u.nus.edu niexuecheng@u.nus.edu elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing 3D human pose estimation models suffer performance drop when applying
to new scenarios with unseen poses due to their limited generalizability. In this
work, we propose a novel framework, Inference Stage Optimization (ISO), for
improving the generalizability of 3D pose models when source and target data
come from different pose distributions. Our main insight is that the target data, even
though not labeled, carry valuable priors about their underlying distribution. To exploit such information, the proposed ISO performs geometry-aware self-supervised
learning (SSL) on each single target instance and updates the 3D pose model before
making prediction. In this way, the model can mine distributional knowledge
about the target scenario and quickly adapt to it with enhanced generalization
performance. In addition, to handle sequential target data, we propose an online
mode for implementing our ISO framework via streaming the SSL, which substantially enhances its effectiveness. We systematically analyze why and how our ISO
framework works on diverse benchmarks under cross-scenario setup. Remarkably,
it yields new state-of-the-art of 83.6% 3D PCK on MPI-INF-3DHP, improving
upon the previous best result by 9.7%.

1

Introduction

3D human pose estimation aims to localize 3D human body joints in images or videos. As a
fundamental task in computer vision, it is widely applied to human-robot interaction [15], action
recognition [53], human tracking [32], etc. This task is commonly resolved in a fully-supervised
manner with golden annotations [30, 57, 32, 55] that are collected in well-controlled laboratorial environments [21]. Despite their success in constrained scenarios, these methods are hardly generalized
to new scenarios (e.g., in-the-wild scenes), due to severe differences in the underlying distributions
(e.g., varying poses, camera viewpoints, body sizes and appearances).
Recent works address such a generalization challenge by leveraging either data augmentation strategies such as image composition [32] and synthesis [8, 49], or more complicated model learning
strategies like introducing kinematics priors [57, 12], separating 2D and depth features [44, 31, 45, 17]
or adopting adversarial learning [54, 14, 51]. However, they are still limited to the cases where
training and test samples have similar poses and otherwise tend to suffer large performance drop,
since their trained model is commonly biased to the training distribution and hardly generalizes well
to an unseen one that is very different.
In this work, we propose a novel scheme named Inference Stage Optimization (ISO). Instead of
focusing on improving model training, ISO improves and adapts the model at its inference stage
before making predictions (Fig. 1). Our insight is that the target samples, although not labeled, carry
valuable information about their distribution, which could be exploited to help adapt the model in the
inference stage for correcting unfavorable training bias and improving generalization performance.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

