When Do Neural Networks Outperform Kernel
Methods?
Behrooz Ghorbani∗, Song Mei†, Theodor Misiakiewicz‡, Andrea Montanari∗‡§

Abstract
For a certain scaling of the initialization of stochastic gradient descent (SGD), wide
neural networks (NN) have been shown to be well approximated by reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) methods. Recent empirical work showed that, for
some classification tasks, RKHS methods can replace NNs without a large loss
in performance. On the other hand, two-layers NNs are known to encode richer
smoothness classes than RKHS and we know of special examples for which SGDtrained NN provably outperform RKHS. This is true even in the wide network limit,
for a different scaling of the initialization.
How can we reconcile the above claims? For which tasks do NNs outperform
RKHS? If covariates are nearly isotropic, RKHS methods suffer from the curse of
dimensionality, while NNs can overcome it by learning the best low-dimensional
representation. Here we show that this curse of dimensionality becomes milder if
the covariates display the same low-dimensional structure as the target function,
and we precisely characterize this tradeoff. Building on these results, we present
the spiked covariates model that can capture in a unified framework both behaviors
observed in earlier works.
We hypothesize that such a latent low-dimensional structure is present in image
classification. We numerically test this hypothesis by showing that specific perturbations of the training distribution degrade the performances of RKHS methods
much more significantly than NNs.

1

Introduction

In supervised learning we are given data {(yi , xi )}i≤n ∼iid P ∈ P(R × Rd ), with xi ∈ Rd a
covariate vector and yi ∈ R the corresponding label, and would like to learn a function f : Rd → R
to predict future labels. In many applications, state-of-the-art systems use multi-layer neural networks
(NN). The simplest such model is provided by two-layers fully-connected networks:
N
n
o
X
N
FNN
:= fˆNN (x; b, W ) =
bi σ(hwi , xi) : bi ∈ R, wi ∈ Rd , ∀i ∈ [N ] .
(1)
i=1
N
FNN is a non-linearly parametrized class of functions:

while nonlinearity poses a challenge to
theoreticians, it is often claimed to be crucial in order to learn rich representation of the data. Recent
N
efforts to understand NN have put the spotlight on two linearizations of FNN
, the random features
[27] and the neural tangent [18] classes
N
n
o
X
N
FRF
(W ) := fˆRF (x; a; W ) =
ai σ(hwi , xi) : ai ∈ R, ∀i ∈ [N ] ,
(2)
i=1
∗

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
‡
Department of Statistics, Stanford University
§
Google Research, Brain Team
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

