Sub-sampling for Efficient Non-Parametric
Bandit Exploration

Dorian Baudry
dorian.baudry@inria.fr

Emilie Kaufmann
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr

Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9198-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

Abstract
In this paper we propose the first multi-armed bandit algorithm based on resampling that achieves asymptotically optimal regret simultaneously for different
families of arms (namely Bernoulli, Gaussian and Poisson distributions). Unlike
Thompson Sampling which requires to specify a different prior to be optimal in
each case, our proposal RB-SDA does not need any distribution-dependent tuning.
RB-SDA belongs to the family of Sub-sampling Duelling Algorithms (SDA) which
combines the sub-sampling idea first used by the BESA [1] and SSMC [2] algorithms with different sub-sampling schemes. In particular, RB-SDA uses Random
Block sampling. We perform an experimental study assessing the flexibility and
robustness of this promising novel approach for exploration in bandit models.

1

Introduction

A K-armed bandit problem is a sequential decision-making problem in which a learner sequentially
samples from K unknown distributions called arms. In each round the learner chooses an arm
At ∈ {1, . . . , K} and obtains a random reward Xt drawn from the distribution of the chosen arm,
that has mean µAt . The learner should adjust her sequential sampling strategy A = (At )t∈N (or
bandit algorithm) in order to maximize the expected sum of rewards obtained after T selections. This
is equivalent to minimizing the regret, defined as the difference between the expected total reward of
an oracle strategy always selecting the arm with largest mean µ? and that of the algorithm:
" T
#
" T
#
X
X
RT (A) = µ? T − E
Xt = E
(µ? − µAt ) .
t=1

t=1

An algorithm with small regret needs to balance exploration (gain information about arms that have
not been sampled a lot) and exploitation (select arms that look promising based on the available
information). Many approaches have been proposed to solve this exploration-exploitation dilemma
(see [3] for a survey), the most popular being Upper Confidence Bounds (UCB) algorithms [4, 5, 6]
and Thompson Sampling (TS) [7, 8]. TS is a randomized Bayesian algorithm that selects arms
according to their posterior probability of being optimal. These algorithms enjoy logarithmic regret
under some assumptions on the arms, and some of them are even asymptotically optimal in that they
attain the smallest possible asymptotic regret given by the lower bound of Lai & Robbins [9], for
some parametric families of distributions. For distributions that are continuously parameterized by
their means, this lower bound states that under any uniformly efficient algorithm,
X (µ? − µk )
RT (A)
lim inf
≥
.,
(1)
T →∞ log(T )
kl(µk , µ? )
k:µk <µ?

0

where kl(µ, µ ) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the distribution of mean µ and that of
mean µ0 in the considered family of distributions. For arms that belong to a one-parameter exponential
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

