Early-Learning Regularization Prevents
Memorization of Noisy Labels
Sheng Liu
Center for Data Science
New York University
shengliu@nyu.edu

Jonathan Niles-Weed
Center for Data Science, and
Courant Inst. of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
jnw@cims.nyu.edu

Narges Razavian
Department of Population Health, and
Department of Radiology
NYU School of Medicine
narges.razavian@nyulangone.org

Carlos Fernandez-Granda
Center for Data Science, and
Courant Inst. of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
cfgranda@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel framework to perform classification via deep learning in the
presence of noisy annotations. When trained on noisy labels, deep neural networks
have been observed to first fit the training data with clean labels during an “early
learning” phase, before eventually memorizing the examples with false labels.
We prove that early learning and memorization are fundamental phenomena in
high-dimensional classification tasks, even in simple linear models, and give a
theoretical explanation in this setting. Motivated by these findings, we develop
a new technique for noisy classification tasks, which exploits the progress of the
early learning phase. In contrast with existing approaches, which use the model
output during early learning to detect the examples with clean labels, and either
ignore or attempt to correct the false labels, we take a different route and instead
capitalize on early learning via regularization. There are two key elements to our
approach. First, we leverage semi-supervised learning techniques to produce target
probabilities based on the model outputs. Second, we design a regularization term
that steers the model towards these targets, implicitly preventing memorization
of the false labels. The resulting framework is shown to provide robustness to
noisy annotations on several standard benchmarks and real-world datasets, where
it achieves results comparable to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have become an essential tool for classification tasks [19, 15, 11]. These
models tend to be trained on large curated datasets such as CIFAR-10 [18] or ImageNet [9], where
the vast majority of labels have been manually verified. Unfortunately, in many applications such
datasets are not available, due to the cost or difficulty of manual labeling (e.g. [13, 32, 25, 1]).
However, datasets with lower quality annotations, obtained for instance from online queries [5] or
crowdsourcing [49, 53], may be available. Such annotations inevitably contain numerous mistakes or
label noise. It is therefore of great importance to develop methodology that is robust to the presence
of noisy annotations.
When trained on noisy labels, deep neural networks have been observed to first fit the training data
with clean labels during an early learning phase, before eventually memorizing the examples with
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

