Understanding Gradient Clipping in Private SGD:
A Geometric Perspective

Xiangyi Chen
University of Minnesota
chen5719@umn.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models are increasingly popular in many machine learning applications where the training data may contain sensitive information. To provide
formal and rigorous privacy guarantee, many learning systems now incorporate
differential privacy by training their models with (differentially) private SGD. A
key step in each private SGD update is gradient clipping that shrinks the gradient
of an individual example whenever its `2 norm exceeds some threshold. We first
demonstrate how gradient clipping can prevent SGD from converging to a stationary point. We then provide a theoretical analysis that fully quantifies the clipping
bias on convergence with a disparity measure between the gradient distribution and
a geometrically symmetric distribution. Our empirical evaluation further suggests
that the gradient distributions along the trajectory of private SGD indeed exhibit
symmetric structure that favors convergence. Together, our results provide an
explanation why private SGD with gradient clipping remains effective in practice
despite its potential clipping bias. Finally, we develop a new perturbation-based
technique that can provably correct the clipping bias even for instances with highly
asymmetric gradient distributions.

1

Introduction

Many modern applications of machine learning rely on datasets that may contain sensitive personal
information, including medical records, browsing history, and geographic locations. To protect the
private information of individual citizens, many machine learning systems now train their models
subject to the constraint of differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006], which informally requires that
no individual training example has a significant influence on the trained model. To achieve this
formal privacy guarantee, one of the most popular training methods, especially for deep learning, is
differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) [Bassily et al., 2014, Abadi et al., 2016b].
At a high level, DP-SGD is a simple modification of SGD that makes each step differentially private
with the Gaussian mechanism: at each iteration t, it first computes a gradient estimate gt based on
a random subsample, and then updates the model using a noisy gradient g̃t = gt + η, where η is a
noise vector drawn from a multivariate Gaussian distribution.
Despite the simple form of DP-SGD, there is a major disparity between its theoretical analysis
and practical implementation. The formal privacy guarantee of Gaussian mechanism requires that
the per-coordinate standard deviation of the noise vector η scales linearly with the `2 sensitivity
of the gradient estimate gt —that is, the maximal change on gt in `2 distance if by changining a
single example. To bound the `2 -sensitivity, existing theoretical analyses typically assume that the
loss function is L-Lipschitz in the model parameters, and the constant L is known to the algorithm
designer for setting the noise rate [Bassily et al., 2014, Wang and Xu, 2019]. Since this assumption
implies that the gradient of each example has `2 norm bounded by L, any gradient estimate from
averaging over the gradients of m examples has `2 -sensitivity bounded by L/m. However, in many
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

