How Do Fair Decisions Fare
in Long-term Qualification?

Xueru Zhang1,∗
Ruibo Tu2,∗
Yang Liu3
Mingyan Liu1
2
4
Hedvig Kjellström
Kun Zhang
Cheng Zhang5

2

1
University of Michigan, {xueru,mingyan}@umich.edu
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, {ruibo,hedvig}@kth.se
3
University of California, Santa Cruz, yangliu@ucsc.edu
4
Carnegie Mellon University, kunz1@cmu.edu
5
Microsoft Research, Cheng.Zhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
Although many fairness criteria have been proposed for decision making, their
long-term impact on the well-being of a population remains unclear. In this work,
we study the dynamics of population qualification and algorithmic decisions under
a partially observed Markov decision problem setting. By characterizing the
equilibrium of such dynamics, we analyze the long-term impact of static fairness
constraints on the equality and improvement of group well-being. Our results show
that static fairness constraints can either promote equality or exacerbate disparity
depending on the driving factor of qualification transitions and the effect of sensitive
attributes on feature distributions. We also consider possible interventions that can
effectively improve group qualification or promote equality of group qualification.
Our theoretical results and experiments on static real-world datasets with simulated
dynamics show that our framework can be used to facilitate social science studies.

1

Introduction

Automated decision making systems trained with real-world data can have inherent bias and exhibit
discrimination against disadvantaged groups. One common approach to alleviating the issue is to
impose fairness constraints on the decision such that certain statistical measures (e.g., true positive
rate, positive classification rate, etc.) across multiple groups are (approximately) equalized. However,
their effectiveness has been studied mostly in a static framework, where only the immediate impact of
the constraint is assessed but not its long-term consequences. Recent studies have shown that imposing
static fairness criteria intended to protect disadvantaged groups can actually lead to pernicious longterm effects [33, 47]. These long-term effects are heavily shaped by the interplay between algorithmic
decisions and individuals’ reactions [34]: algorithmic decisions lead to changes in the underlying
feature distribution, which then feeds back into the decision making process. Understanding how this
type of coupled dynamics evolve is a major challenge [10].
Toward this end, we consider a discrete-time sequential decision process applied to a certain population, where responses to the decisions made at each time step are manifested in changes in the features
of the population in the next time step. Our goal is to understand how (static) fairness criteria in this
type of decision making affect the evolution of group well-being and characterize any equilibrium
state the system may converge to. In particular, we will focus on myopic policies that maximize the
immediate utility under static fairness constraints, and examine their impact on different groups in
the long run.
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

