Learning from Failure:
Training Debiased Classifier from Biased Classifier

Junhyun Nam1

Hyuntak Cha2
Sungsoo Ahn1
Jaeho Lee1
Jinwoo Shin1,2
1
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
2
Graduate School of AI, KAIST
{junhyun.nam, hyuntak.cha, sungsoo.ahn, jaeho-lee, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural networks often learn to make predictions that overly rely on spurious correlation existing in the dataset, which causes the model to be biased. While previous
work tackles this issue by using explicit labeling on the spuriously correlated
attributes or presuming a particular bias type, we instead utilize a cheaper, yet
generic form of human knowledge, which can be widely applicable to various
types of bias. We first observe that neural networks learn to rely on the spurious
correlation only when it is “easier” to learn than the desired knowledge, and such
reliance is most prominent during the early phase of training. Based on the observations, we propose a failure-based debiasing scheme by training a pair of neural
networks simultaneously. Our main idea is twofold; (a) we intentionally train the
first network to be biased by repeatedly amplifying its “prejudice”, and (b) we
debias the training of the second network by focusing on samples that go against
the prejudice of the biased network in (a). Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our method significantly improves the training of network against various types of
biases in both synthetic and real-world datasets. Surprisingly, our framework even
occasionally outperforms the debiasing methods requiring explicit supervision of
the spuriously correlated attributes.

1

Introduction

When trained on carefully curated datasets, deep neural networks achieve state-of-the-art performances on many tasks in artificial intelligence, including image classification [11], object detection
[8], and speech recognition [9]. On the other hand, neural networks often dramatically fail when
trained on a highly biased dataset, by learning the unintended decision rule that works well only on
the dataset being trained on. For instance, it is widely known that object classification datasets suffer
from such misleading correlations [23, 29]. As an example, suppose that the “boat” is the only object
category appearing in the images with the “water” background. When trained on a dataset with such
bias, neural networks often learn to make predictions using the unintended decision rule based on the
background of images, whereas a learner intended to learn the decision rule based on the object in
the images.
To train a debiased model that captures the “intended correlation” from such biased datasets, recent
approaches focus on how to utilize various types of human supervision effectively. One of the most
popular forms of such supervision is an explicit label that indicates the misleadingly correlated
attribute [14, 18, 24]. For instance, Kim et al. [14], Li and Vasconcelos [18] consider training a model
to classify digits (instead of misleadingly correlated color) from the Colored MNIST dataset, under
the setup where RGB values for coloring digits are given as side information. Another line of research
focuses on developing algorithms tailored to a domain-specific type of bias in the target dataset,
whose existence and characteristics are diagnosed by human experts [7, 25, 4, 2]. For instance,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

