Compact task representations as a normative model
for higher-order brain activity

Severin Berger
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown
Lisbon, Portugal
severin.berger@neuro.fchampalimaud.org
Christian K. Machens
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown
Lisbon, Portugal
christian.machens@neuro.fchampalimaud.org

Abstract
Higher-order brain areas such as the frontal cortices are considered essential for
the flexible solution of tasks. However, the precise computational role of these
areas is still debated. Indeed, even for the simplest of tasks, we cannot really
explain how the measured brain activity, which evolves over time in complicated
ways, relates to the task structure. Here, we follow a normative approach, based
on integrating the principle of efficient coding with the framework of Markov
decision processes (MDP). More specifically, we focus on MDPs whose state is
based on action-observation histories, and we show how to compress the state space
such that unnecessary redundancy is eliminated, while task-relevant information is
preserved. We show that the efficiency of a state space representation depends on
the (long-term) behavioural goal of the agent, and we distinguish between modelbased and habitual agents. We apply our approach to simple tasks that require
short-term memory, and we show that the efficient state space representations
reproduce the key dynamical features of recorded neural activity in frontal areas
(such as ramping, sequentiality, persistence). If we additionally assume that neural
systems are subject to cost-accuracy tradeoffs, we find a surprising match to neural
data on a population level.

1

Introduction

Arguably one of the most striking differences between biological and artificial agents is the ease
with which the former navigate and control complex environments [1]. Core functions enabling
such behaviours, including working memory and planning, are typically attributed to higher-order
brain areas such as the prefrontal cortex (PFC) [2, 3], and exactly these functions are thought to
be lacking in today’s machine learning systems [4]. Yet, it remains unclear how higher-order brain
areas generate these complex behaviours, or even the simple behaviours that are often studied
experimentally in rodents and primates. Specifically, both behavioural strategies and neural activities
depend in complex ways on the task at hand, and these dependencies have so far evaded a satisfactory
or intuitive explanation [5]. For example, in tasks that require animals to remember some information,
neurons are sometimes persistently active [6, 7, 8, 9], while at other times they are sequentially active
[10, 11]. Indeed, subtle changes in the timing of a task can lead to a sudden shift from one to the
other [9], but the causes behind these activity shifts have remained unclear.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

