Bayesian Bits: Unifying Quantization and Pruning
Mart van Baalen⇤, Christos Louizos⇤, Markus Nagel, Rana Ali Amjad,
Ying Wang, Tijmen Blankevoort, Max Welling
Qualcomm AI Research†
{mart,clouizos,markusn,ramjad,yinwan,tijmen,mwelling}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
We introduce Bayesian Bits, a practical method for joint mixed precision quantization and pruning through gradient based optimization. Bayesian Bits employs a
novel decomposition of the quantization operation, which sequentially considers
doubling the bit width. At each new bit width, the residual error between the full
precision value and the previously rounded value is quantized. We then decide
whether or not to add this quantized residual error for a higher effective bit width
and lower quantization noise. By starting with a power-of-two bit width, this
decomposition will always produce hardware-friendly configurations, and through
an additional 0-bit option, serves as a unified view of pruning and quantization.
Bayesian Bits then introduces learnable stochastic gates, which collectively control
the bit width of the given tensor. As a result, we can obtain low bit solutions by
performing approximate inference over the gates, with prior distributions that encourage most of them to be switched off. We experimentally validate our proposed
method on several benchmark datasets and show that we can learn pruned, mixed
precision networks that provide a better trade-off between accuracy and efficiency
than their static bit width equivalents.

1

Introduction

To reduce the computational cost of neural network inference, quantization and compression techniques are often applied before deploying a model in real life. The former reduces the bit width of
weight and activation tensors by quantizing floating-point values onto a regular grid, allowing the use
of cheap integer arithmetic, while the latter aims to reduce the total number of multiply-accumulate
(MAC) operations required. We refer the reader to [18] and [19] for overviews of hardware-friendly
quantization and compression techniques, respectively.
In quantization, the default assumption is that all layers should be quantized to the same bit width.
While it has long been understood that low bit width quantization can be achieved by keeping the
first and last layers of a network in higher precision [34; 5], recent work [7; 35; 36] has shown that
carefully selecting the bit width of each tensor can yield a better trade-off between accuracy and
complexity. Since the choice of quantization bit width for one tensor may affect the quantization
sensitivity of all other tensors, the choice of bit width cannot be made without regarding the rest of
the network.
The number of possible bit width configurations for a neural network is exponential in the number of
layers in the network. Therefore, we cannot exhaustively search all possible configurations and pick
the best one. Several approaches to learning the quantization bit widths from data have been proposed,
either during training [35; 24], or on pre-trained networks [36; 7; 6]. However, these works do not
consider the fact that commercially available hardware typically only supports efficient computation
⇤
†

Equal contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

