GCN meets GPU:
Decoupling “When to Sample” from “How to Sample”

Morteza Ramezani ∗
Pennsylvania State University
morteza@cse.psu.edu

Weilin Cong ∗
Pennsylvania State University
wxc272@psu.edu

Anand Sivasubramaniam
Pennsylvania State University
anand@cse.psu.edu

Mehrdad Mahdavi
Pennsylvania State University
mzm616@psu.edu

Mahmut T. Kandemir
Pennsylvania State University
kandemir@cse.psu.edu

Abstract
Sampling-based methods promise scalability improvements when paired with
stochastic gradient descent in training Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs).
While effective in alleviating the neighborhood explosion, due to bandwidth and
memory bottlenecks, these methods lead to computational overheads in preprocessing and loading new samples in heterogeneous systems, which significantly
deteriorate the sampling performance. By decoupling the frequency of sampling
from the sampling strategy, we propose LazyGCN, a general yet effective framework that can be integrated with any sampling strategy to substantially improve the
training time. The basic idea behind LazyGCN is to perform sampling periodically
and effectively recycle the sampled nodes to mitigate data preparation overhead.
We theoretically analyze the proposed algorithm and show that under a mild condition on the recycling size, by reducing the variance of inner layers, we are able to
obtain the same convergence rate as the underlying sampling method. We also give
corroborating empirical evidence on large real-world graphs, demonstrating that
the proposed schema can significantly reduce the number of sampling steps and
yield superior speedup without compromising the accuracy.

1

Introduction

Graphs are powerful and versatile data structures to model many real world problems. However,
learning on a graph is challenging because it requires modeling of both rich node features and
underlying structure information. In recent years, thanks to its effective representation power and
improvements in hardware computing performance, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [15] and
their subsequent variants [13, 25] have achieved great success in numerous domains, including social
relationship detection [26, 7, 23], recommender systems [1, 29], knowledge graphs [27, 28, 21], and
biological networks [8, 9].
Recent success of training deep neural networks with GPUs, makes such a highly parallel architecture
a natural choice for training GCNs. However, directly adopting GPUs on large graphs remains
challenging due to computational overheads introduced by inter-dependency between nodes. In
fact, different from other standard neural architectures [17, 19, 24, 14] (e.g., fully connected or
convolutional neural networks) where the prediction of an individual data sample solely depends
on its own features, in a multi-hop GCN, the representation of a node recursively depends on its
neighbors across multiple hops (i.e., layers) that need to be aggregated – a phenomenon known
∗

Equal Contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

