Planning in Markov Decision Processes with
Gap-Dependent Sample Complexity

Anders Jonsson
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
anders.jonsson@upf.edu

Emilie Kaufmann
CNRS & ULille (CRIStAL), Inria Scool
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr

Pierre Ménard
Inria Lille, Scool team
pierre.menard@inria.fr

Omar Darwiche Domingues
Inria Lille, Scool team
omar.darwiche-domingues@inria.fr

Edouard Leurent
Renault & Inria Lille, Scool team
edouard.leurent@inria.fr

Michal Valko
DeepMind Paris
valkom@deepmind.com

Abstract
We propose MDP-GapE, a new trajectory-based Monte-Carlo Tree Search algorithm for planning in a Markov Decision Process in which transitions have a finite
support. We prove an upper bound on the number of calls to the generative model
needed for MDP-GapE to identify a near-optimal action with high probability.
This problem-dependent sample complexity result is expressed in terms of the
sub-optimality gaps of the state-action pairs that are visited during exploration.
Our experiments reveal that MDP-GapE is also effective in practice, in contrast
with other algorithms with sample complexity guarantees in the fixed-confidence
setting, that are mostly theoretical.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), an agent repeatedly takes actions and observes rewards in an unknown
environment described by a state. Formally, the environment is a Markov Decision Process (MDP)
M = hS, A, p, ri, where S is the state space, A the action space, p = {ph }h≥1 a set of transition
kernels and r = {rh }h≥1 a set of reward functions. By taking action a in state s at step h, the agent
reaches a state s0 with probability ph (s0 |s, a) and receives a random reward with mean rh (s, a). A
common goal is to learn a policy π = (πh )h≥1 that maximizes cumulative reward by taking action
πh (s) in state s at step h. If the agent has access to a generative model, it may plan before acting by
generating additional samples in order to improve its estimate of the best action to take next.
In this work, we consider Monte-Carlo planning as the task of recommending a good action to
be taken by the agent in a given state s1 , by using samples gathered from a generative model.
Let Q? (s1 , a) be the maximum cumulative reward, in expectation, that can be obtained from state
s1 by first taking action a, and let ân be the recommended action after n calls to the generative
model. The quality of the action recommendation is measured by its simple regret, defined as
r̄n (ân ) := V ? (s1 ) − Q? (s, ân ), where V ? (s1 ) := maxa Q? (s1 , a).

We propose an algorithm in the fixed confidence setting (ε, δ): after n calls to the generative model,
the algorithm should return an action ân such that r̄n (ân ) ≤ ε with probability at least 1 − δ. We
prove that its sample complexity n is bounded in high probability by a quantity that depends on
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

