Linearly Converging Error Compensated SGD

Eduard Gorbunov
MIPT, Yandex and Sirius, Russia
KAUST, Saudi Arabia

Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST, Saudi Arabia

Dmitry Makarenko
MIPT, Russia

Peter Richtárik
KAUST, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a unified analysis of variants of distributed SGD
with arbitrary compressions and delayed updates. Our framework is general
enough to cover different variants of quantized SGD, Error-Compensated SGD
(EC-SGD) and SGD with delayed updates (D-SGD). Via a single theorem, we
derive the complexity results for all the methods that fit our framework. For
the existing methods, this theorem gives the best-known complexity results.
Moreover, using our general scheme, we develop new variants of SGD that
combine variance reduction or arbitrary sampling with error feedback and
quantization and derive the convergence rates for these methods beating the
state-of-the-art results. In order to illustrate the strength of our framework,
we develop 16 new methods that fit this. In particular, we propose the
first method called EC-SGD-DIANA that is based on error-feedback for biased
compression operator and quantization of gradient differences and prove the
convergence guarantees showing that EC-SGD-DIANA converges to the exact
optimum asymptotically in expectation with constant learning rate for both
convex and strongly convex objectives when workers compute full gradients
of their loss functions. Moreover, for the case when the loss function of
the worker has the form of finite sum, we modified the method and got
a new one called EC-LSVRG-DIANA which is the first distributed stochastic
method with error feedback and variance reduction that converges to the
exact optimum asymptotically in expectation with a constant learning rate.

1

Introduction

We consider distributed optimization problems of the form


n
P
1
min f (x) = n
fi (x) ,
x∈Rd

(1)

i=1

where n is the number of workers/devices/clients/nodes. The information about function
fi is stored on the i-th worker only. Problems of this form appear in the distributed or
federated training of supervised machine learning models [42, 30]. In such applications,
x ∈ Rd describes the parameters identifying a statistical model we wish to train, and fi is
the (generalization or empirical) loss of model x on the data accessible by worker i. If worker
i has access to data with distribution Di , then fi is assumed to have the structure
fi (x) = Eξi ∼Di [fξi (x)] .

(2)

Dataset Di may or may not be available to worker i in its entirety. Typically, we assume that
worker i has only access to samples from Di . If the dataset is fully available, it is typically
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

