Transfer Learning via `1 Regularization

Masaaki Takada
Toshiba Corporation
Tokyo 105-0023, Japan
masaaki1.takada@toshiba.co.jp

Hironori Fujisawa
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
Tokyo 190-8562, Japan
fujisawa@ism.ac.jp

Abstract
Machine learning algorithms typically require abundant data under a stationary
environment. However, environments are nonstationary in many real-world applications. Critical issues lie in how to effectively adapt models under an ever-changing
environment. We propose a method for transferring knowledge from a source
domain to a target domain via `1 regularization in high dimension. We incorporate
`1 regularization of differences between source parameters and target parameters,
in addition to an ordinary `1 regularization. Hence, our method yields sparsity for
both the estimates themselves and changes of the estimates. The proposed method
has a tight estimation error bound under a stationary environment, and the estimate
remains unchanged from the source estimate under small residuals. Moreover, the
estimate is consistent with the underlying function, even when the source estimate
is mistaken due to nonstationarity. Empirical results demonstrate that the proposed
method effectively balances stability and plasticity.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms typically require abundant data under a stationary environment. However,
real-world environments are often nonstationary due to, for example, changes in the users’ preferences,
hardware or software faults affecting a cyber-physical system, or aging effects in sensors [39].
Concept drift, which means the underlying functions change over time, is recognized as a root cause
of decreased effectiveness in data-driven information systems [25].
Under an ever-changing environment, critical issues lie in how to effectively adapt models to a new
environment. Traditional approaches tried to detect concept drift based on hypothesis test [11, 26, 19,
5], but they are hard to capture continuously ever-changing environments. Continuously updating
approaches, in contrast, are effective for complex concept drift by avoiding misdetection. These
include tree-based methods [7, 16, 24] and ensemble-based methods [31, 20, 10]. Additionally,
parameter-based transfer learning for transferring knowledge from past (source domains) to present
(target domains) has been studied empirically and theoretically [27, 35, 21, 22]. They employed an
empirical risk minimization with `2 regularization, and the regularization was extended to strongly
convex functions. However, these methods do not yield sparsity of parameter changes, so that even
slight changes of data incur update of all parameters.
Specifically, we consider the problem of sparse regression [32, 14]. Sparse models are widely used in
decision making since they have few active features and thus easy to obtain some insight. However,
existing sparse regression methods are not necessarily effective for routine decision making, because
they can significantly change parameters even when the data changes only slightly.
In this paper, we provide a method for transferring knowledge in high dimension via `1 regularization
that allows sparse estimates and changes. We incorporate the `1 regularization of the difference
between source parameters and target parameters into the ordinary Lasso regularization. The ordinary
Lasso regularization has a role of restricting the model complexity in high dimension. The additional
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

