Decisions, Counterfactual Explanations and Strategic
Behavior
Stratis Tsirtsis
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
stsirtsis@mpi-sws.org

Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
As data-driven predictive models are increasingly used to inform decisions, it has
been argued that decision makers should provide explanations that help individuals
understand what would have to change for these decisions to be beneficial ones.
However, there has been little discussion on the possibility that individuals may use
the above counterfactual explanations to invest effort strategically and maximize
their chances of receiving a beneficial decision. In this paper, our goal is to find
policies and counterfactual explanations that are optimal in terms of utility in such
a strategic setting. We first show that, given a pre-defined policy, the problem of
finding the optimal set of counterfactual explanations is NP-hard. Then, we show
that the corresponding objective is nondecreasing and satisfies submodularity and
this allows a standard greedy algorithm to enjoy approximation guarantees. In
addition, we further show that the problem of jointly finding both the optimal policy and set of counterfactual explanations reduces to maximizing a non-monotone
submodular function. As a result, we can use a recent randomized algorithm to
solve the problem, which also offers approximation guarantees. Finally, we demonstrate that, by incorporating a matroid constraint into the problem formulation,
we can increase the diversity of the optimal set of counterfactual explanations
and incentivize individuals across the whole spectrum of the population to self
improve. Experiments on synthetic and real lending and credit card data illustrate
our theoretical findings and show that the counterfactual explanations and decision
policies found by our algorithms achieve higher utility than several competitive
baselines.

1

Introduction

Whenever a bank decides to offer a loan to a customer, a university decides to admit a prospective
student, or a company decides to hire a new employee, the decision is increasingly informed by a
data-driven predictive model. In all these high-stakes applications, the goal of the predictive model is
to provide accurate predictions of the outcomes from a set of observable features while the goal of the
decision maker is to take decisions that maximize a given utility function. For example, in university
admissions, the predictive model may estimate the ability of each prospective student to successfully
complete the graduate program while the decision maker may weigh the model’s estimate against
other socio-economic considerations (e.g., number of available scholarships, diversity commitments).
In this context, there has been a tremendous excitement on the potential of data-driven predictive
models to enhance decision making in high-stakes applications. However, there has also been a
heated debate about their lack of transparency and explainability [1–5]. As a result, there already
exists a legal requirement to grant individuals who are subject to (semi)-automated decision making
the right-to-explanation in the European Union [6, 7]. With this motivation, there has been a flurry
of work on interpretable machine learning [8–16], which has predominantly focused on developing
methods to find explanations for the predictions made by a predictive model. Within this line of work,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

