TSPNet: Hierarchical Feature Learning via Temporal
Semantic Pyramid for Sign Language Translation

Dongxu Li∗ ,1,2,3 , Chenchen Xu∗,1,3 , Xin Yu1,4 , Kaihao Zhang1,5 ,
Ben Swift1 , Hanna Suominen1,3,6 , Hongdong Li1,2
The Australian National University (ANU)1 , Australian Centre for Robotic Vision (ACRV)2 ,
Data61 / CSIRO3 , University of Technology Sydney (UTS)4 , Tencent AI Lab5 , University of Turku6
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Sign language translation (SLT) aims to interpret sign video sequences into textbased natural language sentences. Sign videos consist of continuous sequences of
sign gestures with no clear boundaries in between. Existing SLT models usually
represent sign visual features in a frame-wise manner so as to avoid needing to
explicitly segmenting the videos into isolated signs. However, these methods
neglect the temporal information of signs and lead to substantial ambiguity in
translation. In this paper, we explore the temporal semantic structures of sign
videos to learn more discriminative features. To this end, we first present a novel
sign video segment representation which takes into account multiple temporal
granularities, thus alleviating the need for accurate video segmentation. Taking
advantage of the proposed segment representation, we develop a novel hierarchical
sign video feature learning method via a temporal semantic pyramid network, called
TSPNet. Specifically, TSPNet introduces an inter-scale attention to evaluate and
enhance local semantic consistency of sign segments and an intra-scale attention to
resolve semantic ambiguity by using non-local video context. Experiments show
that our TSPNet outperforms the state-of-the-art with significant improvements
on the BLEU score (from 9.58 to 13.41) and ROUGE score (from 31.80 to 34.96)
on the largest commonly-used SLT dataset. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/verashira/TSPNet.

1

Introduction

Sign language translation (SLT), as an essential sign language interpretation task, aims to provide textbased natural language translation for continuously signing videos. Since sign languages are distinct
linguistic systems [1] which differ from natural languages, signed sentence and their translation
into natural languages do not syntactically align. For instance, sign languages have different word
ordering rules from their natural language counterparts. Because of such discrepancies between a
sign language and its natural language translation, SLT methods are often required to jointly learn
embedding space of sign sentence videos and natural languages as well as mappings between them,
leading to a difficult sequential learning problem.
Existing SLT approaches can be categorized into two-staged and bootstrapping approaches depending
on whether they require additional annotations for video and text alignments or not. Two-staged
models require extra annotations, namely gloss, to describe sign videos with word labels in their
occurring order. These models first learn to recognize gestures using gloss annotations and then
rearrange the recognition results into natural language sentences. Gloss annotations significantly
∗

Authors contributed equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

