A Discrete Variational Recurrent Topic Model
without the Reparametrization Trick

Mehdi Rezaee
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250 USA
rezaee1@umbc.edu

Francis Ferraro
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250 USA
ferraro@umbc.edu

Abstract
We show how to learn a neural topic model with discrete random variables—one
that explicitly models each word’s assigned topic—using neural variational inference that does not rely on stochastic backpropagation to handle the discrete
variables. The model we utilize combines the expressive power of neural methods
for representing sequences of text with the topic model’s ability to capture global,
thematic coherence. Using neural variational inference, we show improved perplexity and document understanding across multiple corpora. We examine the effect of
prior parameters both on the model and variational parameters, and demonstrate
how our approach can compete and surpass a popular topic model implementation
on an automatic measure of topic quality.

1

Introduction

With the successes of deep learning models, neural variational inference (NVI) [27]—also called
variational autoencoders (VAE)—has emerged as an important tool for neural-based, probabilistic
modeling [19, 40, 37]. NVI is relatively straight-forward when dealing with continuous random
variables, but necessitates more complicated approaches for discrete random variables.
The above can pose problems when we use discrete variables to model data, such as capturing both
syntactic and semantic/thematic word dynamics in natural language processing (NLP). Short-term
memory architectures have enabled Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to capture local, syntacticallydriven lexical dependencies, but they can still struggle to capture longer-range, thematic dependencies
[44, 29, 5, 20]. Topic modeling, with its ability to effectively cluster words into thematically-similar
groups, has a rich history in NLP and semantics-oriented applications [4, 3, 50, 6, 46, 35, i.a.].
However, they can struggle to capture shorter-range dependencies among the words in a document
[8]. This suggests these problems are naturally complementary [42, 53, 45, 41, 27, 15, 8, 48, 51, 22].
NVI has allowed the above recurrent topic modeling approaches to be studied, but with two primary
modifications: the discrete variables can be reparametrized and then sampled, or each word’s topic
assignment can be analytically marginalized out, prior to performing any learning. However, previous
work has shown that topic models that preserve explicit topics yield higher quality topics than similar
models that do not [25], and recent work has shown that topic models that have relatively consistent
word-level topic assignments are preferred by end-users [24]. Together, these suggest that there are
benefits to preserving these assignments that are absent from standard RNN-based language models.
Specifically, preservation of word-level topics within a recurrent neural language model may both
improve language prediction as well as yield higher quality topics.
To illustrate this idea of thematic vs. syntactic importance, consider the sentence “She received
bachelor’s and master’s degrees in electrical engineering from Anytown University.” While a topic
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

