Explaining Naive Bayes and Other Linear
Classifiers with Polynomial Time and Delay

Joao Marques-Silva1 , Thomas Gerspacher2 , Martin C. Cooper1
1
IRIT, CNRS, University of Toulouse III, France
2
ANITI, University of Toulouse, France
{joao.marques-silva,thomas.gerspacher,cooper}@irit.fr
Alexey Ignatiev
Monash University, Australia
alexey.ignatiev@monash.edu

Nina Narodytska
VMware Research, CA, USA
nnarodytska@vmware.com

Abstract
Recent work proposed the computation of so-called PI-explanations of Naive Bayes
Classifiers (NBCs) [35]. PI-explanations are subset-minimal sets of feature-value
pairs that are sufficient for the prediction, and have been computed with stateof-the-art exact algorithms that are worst-case exponential in time and space. In
contrast, we show that the computation of one PI-explanation for an NBC can
be achieved in log-linear time, and that the same result also applies to the more
general class of linear classifiers. Furthermore, we show that the enumeration
of PI-explanations can be obtained with polynomial delay. Experimental results
demonstrate the performance gains of the new algorithms when compared with
earlier work. The experimental results also investigate ways to measure the quality
of heuristic explanations.

1

Introduction

Approaches proposed in recent years for computing explanations of Machine Learning (ML) models
can be broadly characterized as heuristic or non-heuristic1 . Heuristic approaches denote those
providing no formal guarantees on their results. In contrast, non-heuristic approaches do provide
some sort of formal guarantee(s) on their results, usually at the cost of increased computational
complexity. Among the heuristic approaches for finding explanations, two have been studied in greater
detail. One line of work focuses on devising model-agnostic linear approximations of the underlying
model [29, 18]. Another line of work is exemplified by Anchor [30], and targets the computation of
a set of feature-value pairs associated with a given instance as a way of explaining the prediction.
To date, all non-heuristic methods have focused on computing sets of feature-value pairs that are
sufficient for the prediction [35, 10, 36, 6]2 . Moreover, in terms of formal guarantees, [35] studies
two distinct definitions of explanations. A PI-explanation represents a subset-minimal set of feature
values that entails the outcome of the decision function for the predicted class whatever the values
of the other features (i.e. it represents a prime implicant of the outcome of the decision function).
PI-explanations have also been studied under the name of abductive explanations [10]. In contrast,
and assuming binary features, an MC-explanation is a cardinality-minimal set of equal-valued features
that entails the outcome of the decision function. Non-heuristic approaches are model-based, and
1
There is a growing body of work on explaining ML models. Example recent overviews include [9, 31, 32,
23, 22, 1, 24, 41, 25].
2
Earlier work imposed the additional restriction of considering boolean-valued features. Clearly, non-boolean
features can be binarized, e.g. with the one hot encoding, at the cost of adding additional features.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

