Distribution Aligning Refinery of Pseudo-label
for Imbalanced Semi-supervised Learning

Jaehyung Kim1 , Youngbum Hur2 , Sejun Park1 ,
Eunho Yang1,3 , Sung Ju Hwang1,3 , Jinwoo Shin1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
3
AItrics
{jaehyungkim,sejun.park,sjhwang82,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
youngbum.hur@samsung.com yangeh@gmail.com

Abstract
While semi-supervised learning (SSL) has proven to be a promising way for
leveraging unlabeled data when labeled data is scarce, the existing SSL algorithms
typically assume that training class distributions are balanced. However, these SSL
algorithms trained under imbalanced class distributions can severely suffer when
generalizing to a balanced testing criterion, since they utilize biased pseudo-labels
of unlabeled data toward majority classes. To alleviate this issue, we formulate
a convex optimization problem to softly refine the pseudo-labels generated from
a biased model, and develop a simple iterative algorithm, named Distribution
Aligning Refinery of Pseudo-label (DARP) that solves it provably and efficiently.
Under various class-imbalanced semi-supervised scenarios, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of DARP and its compatibility with state-of-the-art SSL schemes.

1

Introduction

It has been repeatedly shown that deep neural networks (DNNs) can achieve human- or superhuman-level performances on various tasks [1, 17, 32]. This success, however, crucially relies on
the availability of large-scale labeled datasets, which typically requires a lot of human efforts to be
constructed. For example, the cost for labeling sequential (such as video and speech) data is often
proportional to their lengths. Furthermore, some specific domain knowledge is often critical for
labeling (such as medical) data. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is one of promising, conventional
ways to bypass this cost by leveraging unlabeled data for improving the performance of DNNs, given
a small amount of labeled data [4, 5, 42]. The common approach of these modern state-of-the-art
SSL algorithms is producing pseudo-labels for unlabeled data based on a model’s prediction and then
utilize the generated pseudo-labels for training the model iteratively [28, 36].
Most previous works on the line usually assume a balanced class distribution for both labeled and
unlabeled datasets. However, in many realistic scenarios, the underlying class distribution of training
data is highly imbalanced [27, 37]. It is well known that such an imbalanced class distribution hurts
the generalization of DNNs, i.e., makes their predictions to be biased toward majority classes [13].
In other words, DNNs trained under an imbalanced class distribution suffer when generalizing to a
balanced testing criterion. This issue can be more problematic for SSL algorithms since they generate
pseudo-labels of unlabeled data from the model’s biased predictions, i.e., pseudo-labels are even
more severely imbalanced compared to true labels of labeled or unlabeled data. For example, when
we train a Wide ResNet [43] on CIFAR-10 [12] under the imbalance ratio γ = 1501 using a recent
1

The number of training samples of a class (in both labeled and unlabeled datasets) is up to 150 times smaller
than that of another class.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

