Stability of Stochastic Gradient Descent
on Nonsmooth Convex Losses
Raef Bassily
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University.
bassily.1@osu.edu

Vitaly Feldman
Apple∗

Cristóbal Guzmán
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering
ANID – Millennium Science Initiative Program
Millennium Nucleus Center for the Discovery of
Structures in Complex Data
crguzmanp@mat.uc.cl

Kunal Talwar
Apple∗
ktalwar@apple.com

Abstract
Uniform stability is a notion of algorithmic stability that bounds the worst case
change in the model output by the algorithm when a single data point in the dataset
is replaced. An influential work of Hardt et al. [20] provides strong upper bounds
on the uniform stability of the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm on
sufficiently smooth convex losses. These results led to important progress in
understanding of the generalization properties of SGD and several applications to
differentially private convex optimization for smooth losses.
Our work is the first to address uniform stability of SGD on nonsmooth convex
losses. Specifically, we provide sharp upper and lower bounds for several forms
of SGD and full-batch GD on arbitrary Lipschitz nonsmooth convex losses. Our
lower bounds show that, in the nonsmooth case, (S)GD can be inherently less stable
than in the smooth case. On the other hand, our upper bounds show that (S)GD
is sufficiently stable for deriving new and useful bounds on generalization error.
Most notably, we obtain the first dimension-independent generalization bounds for
multi-pass SGD in the nonsmooth case. In addition, our bounds allow us to derive a
new algorithm for differentially private nonsmooth stochastic convex optimization
with optimal excess population risk. Our algorithm is simpler and more efficient
than the best known algorithm for the nonsmooth case [16].

1

Introduction

Successful applications of a machine learning algorithm require the algorithm to generalize well
to unseen data. Thus understanding and bounding the generalization error of machine learning
algorithms is an area of intense theoretical interest and practical importance. The single most popular
approach to modern machine learning relies on the use of continuous optimization techniques to
optimize the appropriate loss function, most notably the stochastic (sub)gradient descent (SGD)
method. Yet the generalization properties of SGD are still not well understood.
∗

Part of this research was done while the author was at Google Research.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

