Structured Prediction for Conditional Meta-Learning

Ruohan Wang, Yiannis Demiris, Carlo Ciliberto
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
London, UK
{r.wang16,y.demiris,c.ciliberto}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
The goal of optimization-based meta-learning is to find a single initialization
shared across a distribution of tasks to speed up the process of learning new
tasks. Conditional meta-learning seeks task-specific initialization to better capture
complex task distributions and improve performance. However, many existing
conditional methods are difficult to generalize and lack theoretical guarantees.
In this work, we propose a new perspective on conditional meta-learning via
structured prediction. We derive task-adaptive structured meta-learning (TASML),
a principled framework that yields task-specific objective functions by weighing
meta-training data on target tasks. Our non-parametric approach is model-agnostic
and can be combined with existing meta-learning methods to achieve conditioning.
Empirically, we show that TASML improves the performance of existing metalearning models, and outperforms the state-of-the-art on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art learning algorithms such as neural networks typically require vast amounts of data
to generalize well. This is problematic for applications with limited data availability (e.g. drug
discovery [3]). Meta-learning is often employed to tackle the lack of training data [17, 40, 53]. It is
designed to learn data-driven inductive bias to speed up learning on novel tasks [50, 52], with many
application settings such as learning-to-optimize [30], few-shot learning [16, 27] and hyperparameter
optimization [18]. Meta-learning methods could be broadly categorized into metric-learning [e.g.
37, 47, 53], model-based [e.g. 20, 22, 30], and optimization-based [e.g. 17, 35, 44].
We focus on optimization-based approaches, which cast meta-learning as a bi-level optimization [4,
17, 39]. At the single-task level, an “inner” algorithm performs task-specific optimization starting
from a set of meta-parameters shared across all tasks. At the “outer” level, a meta learner accrues
experiences from observed tasks to learn the aforementioned meta-parameters. These methods
seek to learn a single initialization of meta-parameters that can be effectively adapted to all tasks.
Relying on the shared initialization is challenging for complex (e.g. multi-modal) task distributions,
since different tasks may require a substantially different initialization, given the same adaptation
routine. This makes it infeasible to find a common meta-parameters for all tasks. Several recent
works [10, 15, 23, 24, 28, 44, 54, 55, 56] address the issue by conditioning such parameters on
target tasks, and demonstrate consistent improvements over unconditional meta-learning. However,
existing methods often lack theoretical guarantees on generalization performance and implements
specific conditioning principles with customized networks, which may be difficult to generalize
across different application settings.
In this paper, we offer a novel perspective on conditional meta-learning based on structured prediction [6]. This enables us to propose Task-adaptive Structured Meta-Learning (TASML) – a general
framework for conditional meta-learning – by interpreting the inner algorithm as the structured
output to be predicted, conditioned on target tasks. We derive a principled estimator that minimizes
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

