SuperLoss: A Generic Loss
for Robust Curriculum Learning

Thibault Castells
Naver Labs Europe
thibault.castells@wanadoo.fr

Philippe Weinzaepfel
Naver Labs Europe
philippe.weinzaepfel@naverlabs.com

Jerome Revaud
Naver Labs Europe
jerome.revaud@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Curriculum learning is a technique to improve a model performance and generalization based on the idea that easy samples should be presented before difficult
ones during training. While it is generally complex to estimate a priori the difficulty of a given sample, recent works have shown that curriculum learning can be
formulated dynamically in a self-supervised manner. The key idea is to somehow
estimate the importance (or weight) of each sample directly during training based
on the observation that easy and hard samples behave differently and can therefore
be separated. However, these approaches are usually limited to a specific task
(e.g., classification) and require extra data annotations, layers or parameters as
well as a dedicated training procedure. We propose instead a simple and generic
method that can be applied to a variety of losses and tasks without any change
in the learning procedure. It consists in appending a novel loss function on top
of any existing task loss, hence its name: the SuperLoss. Its main effect is to
automatically downweight the contribution of samples with a large loss, i.e. hard
samples, effectively mimicking the core principle of curriculum learning. As a side
effect, we show that our loss prevents the memorization of noisy samples, making it
possible to train from noisy data even with non-robust loss functions. Experimental
results on image classification, regression, object detection and image retrieval
demonstrate consistent gain, particularly in the presence of noise.

1

Introduction

Curriculum learning (CL) [4], a paradigm inspired by the learning process of humans and animals,
has recently received a sustained attention [13, 18, 48, 55]. CL is based on the intuitive observation
that our learning process naturally starts from easy notions before gradually transitioning to more
complex ones. When applied to machine learning, it essentially boils down to designing a sampling
strategy, i.e. a curriculum, that would present easy samples to the model before harder ones [13, 22].
While this was shown to be effective at improving the model performance and its generalization power
in earlier works [4, 22], they were limited to toy datasets and engineered sampling heuristics, leaving
unaddressed the general problem of establishing a curriculum on real-world tasks and datasets.
For this reason, a growing line of research has focused on methods able to automatically determine
the curriculum without requiring prior knowledge about the task at hand [18, 25, 34, 44, 48, 49].
This is indeed possible as easy and hard samples behave differently during training in terms of
their respective loss, allowing them to be somehow discriminated [19, 34, 44]. In this context, CL
is accomplished by predicting the easiness of each sample at each training iteration in the form
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

