Adversarial Distributional Training for
Robust Deep Learning

Yinpeng Dong∗ , Zhijie Deng∗ , Tianyu Pang, Jun Zhu, Hang Su†
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084 China
{dyp17, dzj17, pty17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {suhangss, dcszj}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial training (AT) is among the most effective techniques to improve model
robustness by augmenting training data with adversarial examples. However, most
existing AT methods adopt a specific attack to craft adversarial examples, leading
to the unreliable robustness against other unseen attacks. Besides, a single attack
algorithm could be insufficient to explore the space of perturbations. In this paper,
we introduce adversarial distributional training (ADT), a novel framework for learning robust models. ADT is formulated as a minimax optimization problem, where
the inner maximization aims to learn an adversarial distribution to characterize the
potential adversarial examples around a natural one under an entropic regularizer,
and the outer minimization aims to train robust models by minimizing the expected
loss over the worst-case adversarial distributions. Through a theoretical analysis,
we develop a general algorithm for solving ADT, and present three approaches
for parameterizing the adversarial distributions, ranging from the typical Gaussian
distributions to the flexible implicit ones. Empirical results on several benchmarks
validate the effectiveness of ADT compared with the state-of-the-art AT methods.

1

Introduction

While recent breakthroughs in deep neural networks (DNNs) have led to substantial success in a wide
range of fields [21], DNNs also exhibit adversarial vulnerability to small perturbations around the
input [60, 22]. Due to the security threat, considerable efforts have been devoted to improving the
adversarial robustness of DNNs [22, 36, 38, 42, 68, 46, 72, 47, 78]. Among them, adversarial training
(AT) is one of the most effective techniques [2, 16]. AT can be formulated as a minimax optimization
problem [42], where the inner maximization aims to find an adversarial example that maximizes the
classification loss for a natural one, while the outer minimization aims to train a robust classifier
using the generated adversarial examples. To solve the non-concave and typically intractable inner
maximization problem approximately, several adversarial attack methods can be adopted, such as fast
gradient sign method (FGSM) [22] and projected gradient descent (PGD) method [42].
However, existing AT methods usually solve the inner maximization problem based on a specific
attack algorithm, some of which can result in poor generalization for other unseen attacks under the
same threat model [58]1 . For example, defenses trained on the FGSM adversarial examples, without
random initialization or early stopping [69], are vulnerable to multi-step attacks [36, 63]. Afterwards,
recent methods [77, 70] can achieve the state-of-the-art robustness against the commonly used attacks
(e.g., PGD), but they can still be defeated by others [39, 64]. It indicates that these defenses probably
cause gradient masking [63, 2, 66], and can be fooled by stronger or adaptive attacks.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
It should be noted that we consider the generalization problem across attacks under the same threat model,
rather than studying the generalization ability across different threat models [24, 17, 62].
1

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

