Towards Safe Policy Improvement for
Non-Stationary MDPs

Yash Chandak
University of Massachusetts
ychandak@cs.umass.edu

Scott M. Jordan
University of Massachusetts
sjordan@cs.umass.edu

Martha White
University of Alberta & Amii
whitem@alberta.ca

Georgios Theocharous
Adobe Research
theochar@adobe.com

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts
pthomas@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Many real-world sequential decision-making problems involve critical systems with
financial risks and human-life risks. While several works in the past have proposed
methods that are safe for deployment, they assume that the underlying problem is
stationary. However, many real-world problems of interest exhibit non-stationarity,
and when stakes are high, the cost associated with a false stationarity assumption
may be unacceptable. We take the first steps towards ensuring safety, with high
confidence, for smoothly-varying non-stationary decision problems. Our proposed
method extends a type of safe algorithm, called a Seldonian algorithm, through a
synthesis of model-free reinforcement learning with time-series analysis. Safety is
ensured using sequential hypothesis testing of a policy’s forecasted performance,
and confidence intervals are obtained using wild bootstrap.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) methods have been applied to real-world sequential decision-making
problems such as diabetes management [5], sepsis treatment [50], and budget constrained bidding
[66]. For such real-world applications, safety guarantees are critical to mitigate serious risks in
terms of both human-life and monetary assets. More concretely, here, by safety we mean that
any update to a system should not reduce the performance of an existing system (e.g., a doctor’s
initially prescribed treatment). A further complication is that these applications are non-stationary,
violating the foundational assumption [53] of stationarity in most RL algorithms. This raises the
main question we aim to address: How can we build sequential decision-making systems that provide
safety guarantees for problems with non-stationarities?
Conventionally, RL algorithms designed to ensure safety [47, 26, 58, 69, 38, 17] model the environment as a Markov decision process (MDP), and rely upon the stationarity assumption made by MDPs
[53]. That is, MDPs assume that a decision made by an agent always results in the same (distribution
of) consequence(s) when the environment is in a given state. Consequently, safety is only ensured by
prior methods when this assumption holds, which is rare in real-world problems.
While some works for lifelong-reinforcement learning [10, 1, 12, 13] or meta-reinforcement learning
[3, 67] do aim to address the problem of non-stationarity, they do not provide any safety guarantees.
Perhaps the work most closely related to ours is by Ammar et al. [4], which aims to find a policy that
satisfies a safety constraint in the lifelong-learning setting. They use a follow-the-regularized-leader
(FTRL) [51] approach to first perform an unconstrained maximization over the average performance
over all the trajectories collected in the past, and then project the resulting solution onto a safe
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

