Denoised Smoothing:
A Provable Defense for Pretrained Classifiers
Hadi Salman
Mingjie Sun
Greg Yang
hasalman@microsoft.com
mingjies@cs.cmu.edu
gragyang@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research
CMU
Microsoft Research
Ashish Kapoor
J. Zico Kolter
akapoor@microsoft.com
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu
Microsoft Research
CMU

Abstract
We present a method for provably defending any pretrained image classifier against
`p adversarial attacks. This method, for instance, allows public vision API providers
and users to seamlessly convert pretrained non-robust classification services into
provably robust ones. By prepending a custom-trained denoiser to any off-theshelf image classifier and using randomized smoothing, we effectively create a
new classifier that is guaranteed to be `p -robust to adversarial examples, without
modifying the pretrained classifier. Our approach applies to both the white-box
and the black-box settings of the pretrained classifier. We refer to this defense
as denoised smoothing, and we demonstrate its effectiveness through extensive
experimentation on ImageNet and CIFAR-10. Finally, we use our approach to
provably defend the Azure, Google, AWS, and ClarifAI image classification APIs.
Our code replicating all the experiments in the paper can be found at: https:
//github.com/microsoft/denoised-smoothing1 .

1

Introduction

Image classification using deep learning, despite its recent success, is well-known to be susceptible
to adversarial attacks: small, imperceptible perturbations of the inputs that drastically change the
resulting predictions (Szegedy et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Carlini & Wagner, 2017b). To
solve this problem, many works proposed heuristic defenses that build models robust to adversarial
perturbations, though many of these defenses were broken using more powerful adversaries (Carlini
& Wagner, 2017a; Athalye et al., 2018; Uesato et al., 2018). This has led researchers to both
strengthen empirical defenses (Kurakin et al., 2016; Madry et al., 2017) as well as to develop certified
defenses that come with robustness guarantees, i.e., classifiers whose predictions are constant within
a neighborhood of their inputs (Wong & Kolter, 2018; Raghunathan et al., 2018a; Cohen et al.,
2019; Salman et al., 2019a). However, the majority of these defenses require that the classifier be
trained (from scratch) specifically to optimize the robust performance criterion, making the process
of building robust classifiers a computationally expensive one.
In this paper, we consider the problem of generating a provably robust classifier without retraining
the underlying model at all. This problem has not been investigated before, as previous works on
provable robustness mainly focus on training classifiers for this objective. There are several use cases
that make this problem interesting. For example, a provider of a large-scale image classification API
may want to offer a “robust” version of the API, but may not want to maintain and/or continually
retrain two models that need to be evaluated and validated separately. Even more realistically, a user
of a public vision API might want to use that API to create robust predictions (presuming that the
API performs well on clean data), but may not have access to the underlying non-robust model. In
both cases (which exemplify the white-box and the black-box settings respectively), it would be
highly desirable if one could simply apply an off-the-shelf “filter” that would allow practitioners to
automatically generate a provably robust model from this standard model.
1

Please see http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.01908 for the full and most recent version of this paper.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

