Learning with Differentiable Perturbed Optimizers

Quentin Berthet
Google Research,
Brain Team - Paris, France
qberthet@google.com
Marco Cuturi
Google Research,
Brain Team - Paris, France
cuturi@google.com

Mathieu Blondel
Google Research,
Brain Team - Paris, France
mblondel@google.com
Jean-Philippe Vert
Google Research,
Brain Team - Paris, France
jpvert@google.com

Olivier Teboul
Google Research,
Brain Team - Paris, France
oliviert@google.com
Francis Bach
INRIA - DI, ENS,
PSL Research University Paris
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
Machine learning pipelines often rely on optimization procedures to make discrete
decisions (e.g., sorting, picking closest neighbors, or shortest paths). Although
these discrete decisions are easily computed, they break the back-propagation
of computational graphs. In order to expand the scope of learning problems
that can be solved in an end-to-end fashion, we propose a systematic method
to transform optimizers into operations that are differentiable and never locally
constant. Our approach relies on stochastically perturbed optimizers, and can be
used readily together with existing solvers. Their derivatives can be evaluated
efficiently, and smoothness tuned via the chosen noise amplitude. We also show
how this framework can be connected to a family of losses developed in structured
prediction, and give theoretical guarantees for their use in learning tasks. We
demonstrate experimentally the performance of our approach on various tasks.

1

Introduction

Many applications of machine learning benefit from the possibility to train by gradient descent compositional models using end-to-end differentiability. Yet, there remain fields where discrete decisions
are required at intermediate steps of a data processing pipeline (e.g., in robotics, graphics or biology).
This is the result of many factors: discrete decisions provide a much sought-for interpretability,
and discrete solvers are built upon decades of advances in combinatorial algorithms [47] for quick
decisions (e.g., sorting, picking closest neighbors, exploring options with beam-search, or with
shortest paths problems). These discrete decisions can easily be computed in a forward pass. Their
derivatives with respect to inputs are however degenerate: small changes in the inputs either yield no
change or discontinuous changes in the outputs. Discrete solvers thus break the back-propagation of
computational graphs, and cannot be incorporated in end-to-end learning.
In order to expand the set of operations that can be incorporated in differentiable models, we
propose and investigate a new, systematic method to transform discrete optimizers into differentiable
operations. Our approach builds upon the method of stochastic perturbations, the theory of which
was developed and applied to several tasks of machine learning recently; see [27]. In a nutshell, we
perturb the inputs of a discrete solver with random noise, and consider the perturbed solutions of
the problem. The method is both easy to analyze theoretically and simple to implement. We show
that the formal expectations of these perturbed solutions are never locally constant and everywhere
differentiable, with successive derivatives being expectations of simple expressions.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

