On the Stability and Convergence of Robust
Adversarial Reinforcement Learning:
A Case Study on Linear Quadratic Systems

Kaiqing Zhang
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Bin Hu
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

kzhang66@illinois.edu

binhu7@illinois.edu

Tamer Başar
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
basar1@illinois.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms can fail to generalize due to the gap
between the simulation and the real world. One standard remedy is to use robust
adversarial RL (RARL) that accounts for this gap during the policy training, by
modeling the gap as an adversary against the training agent. In this work, we
reexamine the effectiveness of RARL under a fundamental robust control setting:
the linear quadratic (LQ) case. We first observe that the popular RARL scheme that
greedily alternates agents’ updates can easily destabilize the system. Motivated by
this, we propose several other policy-based RARL algorithms whose convergence
behaviors are then studied both empirically and theoretically. We find: i) the
conventional RARL framework (Pinto et al., 2017) can learn a destabilizing policy
if the initial policy does not enjoy the robust stability property against the adversary;
and ii) with robustly stabilizing initializations, our proposed double-loop RARL
algorithm provably converges to the global optimal cost while maintaining robust
stability on-the-fly. We also examine the stability and convergence issues of other
variants of policy-based RARL algorithms, and then discuss several ways to learn
robustly stabilizing initializations. From a robust control perspective, we aim to
provide some new and critical angles about RARL, by identifying and addressing
the stability issues in this fundamental LQ setting in continuous control. Our results
make an initial attempt toward better theoretical understandings of policy-based
RARL, the core approach in Pinto et al., 2017.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) can fail to generalize due to the gap between the simulation and the real
world. One common remedy for this is to use robust adversarial RL (RARL) that accounts for this
gap during the policy training, by modeling the gap as an adversary against the training agent [1, 2].
To achieve the goal of learning a policy that is robust against a family of possible model uncertainties,
RARL jointly trains a protagonist and an adversary, where the protagonist learns to robustly perform
the control tasks under the possible disturbances generated by its adversary. Despite the recent
development of various robust RL algorithms, especially for continuous control tasks [2, 3, 4, 5, 6],
there is no clean baseline delineating the robustness of the policies learned by such a framework.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

