Statistical Optimal Transport posed as
Learning Kernel Mean Embedding

J. Saketha Nath
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, INDIA.
saketha@cse.iith.ac.in

Pratik Jawanpuria
Microsoft IDC,
Hyderabad, INDIA.
pratik.jawanpuria@microsoft.com

Abstract
The objective in statistical Optimal Transport (OT) is to consistently estimate the
optimal transport plan/map solely using samples from the given source and target
marginal distributions. This work takes the novel approach of posing statistical
OT as that of learning the transport plan’s kernel mean embedding from sample
based estimates of marginal embeddings. The proposed estimator controls overfitting by employing maximum mean discrepancy based regularization, which is
complementary to φ-divergence (entropy) based regularization popularly employed
in existing estimators. A key result is that, under very mild conditions, -optimal
recovery of the transport plan as well as the Barycentric-projection based transport
map is possible with a sample complexity that is completely dimension-free. Moreover, the implicit smoothing in the kernel mean embeddings enables out-of-sample
estimation. An appropriate representer theorem is proved leading to a kernelized
convex formulation for the estimator, which can then be potentially used to perform
OT even in non-standard domains. Empirical results illustrate the efficacy of the
proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport is proving to be an increasingly successful tool in solving diverse machine learning
problems. Recent research shows that variants of Optimal Transport (OT) achieve state-of-the-art
performance in various machine learning (ML) applications such as data alignment/integration [2,
24, 42, 19], domain adaptation [7, 34], model interpolation/combination [38, 35, 9], natural language
processing [43, 44] etc. It is also shown that OT based (Wasserstein) metrics serve as good loss
functions in both supervised [13, 20] and unsupervised [16] learning.
Given two marginal distributions over source and target domains, and a cost function between
elements of the domains, the classical OT problem (Kantorovich’s formulation) is that of finding
the joint distribution whose marginals are equal to the given marginals, and which minimizes the
expected cost with respect to this joint distribution [22]. This joint distribution is known as the
(optimal) transport plan or the optimal coupling. A related object of interest for ML applications
is the so-called Barycentric-projection based transport map corresponding to a transport plan (e.g.,
refer Equation (11) in [37]). Though OT techniques already improve state-of-the-art in many ML
applications, there are two main bottlenecks that seem to limit OT’s success in ML settings:
• while continuous distributions are ubiquitous, algorithms for finding the transport plan/map over
continuous domains are very scarce [15]. The situation is worse in case of non-standard domains,
which are not uncommon in ML.
• the marginal distributions are never available, and merely samples from them are given. The variant
of OT where the transport plan/map needs to be estimated merely using samples from the marginals
is known as the statistical OT problem. Unfortunately, this estimation problem is plagued with the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

