Convolutional Generation of Textured 3D Meshes
Dario Pavllo
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Thomas Hofmann
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

Graham Spinks
Dept. of Computer Science
KU Leuven

Marie-Francine Moens
Dept. of Computer Science
KU Leuven

Aurelien Lucchi
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich

Abstract
While recent generative models for 2D images achieve impressive visual results,
they clearly lack the ability to perform 3D reasoning. This heavily restricts the
degree of control over generated objects as well as the possible applications of
such models. In this work, we bridge this gap by leveraging recent advances in
differentiable rendering. We design a framework that can generate triangle meshes
and associated high-resolution texture maps, using only 2D supervision from singleview natural images. A key contribution of our work is the encoding of the mesh
and texture as 2D representations, which are semantically aligned and can be easily
modeled by a 2D convolutional GAN. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method
on Pascal3D+ Cars and CUB, both in an unconditional setting and in settings where
the model is conditioned on class labels, attributes, and text. Finally, we propose
an evaluation methodology that assesses the mesh and texture quality separately.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art image synthesis models based on the GAN framework [13] nowadays achieve photorealistic results thanks to a series of key contributions in this area [19, 34, 35, 65, 25]. A recent trend
in this field has been to make generative models more controllable and of better use for downstream
applications. This includes works that condition generative models on class labels [35, 65, 4], text
[66, 67, 59, 30], input images [70, 22], as well as structured scene layouts such as semantic maps
[53, 41, 36], bounding boxes [69, 20, 47], and scene graphs [23]. While these approaches achieve
impressive visual results, they are all based on architectures that fundamentally ignore the concept of
image formation. Real-world images depict 2D projections of 3D objects, and explicitly considering
this aspect would lead to better generative models that can provide disentangled control over shape,
color, pose, lighting, and can better handle spatial phenomena such as occlusions. A recent trend
to account for such effects has been to disentangle factors of variation during the generation process
in the hope of making it more interpretable [63, 44, 25, 26]. These approaches potentially learn a
hierarchical decomposition of objects, and in some settings (e.g. faces) they can provide some degree
of control over pose. However, the pose disentanglement assumptions made by these approaches
have been shown to be unrealistic without some form of supervision [32], and they have not reached
the degree of controllability that a native 3D representation would be capable of. More recent efforts
have focused on incorporating 3D information into the model architecture, using either rigid transformations in feature space [38] or analysis-by-synthesis [37]. These approaches represent an interesting
middle ground between 2D and 3D generators, although their objective remains 2D image synthesis.
In this work, we propose a GAN framework for generating triangle meshes and associated textures,
using only 2D supervision from single-view natural images. In terms of applications, our approach
could greatly facilitate content creation for art, movies, video games, virtual reality, as well as
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

