Multi-task Batch Reinforcement Learning with
Metric Learning

Jiachen Li1∗ Quan Vuong1∗ Shuang Liu1 Minghua Liu1
Kamil Ciosek2 Henrik Christensen1 Hao Su1
1
2
UC San Diego
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK
{jil021, qvuong, s3liu, minghua, hichristensen, haosu}@ucsd.edu
kamil.ciosek@microsoft.com

Abstract
We tackle the Multi-task Batch Reinforcement Learning problem. Given multiple
datasets collected from different tasks, we train a multi-task policy to perform
well in unseen tasks sampled from the same distribution. The task identities of
the unseen tasks are not provided. To perform well, the policy must infer the task
identity from collected transitions by modelling its dependency on states, actions
and rewards. Because the different datasets may have state-action distributions
with large divergence, the task inference module can learn to ignore the rewards
and spuriously correlate only state-action pairs to the task identity, leading to poor
test time performance. To robustify task inference, we propose a novel application
of the triplet loss. To mine hard negative examples, we relabel the transitions from
the training tasks by approximating their reward functions. When we allow further
training on the unseen tasks, using the trained policy as an initialization leads to
significantly faster convergence compared to randomly initialized policies (up to
80% improvement and across 5 different Mujoco task distributions). We name our
method MBML (Multi-task Batch RL with Metric Learning) 2 .

1

Introduction

Combining neural networks (NN) with reinforcement learning (RL) has led to many recent advances
[1–5]. Since training NNs requires diverse datasets and collecting real world data is expensive, most
RL successes are limited to scenarios where the data can be cheaply generated in a simulation. On
the other hand, offline data is essentially free for many applications and RL methods should use it
whenever possible. This is especially true because practical deployments of RL are bottle-necked by
its poor sample efficiency. This insight has motivated a flurry of recent works in Batch RL [6–10].
These works introduce specialized algorithms to stabilize training from offline datasets. However,
offline datasets are not necessarily diverse. In this work, we investigate how the properties of a
diverse dataset influence the policy search procedure. By collecting diverse offline dataset, we hope
the networks will generalize without further training to unseen tasks or provide good initialization
that speeds up convergence when we perform further on-policy training.
To collect diverse datasets, it occurs to us that we should collect data from different tasks. However,
datasets collected from different tasks may have state-action distributions with large divergence. Such
dataset bias presents a unique challenge in robust task inference. We provide a brief description of
the problem setting, the challenge and our contributions below. For ease of exposition, we refer to
such datasets as having little overlap in their state-action visitation frequencies thereafter.
∗
2

Equal Contribution
Website: https://sites.google.com/eng.ucsd.edu/multi-task-batch-reinforcement/home

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

