Efficient Algorithms for Device Placement
of DNN Graph Operators

Jakub Tarnawski
Microsoft Research

Amar Phanishayee
Microsoft Research

Divya Mahajan
Microsoft

Nikhil Devanur∗
Amazon

Fanny Nina Paravecino
Microsoft

Abstract
Modern machine learning workloads use large models, with complex structures,
that are very expensive to execute. The devices that execute complex models are
becoming increasingly heterogeneous as we see a flourishing of domain-specific
accelerators being offered as hardware accelerators in addition to CPUs. These
trends necessitate distributing the workload across multiple devices. Recent work
has shown that significant gains can be obtained with model parallelism, i.e,
partitioning a neural network’s computational graph onto multiple devices. In
particular, this form of parallelism assumes a pipeline of devices, which is fed a
stream of samples and yields high throughput for training and inference of DNNs.
However, for such settings (large models and multiple heterogeneous devices), we
require automated algorithms and toolchains that can partition the ML workload
across devices. In this paper, we identify and isolate the structured optimization
problem at the core of device placement of DNN operators, for both inference and
training, especially in modern pipelined settings. We then provide algorithms that
solve this problem to optimality. We demonstrate the applicability and efficiency
of our approaches using several contemporary DNN computation graphs.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been effective across a range of applications, including image
classification [KSH12, SZ14, HZRS15a], translation [WSC+ 16], language modeling [MKS17], and
video captioning [VRD+ 15]. The proliferation of heterogeneous hardware accelerators [JYP+ 17,
SPM+ 16] coupled with the dramatic growth in the size and the structural complexity of DNNs has
bolstered the importance of model parallelism, where for both inference and training, the model is
distributed across devices.
DNN inference in the “single-stream” setting [mlp], where only one inference request is issued
at a time, is latency-sensitive. To achieve low latency, model parallel executions split the model
across many accelerators [CKES16, FOP+ 18, CFO+ 18]. Model-parallel inference is beneficial due
to three primary reasons. First, such splits are mandated by the memory-capacity (size) limitations of
accelerators that cannot fit a single DNN model. Current DNN models have billions of parameters
and require multiple GBs of space to store the weights and intermediate activations. Second, wide
branching in recent DNN structures, as well as in the operator-granularity graphs for established
DNNs, opens up the potential of executing data-independent sections of the computation in parallel
to reduce latency. Third, the model needs to be split across multiple types of devices when a subset
of operators in the graph are better suited or only supported to execute on certain accelerators.
∗

Work done while at Microsoft Research.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

