Language Through a Prism: A Spectral Approach for
Multiscale Language Representations
Alex Tamkin†
Stanford University

Dan Jurafsky
Stanford University

Noah Goodman
Stanford University

Abstract
Language exhibits structure at different scales, ranging from subwords to words,
sentences, paragraphs, and documents. To what extent do deep models capture
information at these scales, and can we force them to better capture structure across
this hierarchy? We approach this question by focusing on individual neurons, analyzing the behavior of their activations at different timescales. We show that signal
processing provides a natural framework for separating structure across scales,
enabling us to 1) disentangle scale-specific information in existing embeddings
and 2) train models to learn more about particular scales. Concretely, we apply
spectral filters to the activations of a neuron across an input, producing filtered
embeddings that perform well on part of speech tagging (word-level), dialog speech
acts classification (utterance-level), or topic classification (document-level), while
performing poorly on the other tasks. We also present a prism layer for training
models, which uses spectral filters to constrain different neurons to model structure
at different scales. Our proposed BERT + Prism model can better predict masked
tokens using long-range context and produces multiscale representations that perform better at utterance- and document-level tasks. Our methods are general and
readily applicable to other domains besides language, such as images, audio, and
video.

1

Introduction

Language exhibits structure at multiple levels, ranging from morphology at the subword level [1],
word meaning at the lexical level [2], coherence and other discourse properties at the clause or
sentence level [3, 4, 5], to topical and narrative structures for entire documents [6, 7]. Prior work in
NLP has shown how these kinds of structures can be explicitly modeled by representing individual
levels of structure [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], multiple levels of structure [14, 15, 16], building hierarchical
models that capture structure at the sentence level [17, 18] or between sentences [19, 20], and probing
to discover known linguistic levels of structure [21, 22, 23, 24].
We propose a new method for uncovering and learning this kind of structure in representations at
every scale, from word meaning to document topics, without drawing on prior linguistic models of
specific structural levels like "sentence" or "clause." To do so, we employ tools from spectral analysis,
widely used in signal processing and other fields [25] to separate and control information at different
timescales. Intuitively, any sequence of values, such as a neuron’s activations across input tokens,
can be represented as a weighted sum of cosine waves with different frequencies. The weight for a
particular frequency indicates the amount of structure in the sequence at that scale: weight on higher
frequencies indicates faster changes in the neuron’s activation from token to token, while weight on
lower frequencies indicates activations that shift more gradually across an input. By removing certain
†

atamkin@stanford.edu

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

