Generalization Bound of Gradient Descent for
Non-Convex Metric Learning

Mingzhi Dong1,2,3∗ Xiaochen Yang3∗ Rui Zhu4 Yujiang Wang5 Jing-Hao Xue3
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Department of Statistical Science, University College London, London, UK
4
The Business School (formerly Cass), City, University of London, London, UK
5
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK
mingzhidong@gmail.com
{xiaochen.yang.16, jinghao.xue}@ucl.ac.uk
rui.zhu@city.ac.uk
yujiang.wang14@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Metric learning aims to learn a distance measure that can benefit distance-based
methods such as the nearest neighbor (NN) classifier. While considerable efforts
have been made to improve its empirical performance and analyze its generalization ability by focusing on the data structure and model complexity, an unresolved
question is how choices of algorithmic parameters, such as the number of training
iterations, affect metric learning as it is typically formulated as an optimization
problem and nowadays more often as a non-convex problem. In this paper, we
theoretically address this question and prove the agnostic Probably Approximately
Correct (PAC) learnability for metric learning algorithms with non-convex objective
functions optimized via gradient descent (GD); in particular, our theoretical guarantee takes the iteration number into account. We first show that the generalization
PAC bound is a sufficient condition for agnostic PAC learnability and this bound
can be obtained by ensuring the uniform convergence on a densely concentrated
subset of the parameter space. We then show that, for classifiers optimized via GD,
their generalizability can be guaranteed if the classifier and loss function are both
Lipschitz smooth, and further improved by using fewer iterations. To illustrate and
exploit the theoretical findings, we finally propose a novel metric learning method
called Smooth Metric and representative Instance LEarning (SMILE), designed
to satisfy the Lipschitz smoothness property and learned via GD with an early
stopping mechanism for better discriminability and less computational cost of NN.

1

Introduction

A good measure of distance between instances is important to many machine learning algorithms,
such as the nearest neighbor (NN) classifier and k-means clustering. As it is difficult to handcraft
an optimal distance for each task, metric learning appears as an appealing technique to learn the
distance metric automatically and directly from the data. The most widely studied metric is the
Mahalanobis distance and it is often learned via an optimization problem [51, 17, 49]. To enhance the
discriminability of the learned metric, various loss functions have been designed, considering the local
property of heterogeneous data [15, 47, 23, 5, 38, 54, 44, 12] and the nonlinear geometry of the sample
space [24, 58, 8]. Meanwhile, to achieve good generalization and robustness, different regularizations
have been imposed to control the model complexity [31, 26, 50, and references therein]. In addition to
methodological advances, theoretical guarantees of metric learning algorithms, as well as guarantees
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

