Geometric Exploration for Online Control

Orestis Plevrakis
Princeton University
orestisp@princeton.edu

Elad Hazan
Princeton University
Google AI Princeton
ehazan@princeton.edu

Abstract
We study the control of an unknown linear dynamical system under general convex
costs. The objective is minimizing regret vs the class of strongly-stable linear
policies. In this work, we first consider the case of known cost
√ functions, for
which we design the first polynomial-time algorithm with n3 T -regret, where
√
n is the dimension of the state plus the dimension of control input. The T horizon dependence is optimal, and improves upon the previous best known bound
of T 2/3 . The main component of our algorithm is a novel geometric exploration
strategy: we adaptively construct a sequence of barycentric spanners in an overparameterized policy space. Second, we consider the case of bandit√feedback,
for which we give the first polynomial-time algorithm with poly(n) T -regret,
building on Stochastic Bandit Convex Optimization.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study the online control of an unknown linear dynamical system under general convex costs. This is a fundamental problem in control theory and it also embodies a central challenge
of reinforcement learning: balancing exploration and exploitation in continuous spaces. For this
reason, it has recently received considerable attention from the machine learning community.
Controlling unknown LDS:
evolves as

In a linear dynamical system (LDS), the system state xt ∈ Rdx

xt+1 = A∗ xt + B∗ ut + wt , where x1 = 0,

(1)
i.i.d

ut ∈ Rdu is the learner’s control input, wt ∈ Rdx is a noise process drawn as wt ∼ N (0, I), and
A∗ , B∗ are unknown system matrices. The learner applies control ut at timestep t, then observes
the state xt+1 and suffers cost c(xt , ut ), where c is a convex function. We consider two forms of
cost information for the learner: the case where c is known in advance, and the bandit version where
only the scalar cost is observed.
Even if the dynamics where known, there are problem instances where the optimal policy is a very
complicated function [6]. A way to circumvent this is to consider a policy class that is both expressive and tractable, and aim for performing as well as the best policy from that class. The objective
that captures this goal is regret, and is a standard performance metric in online control. In this paper,
in accordance with the previous works, we choose the policy class to be all strongly-stable linear
policies1 . These are policies that 1) select the control as a linear function of the state, and 2) mix
fast to a steady state. These policies are a reasonable baseline, since they are optimal for the special
case where the cost c is strongly convex quadratic.
1
In Section 5, we explain how we can extend all our results to hold for the more general class of stabilizing
linear-dynamical-control policies.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

