One-sample Guided Object Representation Disassembling

Zunlei Feng
Zhejiang University
zunleifeng@zju.edu.cn
Xin Gao
Alibaba Group
zimu.gx@alibaba-inc.com

Yongming He
Zhejiang University
yongminghe@zju.edu.cn

Xinchao Wang
Stevens Institute of Technology
xinchao.wang@stevens.edu

Jie Lei
Zhejiang University of Technology
jasonlei@zjut.edu.cn

Cheng Jin
Fudan University
jc@fudan.edu.cn

Mingli Song∗
Zhejiang University
brooksong@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The ability to disassemble the features of objects and background is crucial for
many machine learning tasks, including image classification, image editing, visual
concepts learning, and so on. However, existing (semi-)supervised methods all need
a large amount of annotated samples, while unsupervised methods can’t handle realworld images with complicated backgrounds. In this paper, we introduce the Onesample Guided Object Representation Disassembling (One-GORD) method, which
only requires one annotated sample for each object category to learn disassembled
object representation from unannotated images. For the annotated one-sample, we
first adopt some data augmentation strategies to generate some synthetic samples,
which can guide the disassembling of the object features and background features.
For the unannotated images, two self-supervised mechanisms: dual-swapping
and fuzzy classification are introduced to disassemble object features from the
background with the guidance of annotated one-sample. What’s more, we devise
two metrics to evaluate the disassembling performance from the perspective of
representation and image, respectively. Experiments demonstrate that the OneGORD achieves competitive dissembling performance and can handle natural
scenes with complicated backgrounds.

1

Introduction

Learning disassembled object representation is a vital step in many machine learning tasks, including
image editing, image classification, few/zero-shot learning, and visual concepts learning. For example,
many image editing [4, 21, 26] for objects typically rely on image segmentation techniques and
human labor, which only handles object in image level. The existing classification works [15, 18]
usually train classifiers with large amounts of annotated samples to extract specific object features
and identify them, which also has a serious cost of labor, time, and memory. For the few/zero-shot
learning problem, most of works [2, 22, 27, 30] adopt representations extracted by pre-trained deep
models as the features of specific objects. However, the representations extracted by pre-trained
models usually contain many irrelevant features, which will disturb the performance of models. So,
an object representation learning method that can learn the pure and entire features of the specific
object with a few annotated data is desperately needed.
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

