Bayesian Deep Learning and a Probabilistic
Perspective of Generalization
Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Pavel Izmailov
New York University

Abstract
The key distinguishing property of a Bayesian approach is marginalization, rather
than using a single setting of weights. Bayesian marginalization can particularly
improve the accuracy and calibration of modern deep neural networks, which are
typically underspecified by the data, and can represent many compelling but different solutions. We show that deep ensembles provide an effective mechanism for
approximate Bayesian marginalization, and propose a related approach that further
improves the predictive distribution by marginalizing within basins of attraction,
without significant overhead. We also investigate the prior over functions implied
by a vague distribution over neural network weights, explaining the generalization
properties of such models from a probabilistic perspective. From this perspective,
we explain results that have been presented as mysterious and distinct to neural
network generalization, such as the ability to fit images with random labels, and
show that these results can be reproduced with Gaussian processes. We also show
that Bayesian model averaging alleviates double descent, resulting in monotonic
performance improvements with increased flexibility.

1

Introduction

Imagine fitting the airline passenger data in Figure 1. Which model would you choose: (1) f1 (x) =
P3
P104
w0 + w1 x, (2) f2 (x) = j=0 wj xj , or (3) f3 (x) = j=0 wj xj ?
500k

Airline Passengers

Put this way, most audiences overwhelmingly favour choices
(1) and (2), for fear of overfitting. But of these options, choice
(3) most honestly represents our beliefs. Indeed, it is likely that
the ground truth explanation for the data is out of class for any
of these choices, but there is some setting of the coefficients
{wj } in choice (3) which provides a better description of reality than could be managed by choices (1) and (2), which are
special cases of choice (3). Moreover, our beliefs about the
generative processes for our observations, which are often very
sophisticated, typically ought to be independent of how many
data points we observe.

400k

300k

200k

100k
1949

1951

1953

1955

1957

1959

Year

Figure 1: Airline passenger data.

And in modern practice, we are implicitly favouring choice (3): we often use neural networks with
millions of parameters to fit datasets with thousands of points. Furthermore, non-parametric methods
such as Gaussian processes often involve infinitely many parameters, enabling the flexibility for
universal approximation [40], yet in many cases provide very simple predictive distributions. Indeed,
parameter counting is a poor proxy for understanding generalization behaviour.
From a probabilistic perspective, we argue that generalization depends largely on two properties, the
support and the inductive biases of a model. Consider Figure 2(a), where on the horizontal axis we
have a conceptualization of all possible datasets, and on the vertical axis the Bayesian evidence for a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

