Robust Sequence Submodular Maximization
Gamal Sallam1 , Zizhan Zheng2 , Jie Wu1 , and Bo Ji 1, 3
1

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Temple University
2
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University
3
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech

Abstract
Submodularity is an important property of set functions and has been extensively
studied in the literature. It models set functions that exhibit a diminishing returns
property, where the marginal value of adding an element to a set decreases as the
set expands. This notion has been generalized to considering sequence functions,
where the order of adding elements plays a crucial role and determines the function
value; the generalized notion is called sequence (or string) submodularity. In this
paper, we study a new problem of robust sequence submodular maximization
with cardinality constraints. The robustness is against the removal of a subset of
elements in the selected sequence (e.g., due to malfunctions or adversarial attacks).
Compared to robust submodular maximization for set function, new challenges
arise when sequence functions are concerned. Specifically, there are multiple
definitions of submodularity for sequence functions, which exhibit subtle yet critical differences. Another challenge comes from two directions of monotonicity:
forward monotonicity and backward monotonicity, both of which are important to
proving performance guarantees. To address these unique challenges, we design
two robust greedy algorithms: while one algorithm achieves a constant approximation ratio but is robust only against the removal of a subset of contiguous elements,
the other is robust against the removal of an arbitrary subset of the selected elements but requires a stronger assumption and achieves an approximation ratio
that depends on the number of the removed elements. Finally, we generalize the
analyses to considering sequence functions under weaker assumptions based on
approximate versions of sequence submodularity and backward monotonicity.

1

Introduction

Submodularity is an important property of set functions and has been extensively studied in the
literature [1–4]. It models set functions that exhibit a diminishing returns property, where the marginal
value of adding an element to a set decreases as the set expands (i.e., contains more elements). The
notion of submodularity has been generalized to considering sequence functions, where the order
of adding elements plays a crucial role and determines the function value; the generalized notion
is called sequence (or string) submodularity [5–11]. Several real-world applications, including
machine learning based recommendation systems, ads allocation, and automation and control, involve
the selection of elements in sequence. In this paper, we study a new problem of robust sequence
submodular maximization with cardinality constraints. The robustness is against the removal of a
subset of elements in the selected sequence (e.g., due to malfunctions or adversarial attacks). To
motivate the new problem studied in this paper, we begin with the discussions about two concrete
applications (sensor activation and movie recommendation) and use them to illustrate the key
differences between set functions and sequence functions.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

