On the Almost Sure Convergence of Stochastic
Gradient Descent in Non-Convex Problems
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG &
Criteo AI Lab
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Nadav Hallak
Technion
ndvhllk@technion.ac.il

Ali Kavis
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
ali.kavis@epfl.ch
Volkan Cevher
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
This paper analyzes the trajectories of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to help
understand the algorithm’s convergence properties in non-convex problems. We
first show that the sequence of iterates generated by SGD remains bounded and
converges with probability 1 under a very broad range of step-size schedules.
Subsequently, going beyond existing positive probability guarantees, we show
that SGD avoids strict saddle points/manifolds with probability 1 for the entire
spectrum of step-size policies considered. Finally, we prove that the algorithm’s
rate of convergence to local minimizers with a positive-definite Hessian is O(1/np )
if the method is employed with a Θ(1/np ) step-size. This provides an important
guideline for tuning the algorithm’s step-size as it suggests that a cool-down phase
with a vanishing step-size could lead to faster convergence; we demonstrate this
heuristic using ResNet architectures on CIFAR.

1

Introduction

Owing to its simplicity and empirical successes, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has become the
de facto method for training a wide range of models in machine learning. This paper examines the
properties of SGD in non-convex problems with the aim of answering the following questions:
(Q1) Does SGD always converge to the problem’s critical set?
(Q2) Does SGD always avoid spurious critical regions (non-isolated saddle points, ridges, etc.)?
(Q3) How fast does SGD converge to local minimizers as a function of the method’s step-size?
We provide the following contributions to these questions:
On (Q1): Under mild conditions for the function to be optimized, and allowing for a wide range
of step-size schedules of the form Θ(1/np ) for p ∈ (0, 1], the sequence of iterates Xn generated
by SGD converges with probability 1. In contrast to existing mean squared error guarantees of the
form E[k∇f (Xn )k2 ] → 0 (where f is the problem’s objective), our result is a stronger, trajectory
convergence result: It is not a guarantee that holds on average, but a convergence certificate that
applies with probability 1 to any instantiation of the algorithm.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

