Spectra of the Conjugate Kernel and Neural Tangent
Kernel for Linear-Width Neural Networks
Zhou Fan
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
zhou.fan@yale.edu

Zhichao Wang
Department of Mathematics
University of California, San Diego
zhw036@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We study the eigenvalue distributions of the Conjugate Kernel and Neural Tangent
Kernel associated to multi-layer feedforward neural networks. In an asymptotic
regime where network width is increasing linearly in sample size, under random initialization of the weights, and for input samples satisfying a notion of approximate
pairwise orthogonality, we show that the eigenvalue distributions of the CK and
NTK converge to deterministic limits. The limit for the CK is described by iterating
the Marcenko-Pastur map across the hidden layers. The limit for the NTK is equivalent to that of a linear combination of the CK matrices across layers, and may be
described by recursive fixed-point equations that extend this Marcenko-Pastur map.
We demonstrate the agreement of these asymptotic predictions with the observed
spectra for both synthetic and CIFAR-10 training data, and we perform a small
simulation to investigate the evolutions of these spectra over training.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in our theoretical understanding of neural networks has connected their training
and generalization to two associated kernel matrices. The first is the Conjugate Kernel (CK) or the
equivalent Gaussian process kernel [43, 56, 12, 14, 48, 52, 33, 41]. This is the gram matrix of the
derived features produced by the final hidden layer of the network. The network predictions are linear
in these derived features, and the CK governs training and generalization in this linear model.
The second is the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) [27, 19, 6]. This is the gram matrix of the Jacobian of
in-sample predictions with respect to the network weights, and was introduced to study full network
training. Under gradient-flow training dynamics, the in-sample predictions follow a differential
equation governed by the NTK. We provide a brief review of these matrices in Section 2.1.
The spectral decompositions of these kernel matrices are related to training and generalization
properties of the underlying network. Training occurs most rapidly along the eigenvectors of the
largest eigenvalues [5], and the eigenvalue distribution may determine the trainability of the model
and the extent of implicit bias towards simpler functions [57, 59]. It is thus of interest to understand
the spectral properties of these matrices, both at random initialization and over the course of training.
1.1

Summary of contributions

In this work, we apply techniques of random matrix theory to derive an exact asymptotic characterization of the eigenvalue distributions of the CK and NTK at random initialization, in a multi-layer
feedforward network architecture. We study a “linear-width” asymptotic regime, where each hidden
layer has width proportional to the training sample size. We impose an assumption of approximate
pairwise orthogonality for the training samples, which encompasses general settings of independent
samples that need not have independent entries.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

