CHIP: A Hawkes Process Model for Continuous-time
Networks with Scalable and Consistent Estimation
Makan Arastuie
EECS Department
University of Toledo
makan.arastuie
@rockets.utoledo.edu

Subhadeep Paul
Department of Statistics
The Ohio State University
paul.963@osu.edu

Kevin S. Xu
EECS Department
University of Toledo
kevin.xu@utoledo.edu

Abstract
In many application settings involving networks, such as messages between users of
an on-line social network or transactions between traders in financial markets, the
observed data consist of timestamped relational events, which form a continuoustime network. We propose the Community Hawkes Independent Pairs (CHIP)
generative model for such networks. We show that applying spectral clustering
to an aggregated adjacency matrix constructed from the CHIP model provides
consistent community detection for a growing number of nodes and time duration.
We also develop consistent and computationally efficient estimators for the model
parameters. We demonstrate that our proposed CHIP model and estimation procedure scales to large networks with tens of thousands of nodes and provides superior
fits than existing continuous-time network models on several real networks.

1

Introduction

A variety of complex systems in the computer, information, biological, and social sciences can be
represented as a network, which consists of a set of objects (nodes) and relationships (edges) between
the objects. In many application settings, we observe edges in the form of distinct events occurring
between nodes over time. For example, in on-line social networks, users interact with each other
through events that occur at specific time instances such as liking, mentioning, or sharing another
user’s content. Such interactions form timestamped relational events, where each event is a triplet
(i, j, t) denoting events from node i (sender) to node j (receiver) at timestamp t. The observation of
these triplets defines a dynamic network that continuously evolves over time.
Timestamped relational event data are usually modeled by combining a point process model for the
event times with a network model for the sender and receiver [1–9]. We refer to such models as
continuous-time network models because they provide probabilities of observing events between two
nodes during arbitrarily short time intervals. For model-based exploratory analysis and prediction
of future events with relational event data, continuous-time network models are often superior to
their discrete-time counterparts [10–14], which first aggregate events over time windows to form
discrete-time network “snapshots” and thus lose granularity in modeling temporal dynamics.
We propose the Community Hawkes Independent Pairs (CHIP) model, which is inspired by the
recently proposed Block Hawkes Model (BHM) [9] for timestamped relational event data. Both CHIP
and BHM are based on the Stochastic Block Model (SBM) for static networks [15]. In the BHM,
events between different pairs of nodes belonging to the same pair of communities are dependent,
which makes it difficult to analyze. In contrast, for CHIP the pairs of nodes in the same community
generate events according to independent univariate Hawkes processes with shared parameters, so
that the number of parameters remains the same as in the BHM. The independence between node
pairs enables tractable analysis of the CHIP model and more scalable estimation than the BHM.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

