A Game Theoretic Analysis of Additive
Adversarial Attacks and Defenses
Ambar Pal
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
ambar@jhu.edu

René Vidal
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
rvidal@jhu.edu

Abstract
Research in adversarial learning follows a cat and mouse game between attackers
and defenders where attacks are proposed, they are mitigated by new defenses,
and subsequently new attacks are proposed that break earlier defenses, and so on.
However, it has remained unclear as to whether there are conditions under which
no better attacks or defenses can be proposed. In this paper, we propose a gametheoretic framework for studying attacks and defenses which exist in equilibrium.
Under a locally linear decision boundary model for the underlying binary classifier,
we prove that the Fast Gradient Method attack and a Randomized Smoothing
defense form a Nash Equilibrium. We then show how this equilibrium defense can
be approximated given finitely many samples from a data-generating distribution,
and derive a generalization bound for the performance of our approximation.

1

Introduction

Neural network classifiers have been shown to be vulnerable to additive perturbations to the input,
which can cause an anomalous change in the classification output. There are several attack methods
to compute such perturbations for any input instance which assume access to the model gradient
information, e.g., Fast Gradient Sign Method [12] and Projected Gradient Method [24]. In response
to such additive attacks, researchers have proposed many additive defense methods with varying
levels of success, e.g., Randomized Smoothing [7]. However, it has been later discovered that a lot
of these defenses are in turn susceptible to further additive attacks handcrafted for the particular
defenses. This back and forth where attacks are proposed breaking previous defenses and then further
defenses are proposed mitigating earlier attacks has been going on for some time in the community
and there are several open questions to be answered. Can all defenses be broken, or do there exist
defenses for which we can get provable guarantees? Similarly, does there always exist a defense
against any attack, or are there attacks with provable performance degradation guarantees? Do there
exist scenarios under which attackers always win, and similarly scenarios where defenders always
win? Are there conditions under which an equilibrium between attacks and defenses exist?
In this work, we answer some of these questions in the affirmative in a binary classification setting
with locally linear decision boundaries. Specifically, we find a pair of attack A and defense D such
that if the attacker uses A, then there is no defense which can perform better than D, and vice versa.
Our approach can be seen as a novel way to obtain both provable attacks and provable defenses,
complementing recent advances on certifiable defenses in the literature ([37, 4, 15, 9, 35, 14, 19, 22]).
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
1. We introduce a game-theoretic framework for studying equilibria of attacks and defenses on an
underlying binary classifier. In order to do so, we first specify the capabilities, i.e., the changes the
attacker and defender are allowed to make to the input, the amount of knowledge the attacker and
the defender have about each other, and formalize the strategies that they can follow.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

