Pruning neural networks without any data
by iteratively conserving synaptic flow
Hidenori Tanaka⇤
Physics & Informatics Laboratories
NTT Research, Inc.
Department of Applied Physics
Stanford University

Daniel Kunin⇤
Institute for Computational and
Mathematical Engineering
Stanford University

Daniel L. K. Yamins
Department of Psychology
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University

Surya Ganguli
Department of Applied Physics
Stanford University

Abstract
Pruning the parameters of deep neural networks has generated intense interest due
to potential savings in time, memory and energy both during training and at test
time. Recent works have identified, through an expensive sequence of training
and pruning cycles, the existence of winning lottery tickets or sparse trainable
subnetworks at initialization. This raises a foundational question: can we identify highly sparse trainable subnetworks at initialization, without ever training,
or indeed without ever looking at the data? We provide an affirmative answer
to this question through theory driven algorithm design. We first mathematically
formulate and experimentally verify a conservation law that explains why existing
gradient-based pruning algorithms at initialization suffer from layer-collapse, the
premature pruning of an entire layer rendering a network untrainable. This theory
also elucidates how layer-collapse can be entirely avoided, motivating a novel
pruning algorithm Iterative Synaptic Flow Pruning (SynFlow). This algorithm can
be interpreted as preserving the total flow of synaptic strengths through the network
at initialization subject to a sparsity constraint. Notably, this algorithm makes
no reference to the training data and consistently competes with or outperforms
existing state-of-the-art pruning algorithms at initialization over a range of models
(VGG and ResNet), datasets (CIFAR-10/100 and Tiny ImageNet), and sparsity
constraints (up to 99.99 percent). Thus our data-agnostic pruning algorithm challenges the existing paradigm that, at initialization, data must be used to quantify
which synapses are important.

1

Introduction

Network pruning, or the compression of neural networks by removing parameters, has been an
important subject both for reasons of practical deployment [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] and for theoretical
understanding of artificial [8] and biological [9] neural networks. Conventionally, pruning algorithms
have focused on compressing pre-trained models [1, 2, 3, 5, 6]. However, recent works [10, 11] have
identified through iterative training and pruning cycles (iterative magnitude pruning) that there exist
sparse subnetworks (winning tickets) in randomly-initialized neural networks that, when trained in
⇤

Equal contribution.
kunin@stanford.edu.

Correspondence

to

hidenori.tanaka@ntt-research.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

and

