On Regret with Multiple Best Arms
Yinglun Zhu
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
yinglun@cs.wisc.edu

Robert Nowak
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study a regret minimization problem with the existence of multiple best/nearoptimal arms in the multi-armed bandit setting. We consider the case when the
number of arms/actions is comparable or much larger than the time horizon, and
make no assumptions about the structure of the bandit instance. Our goal is to
design algorithms that can automatically adapt to the unknown hardness of the
problem, i.e., the number of best arms. Our setting captures many modern applications of bandit algorithms where the action space is enormous and the information
about the underlying instance/structure is unavailable. We first propose an adaptive
algorithm that is agnostic to the hardness level and theoretically derive its regret
bound. We then prove a lower bound for our problem setting, which indicates: (1)
no algorithm can be minimax optimal simultaneously over all hardness levels; and
(2) our algorithm achieves a rate function that is Pareto optimal. With additional
knowledge of the expected reward of the best arm, we propose another adaptive
algorithm that is minimax optimal, up to polylog factors, over all hardness levels.
Experimental results confirm our theoretical guarantees and show advantages of
our algorithms over the previous state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandit problems describe exploration-exploitation trade-offs in sequential decision
making. Most existing bandit algorithms tend to provide regret guarantees when the number of
available arms/actions is smaller than the time horizon. In modern applications of bandit algorithm,
however, the action space is usually comparable or even much larger than the allowed time horizon so
that many existing bandit algorithms cannot even complete their initial exploration phases. Consider a
problem of personalized recommendations, for example. For most users, the total number of movies,
or even the amount of sub-categories, far exceeds the number of times they visit a recommendation
site. Similarly, the enormous amount of user-generated content on YouTube and Twitter makes
it increasingly challenging to make optimal recommendations. The tension between a very large
action space and a limited time horizon poses a realistic problem in which deploying algorithms
that converge to an optimal solution over an asymptotically long time horizon do not give satisfying
results. There is a need to design algorithms that can exploit the highest possible reward within a
limited time horizon. Past work has partially addressed this challenge. The quantile regret proposed in
[12] to calculate regret with respect to an satisfactory action rather than the best one. The discounted
regret analyzed in [25, 24] is used to emphasize short time horizon performance. Other existing
works consider the extreme case when the number of actions is indeed infinite, and tackle such
problems with one of two main assumptions: (1) the discovery of a near-optimal/best arm follows
some probability measure with known parameters [6, 30, 4, 15]; (2) the existence of a smooth function
represents the mean-payoff over a continuous subset [1, 20, 19, 8, 23, 17]. However, in many
situations, neither assumption may be realistic. We make minimal assumptions in this paper. We
study the regret minimization problem over a time horizon T , which might be unknown, with respect
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

