Sample Complexity of Asynchronous Q-Learning:
Sharper Analysis and Variance Reduction

Gen Li
Tsinghua

Yuting Wei
CMU

Yuejie Chi
CMU

Yuantao Gu
Tsinghua

Yuxin Chen
Princeton

Abstract
Asynchronous Q-learning aims to learn the optimal action-value function (or Qfunction) of a Markov decision process (MDP), based on a single trajectory of
Markovian samples induced by a behavior policy. Focusing on a γ-discounted
MDP with state space S and action space A, we demonstrate that the `∞ -based
sample complexity of classical asynchronous Q-learning — namely, the number of
samples needed to yield an entrywise ε-accurate estimate of the Q-function — is at
most on the order of
tmix
1
+
µmin (1 − γ)5 ε2
µmin (1 − γ)
up to some logarithmic factor, provided that a proper constant learning rate is
adopted. Here, tmix and µmin denote respectively the mixing time and the minimum
state-action occupancy probability of the sample trajectory. The first term of this
bound matches the complexity in the case with independent samples drawn from the
stationary distribution of the trajectory. The second term reflects the expense taken
for the empirical distribution of the Markovian trajectory to reach a steady state,
which is incurred at the very beginning and becomes amortized as the algorithm
runs. Encouragingly, the above bound improves upon the state-of-the-art result by
a factor of at least |S||A|. Further, the scaling on the discount complexity can be
improved by means of variance reduction.

1

Introduction

Model-free algorithms such as Q-learning [46] play a central role in recent breakthroughs of reinforcement learning (RL) [32]. In contrast to model-based algorithms that decouple model estimation
and planning, model-free algorithms attempt to directly interact with the environment — in the form
of a policy that selects actions based on perceived states of the environment — from the collected
data samples, without modeling the environment explicitly. Therefore, model-free algorithms are able
to process data in an online fashion and are often memory-efficient. Understanding and improving
the sample efficiency of model-free algorithms lie at the core of recent research activity [19], whose
importance is particularly evident for the class of RL applications in which data collection is costly
and time-consuming (such as clinical trials, online advertisements, and so on).
This paper concentrates on Q-learning — an off-policy model-free algorithm that seeks to learn the
optimal action-value function by observing what happens under a behavior policy. The off-policy
feature makes it appealing in various RL applications where it is infeasible to change the policy under
evaluation on the fly. There are two basic update models in Q-learning. The first one is termed a
synchronous setting, which hypothesizes on the existence of a simulator (or a generative model); at
each time, the simulator generates an independent sample for every state-action pair, and the estimates
are updated simultaneously across all state-action pairs. The second model concerns an asynchronous
setting, where only a single sample trajectory following a behavior policy is accessible; at each time,
the algorithm updates its estimate of a single state-action pair using one state transition from the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

