Almost Optimal Model-Free Reinforcement Learning
via Reference-Advantage Decomposition

Zihan Zhang
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
zihan-zh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Yuan Zhou
Department of ISE
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
yuanz@illinois.edu

Xiangyang Ji
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the reinforcement learning problem in the setting of finite-horizon
episodic Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with S states, A actions, and episode
length H. We?
propose a model-free algorithm UCB-A DVANTAGE and prove that
it achieves Õp H 2 SAT q regret where T “ KH and K is the number of episodes
to play. Our regret bound improves upon the results of [Jin et al., 2018] and
matches the best known model-based algorithms as well as the information theoretic lower bound up to logarithmic factors. We also show that UCB-A DVANTAGE
achieves low local switching cost and applies to concurrent reinforcement learning,
improving upon the recent results of [Bai et al., 2019].

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [Burnetas and Katehakis, 1997] studies the problem where an agent
aims to maximize its accumulative rewards through sequential decision making in an unknown
environment modeled by Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). At each time step, the agent observes
the current state s and interacts with the environment by taking an action a and transits to next state
s1 following the underlying transition model.
There are mainly two types of algorithms to approach reinforcement learning: model-based and
model-free learning. Model-based algorithms learn a model from the past experience and make
decision based on this model while model-free algorithms only maintain a group of value functions
and take the induced optimal actions. Because of these differences, model-free algorithms are usually
more space- and time-efficient compared to model-based algorithms. Moreover, because of their
simplicity and flexibility, model-free algorithms are popular in a wide range of practical tasks (e.g.,
DQN [Mnih et al., 2015], A3C [Mnih et al., 2016], TRPO [Schulman et al., 2015a], and PPO
[Schulman et al., 2017]). On the other hand, however, it is believed that model-based algorithms may
be able to take the advantage of the learned model and achieve better learning performance in terms
of regret or sample complexity, which has been empirically evidenced by Deisenroth and Rasmussen
[2011] and Schulman et al. [2015a]. Much experimental research has been done for both types of
the algorithms, and given that there has been a long debate on their pros and cons that dates back
to [Deisenroth and Rasmussen, 2011], a natural and intriguing theoretical question to study about
reinforcement learning algorithms is that –
Question 1. Is it possible that model-free algorithms achieve as competitive learning efficiency as
model-based algorithms, while still maintaining low time and space complexities?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

