Big Bird: Transformers for Longer Sequences
Manzil Zaheer,
Guru Guruganesh,
Avinava Dubey,
Joshua Ainslie,
Chris Alberti, Santiago Ontanon, Philip Pham,
Anirudh Ravula,
Qifan Wang, Li Yang, Amr Ahmed
Google Research
{manzilz, gurug, avinavadubey}@google.com

Abstract
Transformers-based models, such as BERT, have been one of the most successful
deep learning models for NLP. Unfortunately, one of their core limitations is the
quadratic dependency (mainly in terms of memory) on the sequence length due to
their full attention mechanism. To remedy this, we propose, B IG B IRD, a sparse
attention mechanism that reduces this quadratic dependency to linear. We show
that B IG B IRD is a universal approximator of sequence functions and is Turing
complete, thereby preserving these properties of the quadratic, full attention model.
Along the way, our theoretical analysis reveals some of the benefits of having
O(1) global tokens (such as CLS), that attend to the entire sequence as part of the
sparse attention mechanism. The proposed sparse attention can handle sequences
of length up to 8x of what was previously possible using similar hardware. As
a consequence of the capability to handle longer context, B IG B IRD drastically
improves performance on various NLP tasks such as question answering and
summarization. We also propose novel applications to genomics data.

1

Introduction

Models based on Transformers [92], such as BERT [22, 63], are wildly successful for a wide
variety of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks and consequently are mainstay of modern NLP
research. Their versatility and robustness are the primary drivers behind the wide-scale adoption of
Transformers. The model is easily adapted for a diverse range of sequence based tasks – as a seq2seq
model for translation [92], summarization [66], generation [15], etc. or as a standalone encoders
for sentiment analysis [84], POS tagging [65], machine reading comprehension [94], etc. – and it
is known to vastly outperform previous sequence models like LSTM [37]. The key innovation in
Transformers is the introduction of a self-attention mechanism, which can be evaluated in parallel
for each token of the input sequence, eliminating the sequential dependency in recurrent neural
networks, like LSTM. This parallelism enables Transformers to leverage the full power of modern
SIMD hardware accelerators like GPUs/TPUs, thereby facilitating training of NLP models on datasets
of unprecedented size. This ability to train on large scale data has led to surfacing of models like
BERT [22] and T5 [75], which pretrain transformers on large general purpose corpora and transfer
the knowledge to down-stream task. The pretraining has led to significant improvement in low data
regime downstream tasks [51] as well as tasks with sufficient data [102] and thus have been a major
force behind the ubiquity of transformers in contemporary NLP.
The self-attention mechanism overcomes constraints of RNNs (namely the sequential nature of RNN)
by allowing each token in the input sequence to attend independently to every other token in the
sequence. This design choice has several interesting repercussions. In particular, the full self-attention
have computational and memory requirement that is quadratic in the sequence length. We note that
while the corpus can be large, the sequence length, which provides the context in many applications
is very limited. Using commonly available current hardware and model sizes, this requirement
translates to roughly being able to handle input sequences of length 512 tokens. This reduces its
direct applicability to tasks that require larger context, like QA [60], document classification, etc.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

