Experimental design for MRI by greedy policy search
Tim Bakker,
University of Amsterdam,
t.b.bakker@uva.nl

Herke van Hoof,
University of Amsterdam
h.c.vanhoof@uva.nl

Max Welling,
University of Amsterdam, CIFAR
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
In today’s clinical practice, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is routinely accelerated through subsampling of the associated Fourier domain. Currently, the
construction of these subsampling strategies - known as experimental design - relies
primarily on heuristics. We propose to learn experimental design strategies for
accelerated MRI with policy gradient methods. Unexpectedly, our experiments
show that a simple greedy approximation of the objective leads to solutions nearly
on-par with the more general non-greedy approach. We offer a partial explanation
for this phenomenon rooted in greater variance in the non-greedy objective’s gradient estimates, and experimentally verify that this variance hampers non-greedy
models in adapting their policies to individual MR images. We empirically show
that this adaptivity is key to improving subsampling designs.

1

Introduction

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive medical imaging technique with a wide range
of diagnostic applications. However, long acquisition times during the imaging process limit patient
comfort, throughput, and imaging quality (for instance due to patient movement) [47]. Reducing
imaging times has been an active field of research for the past fifty years. A potential avenue for
tackling this problem is to acquire less measurement data during a scan, linearly reducing acquisition
times: this is often referred to as accelerated MRI [47].
Measurements in MR imaging are performed in the frequency domain, also known as k-space. These
measurements are transformed (reconstructed) into the familiar MR images through the inverse
Fourier transform. Accelerating MRI - reducing data acquisition - amounts to subsampling the kspace, which due to the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem will introduce aliasing artefacts in naive
reconstructions. The presence of such artefacts renders the resulting images unusable for diagnostic
purposes [47]: in order to improve image quality, additional information must be included in the
reconstruction process. In clinical settings today, this is typically done using compressed sensing (CS)
techniques [26, 6, 8]. With the rise of deep learning (DL), some successes have also been seen using
deep reconstruction networks to obtain diagnostic quality images from more aggressively subsampled
k-space [18, 25, 16, 34, 14, 43, 30, 29, 40]. The additional information utilised is implicitly learned
from training data. Such neural networks are trained by applying predetermined subsampling masks
to k-space: from this masked frequency domain the model then learns to reconstruct target images
obtained from the fully sampled k-space [47]. In these CS and DL settings, subsampling masks are
typically determined beforehand: either carefully crafted by experts, or based on heuristics [19].
A natural next step is a move away from handcrafted subsampling masks towards learned acquisition
strategies. The process of choosing an optimal set of measurements is known as experimental design
[37]. While such design methods can be employed to learn a fixed subsampling mask for a data set
[15, 2, 45, 11, 12, 32], an ostensively more salient approach is to learn an adaptive strategy that has
the ability to propose different masks for different MR images (e.g. various patients or locations).
Intuitively, such methods should outperform their non-adaptive counterparts on reconstruction quality
given the same measurement budget. In the DL literature two trends are noticeable. The first learns
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

