Self-paced Contrastive Learning with Hybrid
Memory for Domain Adaptive Object Re-ID
Yixiao Ge

Feng Zhu

Dapeng Chen

Rui Zhao

Hongsheng Li

Multimedia Laboratory
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{yxge@link,hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

dapengchenxjtu@gmail.com

Abstract
Domain adaptive object re-ID aims to transfer the learned knowledge from the
labeled source domain to the unlabeled target domain to tackle the open-class
re-identification problems. Although state-of-the-art pseudo-label-based methods
[11, 54, 10, 55, 14] have achieved great success, they did not make full use of
all valuable information because of the domain gap and unsatisfying clustering
performance. To solve these problems, we propose a novel self-paced contrastive
learning framework with hybrid memory. The hybrid memory dynamically generates source-domain class-level, target-domain cluster-level and un-clustered
instance-level supervisory signals for learning feature representations. Different
from the conventional contrastive learning strategy, the proposed framework jointly
distinguishes source-domain classes, and target-domain clusters and un-clustered
instances. Most importantly, the proposed self-paced method gradually creates
more reliable clusters to refine the hybrid memory and learning targets, and is shown
to be the key to our outstanding performance. Our method outperforms state-ofthe-arts on multiple domain adaptation tasks of object re-ID and even boosts the
performance on the source domain without any extra annotations. Our generalized version on unsupervised object re-ID surpasses state-of-the-art algorithms by
considerable 16.7% and 7.9% on Market-1501 and MSMT17 benchmarks† .

1

Introduction

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for object re-identification (re-ID) aims at transferring the
learned knowledge from the labeled source domain (dataset) to properly measure the inter-instance
affinities in the unlabeled target domain (dataset). Common object re-ID problems include person
re-ID and vehicle re-ID, where the source-domain and target-domain data do not share the same
identities (classes). Existing UDA methods on object re-ID [38, 11, 54, 10, 55, 45] generally tackled
this problem following a two-stage training scheme: (1) supervised pre-training on the source domain,
and (2) unsupervised fine-tuning on the target domain. For stage-2 unsupervised fine-tuning, a
pseudo-label-based strategy was found effective in state-of-the-art methods [11, 54, 10, 55], which
alternates between generating pseudo classes by clustering target-domain instances and training the
network with generated pseudo classes. In this way, the source-domain pre-trained network can be
adapted to capture the inter-sample relations in the target domain with noisy pseudo-class labels.
Although the pseudo-label-based methods have led to great performance advances, we argue that
there exist two major limitations that hinder their further improvements (Figure 1 (a)). (1) During the
target-domain fine-tuning, the source-domain images were either not considered [11, 54, 10, 55] or
were even found harmful to the final performance [14] because of the limitations of their methodology
⇤
†

Dapeng Chen is the corresponding author.
Code is available at https://github.com/yxgeee/SpCL.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

