Coupling-based Invertible Neural Networks Are
Universal Diffeomorphism Approximators

Takeshi Teshima∗
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN
teshima@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Koichi Tojo
RIKEN
koichi.tojo@riken.jp
Masahiro Ikeda
RIKEN
masahiro.ikeda@riken.jp

Isao Ishikawa*
Ehime University, RIKEN
ishikawa.isao.zx@ehime-u.ac.jp
Kenta Oono
The University of Tokyo
kenta_oono@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Masashi Sugiyama
RIKEN, The University of Tokyo
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Invertible neural networks based on coupling flows (CF-INNs) have various machine learning applications such as image synthesis and representation learning.
However, their desirable characteristics such as analytic invertibility come at the
cost of restricting the functional forms. This poses a question on their representation power: are CF-INNs universal approximators for invertible functions?
Without a universality, there could be a well-behaved invertible transformation
that the CF-INN can never approximate, hence it would render the model class
unreliable. We answer this question by showing a convenient criterion: a CF-INN
is universal if its layers contain affine coupling and invertible linear functions as
special cases. As its corollary, we can affirmatively resolve a previously unsolved
problem: whether normalizing flow models based on affine coupling can be universal distributional approximators. In the course of proving the universality, we
prove a general theorem to show the equivalence of the universality for certain
diffeomorphism classes, a theoretical insight that is of interest by itself.

1

Introduction

Invertible neural networks based on coupling flows (CF-INNs) are neural network architectures with
invertibility by design [1, 2]. Endowed with the analytic-form invertibility and the tractability of the
Jacobian, CF-INNs have demonstrated their usefulness in various machine learning tasks such as
generative modeling [3–7], probabilistic inference [8–10], solving inverse problems [11], and feature
extraction and manipulation [4, 12–14]. The attractive properties of CF-INNs come at the cost of
potential restrictions on the set of functions that they can approximate because they rely on carefully
designed network layers. To circumvent the potential drawback, a variety of layer designs have been
proposed to construct CF-INNs with high representation power, e.g., the affine coupling flow [3, 4,
15–17], the neural autoregressive flow [18–20], and the polynomial flow [21], each demonstrating
enhanced empirical performance.
Despite the diversity of layer designs [1, 2], the theoretical understanding of the representation power
of CF-INNs has been limited. Indeed, the most basic property as a function approximator, namely the
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

