Certifiably Adversarially Robust Detection of
Out-of-Distribution Data
Julian Bitterwolf
University of Tübingen

Alexander Meinke
University of Tübingen

Matthias Hein
University of Tübingen

Abstract
Deep neural networks are known to be overconfident when applied to out-ofdistribution (OOD) inputs which clearly do not belong to any class. This is a
problem in safety-critical applications since a reliable assessment of the uncertainty
of a classifier is a key property, allowing the system to trigger human intervention
or to transfer into a safe state. In this paper, we aim for certifiable worst case
guarantees for OOD detection by enforcing not only low confidence at the OOD
point but also in an l∞ -ball around it. For this purpose, we use interval bound
propagation (IBP) to upper bound the maximal confidence in the l∞ -ball and
minimize this upper bound during training time. We show that non-trivial bounds on
the confidence for OOD data generalizing beyond the OOD dataset seen at training
time are possible. Moreover, in contrast to certified adversarial robustness which
typically comes with significant loss in prediction performance, certified guarantees
for worst case OOD detection are possible without much loss in accuracy.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are the state-of-the-art in many application areas. Nevertheless it is still a
major concern to use deep learning in safety-critical systems, e.g. medical diagnosis or self-driving
cars, since it has been shown that deep learning classifiers suffer from a number of unexpected
failure modes, such as low robustness to natural perturbations [12, 17], overconfident predictions
[31, 14, 18, 16] as well as adversarial vulnerabilities [36]. For safety critical applications, empirical
checks are not sufficient in order to trust a deep learning system in a high-stakes decision. Thus
provable guarantees on the behavior of a deep learning system are needed.
One property that one expects from a robust classifier is that it should not make highly confident
predictions on data that is very different from the training data. However, ReLU networks have been
shown to be provably overconfident far away from the training data [16]. This is a big problem
as (guaranteed) low confidence of a classifier when it operates out of its training domain can be
used to trigger human intervention or to let the system try to achieve a safe state when it “detects”
that it is applied outside of its specification. Several approaches to the out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection task have been studied [18, 25, 23, 24, 16]. The current state-of-the-art performance of
OOD detection in image classification is achieved by enforcing low confidence on a large training set
of natural images that is considered as out-distribution [19, 28].
Deep neural networks are also notoriously susceptible to small adversarial perturbations in the
input [36, 4] which change the decision of a classifier. Research so far has concentrated on adversarial
robustness around the in-distribution. Several empirical defenses have been proposed but many could
be broken again [8, 3, 1]. Adversarial training and variations [27, 42] perform well empirically, but
typically no robustness guarantees can be given. Certified adversarial robustness has been achieved
by explicit computation of robustness certificates [15, 38, 33, 29, 13] and randomized smoothing [6].
Adversarial changes to generate high confidence predictions on the out-distribution have received
much less attention although it has been shown early on that they can be used to fool a classifier
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

