Certifying Confidence via Randomized Smoothing

Aounon Kumar
University of Maryland
aounon@umd.edu

Alexander Levine
University of Maryland
alevine0@cs.umd.edu

Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Randomized smoothing has been shown to provide good certified-robustness guarantees for high-dimensional classification problems. It uses the probabilities of
predicting the top two most-likely classes around an input point under a smoothing
distribution to generate a certified radius for a classifier’s prediction. However, most
smoothing methods do not give us any information about the confidence with which
the underlying classifier (e.g., deep neural network) makes a prediction. In this
work, we propose a method to generate certified radii for the prediction confidence
of the smoothed classifier. We consider two notions for quantifying confidence:
average prediction score of a class and the margin by which the average prediction
score of one class exceeds that of another. We modify the Neyman-Pearson lemma
(a key theorem in randomized smoothing) to design a procedure for computing the
certified radius where the confidence is guaranteed to stay above a certain threshold.
Our experimental results on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets show that using
information about the distribution of the confidence scores allows us to achieve a
significantly better certified radius than ignoring it. Thus, we demonstrate that extra
information about the base classifier at the input point can help improve certified
guarantees for the smoothed classifier. Code for the experiments is available at
https://github.com/aounon/cdf-smoothing.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, in which a nearly
imperceptible perturbation is added to an input image to completely alter the network’s prediction
[37, 31, 12, 21]. Several empirical defenses have been proposed over the years to produce classifiers
that are robust to such perturbations [20, 4, 16, 8, 30, 14, 11]. However, without robustness guarantees,
it is often the case that these defenses are broken by stronger attacks [5, 1, 40, 39]. Certified
defenses, such as those based on convex-relaxation [41, 33, 35, 6, 36] and interval-bound propagation
[13, 17, 9, 32], address this issue by producing robustness guarantees within a neighborhood of an
input point. However, due to the complexity of present-day neural networks, these methods have seen
limited use in high-dimensional datasets such as ImageNet.
Randomized smoothing has recently emerged as the state-of-the-art technique for certifying adversarial robustness with the scalability to handle datasets as large as ImageNet [22, 28, 7, 34]. This
defense uses a base classifier, e.g. a deep neural network, to make predictions. Given an input
image, a smoothing method queries the top class label at a large number of points in a Gaussian
distribution surrounding the image, and returns the label with the majority vote. If the input image is
perturbed slightly, the new voting population overlaps greatly with the smoothing distribution around
the original image, and so the vote outcome can change only a small amount.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

