Learning to Dispatch for Job Shop Scheduling via
Deep Reinforcement Learning

Cong Zhang1,∗, Wen Song2,∗, Zhiguang Cao3,†, Jie Zhang1 , Puay Siew Tan4 , and Chi Xu4
1

Nanyang Technological University
Institute of Marine Science and Technology, Shandong University, China
3
National University of Singapore
4
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, A*STAR
cong030@e.ntu.edu.sg, wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn, zhiguangcao@outlook.com
zhangj@ntu.edu.sg, {pstan, cxu}@simtech.a-star.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Priority dispatching rule (PDR) is widely used for solving real-world Job-shop
scheduling problem (JSSP). However, the design of effective PDRs is a tedious
task, requiring a myriad of specialized knowledge and often delivering limited performance. In this paper, we propose to automatically learn PDRs via an end-to-end
deep reinforcement learning agent. We exploit the disjunctive graph representation of JSSP, and propose a Graph Neural Network based scheme to embed the
states encountered during solving. The resulting policy network is size-agnostic,
effectively enabling generalization on large-scale instances. Experiments show that
the agent can learn high-quality PDRs from scratch with elementary raw features,
and demonstrates strong performance against the best existing PDRs. The learned
policies also perform well on much larger instances that are unseen in training.

1

Introduction

Job-shop scheduling problem (JSSP) is a well-known combinatorial optimization problem in computer
science and operations research, and is ubiquitous in many industries such as manufacturing and
transportation [1, 2]. In JSSP, a number of jobs with predefined processing constraints (e.g. the
operations are processed in order by their eligible machines) are assigned to a set of heterogeneous
machines, to achieve the desired objective such as minimizing the makespan, flowtime, or tardiness.
Due to its NP-hardness, finding exact solutions to JSSP is often impractical [3, 4], while efficiency in
practice usually relies on heuristics [5, 6] or approximate methods [7].
Priority dispatching rule (PDR) [6] is a heuristic method that is widely used in real-world scheduling
systems. Compared with complicated optimization methods such as mathematical programming
and metaheuristics, PDR is computationally fast, intuitive and easy to implement, and naturally
capable of handling uncertainties that are ubiquitous in practice [8]. Motivated by these advantages, a
large number of PDRs for JSSP have been proposed in the literature [9]. However, it is commonly
accepted that designing an effective PDR is very costly and time-consuming, requiring substantial
domain knowledge and trial-and-error especially for complex JSSP. Moreover, performance of a
PDR often varies drastically on different instances [10]. Therefore, a natural question to ask is: can
we automate the process of designing PDR, such that it performs well on a class of JSSP instances
sharing common characteristics? A number of recent works on learning algorithms for other types of
combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) (see [11] for a survey) show that deep reinforcement
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally.
Corresponding Author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

