Locally Differentially Private
(Contextual) Bandits Learning

Kai Zheng1
zhengk92@gmail.com
Weiran Huang4
weiran.huang@outlook.com

Tianle Cai2,3
caitianle1998@pku.edu.cn
Zhenguo Li4
li.zhenguo@huawei.com

Liwei Wang5,6,∗
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We study locally differentially private (LDP) bandits learning in this paper. First,
we propose simple black-box reduction frameworks that can solve a large family
of context-free bandits learning problems with LDP guarantee. Based on our
frameworks, we can improve previous best results for private bandits learning with
one-point feedback, such as private Bandits Convex Optimization, and obtain the
first result for Bandits Convex Optimization (BCO) with multi-point feedback under
LDP. LDP guarantee and black-box nature make our frameworks more attractive
in real applications compared with previous specifically designed and relatively
weaker differentially private (DP) context-free bandits algorithms. Further, we
extend our (ε, δ)-LDP algorithm to Generalized Linear Bandits, which enjoys a
sub-linear regret Õ(T 3/4 /ε) and is conjectured to be nearly optimal. Note that
given the existing Ω(T ) lower bound for DP contextual linear bandits [35], our
result shows a fundamental difference between LDP and DP contextual bandits
learning.

1

Introduction

As a general and powerful model, (contextual) bandits learning has attracted lots of attentions both in
theoretical study and real applications [8, 28], from personalized recommendation to clinical trails.
However, existing algorithms designed for these applications heavily rely on user’s sensitive data, and
an off-the-shelf use of such algorithms may leak user’s privacy and bring concerns to future users for
sharing their data with related institutions or corporations. For example, in classification or regression
tasks, we update our model according to the feature and label of each user. In Multi-Armed Bandits
(MAB), we estimate underlying rewards of all arms based on user’s feedback. A solid notion of data
privacy is Differential Privacy (DP) proposed by Dwork et al. [13] in 2006. Since then, differentially
private bandits learning has been studied extensively.
Among context-free bandits learning, Bandits Convex Optimization (BCO) is one of the fundamental
problems. Thakurta and Smith [37] designed the first (ε, δ)-differentially private adversarial BCO
1

Kwai Inc.
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Haihua Institute for Frontier Information Technology
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
6
Center for Data Science, Peking University
∗
Corresponding author.
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

