Watch out! Motion is Blurring
Blurring the Vision of Your
Deep Neural Networks

Qing Guo1

Felix Juefei-Xu2

Jian Wang1

Bing Yu3

1

Xiaofei Xie1∗
Wei Feng4

Lei Ma3∗
Yang Liu1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Alibaba Group, USA
3
Kyushu University, Japan 4 Tianjin University, China

Abstract
The state-of-the-art deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
examples with additive random noise-like perturbations. While such examples
are hardly found in the physical world, the image blurring effect caused by object motion, on the other hand, commonly occurs in practice, making the study
of which greatly important especially for the widely adopted real-time image
processing tasks (e.g., object detection, tracking). In this paper, we initiate the
first step to comprehensively investigate the potential hazards of blur effect for
DNN, caused by object motion. We propose a novel adversarial attack method
that can generate visually natural motion-blurred adversarial examples, named
motion-based adversarial blur attack (ABBA). To this end, we first formulate the
kernel-prediction-based attack where an input image is convolved with kernels in a
pixel-wise way, and the misclassification capability is achieved by tuning the kernel
weights. To generate visually more natural and plausible examples, we further
propose the saliency-regularized adversarial kernel prediction, where the salient
region serves as a moving object, and the predicted kernel is regularized to achieve
visual effects that are natural. Besides, the attack is further enhanced by adaptively
tuning the translations of object and background. A comprehensive evaluation on
the NeurIPS’17 adversarial competition dataset demonstrates the effectiveness of
ABBA by considering various kernel sizes, translations, and regions. The in-depth
study further confirms that our method shows more effective penetrating capability
to the state-of-the-art GAN-based deblurring mechanisms compared with other
blurring methods. We release the code to https://github.com/tsingqguo/ABBA.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNN) have been widely applied in various vision perception tasks (e.g.,
object recognition, segmentation, scene understanding), permeating many aspects of our daily life,
such as autonomous driving, robotics, video surveillance, photo taking, etc. However, the state-ofthe-art DNNs are still vulnerable to adversarial examples. Extensive previous works are proposed
(e.g., FGSM [1], BIM [2], MI-FGSM [3], C&W [4]), to mislead the DNN through additive noise
perturbations that could be obtained by optimizing the adversarial objectives. To be imperceptible to
human, Lp -norm plays an important role in such attacks, confining the perturbation noise to be small.
However, the random noise-like perturbation often does not pose imminent threats to the camera
systems, which does not usually occur in natural environment. Thus, some recent attempts [2] were
made to physically fashion adversarial examples such as by putting up stickers or printed patterns
∗

Xiaofei Xie and Lei Ma are corresponding authors (xfxie@ntu.edu.sg, malei@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

