Minimax Regret of Switching-Constrained Online
Convex Optimization: No Phase Transition

Lin Chen1,2∗ Qian Yu3∗ Hannah Lawrence4 Amin Karbasi1
1
Yale University 2 Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
3
University of Southern California 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
We study the problem of switching-constrained online convex optimization (OCO),
where the player has a limited number of opportunities to change her action.
While the discrete analog of this online learning task has been studied extensively,
previous work in the continuous setting has neither established the minimax rate
nor algorithmically achieved it. In this paper, we show that T -round switchingconstrained OCO with fewer than K switches has a minimax regret of Θ( √TK ).
In particular, it is at least √T2K for one dimension and at least √TK for higher
dimensions. The lower bound in higher dimensions is attained by an orthogonal
subspace argument. In one dimension, a novel adversarial strategy yields the
lower bound of O( √TK ), but a precise minimax analysis including constants is
more involved. To establish the tighter one-dimensional result, we introduce the
fugal game relaxation, whose minimax regret lower bounds that of switchingconstrained OCO. We show that the minimax regret of the fugal game is at least
√T
and thereby establish the optimal minimax lower bound in one dimension.
2K
To establish the dimension-independent upper bound, we next show that a minibatching algorithm provides an O( √TK ) upper bound, and therefore conclude that
the minimax regret of switching-constrained OCO is Θ( √TK ) for any K. This is
in sharp contrast to its discrete counterpart, the switching-constrained predictionfrom-experts problem, which exhibits a phase transition in minimax regret between
the low-switching and high-switching regimes.

1

Introduction

Online learning provides a versatile framework for studying a wide range of dynamic optimization
problems, with manifold applications in portfolio selection [18], packet routing [7], hyperparameter
optimization [19], and spam filtering [23]. The fundamental problem is typically formulated as a
repeated game between a player and an adversary. In the tth round, the player first chooses an action
xt from the set of all possible actions D; the adversary then responds by revealing the penalty for
that action, a function ft : D → R. The player’s goal is to minimize the total penalties she receives,
while the adversary’s goal is to maximize the penalties she assigns to the player’s action. Explicitly,
the standard benchmark for success is regret, the difference between the player’s accumulated penalty
PT
PT
and that of the best fixed action in hindsight: R = i=1 fi (xi ) − inf x∈D i=1 fi (x) .
Several variants of this general learning setting have been studied. When D is a discrete set of actions,
the game is called either “prediction from experts" (PFE), if the player is allowed knowledge of the
complete function ft (·) on each round, or “multi-armed bandit" (MAB), if only ft (xt ) is revealed
on each round. Crucially, the adversary is not strongly adaptive and picks ft based solely on prior
∗

First two authors contributed equally. Correspondence to: Lin Chen <lin.chen@berkeley.edu>.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

