Neural Topographic Factor Analysis for fMRI Data

Eli Sennesh ∗1,3 , Zulqarnain Khan∗2 , Yiyu Wang3
Jennifer Dy , Ajay Satpute3 , J. Benjamin Hutchinson4 , Jan-Willem van de Meent1
sennesh.e@northeastern.edu, khan.zu@ece.neu.edu, wang.yiyu@northeastern.edu
jdy@ece.neu.edu, a.satpute@northeastern.edu, bhutch@uoregon.edu,
j.vandemeent@northeastern.edu
1
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
3
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University
4
Department of Psychology, University of Oregon
2

Abstract
Neuroimaging studies produce gigabytes of spatio-temporal data for a small number
of participants and stimuli. Rarely do researchers attempt to model and examine
how individual participants vary from each other – a question that should be
addressable even in small samples given the right statistical tools. We propose
Neural Topographic Factor Analysis (NTFA), a probabilistic factor analysis model
that infers embeddings for participants and stimuli. These embeddings allow us
to reason about differences between participants and stimuli as signal rather than
noise. We evaluate NTFA on data from an in-house pilot experiment, as well as
two publicly available datasets. We demonstrate that inferring representations for
participants and stimuli improves predictive generalization to unseen data when
compared to previous topographic methods. We also demonstrate that the inferred
latent factor representations are useful for downstream tasks such as multivoxel
pattern analysis and functional connectivity.

1

Introduction

Analyzing functional neuroimaging studies is both a large data problem and a small data problem.
A single scanning run typically comprises hundreds of full-brain scans that each consist of tens of
thousands of spatial locations (known as voxels). At the same time, neuroimaging studies tend to have
limited statistical power [Cremers et al., 2017]; a typical study considers a cohort of 20-50 participants
undergoing tens of stimuli from ten (or fewer) stimulus categories. This poses a significant problem
for the over fourteen-thousand functional neuroimaging studies that seek to address both fundamental
and translational research questions in cognitive neuroscience on individual differences in functional
neural activity [Elliott et al., 2020]. A largely unsolved challenge in this domain is to develop analysis
methods that appropriately account for both the commonalities and variations among participants and
stimuli effects, scale to tens of gigabytes of data, and reason about uncertainty.
In this paper, we develop Neural Topographic Factor Analysis (NTFA)2 , a generative model for
neuroimaging data that explicitly represents variation among participants and stimuli. NTFA extends
Topographic Factor Analysis (TFA) and Hierarchical Topographic Factor Analysis (HTFA) [Manning
et al., 2014b, 2018]. It differs from these models in that it learns a prior that maps embeddings
(i.e. vectors of features) for each participant and stimulus to a conditional distribution over spatial
factors and weights, instead of imposing a single global prior. The result is a structured probabilistic
model that learns a representation of each participant and each stimulus.
∗

Equal contribution
Source code submitted with paper and available upon request.

2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

