Matrix Completion with Quantified Uncertainty
through Low Rank Gaussian Copula

Yuxuan Zhao
Cornell University
yz2295@cornell.edu

Madeleine Udell
Cornell University
udell@cornell.edu

Abstract
Modern large scale datasets are often plagued with missing entries. For tabular
data with missing values, a flurry of imputation algorithms solve for a complete
matrix which minimizes some penalized reconstruction error. However, almost
none of them can estimate the uncertainty of its imputations. This paper proposes a probabilistic and scalable framework for missing value imputation with
quantified uncertainty. Our model, the Low Rank Gaussian Copula, augments a
standard probabilistic model, Probabilistic Principal Component Analysis, with
marginal transformations for each column that allow the model to better match
the distribution of the data. It naturally handles Boolean, ordinal, and real-valued
observations and quantifies the uncertainty in each imputation. The time required
to fit the model scales linearly with the number of rows and the number of columns
in the dataset. Empirical results show the method yields state-of-the-art imputation
accuracy across a wide range of data types, including those with high rank. Our
uncertainty measure predicts imputation error well: entries with lower uncertainty
do have lower imputation error (on average). Moreover, for real-valued data, the
resulting confidence intervals are well-calibrated.

1

Introduction

Missing data imputation forms the first critical step of many data analysis pipelines; indeed, in the
context of recommender systems, imputation itself is the task. The remarkable progress in low rank
matrix completion (LRMC) [6, 25, 36] has led to wide use in collaborative filtering [37], transductive
learning [17], automated machine learning [43], and beyond. Nevertheless, reliable decision making
requires one more step: assessing the uncertainty of the imputed entries. While multiple imputation
[39, 28] is a classical tool to quantify uncertainty, its computation is often expensive and limits the
use on large datasets. For single imputation methods such as LRMC, very little work has sought to
quantify imputation uncertainty. The major difficulty in quantifying uncertainty lies in characterizing
how the imputations depend on the observations through the solution to a nonsmooth optimization
problem. Chen et al. [9] avoids this difficulty, providing confidence intervals for imputed real valued
matrices, by assuming isotropic Gaussian noise and a large signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). However,
these assumptions are hardly satisfied for most noisy real data.
The probabilistic principal component analysis (PPCA) model [41] provides a different approach to
quantify uncertainty. The PPCA model posits that the data in each row is sampled iid from a Gaussian
factor model. In this framework, each missing entry has a closed form distribution conditional on the
observations. The conditional mean, which is simply a linear transformation of the observations, is
used for imputation [44, 22]. However, the Gaussian assumption is unrealistic for most real datasets.
The Gaussian copula model presents a compelling alternative that enjoys the analytical benefits
of Gaussians and yet fits real datasets well. The Gaussian copula (or equivalently nonparanormal
distribution) [29, 12, 15, 21] can model real-valued, ordinal and Boolean data by transforming a latent
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

