Efficient active learning of sparse halfspaces with
arbitrary bounded noise
Chicheng Zhang
University of Arizona
chichengz@cs.arizona.edu

Jie Shen
Stevens Institute of Technology
jie.shen@stevens.edu

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research and Rutgers University
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Abstract
We study active learning of homogeneous s-sparse halfspaces in Rd under the
setting where the unlabeled data distribution is isotropic log-concave
and each
⇥
label is flipped with probability at most ⌘ for a parameter ⌘ 2 0, 12 , known as
the bounded noise. Even in the presence of mild label noise, i.e. ⌘ is a small
constant, this is a challenging problem and only recently have label complexity
bounds of the form Õ s · polylog d, 1✏ been established in [Zhang 2018] for
computationally efficient algorithms. In contrast, under high levels of label noise,
the label complexity bounds achieved by computationally efficient algorithms are
much worse: the best known result [Awasthi et al. 2016] provides a computationally
poly(1/(1 2⌘))
efficient algorithm with label complexity Õ ( s ln✏ d )2
, which is labelefficient only when the noise rate ⌘ is a fixed constant. In this work, we substantially
improve on it by designing a polynomial time algorithm for active learning of ssparse halfspaces, with a label complexity of Õ (1 s2⌘)4 polylog d, 1✏ . This
is the first efficient algorithm with label complexity polynomial in 1 12⌘ in this
setting, which is label-efficient even for ⌘ arbitrarily close to 12 . Our active learning
algorithm and its theoretical guarantees also immediately translate to new state-ofthe-art label and sample complexity results for full-dimensional active and passive
halfspace learning under arbitrary bounded noise.

1

Introduction

In machine learning and statistics, linear classifiers (i.e. halfspaces) are arguably one of the most
important models as witnessed by a long-standing research effort dedicated to establishing computationally efficient and provable algorithms for halfspace learning [66, 81, 23]. In practical applications,
however, data are often corrupted by various types of noise [74, 14], are expensive to annotate [22, 27],
and are of high or even infinite dimensions [13, 17]. These characteristics rooted in contemporary
machine learning problems pose new challenges to the design and analysis of learning algorithms
for halfspaces. As a result, there has been extensive study of noise-tolerant, label-efficient, and
attribute-efficient algorithms in the last few decades.
Noise-tolerant learning. In the noiseless setting where there is a halfspace that has zero error
rate with respect to the data distribution, it is well known that by simply finding a halfspace that
fits all the training examples using linear programming, one is guaranteed vanishing generalization
error [82]. In the presence of data corrpution, the success of efficient learning of halfspaces crucially
depends on the underlying noise model. For instance, [14] proposed a polynomial time algorithm
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

