Feature Importance Ranking for Deep Learning

Maksymilian A. Wojtas
Ke Chen
Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, U.K.
{maksymilian.wojtas,ke.chen}@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
Feature importance ranking has become a powerful tool for explainable AI. However, its nature of combinatorial optimization poses a great challenge for deep
learning. In this paper, we propose a novel dual-net architecture consisting of
operator and selector for discovery of an optimal feature subset of a fixed size
and ranking the importance of those features in the optimal subset simultaneously.
During learning, the operator is trained for a supervised learning task via optimal
feature subset candidates generated by the selector that learns predicting the learning performance of the operator working on different optimal subset candidates.
We develop an alternate learning algorithm that trains two nets jointly and incorporates a stochastic local search procedure into learning to address the combinatorial
optimization challenge. In deployment, the selector generates an optimal feature
subset and ranks feature importance, while the operator makes predictions based
on the optimal subset for test data. A thorough evaluation on synthetic, benchmark
and real data sets suggests that our approach outperforms several state-of-the-art
feature importance ranking and supervised feature selection methods. (Our source
code is available: https://github.com/maksym33/FeatureImportanceDL)

1

Introduction

In machine learning, feature importance ranking (FIR) refers to a task that measures contributions
of individual input features (variables) to the performance of a supervised learning model. FIR
has become one of powerful tools in explainable/interpretable AI [1] to facilitate understanding of
decision-making by a learning system and discovery of key factors in a specific domain, e.g., in
medicine, what genes are likely main causes of a cancer [2].
Due to the existence of correlated/dependent and irrelevant features to targets in high-dimensional
real data, feature selection [3] is often employed to address the well-known curse of dimensionality
challenge and to improve the generalization of a learning system, where a subset of optimal features
is selected in terms of the pre-defined criteria to maximize the performance of a learning system.
Feature selection may be conducted at either population or instance level; the populationwise methods
would find out an optimal feature subset collectively for all the instances in a population, while the
instancewise ones tend to uncover a subset of salient features specific to a single instance. In practice,
FIR is always closely associated with feature selection by ranking the importance of those features in
an optimal subset and can also be used as a proxy for feature selection, e.g., [2, 4, 5].
Deep learning has turned out to be extremely powerful in intelligent system development but its
purported “black box” nature makes it extremely difficult to be applied to tasks demanding explainability/interpretability. Recently, FIR for deep learning has become an active research area where
most works focus on instancewise FIR [6] and only few works exist for populationwise FIR/feature
selection, e.g., [7]. In a populationwise scenario, feature selection needs to find an optimum in
detecting any functional dependence between input data and targets, which is NP-hard in general [8].
High degree of nonlinearity in deep learning execrates this combinatorial optimization problem.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

