Analytical Probability Distributions
and Exact Expectation-Maximization
for Deep Generative Networks

Randall Balestriero
ECE Department
Rice University

Sébastien Paris
Univ Toulon, Aix Marseille Univ,
CNRS, LIS, Toulon, France

Richard G. Baraniuk
ECE Department
Rice University

Abstract
Deep Generative Networks (DGNs) with probabilistic modeling of their output
and latent space are currently trained via Variational Autoencoders (VAEs). In the
absence of a known analytical form for the posterior and likelihood expectation,
VAEs resort to approximations, including (Amortized) Variational Inference (AVI)
and Monte-Carlo sampling. We exploit the Continuous Piecewise Affine property
of modern DGNs to derive their posterior and marginal distributions as well as
the latter’s first two moments. These findings enable us to derive an analytical
Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm for gradient-free DGN learning. We
demonstrate empirically that EM training of DGNs produces greater likelihood than
VAE training. Our new framework will guide the design of new VAE AVI that better
approximates the true posterior and open new avenues to apply standard statistical
tools for model comparison, anomaly detection, and missing data imputation.

1

Introduction

Deep Generative Networks (DGNs), which map a low-dimensional latent variable z to a higherdimensional generated sample x are the state-of-the-art methods for a range of machine learning
applications, including anomaly detection, data generation, likelihood estimation, and exploratory
analysis across a wide variety of datasets [1–4].
Training of DGNs roughly falls into two camps: (i) By leveraging an adversarial network as in a
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [5] to turn the method into an adversarial game; and (ii) by
modeling the latent variable and observed variables as random variables and performing some flavor
of likelihood maximization training. A widely used solution to likelihood based DGN training is
via a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [6]. The popularity of the VAE is due to its intuitive and
interpretable loss function, which is obtained from likelihood estimation, and its ability to exploit
standard estimation techniques ported from the probabilistic graphical models literature.
Yet, VAEs offer only an approximate solution for likelihood based training of DGNs. In fact, all
current VAEs employ three major approximation steps in the likelihood maximization process. First,
the true (unknown) posterior is approximated by a variational distribution. This estimate is governed
by some free parameters that must be optimized to fit the variational distribution to the true posterior.
VAEs estimate such parameters by means of an alternative network, the encoder, with the datum
as input and the predicted optimal parameters as output. This step is referred to as Amortized
Variational Inference (AVI), as it removes the explicit, per datum, optimization by a single deep
network (DN) pass. Second, as in any latent variable model, the complete likelihood is estimated
by a lower bound (ELBO) obtained from the expectation of the likelihood taken under the posterior
or variational distribution. With a DGN, this expectation is unknown, and thus VAEs estimate the
ELBO by Monte-Carlo (MC) sampling. Third, the maximization of the MC-estimated ELBO, which
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

