User-Dependent Neural Sequence Models for
Continuous-Time Event Data
Alex Boyd1 Robert Bamler2 Stephan Mandt1,2 Padhraic Smyth1,2
1
Department of Statistics 2 Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
{alexjb, rbamler, mandt}@uci.edu smyth@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
Continuous-time event data are common in applications such as individual behavior
data, financial transactions, and medical health records. Modeling such data can be
very challenging, in particular for applications with many different types of events,
since it requires a model to predict the event types as well as the time of occurrence.
Recurrent neural networks that parameterize time-varying intensity functions are
the current state-of-the-art for predictive modeling with such data. These models
typically assume that all event sequences come from the same data distribution.
However, in many applications event sequences are generated by different sources,
or users, and their characteristics can be very different. In this paper, we extend the
broad class of neural marked point process models to mixtures of latent embeddings,
where each mixture component models the characteristic traits of a given user. Our
approach relies on augmenting these models with a latent variable that encodes
user characteristics, represented by a mixture model over user behavior that is
trained via amortized variational inference. We evaluate our methods on four large
real-world datasets and demonstrate systematic improvements from our approach
over existing work for a variety of predictive metrics such as log-likelihood, next
event ranking, and source-of-sequence identification.

1

Introduction

Event sequences in continuous time occur across many contexts, leading to a variety of data analysis
applications such as forecasting consumer purchases, fraud detection in transaction data, and prediction in clinical medicine. In such data, each event is typically associated with one of K event types,
also known as marks, and a timestamp. There has been significant amount of prior work in statistics
for clustering [Du et al., 2015, Xu and Zha, 2017], factorizing [Schein et al., 2015], and generative
modeling of such data, typically under the framework of marked temporal point process (MTPP)
models [Daley and Vere-Jones, 2007]. We are primarily interested in the third of these objectives.
The multivariate Hawkes process [Hawkes, 1971, Liniger, 2009], Poisson-network [Rajaram et al.,
2005], piecewise-continuous conditional intensity model [Gunawardana et al., 2011], and proximal
graphic event model [Bhattacharjya et al., 2018] are some examples of the many different MTPP
models previously explored. MTPP models characterize the instantaneous rate of occurrence of each
event type, the so-called intensity function, conditioned on the history of past events. However, strong
parametric assumptions in these traditional models limit their flexibility for modeling real-world
phenomena.
Recent work in machine learning has sought to address these limitations via the use of deep recurrent
neural networks (RNNs). These models, such as Du et al. [2016], use expressive representations
for the intensity function, use event embeddings to avoid parameter explosion, and optimize the
associated log-likelihood via stochastic gradient methods. A variety of approaches have been explored
to address the complex mix of discrete events and continuous time that occur in real-world event
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

