Federated Bayesian Optimization via
Thompson Sampling

Zhongxiang Dai† , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low† , Patrick Jaillet§
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore†
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA§
{daizhongxiang,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg† ,jaillet@mit.edu§

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a prominent approach to optimizing expensiveto-evaluate black-box functions. The massive computational capability of edge
devices such as mobile phones, coupled with privacy concerns, has led to a surging
interest in federated learning (FL) which focuses on collaborative training of deep
neural networks (DNNs) via first-order optimization techniques. However, some
common machine learning tasks such as hyperparameter tuning of DNNs lack
access to gradients and thus require zeroth-order/black-box optimization. This hints
at the possibility of extending BO to the FL setting (FBO) for agents to collaborate
in these black-box optimization tasks. This paper presents federated Thompson
sampling (FTS) which overcomes a number of key challenges of FBO and FL in a
principled way: We (a) use random Fourier features to approximate the Gaussian
process surrogate model used in BO, which naturally produces the parameters
to be exchanged between agents, (b) design FTS based on Thompson sampling,
which significantly reduces the number of parameters to be exchanged, and (c)
provide a theoretical convergence guarantee that is robust against heterogeneous
agents, which is a major challenge in FL and FBO. We empirically demonstrate
the effectiveness of FTS in terms of communication efficiency, computational
efficiency, and practical performance.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) has recently become a prominent approach to optimizing expensiveto-evaluate black-box functions with no access to gradients, such as in hyperparameter tuning of
deep neural networks (DNNs) [49]. A rapidly growing computational capability of edge devices
such as mobile phones, as well as an increasing concern over data privacy, has given rise to the
widely celebrated paradigm of federated learning (FL) [39] which is also known as federated
optimization [35]. In FL, individual agents, without transmitting their raw data, attempt to leverage
the contributions from the other agents to more effectively optimize the parameters of their machine
learning (ML) model (e.g., DNNs) through first-order optimization techniques (e.g., stochastic
gradient descent) [24, 33]. However, some common ML tasks such as hyperparameter tuning of
DNNs lack access to gradients and thus require zeroth-order/black-box optimization, and a recent
survey [24] has pointed out that hyperparameter optimization of DNNs in the FL setting is one of the
promising research directions for FL. This opportunity, combined with the proven capability of BO to
efficiently optimize expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions [49], naturally suggests the possibility
of extending BO to the FL setting, which we refer to as federated BO (FBO).
The setting of our FBO is similar to that of FL, except that FBO uses zeroth-order optimization, in
contrast to first-order optimization adopted by FL. In FBO, every agent uses BO to optimize a blackbox function (e.g., hyperparameter optimization of a DNN) and attempts to improve the efficiency of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

