B ONGARD -LOGO: A New Benchmark for
Human-Level Concept Learning and Reasoning

Weili Nie
Rice University
wn8@rice.edu
Ankit B. Patel
Rice University
Baylor College of Medicine
abp4@rice.edu

Zhiding Yu
NVIDIA
zhidingy@nvidia.com
Yuke Zhu
UT Austin
NVIDIA
yukez@cs.utexas.edu

Lei Mao
NVIDIA
lmao@nvidia.com
Animashree Anandkumar
Caltech
NVIDIA
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
Humans have an inherent ability to learn novel concepts from only a few samples
and generalize these concepts to different situations. Even though today’s machine
learning models excel with a plethora of training data on standard recognition
tasks, a considerable gap exists between machine-level pattern recognition and
human-level concept learning. To narrow this gap, the Bongard problems (BPs)
were introduced as an inspirational challenge for visual cognition in intelligent
systems. Despite new advances in representation learning and learning to learn, BPs
remain a daunting challenge for modern AI. Inspired by the original one hundred
BPs, we propose a new benchmark B ONGARD -LOGO for human-level concept
learning and reasoning. We develop a program-guided generation technique to
produce a large set of human-interpretable visual cognition problems in actionoriented LOGO language. Our benchmark captures three core properties of human
cognition: 1) context-dependent perception, in which the same object may have
disparate interpretations given different contexts; 2) analogy-making perception, in
which some meaningful concepts are traded off for other meaningful concepts; and
3) perception with a few samples but infinite vocabulary. In experiments, we show
that the state-of-the-art deep learning methods perform substantially worse than
human subjects, implying that they fail to capture core human cognition properties.
Finally, we discuss research directions towards a general architecture for visual
reasoning to tackle this benchmark.

1

Introduction

Human visual cognition, a key feature of human intelligence, reflects the ability to learn new concepts
from a few examples and use the acquired concepts in diverse ways. In recent years, deep learning
approaches have achieved tremendous success on standard visual recognition benchmarks [1, 2]. In
contrast to human concept learning, data-driven approaches to machine perception have to be trained
on massive datasets and their abilities to reuse acquired concepts in new situations are bounded
by the training data [3]. For this reason, researchers in cognitive science and artificial intelligence
(AI) have attempted to bridge the chasm between human-level visual cognition and machine-based
pattern recognition. The hope is to develop the next generation of computing paradigms that capture
innate abilities of humans in visual concept learning and reasoning, such as few-shot learning [4, 5],
compositional reasoning [6, 7], and symbolic abstraction [8, 9].
The deficiency of standard pattern recognition techniques has been pinpointed by interdisciplinary
scientists in the past several decades [3, 10]. Over fifty years ago, M. M. Bongard, a Russian computer
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

