Hierarchical Quantized Autoencoders
Will Williams∗
willw@speechmatics.com

Sam Ringer∗
samr@speechmatics.com

John Hughes
johnh@speechmatics.com

Tom Ash
toma@speechmatics.com

David MacLeod
davidma@speechmatics.com

Jamie Dougherty
jamied@speechmatics.com

Abstract
Despite progress in training neural networks for lossy image compression, current
approaches fail to maintain both perceptual quality and abstract features at very
low bitrates. Encouraged by recent success in learning discrete representations
with Vector Quantized Variational Autoencoders (VQ-VAEs), we motivate the use
of a hierarchy of VQ-VAEs to attain high factors of compression. We show that
the combination of stochastic quantization and hierarchical latent structure aids
likelihood-based image compression. This leads us to introduce a novel objective
for training hierarchical VQ-VAEs. Our resulting scheme produces a Markovian
series of latent variables that reconstruct images of high-perceptual quality which
retain semantically meaningful features. We provide qualitative and quantitative
evaluations on the CelebA and MNIST datasets.

1

Introduction

The internet age relies on lossy compression algorithms that transmit information at low bitrates.
These algorithms are typically analysed through the rate-distortion trade-off, originally posited
by Shannon [33]. When performing lossy compression at extremely low bit rates, obtaining low
distortions often results in reconstructions of very low perceptual quality [5, 6, 38]. For modern lossy
compression, high perceptual quality of reconstructions is often more desirable than low distortions.
This work investigates good performance on this rate-perception tradeoff as opposed to more standard
rate-distortion trade offs, with a focus on the low-rate regime.
At low bitrates it is desirable to communicate only high-level concepts and offload the ‘filling in’ of
details to a powerful decoder [38]. Neural Networks present a promising avenue since they are flexible
enough to learn the complex transformations required to both capture such high-level concepts and
reconstruct in a convincing way that avoids artifacts [32, 10, 14].
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs [15]) are latent variable Neural Network models that have made
significant strides in lossy image compression [35, 1]. However, due to a combination of a poor
likelihood function and a sub-optimal variational posterior [31, 43], reconstructions can look blurred
and unrealistic [44, 11]. There have been many attempts to construct hierarchical forms of both VAEs
and Vector Quantized Variational Autoencoders (VQ-VAEs), however perceptual quality is frequently
sacrificed at low-rates, and has only recently been made viable with methods that require large
autoregressive decoders [8, 30]. Solutions to this problem then take two forms: either augmenting
the likelihood model, for instance, by using adversarial methods [38] or improving the structure of
the posterior/latent space [43, 3]. However, at low rates both solutions struggle to match the realism
of implicit generative models [9].
*

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

