Improving Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
with Mixture Regularization

Kaixin Wang1 Bingyi Kang1 Jie Shao2 Jiashi Feng1
1
National University of Singapore 2 ByteDance AI Lab
{kaixin.wang, kang}@u.nus.edu, shaojie.mail@bytedance.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents trained in a limited set of environments
tend to suffer overfitting and fail to generalize to unseen testing environments.
To improve their generalizability, data augmentation approaches (e.g. cutout and
random convolution) are previously explored to increase the data diversity. However, we find these approaches only locally perturb the observations regardless
of the training environments, showing limited effectiveness on enhancing the
data diversity and the generalization performance. In this work, we introduce
a simple approach, named mixreg, which trains agents on a mixture of observations from different training environments and imposes linearity constraints on
the observation interpolations and the supervision (e.g. associated reward) interpolations. Mixreg increases the data diversity more effectively and helps learn
smoother policies. We verify its effectiveness on improving generalization by
conducting extensive experiments on the large-scale Procgen benchmark. Results
show mixreg outperforms the well-established baselines on unseen testing environments by a large margin. Mixreg is simple, effective and general. It can be
applied to both policy-based and value-based RL algorithms. Code is available at
https://github.com/kaixin96/mixreg.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has brought significant progress in learning policies to tackle
various challenging tasks, such as board games like Go [19, 21], Chess and Shogi [20], video
games like Atari [15, 1] and StarCraft [27], and robotics control tasks [14]. Despite its outstanding
performance, deep RL agents tend to suffer poor generalization to unseen environments [31, 23, 29, 3,
2, 30]. For example, in video games, agents trained with a small set of levels struggle to make progress
in unseen levels of the same game [2]; in robotics control, agents trained in simulation environments
of low diversity generalize poorly to the realistic environments [26]. Such a generalization gap has
become a major obstacle for deploying deep RL in real applications.
One of the main causes for this generalization gap is the limited diversity of training environments [29,
3, 2]. Motivated by this, some works propose to improve RL agents’ generalizability by diversifying
the training data via data augmentation techniques [3, 13, 12, 11]. However, these approaches merely
augment the observations individually with image processing techniques, such as random crop, patch
cutout [4] and random convolutions [13]. As shown in Figure 1 (left), such techniques are performing
local perturbation within the state feature space, which only incrementally increases the training data
diversity and thus leads to limited generalization performance gain. This is evidenced by our findings
that these augmentation techniques fail to improve generalization performance of the RL agents when
evaluated on a large-scale benchmark (see Section 4.1).
In this work, we introduce mixreg that trains the RL agent on a mixture of observations collected
from different training environments. Inspired by the success of mixup [32] in supervised learning,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

