Multi-Plane Program Induction with 3D Box Priors

Yikai Li1,2∗ Jiayuan Mao1∗ Xiuming Zhang1
William T. Freeman1,3 Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 Noah Snavely3
1

Jiajun Wu4

2
MIT CSAIL
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
4
Google Research
Stanford University

Abstract
We consider two important aspects in understanding and editing images: modeling
regular, program-like texture or patterns in 2D planes, and 3D posing of these planes
in the scene. Unlike prior work on image-based program synthesis, which assumes
the image contains a single visible 2D plane, we present Box Program Induction
(BPI), which infers a program-like scene representation that simultaneously models
repeated structure on multiple 2D planes, the 3D position and orientation of the
planes, and camera parameters, all from a single image. Our model assumes a
box prior, i.e., that the image captures either an inner view or an outer view of a
box in 3D. It uses neural networks to infer visual cues such as vanishing points
or wireframe lines to guide a search-based algorithm to find the program that
best explains the image. Such a holistic, structured scene representation enables
3D-aware interactive image editing operations such as inpainting missing pixels,
changing camera parameters, and extrapolate the image contents.

1

Introduction

We aim to build autonomous algorithms that can infer two important structures for compositional
scene understanding and editing from a single image: the regular, program-like texture or patterns in
2D planes and the 3D posing of these planes in the scene. As a motivating example, when observing
a single image of a corridor like the one in Fig. 1, we humans can effortlessly infer the camera pose,
partition the image into five planes—including left and right walls, floor, ceiling, and a far plane—and
recognize the repeated pattern on each of these planes. Such a holistic and structural representation
allows us to flexibly edit the image, for instance by inpainting missing regions, moving the camera,
and extrapolating the corridor to make it infinite.
A range of computer vision algorithms have utilized such a holistic scene representation to guide image
manipulation tasks. Several recent ones fit into a program-guided image manipulation framework [11,
24, 25]. These methods infer a program-like image representation that captures camera parameters
and scene structures, enabling image editing operations guided by such programs so that the scene
structure is preserved during editing. However, due to the combinatorial complexity of possible
compositions of elementary components based on the program grammar, these methods usually only
work for images in highly specific domains with a fixed set of primitives such as hand-drawn figures
of simple 2D geometric shapes [11] and synthesized tabletop scenes [24], or natural images with of a
single visible plane, such as ground tiles and patterned cloth [25, 21].
To address these issues and scale up program-guided image manipulation, we present a new framework, namely, Box Program Induction (BPI, for short), that jointly segments the image into multiple
planes and infers the repeated structure on each plane. Our model assumes a box prior, leveraging
the observation that box-like structures widely exist in images. Many indoor and outdoor scenes fall
into this category: walking in a corridor or room corresponds to observing a box from the inside, and
taking a picture of a building corresponds to seeing a box from the outside.
*: indicates equal contribution.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

