Long-Tailed Classification by Keeping the Good and
Removing the Bad Momentum Causal Effect

Kaihua Tang1 ,

Jianqiang Huang1,2 ,

Hanwang Zhang1

1

Nanyang Technological University, 2 Damo Academy, Alibaba Group
kaihua001@e.ntu.edu.sg,
jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
As the class size grows, maintaining a balanced dataset across many classes is
challenging because the data are long-tailed in nature; it is even impossible when the
sample-of-interest co-exists with each other in one collectable unit, e.g., multiple
visual instances in one image. Therefore, long-tailed classification is the key
to deep learning at scale. However, existing methods are mainly based on reweighting/re-sampling heuristics that lack a fundamental theory. In this paper,
we establish a causal inference framework, which not only unravels the whys of
previous methods, but also derives a new principled solution. Specifically, our
theory shows that the SGD momentum is essentially a confounder in long-tailed
classification. On one hand, it has a harmful causal effect that misleads the tail
prediction biased towards the head. On the other hand, its induced mediation also
benefits the representation learning and head prediction. Our framework elegantly
disentangles the paradoxical effects of the momentum, by pursuing the direct
causal effect caused by an input sample. In particular, we use causal intervention in
training, and counterfactual reasoning in inference, to remove the “bad” while keep
the “good”. We achieve new state-of-the-arts on three long-tailed visual recognition
benchmarks1 : Long-tailed CIFAR-10/-100, ImageNet-LT for image classification
and LVIS for instance segmentation.

1

Introduction

Over the years, we have witnessed the fast development of computer vision techniques [1, 2, 3],
stemming from large and balanced datasets such as ImageNet [4] and MS-COCO [5]. Along with the
growth of the digital data created by us, the crux of making a large-scale dataset is no longer about
where to collect, but how to balance. However, the cost of expanding them to a larger class vocabulary
with balanced data is not linear — but exponential — as the data will be inevitably long-tailed by
Zipf’s law [6]. Specifically, a single sample increased for one data-poor tail class will result in more
samples from the data-rich head. Sometimes, even worse, re-balancing the class is impossible. For
example, in instance segmentation [7], if we target at increasing the images of tail class instances like
“remote controller”, we have to bring in more head instances like “sofa” and “TV” simultaneously in
every newly added image [8].
Therefore, long-tailed classification is indispensable for training deep models at scale. Recent
work [9, 10, 11] starts to fill in the performance gap between class-balanced and long-tailed datasets,
while new long-tailed benchmarks are springing up such as Long-tailed CIFAR-10/-100 [12, 10],
ImageNet-LT [9] for image classification and LVIS [7] for object detection and instance segmentation.
Despite the vigorous development of this field, we find that the fundamental theory is still missing. We
conjecture that it is mainly due to the paradoxical effects of long tail. On one hand, it is bad because
1

Our code is available on https://github.com/KaihuaTang/Long-Tailed-Recognition.pytorch

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

