Agnostic Learning with Multiple Objectives

Corinna Cortes
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
corinna@google.com

Javier Gonzalvo
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
xavigonzalvo@google.com

Mehryar Mohri
Google & Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
mohri@google.com

Dmitry Storcheus
Courant Institute & Google
New York, NY 10012
dstorcheus@google.com

Abstract
Most machine learning tasks are inherently multi-objective. This means that the
learner has to come up with a model that performs well across a number of base
objectives L1 , . . . , Lp , as opposed to a single one. Since optimizing with respect
to multiple objectives at the same time is often computationally
expensive, the
Pp
base objectives are often combined in an ensemble k=1 λk Lk , thereby reducing
the problem to scalar optimization. The mixture weights λk are set to uniform
or some other fixed distribution, based on the learner’s preferences. We argue
that learning with a fixed distribution on the mixture weights runs the risk of
overfitting to some individual objectives and significantly harming others, despite
performing well on an entire ensemble. Moreover, in reality, the true preferences
of a learner across multiple objectives are often unknown or hard to express as a
specific distribution. Instead, we propose a new framework of Agnostic Learning
with Multiple Objectives (ALMO), where a model is optimized for any weights in
the mixture of base objectives. We present data-dependent Rademacher complexity
guarantees for learning in the ALMO framework, which are used to guide a
scalable optimization algorithm and the corresponding regularization. We present
convergence guarantees for this algorithm, assuming convexity of the loss functions
and the underlying hypothesis space. We further implement the algorithm in a
popular symbolic gradient computation framework and empirically demonstrate
on a number of datasets the benefits of ALMO framework versus learning with a
fixed mixture weights distribution.

1

Motivation

Machine learning is inherently a multi-objective task [Jin, 2006, Jin and Sendhoff, 2008]. In most
real-world problems, a learner is required to find a model with strong performance across multiple
objectives L1 , . . . , Lp . Committing to a single objective Lk often fails to capture the full complexity
of the underlying problem and causes models to overfit to that individual objective [Kendall et al.,
2018].
For example, the BLEU score [Papineni et al., 2002] is commonly selected as a single objective
for model training and evaluation in machine translation literature. However, it overfits to short
sentences, because it is focused on word-based n-gram precision [Duh et al., 2012]. Thus, it is often
agreed upon in the research community that machine translation models need to perform well not just
in terms of the BLEU score, but also for other metrics that measure various aspects of translation
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

