Strictly Batch Imitation Learning
by Energy-based Distribution Matching
Daniel Jarrett ⇤
University of Cambridge

Ioana Bica ⇤
Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Oxford
University of Cambridge
daniel.jarrett@maths.cam.ac.uk The Alan Turing Institute University of California, Los Angeles
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Consider learning a policy purely on the basis of demonstrated behavior—that is,
with no access to reinforcement signals, no knowledge of transition dynamics, and
no further interaction with the environment. This strictly batch imitation learning
problem arises wherever live experimentation is costly, such as in healthcare. One
solution is simply to retrofit existing algorithms for apprenticeship learning to work
in the offline setting. But such an approach leans heavily on off-policy evaluation
or offline model estimation, and can be indirect and inefficient. We argue that a
good solution should be able to explicitly parameterize a policy (i.e. respecting
action conditionals), implicitly learn from rollout dynamics (i.e. leveraging state
marginals), and—crucially—operate in an entirely offline fashion. To address this
challenge, we propose a novel technique by energy-based distribution matching
(EDM): By identifying parameterizations of the (discriminative) model of a policy
with the (generative) energy function for state distributions, EDM yields a simple
but effective solution that equivalently minimizes a divergence between the occupancy measure for the demonstrator and a model thereof for the imitator. Through
experiments with application to control and healthcare settings, we illustrate consistent performance gains over existing algorithms for strictly batch imitation learning.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning deals with training an agent to mimic the actions of a demonstrator. In this paper,
we are interested in the specific setting of strictly batch imitation learning—that is, of learning a
policy purely on the basis of demonstrated behavior, with no access to reinforcement signals, no
knowledge of transition dynamics, and—importantly—no further interaction with the environment.
This problem arises wherever live experimentation is costly, such as in medicine, healthcare, and
industrial processes. While behavioral cloning is indeed an intrinsically offline solution as such, it
fails to exploit precious information contained in the distribution of states visited by the demonstrator.
Of course, given the rich body of recent work on (online) apprenticeship learning, one solution is
simply to repurpose such existing algorithms—including classic inverse reinforcement learning and
more recent adversarial imitation learning methods—to operate in the offline setting. However, this
strategy leans heavily on off-policy evaluation (which is its own challenge per se) or offline model
estimation (inadvisable beyond small or discrete models), and can be indirect and inefficient—via
off-policy alternating optimizations, or by running RL in a costly inner loop. Instead, we argue that
a good solution should directly parameterize a policy (i.e. respect action conditionals), account for
rollout dynamics (i.e. respect state marginals), and—crucially—operate in an entirely offline fashion
without recourse to off-policy evaluation for retrofitting existing (but intrinsically online) methods.
Contributions In the sequel, we first formalize imitation learning in the strictly batch setting, and
motivate the unique desiderata expected of a good solution (Section 2). To meet this challenge, we propose a novel technique by energy-based distribution matching (EDM) that identifies parameterizations
⇤ Authors contributed equally
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

