Adversarial Soft Advantage Fitting:
Imitation Learning without Policy Optimization

Paul Barde∗†
Québec AI institute (Mila)
McGill University
bardepau@mila.quebec

Julien Roy∗†
Québec AI institute (Mila)
Polytechnique Montréal
julien.roy@mila.quebec

Wonseok Jeon∗
Québec AI institute (Mila)
McGill University
jeonwons@mila.quebec

Joelle Pineau‡
Québec AI institute (Mila)
McGill University
Facebook AI Research

Derek Nowrouzezahrai
Québec AI institute (Mila)
McGill University

Christopher Pal‡
Québec AI institute (Mila)
Polytechnique Montréal
Element AI

Abstract
Adversarial Imitation Learning alternates between learning a discriminator – which
tells apart expert’s demonstrations from generated ones – and a generator’s policy
to produce trajectories that can fool this discriminator. This alternated optimization
is known to be delicate in practice since it compounds unstable adversarial training
with brittle and sample-inefficient reinforcement learning. We propose to remove
the burden of the policy optimization steps by leveraging a novel discriminator
formulation. Specifically, our discriminator is explicitly conditioned on two policies: the one from the previous generator’s iteration and a learnable policy. When
optimized, this discriminator directly learns the optimal generator’s policy. Consequently, our discriminator’s update solves the generator’s optimization problem
for free: learning a policy that imitates the expert does not require an additional
optimization loop. This formulation effectively cuts by half the implementation and
computational burden of Adversarial Imitation Learning algorithms by removing
the Reinforcement Learning phase altogether. We show on a variety of tasks that
our simpler approach is competitive to prevalent Imitation Learning methods.

1

Introduction

Imitation Learning (IL) treats the task of learning a policy from a set of expert demonstrations. IL
is effective on control problems that are challenging for traditional Reinforcement Learning (RL)
methods, either due to reward function design challenges or the inherent difficulty of the task itself
[1, 24].
Most IL work can be divided into two branches: Behavioral Cloning and Inverse Reinforcement
Learning. Behavioral Cloning casts IL as a supervised learning objective and seeks to imitate the
expert’s actions using the provided demonstrations as a fixed dataset [19]. Thus, Behavioral Cloning
usually requires a lot of expert data and results in agents that struggle to generalize. As an agent
deviates from the demonstrated behaviors – straying outside the state distribution on which it was
trained – the risks of making additional errors increase, a problem known as compounding error [24].
∗

Equal contribution.
Work conducted while interning at Ubisoft Montreal’s La Forge R&D laboratory.
‡
Canada CIFAR AI Chair.
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

