Content Provider Dynamics and Coordination in
Recommendation Ecosystems

Omer Ben-Porat
Technion
Haifa 32000 Israel
omerbp@campus.technion.ac.il

Itay Rosenberg
Technion
Haifa 32000 Israel
itayrose@campus.technion.ac.il

Moshe Tennenholtz
Technion
Haifa 32000 Israel
moshet@ie.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Recommendation Systems like YouTube are vibrant ecosystems with two types
of users: Content consumers (those who watch videos) and content providers
(those who create videos). While the computational task of recommending relevant
content is largely solved, designing a system that guarantees high social welfare for
all stakeholders is still in its infancy. In this work, we investigate the dynamics of
content creation using a game-theoretic lens. Employing a stylized model that was
recently suggested by other works, we show that the dynamics will always converge
to a pure Nash Equilibrium (PNE), but the convergence rate can be exponential.
We complement the analysis by proposing an efficient PNE computation algorithm
via a combinatorial optimization problem that is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems (RSs hereinafter) play a major role in our life nowadays. Many modern
RSs, like YouTube, Medium, or Spotify, recommend content created by others and go far beyond
recommendations. They are vibrant ecosystems with multiple stakeholders and are responsible for
the well-being of all of them. For example, in the online publishing platform Medium, the platform
should be profitable; suggest relevant content to the content consumers (readers); and support the
content providers (authors). In light of this ecosystem approach, research on RSs has shifted from
determining consumers’ taste (e.g., the Netflix Prize challenge [9, 25]) to other aspects like fairness,
ethics, and long-term welfare [5, 29, 31, 35, 37, 40–42, 44].
Understanding content providers and their utility1 is still in its infancy. Content providers produce a
constant supply of content (e.g., articles in Medium, videos on YouTube), and are hence indispensable.
Successful content providers rely on the RS for some part of their income: Advertising, affiliated
marketing, sponsorship, and merchandise; thus, unsatisfied content providers might decide to provide
a different type of content or even abandon the RS. To illustrate, a content provider who is unsatisfied
with her exposure, which is heavily correlated with her income from the RS, can switch to another
type of content or seek another niche. Such downstream effects are detrimental to content consumer
satisfaction because they change the available content the RS can recommend. The synergy between
content providers and consumers is thus fragile, and solidifying one side solidifies the other.
1
We use the term utility to address the well-being of the content providers, and social welfare for the
well-being of the content consumers.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

