Invertible Gaussian Reparameterization: Revisiting
the Gumbel-Softmax
Andres Potapczynski
Zuckerman Institute
Columbia University
ap3635@columbia.edu

Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem
Layer 6 AI∗
gabriel@layer6.ai

John P. Cunningham
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
The Gumbel-Softmax is a continuous distribution over the simplex that is often
used as a relaxation of discrete distributions. Because it can be readily interpreted
and easily reparameterized, it enjoys widespread use. We propose a modular and
more flexible family of reparameterizable distributions where Gaussian noise is
transformed into a one-hot approximation through an invertible function. This
invertible function is composed of a modified softmax and can incorporate diverse
transformations that serve different specific purposes. For example, the stickbreaking procedure allows us to extend the reparameterization trick to distributions
with countably infinite support, thus enabling the use of our distribution along
nonparametric models, or normalizing flows let us increase the flexibility of the
distribution. Our construction enjoys theoretical advantages over the GumbelSoftmax, such as closed form KL, and significantly outperforms it in a variety of
experiments. Our code is available at https://github.com/cunningham-lab/
igr.

1

Introduction

Numerous machine learning tasks involve optimization problems over discrete stochastic components
whose parameters we wish to learn. Mixture and mixed-membership models, variational autoencoders,
language models and reinforcement learning fall into this category [13, 14, 26, 17, 8]. Ideally, as with
fully continuous models, we would use stochastic optimization via backpropagation. One strategy
to compute the necessary gradients is using score estimators [8, 32], however these estimates suffer
from high variance which leads to slow convergence. Another strategy is to find a reparameterizable
continuous relaxation of the discrete distribution. Reparameterization gradients exhibit lower variance
but are contingent on finding such a relaxation. Jang et al. [12] and Maddison et al. [19] independently
found such a continuous relaxation via the Gumbel-Softmax (GS) or Concrete distribution.
The GS has experienced wide use and has been extended to other settings, such as permutations
[18], subsets [33] and more [1]. Its success relies on several qualities that make it appealing: (i) it is
reparameterizable, that is, it can be sampled by transforming parameter-independent noise through a
smooth function, (ii) it can approximate any discrete distribution, (i.e. converge in distribution) (iii)
it has a closed form density, and (iv) its parameters can be interpreted as the discrete distribution that
it is relaxing. While the last quality is mathematically pleasing, it is not a necessary condition for a
valid relaxation. Here we ask: how important is this parameter interpretability? In the context of
deep learning models, interpreting the parameters is not a first concern, and we show that the GS can
be significantly improved upon by giving up this quality.
In this paper we propose an alternative family of distributions over the simplex to achieve this
relaxation, which we call Invertible Gaussian Reparameterization (IGR). Our reparameterization
∗

Work partially done while at the Department of Statistics, Columbia University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

