Deep Smoothing of the Implied Volatility Surface

Damien Ackerer
UBS
Zürich, Switzerland
damien.ackerer@epfl.ch
Natasa Tagasovska
Swiss Data Science Center
Lausanne, Switzerland
natasa.tagasovska@sdsc.ch

Thibault Vatter
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
New York, USA
thibault.vatter@columbia.edu

Abstract
We present a neural network (NN) approach to fit and predict implied volatility
surfaces (IVSs). Atypically to standard NN applications, financial industry practitioners use such models equally to replicate market prices and to value other
financial instruments. In other words, low training losses are as important as
generalization capabilities. Importantly, IVS models need to generate realistic
arbitrage-free option prices, meaning that no portfolio can lead to risk-free profits.
We propose an approach guaranteeing the absence of arbitrage opportunities by
penalizing the loss using soft constraints. Furthermore, our method can be combined with standard IVS models in quantitative finance, thus providing a NN-based
correction when such models fail at replicating observed market prices. This lets
practitioners use our approach as a plug-in on top of classical methods. Empirical
results show that this approach is particularly useful when only sparse or erroneous
data are available. We also quantify the uncertainty of the model predictions in
regions with few or no observations. We further explore how deeper NNs improve
over shallower ones, as well as other properties of the network architecture. We
benchmark our method against standard IVS models. By evaluating our method
on both training sets, and testing sets, namely, we highlight both their capacity to
reproduce observed prices and predict new ones.

1

Introduction

The implied volatility surface (IVS) is a key input for computing margin requirements for brokers,
quotes for market makers, prices of exotic derivatives for quants, and strategies positions for traders.
As a result, tiny predictions errors can lead to dramatic financial losses. But standard IVS models
often lack the ability to flexibly reproduce market prices and value other instruments without quotes.
In this paper, we merge known ideas from different fields, namely machine learning (ML) and
mathematical finance, to build a new solution for a non-trivial and relevant financial problem: the
interpolation and extrapolation of the IVS. More specifically, we use a neural network (NN) to
correct the IVS produced by any standard model. This lets practitioners plug our method on top of
existing approaches while offering an unprecedented trade-off between flexibility and computational
complexity. This problem was initially brought to us by a financial institution willing to improve its
existing solution and a version of this method is being tested in production by a financial institution,
where thousands of models are continuously updated throughout the day and used as inputs to various
quantitative tools.
Practitioners have a growing interest to leverage NNs as flexible predictors for applications requiring
an understanding of the complex dynamics of financial markets. And the ML community continues
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

