Rethinking Pre-training and Self-training
Barret Zoph⇤, Golnaz Ghiasi⇤, Tsung-Yi Lin⇤,
Yin Cui, Hanxiao Liu, Ekin D. Cubuk, Quoc V. Le
Google Research, Brain Team
{barretzoph,golnazg,tsungyi,yincui,hanxiaol,cubuk,qvl}@google.com

Abstract
Pre-training is a dominant paradigm in computer vision. For example, supervised
ImageNet pre-training is commonly used to initialize the backbones of object detection and segmentation models. He et al. [1], for example, show a contrasting result
that ImageNet pre-training has limited impact on COCO object detection. Here we
investigate self-training as another method to utilize additional data on the same
setup and contrast it against ImageNet pre-training. Our study reveals the generality
and flexibility of self-training with three additional insights: 1) stronger data augmentation and more labeled data further diminish the value of pre-training, 2) unlike
pre-training, self-training is always helpful when using stronger data augmentation,
in both low-data and high-data regimes, and 3) in the case that pre-training is
helpful, self-training improves upon pre-training. For example, on the COCO
object detection dataset, pre-training benefits when we use one fifth of the labeled
data, and hurts accuracy when we use all labeled data. Self-training, on the other
hand, shows positive improvements from +1.3 to +3.4AP across all dataset sizes.
In other words, self-training works well exactly on the same setup that pre-training
does not work (using ImageNet to help COCO). On the PASCAL segmentation
dataset, which is a much smaller dataset than COCO, though pre-training does
help significantly, self-training improves upon the pre-trained model. On COCO
object detection, we achieve 54.3AP, an improvement of +1.5AP over the strongest
SpineNet model. On PASCAL segmentation, we achieve 90.5 mIOU, an improvement of +1.5% mIOU over the previous state-of-the-art result by DeepLabv3+.1

1

Introduction

Pre-training is a dominant paradigm in computer vision. As many vision tasks are related, it is
expected a model, pre-trained on one dataset, to help another. It is now common practice to pre-train
the backbones of object detection and segmentation models on ImageNet classification [2–5]. This
practice has been recently challenged He et al. [1], among others [6, 7], who show a surprising result
that such ImageNet pre-training does not improve accuracy on the COCO dataset.
A stark contrast to pre-training is self-training [8–10]. Let’s suppose we want to use ImageNet to
help COCO object detection; under self-training, we will first discard the labels on ImageNet. We
then train an object detection model on COCO, and use it to generate pseudo labels on ImageNet.
The pseudo-labeled ImageNet and labeled COCO data are then combined to train a new model. The
recent successes of self-training [11–14] raise the question to what degree does self-training work
better than pre-training. Can self-training work well on the exact setup, using ImageNet to improve
COCO, where pre-training fails?
⇤

Authors contributed equally.
Code and checkpoints for our models are available at https://github.com/tensorflow/tpu/tree/
master/models/official/detection/projects/self_training
1

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

