Reward-rational (implicit) choice:
A unifying formalism for reward learning

Hong Jun Jeon∗1 , Smitha Milli∗2 , Anca Dragan2
hjjeon@stanford.edu, smilli@berkeley.edu, anca@berkeley.edu
∗

Equal contribution,
Stanford University,
2
University of California, Berkeley
1

Abstract
It is often difficult to hand-specify what the correct reward function is for a task, so
researchers have instead aimed to learn reward functions from human behavior or
feedback. The types of behavior interpreted as evidence of the reward function have
expanded greatly in recent years. We’ve gone from demonstrations, to comparisons,
to reading into the information leaked when the human is pushing the robot away
or turning it off. And surely, there is more to come. How will a robot make sense
of all these diverse types of behavior? Our key observation is that different types of
behavior can be interpreted in a single unifying formalism - as a reward-rational
choice that the human is making, often implicitly. We use this formalism to survey
prior work through a unifying lens, and discuss its potential use as a recipe for
interpreting new sources of information that are yet to be uncovered.

1

Introduction

It is difficult to specify reward functions that always lead to the desired behavior. Recent work has
argued that the reward specified by a human is merely a source of information about what people
actually want a robot to optimize, i.e., the intended reward [1, 2]. Luckily, it is not the only one.
Robots can also learn about the intended reward from demonstrations (IRL) [3, 4], by asking us to
make comparisons between trajectories [5, 6, 7], or by grounding our instructions [8, 9].
Perhaps even more fortunate is that we seem to leak information left and right about the intended
reward. For instance, if we push the robot away, this shouldn’t just modify the robot’s current
behavior – it should also inform the robot about our preferences more generally [10, 11]. If we turn
the robot off in a state of panic to prevent it from disaster, this shouldn’t just stop the robot right
now. It should also inform the robot about the intended reward function so that the robot prevents
itself from the same disaster in the future: the robot should infer that whatever it was about to do
has a tragically low reward. Even the current state of the world ought to inform the robot about our
preferences – it is a direct result of us having been acting in the world according to these preferences
[12]! For instance, those shoes didn’t magically align themselves at the entrance, someone put effort
into arranging them that way, so their state alone should tell the robot something about what we want.
Overall, there is much information out there, some purposefully communicated, other leaked. While
existing papers are instructing us how to tap into some of it, one can only imagine that there is much
more that is yet untapped. There are probably new yet-to-be-invented ways for people to purposefully
provide feedback to robots – e.g. guiding them on which part of a trajectory was particularly good or
bad. And, there will probably be new realizations about ways in which human behavior already leaks
information, beyond the state of the world or turning the robot off. How will robots make sense of all
these diverse sources of information?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

