On the training dynamics of deep networks with L2
regularization
Aitor Lewkowycz
Google
Mountain View, CA
alewkowycz@google.com

Guy Gur-Ari
Google
Mountain View, CA
guyga@google.com

Abstract
We study the role of L2 regularization in deep learning, and uncover simple
relations between the performance of the model, the L2 coefficient, the learning rate,
and the number of training steps. These empirical relations hold when the network
is overparameterized. They can be used to predict the optimal regularization
parameter of a given model. In addition, based on these observations we propose a
dynamical schedule for the regularization parameter that improves performance and
speeds up training. We test these proposals in modern image classification settings.
Finally, we show that these empirical relations can be understood theoretically in
the context of infinitely wide networks. We derive the gradient flow dynamics of
such networks, and compare the role of L2 regularization in this context with that
of linear models.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are commonly trained with L2 regularization. This involves adding the term
1
2
is a hyperparameter. In
2 k✓k2 to the loss function, where ✓ is the vector of model parameters and
some cases, the theoretical motivation for using this type of regularization is clear. For example, in
the context of linear regression, L2 regularization increases the bias of the learned parameters while
reducing their variance across instantiations of the training data; in other words, it is a manifestation
of the bias-variance tradeoff. In statistical learning theory, a “hard” variant of L2 regularization, in
which one imposes the constraint k✓k2  ✏, is often employed when deriving generalization bounds.
In deep learning, the use of L2 regularization is prevalent and often leads to improved performance in
practical settings [Hinton, 1986], although the theoretical motivation for its use is less clear. Indeed,
it well known that overparameterized models overfit far less than one may expect [Zhang et al., 2016],
and so the classical bias-variance tradeoff picture does not apply [Neyshabur et al., 2017, Belkin et al.,
2018, Geiger et al., 2020]. There is growing understanding that this is caused, at least in part, by the
(implicit) regularization properties of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [Soudry et al., 2017]. The
goal of this paper is to improve our understanding of the role of L2 regularization in deep learning.
1.1

Our contribution

We study the role of L2 regularization when training over-parameterized deep networks, taken here to
mean networks that can achieve training accuracy 1 when trained with SGD. Specifically, we consider
the early stopping performance of a model, namely the maximum test accuracy a model achieves
during training, as a function of the L2 parameter . We make the following observations based on
the experimental results presented in the paper.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

