BRP-NAS: Prediction-based NAS using GCNs

Łukasz Dudziak1* , Thomas Chau1* , Mohamed S. Abdelfattah1
Royson Lee1 , Hyeji Kim3† , Nicholas D. Lane1,2
1

2

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
3
University of Cambridge, UK
University of Texas at Austin, US

*

Indicates equal contributions, † Work performed while at Samsung AI Center

{l.dudziak, thomas.chau, mohamed1.a, royson.lee, nic.lane}@samsung.com
hyeji.kim@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) enables researchers to automatically explore
broad design spaces in order to improve efficiency of neural networks. This
efficiency is especially important in the case of on-device deployment, where improvements in accuracy should be balanced out with computational demands of a
model. In practice, performance metrics of model are computationally expensive
to obtain. Previous work uses a proxy (e.g., number of operations) or a layer-wise
measurement of neural network layers to estimate end-to-end hardware performance but the imprecise prediction diminishes the quality of NAS. To address
this problem, we propose BRP-NAS, an efficient hardware-aware NAS enabled by
an accurate performance predictor-based on graph convolutional network (GCN).
What is more, we investigate prediction quality on different metrics and show that
sample efficiency of the predictor-based NAS can be improved by considering
binary relations of models and an iterative data selection strategy. We show that
our proposed method outperforms all prior methods on NAS-Bench-101 and NASBench-201, and that our predictor can consistently learn to extract useful features
from the DARTS search space, improving upon the second-order baseline. Finally,
to raise awareness of the fact that accurate latency estimation is not a trivial task,
we release LatBench – a latency dataset of NAS-Bench-201 models running on a
broad range of devices.

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) has demonstrated great success in automatically designing competitive neural networks compared with hand-crafted alternatives [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, NAS is
computationally expensive requiring to train models [5, 6] or introduce non-trivial complexity into
the search process [7, 8]. Additionally, real-world deployment demands models meeting efficiency or
hardware constraints (e.g., latency, memory and energy consumption) on top of being accurate, but
acquiring various performance metrics of a model can also be time consuming, independently from
the cost of training it.
In this paper, we (a) show the limitations of the layer-wise predictor both in terms of prediction
accuracy and NAS performance and (b) propose a Graph convolutional networks (GCN)-based
predictor for the end-to-end latency which significantly outperforms the layer-wise approach on
devices of various specifications.
One of the key challenges in obtaining a reliable accuracy predictor is that acquiring training samples
(pairs of (model, accuracy)) is computationally expensive. Sample efficiency denotes how many
samples are required to find the best model during a search under a target hardware constraint, and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

