MOPO: Model-based Offline Policy Optimization

Tianhe Yu∗ 1 , Garrett Thomas∗1 , Lantao Yu1 , Stefano Ermon1 , James Zou1 ,
Sergey Levine2 , Chelsea Finn†1 , Tengyu Ma†1
Stanford University1 , UC Berkeley2
{tianheyu,gwthomas}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) refers to the problem of learning policies
entirely from a large batch of previously collected data. This problem setting offers
the promise of utilizing such datasets to acquire policies without any costly or
dangerous active exploration. However, it is also challenging, due to the distributional shift between the offline training data and those states visited by the learned
policy. Despite significant recent progress, the most successful prior methods are
model-free and constrain the policy to the support of data, precluding generalization to unseen states. In this paper, we first observe that an existing model-based
RL algorithm already produces significant gains in the offline setting compared to
model-free approaches. However, standard model-based RL methods, designed
for the online setting, do not provide an explicit mechanism to avoid the offline
setting’s distributional shift issue. Instead, we propose to modify the existing
model-based RL methods by applying them with rewards artificially penalized by
the uncertainty of the dynamics. We theoretically show that the algorithm maximizes a lower bound of the policy’s return under the true MDP. We also characterize
the trade-off between the gain and risk of leaving the support of the batch data.
Our algorithm, Model-based Offline Policy Optimization (MOPO), outperforms
standard model-based RL algorithms and prior state-of-the-art model-free offline
RL algorithms on existing offline RL benchmarks and two challenging continuous
control tasks that require generalizing from data collected for a different task.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning using deep neural networks have shown significant successes in
scaling to large realistic datasets, such as ImageNet [13] in computer vision, SQuAD [55] in NLP, and
RoboNet [10] in robot learning. Reinforcement learning (RL) methods, in contrast, struggle to scale
to many real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving [74] and healthcare [22], because they rely
on costly online trial-and-error. However, pre-recorded datasets in domains like these can be large
and diverse. Hence, designing RL algorithms that can learn from those diverse, static datasets would
both enable more practical RL training in the real world and lead to more effective generalization.
While off-policy RL algorithms [43, 27, 20] can in principle utilize previously collected datasets,
they perform poorly without online data collection. These failures are generally caused by large
extrapolation error when the Q-function is evaluated on out-of-distribution actions [19, 36], which
can lead to unstable learning and divergence. Offline RL methods propose to mitigate bootstrapped
error by constraining the learned policy to the behavior policy induced by the dataset [19, 36, 72, 30,
49, 52, 58]. While these methods achieve reasonable performances in some settings, their learning is
limited to behaviors within the data manifold. Specifically, these methods estimate error with respect
to out-of-distribution actions, but only consider states that lie within the offline dataset and do not
∗

equal contribution. † equal advising. Orders randomized.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

