Black-Box Optimization with
Local Generative Surrogates

Sergey Shirobokov∗
Department of Physics
Imperial College London
United Kingdom
s.shirobokov17@imperial.ac.uk

Vladislav Belavin∗
National Research University
Higher School of Economics
Moscow, Russia
vbelavin@hse.ru

Michael Kagan
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA
United States

Andrey Ustyuzhanin
National Research University
Higher School of Economics
Moscow, Russia

Atılım Güneş Baydin
Department of Computer Science
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
United Kingdom

Abstract
We propose a novel method for gradient-based optimization of black-box simulators using differentiable local surrogate models. In fields such as physics and
engineering, many processes are modeled with non-differentiable simulators with
intractable likelihoods. Optimization of these forward models is particularly challenging, especially when the simulator is stochastic. To address such cases, we
introduce the use of deep generative models to iteratively approximate the simulator in local neighborhoods of the parameter space. We demonstrate that these
local surrogates can be used to approximate the gradient of the simulator, and
thus enable gradient-based optimization of simulator parameters. In cases where
the dependence of the simulator on the parameter space is constrained to a low
dimensional submanifold, we observe that our method attains minima faster than
baseline methods, including Bayesian optimization, numerical optimization, and
approaches using score function gradient estimators.

1

Introduction

Computer simulation is a powerful method that allows for the modeling of complex real-world
systems and the estimation of a system’s parameters given conditions and constraints. Simulators
drive research in many fields of engineering and science [13] and are also used for the generation of
synthetic labeled data for various tasks in machine learning [52, 49, 50, 7]. A common challenge
is to find optimal parameters of a simulated system in terms of a given objective function, e.g., to
optimize a real-world system’s design or efficiency using the simulator as a proxy, or to calibrate
a simulator to generate data that match a real-data distribution.
A typical simulator optimization
P
problem can be defined as finding ψ ∗ = arg minψ x R(F (x, ψ)), where R is an objective we
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

