AViD Dataset: Anonymized Videos from Diverse
Countries
AJ Piergiovanni
Indiana University
ajpiergi@indiana.edu

Michael S. Ryoo
Stony Brook University
mryoo@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new public video dataset for action recognition: Anonymized
Videos from Diverse countries (AViD). Unlike existing public video datasets, AViD
is a collection of action videos from many different countries. The motivation
is to create a public dataset that would benefit training and pretraining of action
recognition models for everybody, rather than making it useful for limited countries.
Further, all the face identities in the AViD videos are properly anonymized to
protect their privacy. It also is a static dataset where each video is licensed with the
creative commons license. We confirm that most of the existing video datasets are
statistically biased to only capture action videos from a limited number of countries.
We experimentally illustrate that models trained with such biased datasets do not
transfer perfectly to action videos from the other countries, and show that AViD
addresses such problem. We also confirm that the new AViD dataset could serve as
a good dataset for pretraining the models, performing comparably or better than
prior datasets1 .

1

Introduction

Video recognition is an important problem with many potential applications. One key challenge in
training a video model (e.g., 3D spatio-temporal convolutional neural networks) is the lack of data, as
these models generally have more parameters than image models requiring even more data. Kinetics
(Kay et al., 2017) found that by training on a hundreds of thousands of labeled video clips, one is
able to increase the performance of video models significantly. Other large-scale datasets, such as
HVU (Diba et al., 2019), Moments-in-Time (Monfort et al., 2018), and HACS (Zhao et al., 2019)
also have been introduced, motivated by such findings.
However, many of today’s large-scale datasets suffer from multiple problems: First, due to their
collection process, the videos in the datasets are very biased particularly in terms of where the videos
are from (Fig. 1 and Table 3). Secondly, many of these datasets become inconsistent as YouTube
videos get deleted. For instance, in the years since Kinetics-400 was first released, over 10% of the
videos have been removed from YouTube. Further, depending on geographic location, some videos
may not be available. This makes it very challenging for researchers in different countries and at
different times to equally benefit from the data and reproduce the results, making the trained models
to be biased based on when and where they were trained. They are not static datasets (Figure 3).
AViD, unlike previous datasets, contains videos from diverse groups of people all over the world.
Existing datasets, such as Kinetics, have videos mostly from from North America (Kay et al., 2017)
due to being sampled from YouTube and English queries. AViD videos are distributed more broadly
across the globe (Fig. 1) since they are sampled from many sites using many different languages.
This is important as certain actions are done differently in different cultures, such as greetings (shown
1

The dataset is available https://github.com/piergiaj/AViD

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

