Learning Compositional Rules via Neural Program
Synthesis

Maxwell I. Nye∗
MIT

Armando Solar-Lezama
MIT

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

Brenden M. Lake
NYU
Facebook AI

Abstract
Many aspects of human reasoning, including language, require learning rules
from very little data. Humans can do this, often learning systematic rules from
very few examples, and combining these rules to form compositional rule-based
systems. Current neural architectures, on the other hand, often fail to generalize in
a compositional manner, especially when evaluated in ways that vary systematically
from training. In this work, we present a neuro-symbolic model which learns entire
rule systems from a small set of examples. Instead of directly predicting outputs
from inputs, we train our model to induce the explicit system of rules governing a
set of previously seen examples, drawing upon techniques from the neural program
synthesis literature. Our rule-synthesis approach outperforms neural meta-learning
techniques in three domains: an artificial instruction-learning domain used to
evaluate human learning, the SCAN challenge datasets, and learning rule-based
translations of number words into integers for a wide range of human languages.

1

Introduction

Humans have a remarkable ability to learn compositional rules from very little data. For example,
a person can learn a novel verb “to dax" from a few examples, and immediately understand what
it means to “dax twice" or “dax around the room quietly." When learning language, children must
learn many interrelated concepts simultaneously, including the meaning of both verbs and modifiers
(“twice", “quietly", etc.), and how they combine to form complex meanings. People can also
learn novel artificial languages and generalize systematically to new compositional meanings (see
Figure 3). Fodor and Marcus have argued that this systematic compositionality, while critical
to human language and thought, is incompatible with classic neural networks (i.e., eliminative
connectionism) [1, 2, 3]. Despite advances, recent work shows that contemporary neural architectures
still struggle to generalize in systematic ways when directly learning rule-like mappings between
input sequences and output sequences [4, 5]. Given these findings, Marcus continues to postulate
that hybrid neural-symbolic architectures (implementational connectionism) are needed to achieve
genuine compositional, human-like generalization [3, 6, 7].
An important goal of AI is to build systems which possess this sort of systematic rule-learning
ability, while retaining the speed and flexibility of neural inference. In this work, we present a
neural-symbolic framework for learning entire rule systems from examples. As illustrated in Figure
1B, our key idea is to leverage techniques from the program synthesis community [8], and frame
the problem as explicit rule-learning through fast neural proposals and rigorous symbolic checking.
Instead of training a model to predict the correct output given a novel input (Figure 1A), we train our
model to induce the explicit system of rules governing the behavior of all previously seen examples
(Figure 1B; Grammar proposals). Once inferred, this rule system can be used to predict the behavior
of any new example (Figure 1B; Symbolic application).
∗

Correspondence to mnye@mit.edu. Code can be found here: github.com/mtensor/rulesynthesis

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

