Bridging the Gap between Sample-based and
One-shot Neural Architecture Search with BONAS
Han Shi1∗, Renjie Pi2∗, Hang Xu3 , Zhenguo Li3 , James T. Kwok1 , Tong Zhang1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
{hshiac,jamesk}@cse.ust.hk, tongzhang@ust.hk
2
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
pipilu@hku.hk
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{xu.hang,li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has shown great potentials in finding better
neural network designs. Sample-based NAS is the most reliable approach which
aims at exploring the search space and evaluating the most promising architectures.
However, it is computationally very costly. As a remedy, the one-shot approach
has emerged as a popular technique for accelerating NAS using weight-sharing.
However, due to the weight-sharing of vastly different networks, the one-shot
approach is less reliable than the sample-based approach. In this work, we propose
BONAS (Bayesian Optimized Neural Architecture Search), a sample-based NAS
framework which is accelerated using weight-sharing to evaluate multiple related
architectures simultaneously. Specifically, we apply a Graph Convolutional Network predictor as surrogate model for Bayesian Optimization to select multiple
related candidate models in each iteration. We then apply weight-sharing to train
multiple candidate models simultaneously. This approach not only accelerates
the traditional sample-based approach significantly, but also keeps its reliability.
This is because weight-sharing among related architectures is more reliable than
that in the one-shot approach. Extensive experiments are conducted to verify the
effectiveness of our method over competing algorithms.1

1

Introduction

Designing an appropriate deep network architecture for each task and data set is tedious and timeconsuming. Neural architecture search (NAS) [42], which attempts to find this architecture automatically, has aroused significant interest recently. Results competitive with hand-crafted architectures
have been obtained in many application areas, such as natural language processing [20, 30] and
computer vision [25, 9, 3, 16, 4].
Optimization in NAS is difficult because the search space can contain billions of network architectures.
Moreover, the performance (e.g., accuracy) of a particular architecture is computationally expensive
to evaluate. Hence, a central component in NAS is the strategy to search such a huge space of
architectures. These strategies can be broadly categorized into two groups. Sample-based algorithms
[41, 17, 25, 19], which perform NAS in two phases: (i) search for candidate architectures with
potentially good performance; and (ii) query their actual performance by full training. The second
category contains one-shot NAS algorithms, which combine architectures in the whole search space
together using weight sharing [24] or continuous relaxation [18, 19] for faster evaluation. Despite
∗
1

Equal contribution.
The code is available at https://github.com/pipilurj/BONAS.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

