Practical Low-Rank Communication Compression
in Decentralized Deep Learning
Thijs Vogels
EPFL
thijs.vogels@epfl.ch

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy
EPFL
sai.karimireddy@epfl.ch

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Lossy gradient compression has become a practical tool to overcome the communication bottleneck in centrally coordinated distributed training of machine learning
models. However, algorithms for decentralized training with compressed communication over arbitrary connected networks have been more complicated, requiring
additional memory and hyperparameters. We introduce a simple algorithm that
directly compresses the model differences between neighboring workers using lowrank linear compressors applied to model differences. Inspired by the PowerSGD
algorithm for centralized deep learning (Vogels et al., 2019), this algorithm uses
power iteration steps to maximize the information transferred per bit. We prove
that our method requires no additional hyperparameters, converges faster than prior
methods, and is asymptotically independent of both the network and the compression. Out of the box, these compressors perform on par with state-of-the-art tuned
compression algorithms in a series of deep learning benchmarks.
This paper’s code is available at https://github.com/epfml/powergossip.

1

Introduction

The major advances in machine learning in the last decade have been made possible by very large
datasets collected by multifaceted organizations. We live in a society where almost every individual
owns electronic devices that collect huge amounts of data, which—when used collaboratively—could
lead to transformative insights (Nedic, 2020). Often this data is bound to the device it is captured on.
This might be for practical reasons of communication efficiency, or for more fundamental reasons
such as privacy constraints.
Decentralized machine learning enables collaborative processing of this new kind of data. In this
paradigm, devices (nodes) have their own local data. The nodes joinly train a model by minimizing a
loss function on their joint dataset. To do so, nodes communicate in a peer-to-peer fashion without any
central coordination. A node can only communicate with few ‘neighbor’ nodes. This decentralized
approach is not only useful in fundamentally decentralized systems, but the sparse communication
patterns can sometimes even lead to efficiency gains in a datacenter (Assran et al., 2019).
In bringing decentralized optimization algorithms into the realm of deep learning, the more-than
gigabytes large model parameters and gradients (Rajbhandari et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) have
spurred interest in communication compression techniques to reduce the bandwidth requirements of
training such models. While practical plug-and-play compressors already exist for communication in
centralized deep learning (Seide et al., 2014; Vogels et al., 2019) that can retain full model quality at
significant communication reductions, current compression algorithms in decentralized optimization
require the tuning of additional hyperparameters. This is unfortunate, since running many experiments
to tune these hyperparameters is especially challenging and costly in a decentralized environment.
In this paper, we study a specific class of low-rank compressors for decentralized optimization
inspired by (Vogels et al., 2019; Cho et al., 2019) that are reliable and require no tuning. Like in their
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

