Probabilistic Orientation Estimation with Matrix
Fisher Distributions
David Mohlin
KTH/Tobii
Stockholm, Sweden
davmo@kth.se

Gérald Bianchi
Tobii
Danderyd, Sweden
gerald.bianchi@tobii.com

Josephine Sullivan
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
sullivan@kth.se

Abstract
This paper focuses on estimating probability distributions over the set of 3D rotations (SO(3)) using deep neural networks. Learning to regress models to the
set of rotations is inherently difficult due to differences in topology between
RN and SO(3). We overcome this issue by using a neural network to output the parameters for a matrix Fisher distribution since these parameters are
homeomorphic to R9 . By using a negative log likelihood loss for this distribution we get a loss which is convex with respect to the network outputs. By
optimizing this loss we improve state-of-the-art on several challenging applicable datasets, namely Pascal3D+, ModelNet10-SO(3). Our code is available at
https://github.com/Davmo049/Public_prob_orientation_estimation_with_matrix
_fisher_distributions

1

Introduction

Estimating the 3D rotation of an object from 2D images is one of the fundamental problems in
computer vision. Several applications relying on 3D rotation estimation have been developed such as
a robot grasping an object[23], a self driving vehicle constantly sensing its surrounding environment
[18], an augmented reality system combining computer-generated information onto the real world
[16], or a system detecting the face orientation to enhance human-computer interactions [25].
Advances of deep learning techniques have resulted in improvements in estimation of 3D orientation.
However, precise orientation estimation remains an open problem. The main problem is that the
space of all 3D rotations lies on a nonlinear and closed manifold, referred to as the special orthogonal
group SO(3). This manifold has a different topology than unconstrained values in RN , where neural
network outputs exist. As a result it is hard to design a loss function which is continuous without
disconnected local minima. For example using euler angles as an intermediate step causes problems
due to the so-called gimbal lock. Quaternions have a double embedding giving rise to the existence of
two disconnected local minimas. Some more complicated methods use Gram-Schmidt [30] which has
a continuous inverse, but the function is not continuous with a discontinuity when the input vectors
do not span R3 .
Despite these issues various deep learning based solutions have been suggested. One approach is to
use one of the rotation representations and model the constraint in the loss function or in the network
architecture [14]. An alternative is to construct a mapping function, which directly converts the
network output to a rotation matrix [30].
Quantifying the 3D orientation uncertainty when dealing with noisy or otherwise difficult inputs is
also an important task. Uncertainty estimation provides valuable information about the quality of the
prediction during the process of decision making. Only recent efforts have been made on modeling
the uncertainty of 3D rotation estimation [20, 5]. However, those methods still rely on complex
solutions to fulfil the constraints required by their parameterization.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

