Tackling the Objective Inconsistency Problem
in Heterogeneous Federated Optimization

Jianyu Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jianyuw1@andrew.cmu.edu
Hao Liang
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
hliang2@andrew.cmu.edu

Qinghua Liu
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
qinghual@princeton.edu

Gauri Joshi
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
gaurij@andrew.cmu.edu

H. Vincent Poor
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
poor@princeton.edu

Abstract
In federated learning, heterogeneity in the clients’ local datasets and computation
speeds results in large variations in the number of local updates performed by each
client in each communication round. Naive weighted aggregation of such models
causes objective inconsistency, that is, the global model converges to a stationary
point of a mismatched objective function which can be arbitrarily different from
the true objective. This paper provides a general framework to analyze the convergence of heterogeneous federated optimization algorithms. It subsumes previously
proposed methods such as FedAvg and FedProx, and provides the first principled
understanding of the solution bias and the convergence slowdown due to objective
inconsistency. Using insights from this analysis, we propose FedNova, a normalized averaging method that eliminates objective inconsistency while preserving
fast error convergence.

1

Introduction

Federated learning [1–5] is an emerging sub-area of distributed optimization where both data collection and model training is pushed to a large number of edge clients that have limited communication
and computation capabilities. Unlike traditional distributed optimization [6, 7] where consensus
(either through a central server or peer-to-peer communication) is performed after every local gradient
computation, in federated learning, the subset of clients selected in each communication round
perform multiple local updates before these models are aggregated in order to update a global model.
Heterogeneity in the Number of Local Updates in Federated Learning. The clients participating
in federated learning are typically highly heterogeneous, both in the size of their local datasets as
well as their computation speeds. The original paper on federated learning [1] proposed that each
client performs E epochs (traversals of their local dataset) of local-update stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) with a mini-batch size B. Thus, if a client has ni local data samples, the number of local
SGD iterations is τi = bEni /Bc, which can vary widely across clients. The heterogeneity in the
number of local SGD iterations is exacerbated by relative variations in the clients’ computing speeds.
Within a given wall-clock time interval, faster clients can perform more local updates than slower
clients. The number of local updates made by a client can also vary across communication rounds
due to unpredictable straggling or slowdown caused by background processes, outages, memory
limitations etc. Finally, clients may use different learning rates and local solvers (instead of vanilla
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

