CogMol: Target-Specific and Selective Drug Design
for COVID-19 Using Deep Generative Models
Vijil Chenthamarakshan†, Payel Das† , Samuel C. Hoffman, Hendrik Strobelt∗ , Inkit Padhi, Kar Wai
Lim§ , Benjamin Hoover∗ , Matteo Manica‡ , Jannis Born‡ , Teodoro Laino‡ , Aleksandra Mojsilovic
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, New York; § IBM Research, Singapore
IBM Research, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge; ‡ IBM Research Europe
{ecvijil,daspa,aleksand}@us.ibm.com, {shoffman,hendrik.strobelt}@ibm.com,
{inkpad,kar.wai.lim,benjamin.hoover}@ibm.com, {tte,jab,teo}@zurich.ibm.com
∗

Abstract
The novel nature of SARS-CoV-2 calls for the development of efficient de novo
drug design approaches. In this study, we propose an end-to-end framework, named
CogMol (Controlled Generation of Molecules), for designing new drug-like small
molecules targeting novel viral proteins with high affinity and off-target selectivity. CogMol combines adaptive pre-training of a molecular SMILES Variational
Autoencoder (VAE) and an efficient multi-attribute controlled sampling scheme
that uses guidance from attribute predictors trained on latent features. To generate
novel and optimal drug-like molecules for unseen viral targets, CogMol leverages
a protein-molecule binding affinity predictor that is trained using SMILES VAE
embeddings and protein sequence embeddings learned unsupervised from a large
corpus. We applied the CogMol framework to three SARS-CoV-2 target proteins:
main protease, receptor-binding domain of the spike protein, and non-structural
protein 9 replicase. The generated candidates are novel at both the molecular
and chemical scaffold levels when compared to the training data. CogMol also
includes in silico screening for assessing toxicity of parent molecules and their
metabolites with a multi-task toxicity classifier, synthetic feasibility with a chemical retrosynthesis predictor, and target structure binding with docking simulations.
Docking reveals favorable binding of generated molecules to the target protein
structure, where 87–95% of high affinity molecules showed docking free energy
< -6 kcal/mol. When compared to approved drugs, the majority of designed
compounds show low predicted parent molecule and metabolite toxicity and high
predicted synthetic feasibility. In summary, CogMol can handle multi-constraint
design of synthesizable, low-toxic, drug-like molecules with high target specificity and selectivity, even to novel protein target sequences, and does not need
target-dependent fine-tuning of the framework or target structure information.

1

Introduction

Generating novel drug molecules is a daunting task that aims to create new molecules (or optimize
known molecules) with multiple desirable properties that often compete and tightly interact with
each other. For example, optimal drug molecules should have binding affinity to the target protein
of interest (target specificity), low binding affinity to other targets (off-target selectivity), be easy to
synthesize, and also exhibit high drug likeliness (QED). This makes drug discovery a costly (2-3
billion USD) and time-consuming process (more than a decade) with a low success rate (< 10%) [1].
†

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

