Nonconvex Sparse Graph Learning under Laplacian
Constrained Graphical Model

Jiaxi Ying1
jx.ying@connect.ust.hk

José Vinícius de M. Cardoso1
jvdmc@connect.ust.hk

Daniel P. Palomar1,2
palomar@ust.hk
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering1
Department of Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning a sparse graph from the Laplacian
constrained Gaussian graphical model. This problem can be formulated as a
penalized maximum likelihood estimation of the precision matrix under Laplacian
structural constraints. Like in the classical graphical lasso problem, recent works
made use of the `1 -norm with the goal of promoting sparsity in the Laplacian
constrained precision matrix estimation. However, through empirical evidence,
we observe that the `1 -norm is not effective in imposing a sparse solution in this
problem. From a theoretical perspective, we prove that a large regularization
parameter will surprisingly lead to a solution representing a complete graph, i.e.,
every pair of vertices is connected by an edge. To address this issue, we propose a
nonconvex penalized maximum likelihood estimation method, and establish the
order of the statistical error. Numerical experiments involving synthetic and realworld data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. An open
source R package is available at https://github.com/mirca/sparseGraph.

1

Introduction

Gaussian graphical models (GGM) have been widely used in a number of fields such as finance,
bioinformatics, and image analysis [1, 31, 38]. Graph learning under GGM can be formulated to
estimate the precision matrix that captures the conditional dependency relations between random
variables [10, 29]. In this paper, the goal is to learn a sparse graph under the Laplacian constrained
GGM, where the precision matrix obeys Laplacian structural constraints.
The general GGM has received broad interest in statistical machine learning, where the problem can
be formulated as a sparse precision matrix estimation. The papers [1, 9, 58] proposed the `1 -norm
penalized maximum likelihood estimation, also known as graphical lasso, to encourage sparsity in
its entries. Various extensions of graphical lasso and their theoretical properties are also studied
[11, 18, 21, 35, 41, 42, 47, 55, 56]. To reduce the estimation bias, nonconvex penalties like the
smooth clipped absolute deviation (SCAD) [16], minimax concave penalty (MCP) [60], and capped
`1 -penalty [61] have been introduced in estimating a sparse precision matrix [2, 7, 27, 33, 46, 54, 60].
However, those methods mentioned above focus on general graphical models, and cannot be directly
extended to Laplacian constrained GGM because of the multiple constraints on the precision matrices.
Moreover, unlike the above GGM cases, this paper will show that the `1 -norm is not effective in
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

