Model Class Reliance for Random Forests
Gavin Smith
N/LAB
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK

Roberto Mansilla
N/LAB
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
{first.last}@nottingham.ac.uk

James Goulding
N/LAB
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK

Abstract
Variable Importance (VI) has traditionally been cast as the process of estimating
each variable’s contribution to a predictive model’s overall performance. Analysis
of a single model instance, however, guarantees no insight into a variables relevance
to underlying generative processes. Recent research has sought to address this
concern via analysis of Rashomon sets - sets of alternative model instances that
exhibit equivalent predictive performance to some reference model, but which take
different functional forms. Measures such as Model Class Reliance (MCR) have
been proposed, that are computed against Rashomon sets, in order to ascertain
how much a variable must be relied on to make robust predictions, or whether
alternatives exist. If MCR range is tight, we have no choice but to use a variable;
if range is high then there exists competing, perhaps fairer models, that provide
alternative explanations of the phenomena being examined. Applications are
wide, from enabling construction of ‘fairer’ models in areas such as recidivism
to health analytics and ethical marketing. Tractable estimation of MCR for nonlinear models is currently restricted to Kernel Regression under squared loss [7].
In this paper we introduce a new technique that extends computation of Model
Class Reliance (MCR) to Random Forest classifiers and regressors. The proposed
approach addresses a number of open research questions, and in contrast to prior
Kernel SVM MCR estimation, runs in linearithmic rather than polynomial time.
Taking a fundamentally different approach to previous work, we provide a solution
for this important model class, identifying situations where irrelevant covariates do
not improve predictions.

1

Introduction

Post-hoc model explanation, through the use of variable importance measures, underpins a range of
applications including variable selection, fit-for-purpose model auditing in domains such as criminal
recidivism cases and the identification of potentially causal features. However, given input features
typically share predictive information regarding the output variable, the learnt model potentially
encodes just one of many equally well performing functional relationships between the input and
output variables, with the choice often made arbitrarily with respect to the use case by the model
building algorithm. This means variables may be incorrectly considered unimportant, that model
audits are not robust to model retraining and the interpretation of potential causal features may
be incomplete and misleading. In some cases these issues do not matter (i.e. minimal subset
selection when predictive performance is the only goal) but often they do, with any machine learning
framework/pipeline that subsequently includes the interpretation/explanation of a single model (e.g.
[21, 6, 8, 5, 10]) likely to be improved.
Recently, [7] formally defined this issue - the multiplicity of models with the same prediction
performance based on different underpining predicting factors - with regard to model classes. Given
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

