Self-Supervised Relational Reasoning for
Representation Learning

Massimiliano Patacchiola
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
mpatacch@ed.ac.uk

Amos Storkey
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
a.storkey@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
In self-supervised learning, a system is tasked with achieving a surrogate objective
by defining alternative targets on a set of unlabeled data. The aim is to build useful
representations that can be used in downstream tasks, without costly manual annotation. In this work, we propose a novel self-supervised formulation of relational
reasoning that allows a learner to bootstrap a signal from information implicit
in unlabeled data. Training a relation head to discriminate how entities relate to
themselves (intra-reasoning) and other entities (inter-reasoning), results in rich
and descriptive representations in the underlying neural network backbone, which
can be used in downstream tasks such as classification and image retrieval. We
evaluate the proposed method following a rigorous experimental procedure, using
standard datasets, protocols, and backbones. Self-supervised relational reasoning
outperforms the best competitor in all conditions by an average 14% in accuracy,
and the most recent state-of-the-art model by 3%. We link the effectiveness of the
method to the maximization of a Bernoulli log-likelihood, which can be considered
as a proxy for maximizing the mutual information, resulting in a more efficient
objective with respect to the commonly used contrastive losses.

1

Introduction

Learning useful representations from unlabeled data can substantially reduce dependence on costly
manual annotation, which is a major limitation in modern deep learning. Toward this end, one solution
is to develop learners able to self-generate a supervisory signal exploiting implicit information, an
approach known as self-supervised learning (Schmidhuber, 1987, 1990). Humans and animals are
naturally equipped with the ability to learn via an intrinsic signal, but how machines can build similar
abilities has been material for debate (Lake et al., 2017). A common approach consists of defining a
surrogate task (pretext) which can be solved by learning generalizable representations, then use those
representations in downstream tasks, e.g. classification and image retrieval (Jing and Tian, 2020).
A key factor in self-supervised human learning is the acquisition of new knowledge by relating
entities, whose positive effects are well established in studies of adult learning (Gentner and Kurtz,
2005; Goldwater et al., 2018). Developmental studies have shown something similar in children, who
can build complex taxonomic names when they have the opportunity to compare objects (Gentner
and Namy, 1999; Namy and Gentner, 2002). Comparison allows the learner to neglect irrelevant
perceptual features and focus on non-obvious properties. Here, we argue that it is possible to exploit
a similar mechanism in self-supervised machine learning via relational reasoning.
The relational reasoning paradigm is based on a key design principle: the use of a relation network
as a learnable function to quantify the relationships between a set of objects. Starting from this
principle, we propose a new formulation of relational reasoning which can be used as a pretext task to
build useful representations in a neural network backbone, by training the relation head on unlabeled
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

