Gradient Regularized V -Learning for Dynamic
Treatment Regimes
Yao Zhang
University of Cambridge
yz555@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California, Los Angeles
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Deciding how to optimally treat a patient, including how to select treatments over
time among the multiple available treatments, represents one of the most important
issues that need to be addressed in medicine today. A dynamic treatment regime
(DTR) is a sequence of treatment rules indicating how to individualize treatments
for a patient based on the previously assigned treatments and the evolving covariate
history. However, DTR evaluation and learning based on offline data remain
challenging problems due to the bias introduced by time-varying confounders
that affect treatment assignment over time; this may lead to suboptimal treatment
rules being used in practice. In this paper, we introduce Gradient Regularized
V -learning (GRV), a novel method for estimating the value function of a DTR.
GRV regularizes the underlying outcome and propensity score models with respect
to the optimality condition in semiparametric estimation theory. On the basis of
this design, we construct estimators that are efficient and stable in finite samples
regime. Using multiple simulation studies and one real-world medical dataset, we
demonstrate that our method is superior in DTR evaluation and learning, thereby
providing improved treatment options over time for patients.

1

Introduction

Clinical decision-makers regularly face the daunting challenge of choosing from multiple treatment
options and treatment timings. While clinical trials represent the gold standard for causal inference,
clinical trials for longitudinal studies are expensive to conduct. They have few patients and narrow
inclusion criteria, and usually do not follow patients for long periods of time. Leveraging increasingly
available observational data about patients, such as electronic health records, represents a more viable
alternative for developing individualized treatment plans over time. Across multiple communities,
including machine learning, statistics and economics, increasing attention has been paid to the need
to understand how decision-makers decide which treatments to give patients, and how to construct
treatment rules based on their static information [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
Treatment individualization and adaptation over time are crucial for managing chronic diseases. For
example, the time-varying patient information, such as side-effect severity and treatment adherence,
drives the treatment for major depressive disorder [8]; clinicians routinely adjust therapy based
on the risk of toxicity and antibiotics resistance in treating cystic fibrosis [9]. Unlike in static
settings, developing time-varying treatment rules in longitudinal settings poses unique opportunities
to understand how diseases evolve under different treatment plans, how individual patients respond to
medication over time, and which timings are optimal for assigning treatments. Dynamic treatment
regimes (DTRs) [10, 11] offer an attractive causal inference framework that serves this purpose.
A DTR is a sequence of time-varying treatment rules that determine which treatment to provide
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

