Node Classification on Graphs with Few-Shot Novel
Labels via Meta Transformed Network Embedding

Lin Lan1∗, Pinghui Wang1∗†, Xuefeng Du2∗, Kaikai Song3 , Jing Tao1 , Xiaohong Guan1,4
1
MOE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networks and Network Security,
School of Automation Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
4
Department of Automation and NLIST Lab, Tsinghua University, China
llan@sei.xjtu.edu.cn, {phwang, jtao, xhguan}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
xdu66@wisc.edu, caesar.song@huawei.com

Abstract
We study the problem of node classification on graphs with few-shot novel labels,
which has two distinctive properties: (1) There are novel labels to emerge in the
graph; (2) The novel labels have only a few representative nodes for training a classifier. The study of this problem is instructive and corresponds to many applications
such as recommendations for newly formed groups with only a few users in online
social networks. To cope with this problem, we propose a novel Meta Transformed
Network Embedding framework (MetaTNE), which consists of three modules: (1)
A structural module provides each node a latent representation according to the
graph structure. (2) A meta-learning module captures the relationships between the
graph structure and the node labels as prior knowledge in a meta-learning manner.
Additionally, we introduce an embedding transformation function that remedies the
deficiency of the straightforward use of meta-learning. Inherently, the meta-learned
prior knowledge can be used to facilitate the learning of few-shot novel labels.
(3) An optimization module employs a simple yet effective scheduling strategy to
train the above two modules with a balance between graph structure learning and
meta-learning. Experiments on four real-world datasets show that MetaTNE brings
a huge improvement over the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitously used to represent data in a wide range of fields, including social network
analysis, bioinformatics, recommender systems, and computer network security. Accordingly, graph
analysis tasks, such as node classification, link prediction, and community detection, have a significant
impact on our lives in reality. In this paper, we focus on the task of node classification. Particularly,
we consider the classification of few-shot novel labels, which means there are some novel labels to
emerge in the graph of interest and the novel labels usually have only a few representative nodes
including the positive and the negative (i.e., holding and not holding the novel labels, respectively).
Hereafter, we refer to the available positive and negative nodes of a label as the support nodes of
that label. The study of Node Classification on graphs with Few-shot Novel Labels (NCFNL) is
instructive for many practical applications. Let us consider the following scenarios.
Motivating Examples. (1) Some organizations in online social networks, such as Facebook, Twitter,
and Flickr, may distribute advertisements about whether users are interested in their new features or
∗
†

Lin, Pinghui, and Xuefeng contributed equally to this work.
Pinghui Wang is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

