Differentiable Augmentation
for Data-Efficient GAN Training

Shengyu Zhao
IIIS, Tsinghua University and MIT

Zhijian Liu
MIT

Ji Lin
MIT

Jun-Yan Zhu
Adobe and CMU

Song Han
MIT

Abstract
The performance of generative adversarial networks (GANs) heavily deteriorates
given a limited amount of training data. This is mainly because the discriminator
is memorizing the exact training set. To combat it, we propose Differentiable
Augmentation (DiffAugment), a simple method that improves the data efficiency of
GANs by imposing various types of differentiable augmentations on both real and
fake samples. Previous attempts to directly augment the training data manipulate
the distribution of real images, yielding little benefit; DiffAugment enables us to
adopt the differentiable augmentation for the generated samples, effectively stabilizes training, and leads to better convergence. Experiments demonstrate consistent
gains of our method over a variety of GAN architectures and loss functions for both
unconditional and class-conditional generation. With DiffAugment, we achieve a
state-of-the-art FID of 6.80 with an IS of 100.8 on ImageNet 128×128 and 2-4×
reductions of FID given 1,000 images on FFHQ and LSUN. Furthermore, with only
20% training data, we can match the top performance on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100.
Finally, our method can generate high-fidelity images using only 100 images without pre-training, while being on par with existing transfer learning algorithms. Code
is available at https://github.com/mit-han-lab/data-efficient-gans.

1

Introduction

Big data has enabled deep learning algorithms achieve rapid advancements. In particular, stateof-the-art generative adversarial networks (GANs) [11] are able to generate high-fidelity natural
images of diverse categories [2, 18]. Many computer vision and graphics applications have been
enabled [32, 43, 53]. However, this success comes at the cost of a tremendous amount of computation
and data. Recently, researchers have proposed promising techniques to improve the computational
efficiency of model inference [22,36], while the data efficiency remains to be a fundamental challenge.
GANs heavily rely on vast quantities of diverse and high-quality training examples. To name a few,
the FFHQ dataset [17] contains 70,000 selective post-processed high-resolution images of human
faces; the ImageNet dataset [6] annotates more than a million of images with various object categories.
Collecting such large-scale datasets requires months or even years of considerable human efforts
along with prohibitive annotation costs. In some cases, it is not even possible to have that many
examples, e.g., images of rare species or photos of a specific person or landmark. Thus, it is of critical
importance to eliminate the need of immense datasets for GAN training. However, reducing the
amount of training data results in drastic degradation in the performance. For example in Figure 1,
given only 10% or 20% of the CIFAR-10 data, the training accuracy of the discriminator saturates
quickly (to nearly 100%); however, its validation accuracy keeps decreasing (to lower than 30%),
suggesting that the discriminator is simply memorizing the entire training set. This severe over-fitting
problem disrupts the training dynamics and leads to degraded image quality.
A widely-used strategy to reduce overfitting in image classification is data augmentation [20, 38, 42],
which can increase the diversity of training data without collecting new samples. Transformations such
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

