Finite-Time Analysis of Round-Robin
Kullback-Leibler Upper Confidence Bounds for
Optimal Adaptive Allocation with Multiple Plays and
Markovian Rewards
Vrettos Moulos
University of California Berkeley
vrettos@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study an extension of the classic stochastic multi-armed bandit problem which
involves multiple plays and Markovian rewards in the rested bandits setting. In
order to tackle this problem we consider an adaptive allocation rule which at each
stage combines the information from the sample means of all the arms, with the
Kullback-Leibler upper confidence bound of a single arm which is selected in
round-robin way. For rewards generated from a one-parameter exponential family
of Markov chains, we provide a finite-time upper bound for the regret incurred
from this adaptive allocation rule, which reveals the logarithmic dependence of the
regret on the time horizon, and which is asymptotically optimal. For our analysis
we devise several concentration results for Markov chains, including a maximal
inequality for Markov chains, that may be of interest in their own right. As a
byproduct of our analysis we also establish asymptotically optimal, finite-time
guarantees for the case of multiple plays, and i.i.d. rewards drawn from a oneparameter exponential family of probability densities. Additionally, we provide
simulation results that illustrate that calculating Kullback-Leibler upper confidence
bounds in a round-robin way, is significantly more efficient than calculating them
for every arm at each round, and that the expected regrets of those two approaches
behave similarly.

1

Introduction

In this paper we study a generalization of the stochastic multi-armed bandit problem, where there are
K independent arms, and each arm a ∈ [K] = {1, . . . , K} is associated with a parameter θa ∈ R,
and modeled as a discrete time stochastic process governed by the probability law Pθa . A time horizon
T is prescribed, and at each round t ∈ [T ] = {1, . . . , T } we select M arms, where 1 ≤ M ≤ K,
without any prior knowledge of the statistics of the underlying stochastic processes. The M stochastic
processes that correspond to the selected arms evolve by one time step, and we observe this evolution
through a reward function, while the stochastic processes for the rest of the arms stay frozen, i.e.
we consider the rested bandits setting. Our goal is to select arms in such a way so as to make the
cumulative reward over the whole time horizon T as large as possible. For this task we are faced with
an exploitation versus exploration dilemma. At each round we need to decide whether we are going
to exploit the best M arms according to the information that we have gathered so far, or we are going
to explore some other arms which do not seem to be so rewarding, just in case that the rewards we
have observed so far deviate significantly from the expected rewards. The answer to this dilemma
is usually coming by calculating indices for the arms and ranking them according to those indices,
which should incorporate both information on how good an arm seems to be as well as on how many
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

