MESA: Boost Ensemble Imbalanced Learning with
MEta-SAmpler

Zhining Liu
Jilin University
znliu19@mails.jlu.edu.cn

Pengfei Wei
National University of Singapore
dcsweip@nus.edu.sg

Jing Jiang
University of Technology Sydney
jing.jiang@uts.edu.au

Wei Cao
Microsoft Research
weicao@microsoft.com

Jiang Bian
Microsoft Research
jiang.bian@microsoft.com

Yi Chang∗
Jilin University
yichang@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Imbalanced learning (IL), i.e., learning unbiased models from class-imbalanced
data, is a challenging problem. Typical IL methods including resampling and
reweighting were designed based on some heuristic assumptions. They often suffer
from unstable performance, poor applicability, and high computational cost in complex tasks where their assumptions do not hold. In this paper, we introduce a novel
ensemble IL framework named M ESA. It adaptively resamples the training set in
iterations to get multiple classifiers and forms a cascade ensemble model. M ESA directly learns the sampling strategy from data to optimize the final metric beyond following random heuristics. Moreover, unlike prevailing meta-learning-based IL solutions, we decouple the model-training and meta-training in M ESA by independently
train the meta-sampler over task-agnostic meta-data. This makes M ESA generally
applicable to most of the existing learning models and the meta-sampler can be
efficiently applied to new tasks. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and realworld tasks demonstrate the effectiveness, robustness, and transferability of M ESA.
Our code is available at https://github.com/ZhiningLiu1998/mesa.

1

Introduction

Class imbalance, due to the naturally-skewed class distributions, has been widely observed in many
real-world applications such as click prediction, fraud detection, and medical diagnosis [13, 15, 20].
Canonical classification algorithms usually induce the bias, i.e., perform well in terms of global
accuracy but poorly on the minority class, in solving class imbalance problems. However, the minority
class commonly yields higher interests from both learning and practical perspectives [18, 19].
Typical imbalanced learning (IL) algorithms attempt to eliminate the bias through data resampling
[6, 16, 17, 25, 32] or reweighting [27, 30, 36] in the learning process. More recently, ensemble
learning is incorporated to reduce the variance introduced by resampling or reweighting and has
achieved satisfactory performance [22]. In practice, however, all these methods have been observed
to suffer from three major limitations: (I) unstable performance due to the sensitivity to outliers, (II)
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

