Deep Imitation Learning for Bimanual
Robotic Manipulation

Fan Xie †1
Linfeng Zhao1

Alexander Chowdhury†1
Lawson L.S. Wong1

M. Clara De Paolis Kaluza1
Rose Yu1,2 ∗

Abstract
We present a deep imitation learning framework for robotic bimanual manipulation
in a continuous state-action space. A core challenge is to generalize the manipulation skills to objects in different locations. We hypothesize that modeling the
relational information in the environment can significantly improve generalization. To achieve this, we propose to (i) decompose the multi-modal dynamics into
elemental movement primitives, (ii) parameterize each primitive using a recurrent graph neural network to capture interactions, and (iii) integrate a high-level
planner that composes primitives sequentially and a low-level controller to combine primitive dynamics and inverse kinematics control. Our model is a deep,
hierarchical, modular architecture. Compared to baselines, our model generalizes
better and achieves higher success rates on several simulated bimanual robotic
manipulation tasks. We open source the code for simulation, data, and models at:
https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/HDR-IL.

1

Introduction

Manipulation is a fundamental capability robots need for many real-world applications. Although
there has been significant progress in single-arm manipulation tasks such as grasping, pick-andplace, and pushing [1, 2, 3, 4], bimanual manipulation has received less attention. Many tasks
however require using both arms/hands; consider opening a bottle, steadying a nail while hammering,
or moving a table. While having two arms to accomplish these tasks is clearly useful, bimanual
manipulation tasks are also significantly more challenging, due to higher-dimensional continuous
state-action spaces, more object interactions, and longer-horizon solutions.
Most existing work in bimanual manipulation addresses the problem in a classical control setting,
where the environment and its dynamics are known [5]. However, these models are difficult to
construct explicitly and are inaccurate, because of complicated interactions in the task including
friction, adhesion, and deformation between the two arms/hands and the object being manipulated. A
promising approach that avoids manually specifying models is imitation learning, where a teacher
provides demonstrations of desired behavior to the robot (sequences of sensed input states and
target control actions in those states), and the robot learns a policy to mimic the teacher [6, 7, 8].
In particular, recent deep imitation learning methods have been successful at learning single-arm
manipulation from demonstrations, even with only images as observations (e.g., [9, 10]).
In this work, we explore extending deep imitation learning methods to bimanual manipulation. In
light of the challenges identified above, our goal is to design an imitation learning model to capture
relational information (i.e., the trajectory involves relations to other objects in the environment) in
environments with complex dynamics (i.e., the task requires multiple object interactions to accomplish
∗

†Equal contribution; Correspondence: xie.f@northeastern.edu,chowdhury.al@northeastern.edu,
roseyu@ucsd.edu; 1 Northeastern University, Boston MA, USA, 2 University of California, San Diego, USA.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

