Self-training Avoids Using Spurious Features Under
Domain Shift
Yining Chen∗ , Colin Wei∗ , Ananya Kumar, Tengyu Ma
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{cynnjjs, colinwei, ananya1, tengyuma}@stanford.edu

Abstract
In unsupervised domain adaptation, existing theory focuses on situations where the
source and target domains are close. In practice, conditional entropy minimization
and pseudo-labeling work even when the domain shifts are much larger than those
analyzed by existing theory. We identify and analyze one particular setting where
the domain shift can be large, but these algorithms provably work: certain spurious
features correlate with the label in the source domain but are independent of the
label in the target. Our analysis considers linear classification where the spurious
features are Gaussian and the non-spurious features are a mixture of log-concave
distributions. For this setting, we prove that entropy minimization on unlabeled
target data will avoid using the spurious feature if initialized with a decently
accurate source classifier, even though the objective is non-convex and contains
multiple bad local minima using the spurious features. We verify our theory for
spurious domain shift tasks on semi-synthetic Celeb-A and MNIST datasets. Our
results suggest that practitioners collect and self-train on large, diverse datasets to
reduce biases in classifiers even if labeling is impractical.

1

Introduction

Reliable machine learning systems need to generalize to test distributions that are different from the
training distribution. However, the test performance of machine learning models often significantly
degrades as the test domain drifts away from the training domain. Various approaches have been
proposed to adapt the models to new domains [37, 10, 38] but theoretical understanding of these
algorithms is limited. Prior theoretical works focus on settings where the target domain is sufficiently
close to the source domain [5, 29, 17, 34]. To theoretically study realistic scenarios where domain
shifts can be much larger, we need to leverage additional structure of the shifts.
Towards this goal, we propose to study a particular structured domain shift for which unsupervised
domain adaptation is provably feasible: in the source domain, a subset of “spurious” features correlate
with the label, whereas in the unlabeled target data, these features are independent of the label. In
real-world training data, these spurious correlations can occur due to biased sampling or artifacts in
crowd-sourcing [14]. For example, we may have a labeled dataset for recidivism prediction where
race correlates with recurrence of crime due to sample selection bias, but this correlation does not
hold on the population. Models which learn spurious correlations can generalize poorly on population
data which does not have these biases [23]. In these settings, it could be impractical to acquire labels
for an unbiased sub-sample of the population, but unlabeled data is often available.
We prove that in certain settings, perhaps surprisingly, self-training on unlabeled target data can avoid
using these spurious features. Our theoretical results apply to two closely-related popular algorithms:
∗

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

