Optimal Lottery Tickets via S UBSET S UM:
Logarithmic Over-Parameterization is Sufficient

Ankit Pensia∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ankitp@cs.wisc.edu

Shashank Rajput∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
rajput3@wisc.edu

Alliot Nagle
University of Wisconsin-Madison
acnagle@wisc.edu

Harit Vishwakarma
University of Wisconsin-Madison
hvishwakarma@cs.wisc.edu

Dimitris Papailiopoulos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
dimitris@papail.io

Abstract
The strong lottery ticket hypothesis (LTH) postulates that one can approximate
any target neural network by only pruning the weights of a sufficiently overparameterized random network. A recent work by Malach et al. [1] establishes the
first theoretical analysis for the strong LTH: one can provably approximate a neural
network of width d and depth l, by pruning a random one that is a factor O(d4 l2 )
wider and twice as deep. This polynomial over-parameterization requirement is
at odds with recent experimental research that achieves good approximation with
networks that are a small factor wider than the target. In this work, we close the gap
and offer an exponential improvement to the over-parameterization requirement
for the existence of lottery tickets. We show that any target network of width d
and depth l can be approximated by pruning a random network that is a factor
O(log(dl)) wider and twice as deep. Our analysis heavily relies on connecting
pruning random ReLU networks to random instances of the S UBSET S UM problem.
We then show that this logarithmic over-parameterization is essentially optimal for
constant depth networks. Finally, we verify several of our theoretical insights with
experiments.

1

Introduction

Many of the recent unprecedented successes of machine learning can be partially attributed to stateof-the-art neural network architectures that come with up to tens of billions of trainable parameters.
Although test accuracy is one of the gold standards in choosing one of these architectures, in many
applications having a “compressed” model is of practical interest, due to typically reduced energy,
memory, and computational footprint [2–15]. Such a compressed form can be achieved by either
modifying the architecture to be leaner in terms of the number of weights, or by starting with a
high-accuracy network and pruning it down to one that is sparse in some representation domain,
while not sacrificing much of the original network’s accuracy. A rich and long body of research
work shows that one can prune a large network to a tiny fraction of its size, while maintaining (or
sometimes even improving) its original accuracy [2–15].
∗

Authors contributed equally to this paper and are listed alphabetically.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

