Federated Accelerated Stochastic Gradient Descent
Honglin Yuan
Stanford University
yuanhl@stanford.edu

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose Federated Accelerated Stochastic Gradient Descent (F EDAC), a principled acceleration of Federated Averaging (F EDAVG, also known as Local SGD)
for distributed optimization. F EDAC is the first provable acceleration of F EDAVG
that improves convergence speed and communication efficiency on various types
of convex functions. For example, for strongly convex and smooth functions, when
using M workers, the previous state-of-the-art F EDAVG analysis can achieve a
linear speedup in M if given Õ(M ) rounds of synchronization, whereas F EDAC
1
only requires Õ(M 3 ) rounds. Moreover, we prove stronger guarantees for F EDAC
when the objectives are third-order smooth. Our technique is based on a potentialbased perturbed iterate analysis, a novel stability analysis of generalized accelerated
SGD, and a strategic tradeoff between acceleration and stability.

1

Introduction

Leveraging distributed computing resources and decentralized data is crucial, if not necessary, for
large-scale machine learning applications. Communication is usually the major bottleneck for
parallelization in both data-center settings and cross-device federated settings [Kairouz et al., 2019].
We study the distributed stochastic optimization minw2Rd F (w) := E⇠⇠D f (w; ⇠) where F is convex.
We assume there are M parallel workers and each worker can access F at w via oracle rf (w; ⇠)
for independent sample ⇠ drawn from distribution D. We assume synchronization (communication)
among workers is allowed but limited to R rounds. We denote T as the parallel runtime.
One of the most common and well-studied algorithms for this setting is Federated Averaging
(F EDAVG) [McMahan et al., 2017], also known as Local SGD or Parallel SGD [Mangasarian, 1995,
Zinkevich et al., 2010, Coppola, 2014, Zhou and Cong, 2018] in the literature.1 In F EDAVG, each
worker runs a local thread of SGD [Robbins and Monro, 1951], and periodically synchronizes with
other workers by collecting the averages and broadcast to all workers. The analysis of F EDAVG
[Stich, 2019a, Stich and Karimireddy, 2019, Khaled et al., 2020, Woodworth et al., 2020] usually
follows the perturbed iterate analysis framework [Mania et al., 2017] where the performance of
F EDAVG is compared with the idealized version with infinite synchronization. The key idea is to
control the stability of SGD so that the local iterates held by parallel workers do not differ much,
even with infrequent synchronization.
We study the acceleration of F EDAVG and investigate whether it is possible to improve convergence
speed and communication efficiency. The main challenge for introducing acceleration lies in the
disaccord of acceleration and stability. Stability is essential for analyzing distributed algorithms such
as F EDAVG, whereas momentum applied for acceleration may amplify the instability of the algorithm.
Indeed, we show that standard Nesterov accelerated gradient descent algorithm [Nesterov, 2018] may
not be initial-value stable even for smooth and strongly convex functions, in the sense that the initial
1
In the literature, F EDAVG usually runs on a randomly sampled subset of heterogeneous workers for each
synchronization round, whereas Local SGD or Parallel SGD usually run on a fixed set of workers. In this paper
we do not differentiate the terminology and assumed a fixed set of workers are deployed for simplicity.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

