Efficient Nonmyopic Bayesian Optimization via
One-Shot Multi-Step Trees

Shali Jiang∗
Facebook
shalijiang@fb.com
Brian Karrer
Facebook
briankarrer@fb.com

Daniel R. Jiang∗
Facebook
drjiang@fb.com

Jacob R. Gardner
University of Pennsylvania
jacobrg@cis.upenn.edu

Maximilian Balandat∗
Facebook
balandat@fb.com
Roman Garnett
Washington University in St. Louis
garnett@wustl.edu

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is a sequential decision making framework for optimizing
expensive-to-evaluate black-box functions. Computing a full lookahead policy
amounts to solving a highly intractable stochastic dynamic program. Myopic
approaches, such as expected improvement, are often adopted in practice, but
they ignore the long-term impact of the immediate decision. Existing nonmyopic
approaches are mostly heuristic and/or computationally expensive. In this paper, we
provide the first efficient implementation of general multi-step lookahead Bayesian
optimization, formulated as a sequence of nested optimization problems within
a multi-step scenario tree. Instead of solving these problems in a nested way,
we equivalently optimize all decision variables in the full tree jointly, in a “oneshot” fashion. Combining this with an efficient method for implementing multistep Gaussian process “fantasization,” we demonstrate that multi-step expected
improvement is computationally tractable and exhibits performance superior to
existing methods on a wide range of benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a powerful technique for optimizing expensive-to-evaluate black-box
functions. Important applications include materials design [33], drug discovery [12], machine learning
hyperparameter tuning [24], neural architecture search [16, 32], etc. BO operates by constructing a
surrogate model for the target function, typically a Gaussian process (GP), and then using a cheap-toevaluate acquisition function (AF) to guide iterative queries of the target function until a predefined
budget is expended. We refer to [23] for a literature survey.
Most of the existing acquisition policies are only one-step optimal, that is, optimal if the decision
horizon were one. An example is the popular expected improvement (EI) [20]. Such myopic policies
only consider the immediate utility of the decision, ignoring the long-term impact of exploration.
Despite the sub-optimal balancing of exploration and exploitation, they are widely used in practice
due to their simplicity and computational efficiency.
When the query budget is explicitly considered, BO can be formulated as a Markov decision process
(MDP), whose optimal policy maximizes the expected utility of the at the end of the decision horizon
[18, 15]. However, solving the MDP is generally intractable due to the uncountable state space,
uncountable action space, and potentially long decision horizon. There has been recent interest in
∗

Equal contribution. Work mostly done at Washington University in St. Louis for S. Jiang.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

