Attribution Preservation in Network Compression for
Reliable Network Interpretation

Geondo Park1∗, June Yong Yang1∗, Sung Ju Hwang1,2 , Eunho Yang1,2
KAIST1 , AITRICS2 , South Korea
{geondopark, laoconeth, sjhwang82, eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural networks embedded in safety-sensitive applications such as self-driving cars
and wearable health monitors rely on two important techniques: input attribution for
hindsight analysis and network compression to reduce its size for edge-computing.
In this paper, we show that these seemingly unrelated techniques conflict with each
other as network compression deforms the produced attributions, which could lead
to dire consequences for mission-critical applications. This phenomenon arises
due to the fact that conventional network compression methods only preserve
the predictions of the network while ignoring the quality of the attributions. To
combat the attribution inconsistency problem, we present a framework that can
preserve the attributions while compressing a network. By employing the Weighted
Collapsed Attribution Matching regularizer, we match the attribution maps of the
network being compressed to its pre-compression former self. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our algorithm both quantitatively and qualitatively on diverse
compression methods.

1

Introduction

Riding on the recent success of deep learning in numerous fields, there is an emergent trend to
utilize deep neural networks (DNNs) even for safety-critical applications such as self-driving cars and
wearable health monitors. Due to the inherent nature of such devices, it is of paramount importance
that the utilized DNNs be reliable and trustworthy to human users.
For a system to be reliable, perpetual service must be rendered and the integrity of the system
must hold even under unexpected circumstances. For most commercially deployed DNNs, this
condition is hardly met as they are often operated in the cloud due to their heavy computational
requirements. However, this dependence on clouds acts as a critical weakness in safety-sensitive
settings as intermittent communication failures to the cloud may cause difficulties in reacting to
situations immediately, or even worse, the device’s connection to the cloud may be severed indefinitely.
Thus, to guarantee reliable service, the DNNs must be embedded on the edge device. To this end,
network compression techniques such as pruning [1, 2] and distillation [3, 4] are commonly employed
- as a compressed network would require less computational time and memory but maintain its
prediction performance to a certain acceptable margin, effectively substituting the original network
for edge computation.
At the same time, for a system to be trustworthy, the system must be transparent enough for humans
to understand its workings and the reasons for its outputs. An example would be when a health
monitor predicts an onset of a disease [5] - then the clinician would require an acceptable explanation
to the device output. However, the black-box nature of deep neural networks complicates this goal impeding its advance in safety-critical areas. For DNNs to gain trustworthiness, the ability to explain
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
∗

Equal contribution. Listing order is alphabetical.

