The Cone of Silence: Speech Separation by
Localization
Teerapat Jenrungrot⇤

Vivek Jayaram⇤ Steve Seitz
Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman
University of Washington
{tjenrung, vjayaram, seitz, kemelmi}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Given a multi-microphone recording of an unknown number of speakers talking
concurrently, we simultaneously localize the sources and separate the individual
speakers. At the core of our method is a deep network, in the waveform domain,
which isolates sources within an angular region ✓ ± w/2, given an angle of interest
✓ and angular window size w. By exponentially decreasing w, we can perform a
binary search to localize and separate all sources in logarithmic time. Our algorithm
allows for an arbitrary number of potentially moving speakers at test time, including
more speakers than seen during training. Experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art
performance for both source separation and source localization, particularly in high
levels of background noise.

1

Introduction

The ability of humans to separate and localize sounds in noisy environments is a remarkable phenomenon known as the “cocktail party effect.” However, our natural ability only goes so far – we
may still have trouble hearing a conversation partner in a noisy restaurant or during a call with other
speakers in the background. One can imagine future earbuds or hearing aids that selectively cancel
audio sources that you don’t want to listen to. As a step towards this goal, we introduce a deep neural
network technique that can be steered to any direction at run time, cancelling all audio sources outside
a specified angular window, aka cone of silence (CoS) [1].
But how do you know what direction to listen to? We further show that this directionally sensitive
CoS network can be used as a building block to yield simple yet powerful solutions to 1) sound
localization, and 2) audio source separation. Our experimental evaluation demonstrates state of
the art performance in both domains. Furthermore, our ability to handle an unknown number of
potentially moving sound sources combined with fast performance represents additional steps forward
in generality. Audio demos can be found at our project website.2
We are particularly motivated by the recent increase of multi-microphone devices in everyday settings.
This includes headphones, hearing aids, smart home devices, and many laptops. Indeed, most of
these devices already employ directional sensitivity both in the design of the individual microphones
and in the way they are combined together. In practice however, this directional sensitivity is limited
to either being hard tuned to a fixed range of directions (e.g., cardioid), or providing only limited
attenuation of audio outside that range (e.g., beam-forming). In contrast, our CoS approach enables
true cancellation of audio sources outside a specified angular window that can be specified (and
instantly changed) in software.
Our approach uses a novel deep network that can separate sources in the waveform domain within
any angular region ✓ ± w2 , parameterized by a direction of interest ✓ and angular window size w. For
simplicity, we focus only on azimuth angles, but the method could equally be applied to elevation
⇤

2

Equal Contribution
https://grail.cs.washington.edu/projects/cone-of-silence/

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

