Doubly Robust Off-Policy Value and Gradient
Estimation for Deterministic Policies
Nathan Kallus, Masatoshi Uehara ∗
Cornell University and Cornell Tech
New York, NY
kallus@cornell.edu, mu223@cornell.edu

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning, wherein one uses off-policy data logged by a fixed
behavior policy to evaluate and learn new policies, is crucial in applications where
experimentation is limited such as medicine. We study the estimation of policy
value and gradient of a deterministic policy from off-policy data when actions are
continuous. Targeting deterministic policies, for which action is a deterministic
function of state, is crucial since optimal policies are always deterministic (up to
ties). In this setting, standard importance sampling and doubly robust estimators
for policy value and gradient fail because the density ratio does not exist. To
circumvent this issue, we propose several new doubly robust estimators based on
different kernelization approaches. We analyze the asymptotic mean-squared error
of each of these under mild rate conditions for nuisance estimators. Specifically,
we demonstrate how to obtain a rate that is independent of the horizon length.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL), wherein one uses off-policy data logged by a fixed behavior
policy to evaluate and learn new policies, is crucial in applications where experimentation is limited
(Farajtabar et al., 2018; Bibaut et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2018; Kallus and Uehara, 2019b). A key
application is RL for healthcare (Gottesman et al., 2019; Murphy, 2003). Since it is not possible to
collect new data, it is crucial to efficiently use the available data. Recent work on off-policy evaluation
(OPE; Kallus and Uehara, 2020a, 2019a) have shown how efficiently taking advantage of problem
structure, such as Markovianness and ergodicity, can improve OPE and tackle the well-known issue
of OPE known as the curse of horizon (Liu et al., 2018). Kallus and Uehara (2020b) applied these
advances to off-policy learning using a policy gradient approach, i.e., proposing efficient off-policy
estimators for the policy gradient and incorporating them into gradient ascent methods.
All the aforementioned methods, however, cannot be directly applied to the evaluation and learning of
deterministic policies when actions are continuous since the density ratio (Radon-Nikodym derivative)
does not exist: the behavior policy usually has zero mass on single actions (more generally, it can
have at most countably-many atoms while the evaluation policy may take any of a continuum of
actions). This question is important since the maximum-value policy is generally deterministic (up to
ties between actions) so if one seeks optimal policies one should focus on deterministic ones. In the
bandit setting (horizon of one action), several recent works tackle this problem (Bibaut and J. van der
Laan, 2017; Kallus and Zhou, 2018; Colangelo and Lee, 2019), but applying these methods in a
straightforward manner to RL may lead to a bad convergence rate that deteriorates with horizon.
In this paper, we propose several doubly robust off-policy value and gradient estimators for deterministic policies in an RL setting. We analyze the asymptotic mean-squared error (MSE) of each
∗

corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

