A kernel test for quasi-independence

Tamara Fernández
Gatsby Unit
University College London
t.a.fernandez@ucl.ac.uk

Wenkai Xu
Gatsby Unit
University College London
xwk4813@gmail.com

Marc Ditzhaus
Department of Statistics
TU Dortmund University
marc.ditzhaus@tu-dortmund.de

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider settings in which the data of interest correspond to pairs of ordered
times, e.g, the birth times of the first and second child, the times at which a new
user creates an account and makes the first purchase on a website, and the entry
and survival times of patients in a clinical trial. In these settings, the two times
are not independent (the second occurs after the first), yet it is still of interest to
determine whether there exists significant dependence beyond their ordering in
time. We refer to this notion as "quasi-(in)dependence". For instance, in a clinical
trial, to avoid biased selection, we might wish to verify that recruitment times
are quasi-independent of survival times, where dependencies might arise due to
seasonal effects. In this paper, we propose a nonparametric statistical test of quasiindependence. Our test considers a potentially infinite space of alternatives, making
it suitable for complex data where the nature of the possible quasi-dependence is
not known in advance. Standard parametric approaches are recovered as special
cases, such as the classical conditional Kendall’s tau, and log-rank tests. The tests
apply in the right-censored setting: an essential feature in clinical trials, where
patients can withdraw from the study. We provide an asymptotic analysis of our
test-statistic, and demonstrate in experiments that our test obtains better power than
existing approaches, while being more computationally efficient.

1

Introduction

Many practical scientific problems require the study of events which occur consecutively in time. We
focus here on the setting where event-times, X and Y , are only observed if they are in the ordered
relationship X ≤ Y . This type of data is commonly known as truncated data, and, in particular, we
say that X is right-truncated by Y , or Y is left-truncated by X. In clinical trails, for example, only
patients still alive at the beginning of the study can be recruited, hence the recruitment times X and
the survival times Y are ordered. In the field of insurance, a liability claim may be placed at a time Y
as a consequence of an incident at a time X. In e-commerce, the time Y of first purchase by a new
user may only happen after the time X when the user registers with the website.
Our goal is to determine whether there exists an association between X and Y in the truncated data
setting. Given that X ≤ Y , the times X and Y clearly will not be independent (with the exception of
trivial cases in which, for instance, X and Y have disjoint support). Thus, while it is not meaningful
to test for statistical independence in the truncated setting, we can nevertheless still test for whether
X and Y are uncoupled apart from the fact that X ≤ Y , using the notion of quasi-independence. We
will make this notion formal in Section 2.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

