Minibatch Stochastic Approximate Proximal Point
Methods
Hilal Asi∗
Stanford University
asi@stanford.edu

Karan Chadha∗
Stanford University
knchadha@stanford.edu

Gary Cheng∗
Stanford University
chenggar@stanford.edu

John C. Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Abstract
We extend the Approximate-Proximal Point (A P ROX) family of model-based
methods for solving stochastic convex optimization problems, including stochastic
subgradient, proximal point, and bundle methods, to the minibatch setting. To do
this, we propose two minibatched algorithms for which we prove a non-asymptotic
upper bound on the rate of convergence, revealing a linear speedup in minibatch
size. In contrast to standard stochastic gradient methods, these methods may
have linear speedup in the minibatch setting even for non-smooth functions. Our
algorithms maintain the desirable traits characteristic of the A P ROX family, such as
robustness to initial step size choice. Additionally, we show improved convergence
rates for "interpolation" problems, which (for example) gives a new parallelization
strategy for alternating projections. We corroborate our theoretical results with
extensive empirical testing, which demonstrates the gains provided by accurate
modeling and minibatching.

1

Introduction

We develop parallel stochastic approximate proximal point methods (A P ROX) for solving the stochastic optimization problem
Z
minimize f (x) = EP [F (x; S)] =
F (x; s)dP (s)
(1)
S
subject to x ∈ X .
Here the set S is a sample space, and for each s ∈ S, the function F (·; s) : Rn → R is a closed
convex function, subdifferentiable on the closed convex set X ⊂ Rn . While stochastic gradient
methods (SGM) are the de facto choice for problem (1) [32, 22, 8, 29]—enjoying several convergence
guarantees [32], with straightforward parallel extensions that make them practically attractive [18,
11, 13]—they are very sensitive to the objective f , noise, and hyperparameter tuning [19, 1, 2]. For
example, stochastic gradient methods are extremely sensitive to stepsize, and they may even diverge
for objectives that do not satisfy their convergence criteria [2].
Motivated by these limitations, several researchers [6, 16, 10, 12, 2] have developed stochastic
(approximate) proximal-point and model-based methods as a more robust alternative to standard
gradient methods. These A P ROX methods, as we explain more carefully in Section 1.1, construct a
model of the function at each iterate and update by minimizing a regularized version of the model.
∗

Denotes equal contribution; authors listed in alphabetical order

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

