Why are Adaptive Methods Good
for Attention Models?
Jingzhao Zhang
MIT
jzhzhang@mit.edu
Seungyeon Kim
Google Research
seungyeonk@google.com

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy
EPFL
sai.karimireddy@epfl.ch

Andreas Veit
Google Research
aveit@google.com

Sashank Reddi
Google Research
sashank@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
sanjivk@google.com

Suvrit Sra
MIT
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
While stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is still the de facto algorithm in deep
learning, adaptive methods like Clipped SGD/Adam have been observed to outperform SGD across important tasks, such as attention models. The settings under
which SGD performs poorly in comparison to adaptive methods are not well understood yet. In this paper, we provide empirical and theoretical evidence that a
heavy-tailed distribution of the noise in stochastic gradients is one cause of SGD’s
poor performance. We provide the first tight upper and lower convergence bounds
for adaptive gradient methods under heavy-tailed noise. Further, we demonstrate
how gradient clipping plays a key role in addressing heavy-tailed gradient noise.
Subsequently, we show how clipping can be applied in practice by developing an
adaptive coordinate-wise clipping algorithm (ACClip) and demonstrate its superior
performance on BERT pretraining and finetuning tasks.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the canonical algorithm for training neural networks [24]. SGD
iteratively updates model parameters in the negative gradient direction and seamlessly scales to
large-scale settings. Though a well-tuned SGD outperforms adaptive methods [31] in many tasks
including ImageNet classification (see Figure 1a), certain tasks necessitate the use of adaptive variants
of SGD (e.g., Adagrad [10], Adam [14], AMSGrad [23]), which employ adaptive learning rates. For
instance, consider training an attention model [29] using BERT [9]. Figure 1e shows that in spite of
extensive hyperparameter tuning, SGD converges much slower than Adam during BERT training.
In this work, we provide one explanation for why adaptivity can facilitate convergence with theoretical
and empirical evidence. The significant hint that initializes our work comes from the distribution of
the stochastic gradients. For Imagenet, the norms of the mini-batch gradients are typically quite small
and well concentrated around their mean. On the other hand, the mini-batch gradient norms for BERT
take a wide range of values and are sometimes much larger than their mean value. More formally,
while the distribution of the stochastic gradients in Imagenet is well approximated by a Gaussian,
the distribution for BERT seems to be heavy-tailed. Such observation leads us to the question: does
adaptivity stabilize optimization under heavy-tailed noise?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

