Randomized tests for high-dimensional regression:
A more efficient and powerful solution

Yue Li1 , Ilmun Kim2 , Yuting Wei1∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, University of Cambridge
yuel5@andrew.cmu.edu, ik396@dpmms.cam.ac.uk, ytwei@cmu.edu
1

Abstract
We investigate the problem of testing the global null in the high-dimensional regression models when the feature dimension p grows proportionally to the number
of observations n. Despite a number of prior work studying this problem, whether
there exists a test that is model-agnostic, efficient to compute and enjoys a high
power, still remains unsettled. In this paper, we answer this question in the affirmative by leveraging the random projection techniques, and propose a testing
procedure that blends the classical F -test with a random projection step. When
combined with a systematic choice of the projection dimension, the proposed procedure is proved to be minimax optimal and, meanwhile, reduces the computation
and data storage requirements. We illustrate our results in various scenarios when
the underlying feature matrix exhibits an intrinsic lower dimensional structure
(such as approximate low-rank or has exponential/polynomial eigen-decay), and
it turns out that the proposed test achieves sharp adaptive rates. Our theoretical
findings are further validated by comparisons to other state-of-the-art tests on the
synthetic data.
Keywords: high-dimensional regression, random projections, F -test, minimax optimality, proportional regime

1

Introduction

Many applications in modern science and engineering operate in the regime where the number of
parameters is comparable to the number of observations. For each dimension, on average, there are
only a few samples that are available for statistical inference. This new aspect brings challenges to
many traditional tools and methodologies which are often built upon the assumption that the number
of observations per dimension goes to infinity.
The current paper concentrates on the high-dimensional linear regression model which is the most
commonly used statistical approach to model linear relationships between variables. One set of
fundamental problems is to conduct hypothesis testing on the linear parameters, in particular, whether
there are signals presented in the observations, and if there are, testing the statistical significance
of each feature. Despite a considerably amount of prior work devoted to the study of this problem,
whether an optimal testing procedure can be designed for arbitrary feature matrix in the proportional
regime (n and p grows proportionally) still remains unsettled. The prior literature that considered
this problem often assume the feature dimension is low or has an intrinsic low dimension structure —
cases including assuming the parameter being sparse (e.g. [16, 1, 46, 39, 25]), lying in a Lp -ellipse
or convex cone (e.g. [27, 23, 3, 41, 42]) — or assume the feature matrix is generated from a standard
Gaussian design in the proportional regime (see, e.g. [38, 26, 36, 31, 12]).
∗

Y. Wei is supported in part by the NSF grant CCF-2007911 and DMS-2015447.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

