Likelihood Regret: An Out-of-Distribution Detection
Score For Variational Auto-encoder
Zhisheng Xiao ∗
Computational and Applied Mathematics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
zxiao@uchicago.edu

Qing Yan ∗
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
yanq@uchicago.edu

Yali Amit
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL, 60637
amit@marx.uchicago.edu

Abstract
Deep probabilistic generative models enable modeling the likelihoods of very high
dimensional data. An important application of generative modeling should be the
ability to detect out-of-distribution (OOD) samples by setting a threshold on the
likelihood. However, some recent studies show that probabilistic generative models
can, in some cases, assign higher likelihoods on certain types of OOD samples,
making the OOD detection rules based on likelihood threshold problematic. To
address this issue, several OOD detection methods have been proposed for deep
generative models. In this paper, we make the observation that many of these
methods fail when applied to generative models based on Variational Auto-encoders
(VAE). As an alternative, we propose Likelihood Regret, an efficient OOD score
for VAEs. We benchmark our proposed method over existing approaches, and
empirical results suggest that our method obtains the best overall OOD detection
performances when applied to VAEs.

1

Introduction

In order to make reliable and safe decisions, deep learning models that are deployed for real life
applications need to be able to identify whether the input data is anomalous or significantly different
from the training data. Such data are called out-of-distribution (OOD) data. However, it is known that
neural network classifiers can over-confidently classify OOD data into one of the training categories
[37]. This observation poses a great challenge to the reliability and safety of AI [2], making OOD
detection a problem of primary importance. Several approaches have been proposed to detect OOD
data based on deep classifiers [17, 24, 13, 18]. Unfortunately, these methods cannot be applied
to OOD detection for models trained without supervision, such as many generative models. An
appealing OOD detection approach that may work for probabilistic generative models is to use their
likelihood estimates. Such models can evaluate the likelihood of input data, and if a generative model
fits the training data distribution well enough, it should assign high likelihood to samples from the
training distribution and low likelihood to OOD samples.
Recent advances in deep probabilistic generative models [20, 46, 42, 21] make generative modeling of
very high dimensional and complicated data such as natural images, sequences [38] and graphs [22]
∗

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

