Almost Surely Stable Deep Dynamics
Nathan P. Lawrence
Department of Mathematics
University of British Columbia
lawrence@math.ubc.ca

Philip D. Loewen
Department of Mathematics
University of British Columbia
loew@math.ubc.ca

Michael G. Forbes
Honeywell Process Solutions
michael.forbes@honeywell.com

Johan U. Backström
Backstrom Systems Engineering Ltd.
johan.u.backstrom@gmail.com

R. Bhushan Gopaluni
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
University of British Columbia
bhushan.gopaluni@ubc.ca

Abstract
We introduce a method for learning provably stable deep neural network based
dynamic models from observed data. Specifically, we consider discrete-time
stochastic dynamic models, as they are of particular interest in practical applications
such as estimation and control. However, these aspects exacerbate the challenge
of guaranteeing stability. Our method works by embedding a Lyapunov neural
network into the dynamic model, thereby inherently satisfying the stability criterion.
To this end, we propose two approaches and apply them in both the deterministic
and stochastic settings: one exploits convexity of the Lyapunov function, while the
other enforces stability through an implicit output layer. We demonstrate the utility
of each approach through numerical examples.

1

Introduction

Stability is a critical requirement in the design of physical systems. White-box models based on
first principles can explicitly account for stability in their design. On the other hand, deep neural
networks (DNNs) are flexible function approximators, well suited for modeling complicated dynamics.
However, their black-box design makes both physical interpretation and stability analysis challenging.
This paper focuses on the construction of provably stable DNN-based dynamic models. These models
are amenable to standard deep learning architectures and training practices, while retaining the
asymptotic behavior of the underlying dynamics. Specifically, we focus on stochastic systems whose
state xt 2 Rn evolves in discrete time as follows:
xt+1 = f (xt , !t+1 ),

t 2 N0 ,

(1)

where !t 2 R is a stochastic process. Although real physical systems typically evolve in continuous
time, the periodic sampling of measurement and control signals in digital systems give great practical
interest to discrete-time analysis. Moreover, noise often plays a prominent role in the underlying
dynamics, making it an important feature to consider in the stability analysis. Our strategy starts
from the philosophy proposed by Manek and Kolter [30]: It is easier to construct a stable dynamic
model by simultaneously training a suitable Lyapunov function, than it is to separately verify stability
for a trained model a posteriori. In this work, we propose two methods for guaranteeing stability of
d

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

