ConvBERT: Improving BERT with Span-based
Dynamic Convolution

Zihang Jiang1∗ † , Weihao Yu1† , Daquan Zhou1 , Yunpeng Chen2 , Jiashi Feng1 , Shuicheng Yan2
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Yitu Technology
jzihang@u.nus.edu, {weihaoyu6,zhoudaquan21}@gmail.com,
yunpeng.chen@yitu-inc.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg, shuicheng.yan@yitu-inc.com

Abstract
Pre-trained language models like BERT and its variants have recently achieved
impressive performance in various natural language understanding tasks. However,
BERT heavily relies on the global self-attention block and thus suffers large
memory footprint and computation cost. Although all its attention heads query on
the whole input sequence for generating the attention map from a global perspective,
we observe some heads only need to learn local dependencies, which means the
existence of computation redundancy. We therefore propose a novel span-based
dynamic convolution to replace these self-attention heads to directly model local
dependencies. The novel convolution heads, together with the rest self-attention
heads, form a new mixed attention block that is more efficient at both global
and local context learning. We equip BERT with this mixed attention design and
build a ConvBERT model. Experiments have shown that ConvBERT significantly
outperforms BERT and its variants in various downstream tasks, with lower training
costs and fewer model parameters. Remarkably, ConvBERT BASE model achieves
86.4 GLUE score, 0.7 higher than ELECTRA BASE, using less than 1/4 training
cost. Code and pre-trained models will be released 3 .

1

Introduction

Language model pre-training has shown great power for improving many natural language processing
tasks [53, 43, 42, 25]. Most pre-training models, despite their variety, follow the BERT [10]
architecture heavily relying on multi-head self-attention [52] to learn comprehensive representations.
It has been found that 1) though the self-attention module in BERT is a highly non-local operator, a
large proportion of attention heads indeed learn local dependencies due to the inherent property of
natural language [23, 1]; 2) removing some attention heads during fine-tuning on downstream tasks
does not degrade the performance [32]. The two findings indicate that heavy computation redundancy
exists in the current model design. In this work, we aim to resolve this intrinsic redundancy issue
and further improve BERT w.r.t. its efficiency and downstream task performance. We consider such
a question: can we reduce the redundancy of attention heads by using a naturally local operation
to replace some of them? We notice that convolution has been very successful in extracting local
features [27, 24, 46, 16], and thus propose to use convolution layers as a more efficient complement
to self-attention for addressing local dependencies in natural language.
Specifically, we propose to integrate convolution into self-attention to form a mixed attention mechanism that combines the advantages of the two operations. Self-attention uses all input tokens to
generate attention weights for capturing global dependencies, while we expect to perform local
∗

Work done during an internship at Yitu Tech.
Equal contribution.
3
https://github.com/yitu-opensource/ConvBert

†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

