Online Structured Meta-learning

Huaxiu Yao1∗, Yingbo Zhou2 , Mehrdad Mahdavi1
Zhenhui Li1 , Richard Socher2 , Caiming Xiong2
1
Pennsylvania State University, 2 Salesforce Research
1
{huaxiuyao,mzm616,zul17}@psu.edu, 2 {yingbo.zhou,cxiong}@salesforce.com, richard@socher.org

Abstract
Learning quickly is of great importance for machine intelligence deployed in
online platforms. With the capability of transferring knowledge from learned tasks,
meta-learning has shown its effectiveness in online scenarios by continuously
updating the model with the learned prior. However, current online meta-learning
algorithms are limited to learn a globally-shared meta-learner, which may lead
to sub-optimal results when the tasks contain heterogeneous information that are
distinct by nature and difficult to share. We overcome this limitation by proposing
an online structured meta-learning (OSML) framework. Inspired by the knowledge
organization of human and hierarchical feature representation, OSML explicitly
disentangles the meta-learner as a meta-hierarchical graph with different knowledge
blocks. When a new task is encountered, it constructs a meta-knowledge pathway
by either utilizing the most relevant knowledge blocks or exploring new blocks.
Through the meta-knowledge pathway, the model is able to quickly adapt to the new
task. In addition, new knowledge is further incorporated into the selected blocks.
Experiments on three datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and interpretability of
our proposed framework in the context of both homogeneous and heterogeneous
tasks.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning has shown its effectiveness in adapting to new tasks with transferring the prior
experience learned from other related tasks [7, 34, 38]. At a high level, the meta-learning process
involves two steps: meta-training and meta-testing. During the meta-training time, meta-learning
aims to obtain a generalized meta-learner by learning from a large number of past tasks. The metalearner is then applied to adapt to newly encountered tasks during the meta-testing time. Despite
the early success of meta-learning on various applications (e.g., computer vision [7, 40], natural
language processing [14, 36]), almost all traditional meta-learning algorithms make the assumption
that tasks are sampled from the same stationary distribution. However, in human learning, a promising
characteristic is the ability to continuously learn and enhance the learning capacity from different tasks.
To equip agents with such capability, recently, Finn et al. [10] presented the online meta-learning
framework by connecting meta-learning and online learning. Under this setting, the meta-learner
not only benefits the learning process from the current task but also continuously updates itself with
accumulated new knowledge.
Although online meta-learning has shown preliminary success in handling non-stationary task distribution, the globally shared meta-learner across all tasks is far from achieving satisfactory performance
when tasks are sampled from complex heterogeneous distribution. For example, if the task distribution is heterogeneous with disjoint modes, a globally shared meta-learner is not able to cover
the information from all modes. Under the stationary task distribution, a few studies attempt to
∗

Part of the work was done while the author interned at Salesforce Research

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

