Outlier Robust Mean Estimation with Subgaussian
Rates via Stability

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Ankit Pensia
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ankitp@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of outlier robust high-dimensional mean estimation under a
finite covariance assumption, and more broadly under finite low-degree moment
assumptions. We consider a standard stability condition from the recent robust
statistics literature and prove that, except with exponentially small failure probability, there exists a large fraction of the inliers satisfying this condition. As a
corollary, it follows that a number of recently developed algorithms for robust
mean estimation, including iterative filtering and non-convex gradient descent, give
optimal error estimators with (near-)subgaussian rates. Previous analyses of these
algorithms gave significantly suboptimal rates. As a corollary of our approach,
we obtain the first computationally efficient algorithm with subgaussian rate for
outlier-robust mean estimation in the strong contamination model under a finite
covariance assumption.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and Motivation

Consider the following problem: For a given family F of distributions on Rd , estimate the mean of
an unknown D ∈ F, given access to i.i.d. samples from D. This is the problem of (multivariate)
mean estimation and is arguably the most fundamental statistical task. In the most basic setting where
F is the family of high-dimensional Gaussians, the empirical mean is well-known to be an optimal
estimator — in the sense that it achieves the best possible accuracy-confidence tradeoff and is easy
to compute. Unfortunately, the empirical mean is known to be highly suboptimal if we relax the
aforementioned modeling assumptions. In this work, we study high-dimensional mean estimation
in the high confidence regime when the underlying family F is only assumed to satisfy bounded
moment conditions (e.g., finite covariance). Moreover, we relax the “i.i.d. assumption” and aim to
obtain estimators that are robust to a constant fraction of adversarial outliers.
Throughout this paper, we focus on the following data contamination model (see, e.g., [DKK+ 16])
that generalizes several existing models, including Huber’s contamination model [Hub64].
Definition 1.1 (Strong Contamination Model). Given a parameter 0 <  < 1/2 and a distribution
family F on Rd , the adversary operates as follows: The algorithm specifies the number of samples
n, and n samples are drawn from some unknown D ∈ F. The adversary is allowed to inspect the
samples, remove up to n of them and replace them with arbitrary points. This modified set of n
points is then given as input to the algorithm. We say that a set of samples is -corrupted if it is
generated by the above process.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

