Bayes Consistency vs. H-Consistency:
The Interplay between Surrogate Loss Functions and
the Scoring Function Class

Mingyuan Zhang
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
myz@seas.upenn.edu

Shivani Agarwal
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
ashivani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
A fundamental question in multiclass classification concerns understanding the
consistency properties of surrogate risk minimization algorithms, which minimize
a (often convex) surrogate to the multiclass 0-1 loss. In particular, the framework of
calibrated surrogates has played an important role in analyzing Bayes consistency of
such algorithms, i.e. in studying convergence to a Bayes optimal classifier (Zhang,
2004; Tewari and Bartlett, 2007). However, follow-up work has suggested this
framework can be of limited value when studying H-consistency; in particular,
concerns have been raised that even when the data comes from an underlying
linear model, minimizing certain convex calibrated surrogates over linear scoring
functions fails to recover the true model (Long and Servedio, 2013). In this
paper, we investigate this apparent conundrum. We find that while some calibrated
surrogates can indeed fail to provide H-consistency when minimized over a naturallooking but naïvely chosen scoring function class F, the situation can potentially
be remedied by minimizing them over a more carefully chosen class of scoring
functions F. In particular, for the popular one-vs-all hinge and logistic surrogates,
both of which are calibrated (and therefore provide Bayes consistency) under
realizable models, but were previously shown to pose problems for realizable
H-consistency, we derive a form of scoring function class F that enables Hconsistency. When H is the class of linear models, the class F consists of certain
piecewise linear scoring functions that are characterized by the same number of
parameters as in the linear case, and minimization over which can be performed
using an adaptation of the min-pooling idea from neural network training. Our
experiments confirm that the one-vs-all surrogates, when trained over this class of
nonlinear scoring functions F, yield better linear multiclass classifiers than when
trained over standard linear scoring functions.

1

Introduction and Background

Consider a standard multiclass classification problem, with instance space X ⊆ Rd , label space
Y = [n] := {1, . . . , n} with n > 2 classes, and standard 0-1 loss `0-1 : Y × Y→R+ given by
`0-1 (y, yb) = 1(b
y 6= y). There is an unknown probability distribution D on X × Y; given a training
sample S = ((x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xm , ym )) containing examples drawn i.i.d. from D, the goal is to learn a
classifier h : X →Y with small 0-1 generalization error on new examples drawn from D:



er0-1
(1)
D [h] = E(X,Y )∼D `0-1 (Y, h(X)) = P(X,Y )∼D h(X) 6= Y .
A Bayes consistent algorithm is one which, given enough training examples, learns a classifier whose
generalization error approaches the Bayes optimal error:
0-1,∗
erD
=

inf

h:X →Y

er0-1
D [h] .

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(2)

