Robust Pre-Training by
Adversarial Contrastive Learning
Ziyu Jiang1 , Tianlong Chen2 , Ting Chen3 , Zhangyang Wang2
1 Texas A&M University, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 Google Research, Brain Team

jiangziyu@tamu.edu, {tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu, iamtingchen@google.com

Abstract
Recent work has shown that, when integrated with adversarial training, selfsupervised pre-training can lead to state-of-the-art robustness [1]. In this work, we
improve robustness-aware self-supervised pre-training by learning representations
that are consistent under both data augmentations and adversarial perturbations. Our
approach leverages a recent contrastive learning framework [2], which learns representations by maximizing feature consistency under differently augmented views.
This fits particularly well with the goal of adversarial robustness, as one cause of adversarial fragility is the lack of feature invariance, i.e., small input perturbations can
result in undesirable large changes in features or even predicted labels. We explore
various options to formulate the contrastive task, and demonstrate that by injecting
adversarial perturbations, contrastive pre-training can lead to models that are both
label-efficient and robust. We empirically evaluate the proposed Adversarial Contrastive Learning (ACL) and show it can consistently outperform existing methods.
For example on the CIFAR-10 dataset, ACL outperforms the previous state-of-theart unsupervised robust pre-training approach [1] by 2.99% on robust accuracy and
2.14% on standard accuracy. We further demonstrate that ACL pre-training can
improve semi-supervised adversarial training, even when only a few labeled examples are available. Our codes and pre-trained models have been released at: https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/Adversarial-Contrastive-Learning.

1

Introduction

Label efficiency and model robustness are two desirable characteristics when it comes to building
machine learning models, including the training of deep neural networks. Traditional supervised
learning of deep networks requires a lot of labeled data, whose annotation costs can be prohibitively
high. Utilizing unlabeled data, e.g., by various unsupervised or semi-supervised learning techniques,
is thus of booming interests. One particular branch of unsupervised learning based on contrastive
learning has shown great promise recently [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 2]. The latest contrastive learning framework
[2] can largely improves label efficiency of the deep networks, e.g., surpassing the fully-supervised
AlexNet [8] when fine-tuned on only 1% of the labels.
The labeling scarcity is even amplified when we come to adversarially robust deep learning [9],
i.e., to training deep models that are not fooled by maliciously crafted, although imperceivable
perturbations. As suggested in [10], the sample complexity of adversarially robust generalization is
significantly higher than that of standard learning. Recent results [11, 12, 13] advocated unlabeled
data to be a powerful backup for training adversarially robust models as well, by using unlabeled data
to form an auxiliary loss (e.g., a label-independent robust regularizer or a pseudo-label loss).
Only lately, researchers start linking self-supervised learning to adversarial robustness. [14] proposed
a multi-task learning framework that incorporates a self-supervised objective to be co-optimized with
the conventional classification loss. The latest work [1] introduced adversarial training [15] into
self-supervision, to provide general-purpose robust pre-trained models for the first time. However,
existing work is based on ad-hoc “pretext” self-supervised tasks, and as shown in [6, 2], the learned
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

