Primal-Dual Mesh Convolutional Neural Networks
Francesco Milano∗
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
fmilano@student.ethz.ch

Antonio Loquercio
Robotics and Perception Group
University of Zurich, Switzerland
loquercio@ifi.uzh.ch

Davide Scaramuzza
Robotics and Perception Group
University of Zurich, Switzerland
sdavide@ifi.uzh.ch

Antoni Rosinol
SPARK Lab
MIT, USA
arosinol@mit.edu

Luca Carlone
SPARK Lab
MIT, USA
lcarlone@mit.edu

Abstract
Recent works in geometric deep learning have introduced neural networks that
allow performing inference tasks on three-dimensional geometric data by defining
convolution –and sometimes pooling– operations on triangle meshes. These methods, however, either consider the input mesh as a graph, and do not exploit specific
geometric properties of meshes for feature aggregation and downsampling, or are
specialized for meshes, but rely on a rigid definition of convolution that does not
properly capture the local topology of the mesh. We propose a method that combines the advantages of both types of approaches, while addressing their limitations:
we extend a primal-dual framework drawn from the graph-neural-network literature
to triangle meshes, and define convolutions on two types of graphs constructed from
an input mesh. Our method takes features for both edges and faces of a 3D mesh as
input, and dynamically aggregates them using an attention mechanism. At the same
time, we introduce a pooling operation with a precise geometric interpretation, that
allows handling variations in the mesh connectivity by clustering mesh faces in a
task-driven fashion. We provide theoretical insights of our approach using tools
from the mesh-simplification literature. In addition, we validate experimentally
our method in the tasks of shape classification and shape segmentation, where we
obtain comparable or superior performance to the state of the art.

1

Introduction

The development of deep-learning tools that operate on three-dimensional triangular meshes has
recently received an increasing attention by the computer graphics, vision, and machine learning
communities, due to the availability of large 3D datasets with semantic annotations [1, 2] and
to the expressiveness and efficiency of meshes in representing non-uniform, irregular surfaces.
Compared to alternative representations often used for 3D geometry, such as voxels and point
clouds, that scale poorly to high object resolutions [3], meshes allow representing structure more
adaptively and compactly [4]; at the same time, they naturally provide connectivity information, as
opposed to point clouds, and lend themselves to simple, commonly used rendering and processing
algorithms [5, p. 14]. However, meshes have both a geometric and a topological component [6, p. 10],
represented respectively by the vertices and by the connectivity of edges and faces [5, p. 19]; while
the geometrical variability of the underlying surface encodes essential semantic information, the
randomness in the discretization of the surface (which can include, e.g., variations in tessellation,
isotropy, regularity, level-of-detail [5]) is to a certain extent not informative and independent of the
∗

Work performed while at MIT.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

