On the Trade-off between Adversarial
and Backdoor Robustness
Cheng-Hsin Weng
Yan-Ting Lee
Shan-Hung Wu
Department of Computer Science, National Tsing-Hua University, Taiwan, R.O.C.
{zxweng,ytlee}@datalab.cs.nthu.edu.tw, shwu@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Deep neural networks are shown to be susceptible to both adversarial attacks
and backdoor attacks. Although many defenses against an individual type of the
above attacks have been proposed, the interactions between the vulnerabilities of
a network to both types of attacks have not been carefully investigated yet. In
this paper, we conduct experiments to study whether adversarial robustness and
backdoor robustness can affect each other and find a trade-off—by increasing
the robustness of a network to adversarial examples, the network becomes more
vulnerable to backdoor attacks. We then investigate the cause and show how such
a trade-off can be exploited for either good or bad purposes. Our findings suggest
that future research on defense should take both adversarial and backdoor attacks
into account when designing algorithms or robustness measures to avoid pitfalls
and a false sense of security.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive performance in many domains such as
computer vision, natural language processing, speech, and robotics, etc. However, DNNs are shown
to be susceptible to both adversarial attacks [14, 34] and backdoor attacks [7, 16, 25]. Adversarial
attacks aim at fooling a model using examples (which are called adversarial examples) that are nearly
indistinguishable from regular examples in human eyes or some distance measures in the input space.
An adversarial example can be generated by slightly perturbing the input of a regular example in
directions where the output of the model gives the highest loss. On the other hand, backdoor attacks
aim at fooling the model with pre-mediated inputs. An attacker can “poison” training data by adding
crafted triggers in some data points of a specific label. So, a model trained with poisoned data will
perform well on a benign test set but behaves wrongly when the triggers are present in test data.
The vulnerabilities of DNNs to these attacks raise concern about the robustness of security-critical
machine learning applications, such as autonomous cars and speech recognition authorization.
Many defenses against adversarial or backdoor attacks have been proposed. In particular, the certified
robustness [2,3,8,10–13,15,21,28,35,40–43] and adversarial training [14,17,19,20,24,26,29,32,44]
are theoretically grounded and empirically strong methods, respectively, for defending adversarial
attacks. To defend backdoor attacks, efforts have been made to detect and remove poisoned data
(before training) [6, 36] or to fine-tune the model (after training) to unlearn backdoors [30, 39].
However, most existing defense methods are designed for one type of attacks only. The interactions
between the vulnerabilities of a network to adversarial and backdoor attacks have not been carefully
investigated yet. In practice, a model may be trained using the data collected from the public. It
may also be deployed in an open environment where the input at runtime is accessible to the third
party. As attackers could manipulate both training and testing data, it is crucial to understand how the
interactions, if existing, will impact the current defenses.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

