Learning Individually Inferred Communication for
Multi-Agent Cooperation

Ziluo Ding

Tiejun Huang Zongqing Lu†
Peking University

{ziluo,tjhuang,zongqing.lu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Communication lays the foundation for human cooperation. It is also crucial for
multi-agent cooperation. However, existing work focuses on broadcast communication, which is not only impractical but also leads to information redundancy that
could even impair the learning process. To tackle these difficulties, we propose
Individually Inferred Communication (I2C), a simple yet effective model to enable
agents to learn a prior for agent-agent communication. The prior knowledge is
learned via causal inference and realized by a feed-forward neural network that
maps the agent’s local observation to a belief about who to communicate with.
The influence of one agent on another is inferred via the joint action-value function in multi-agent reinforcement learning and quantified to label the necessity
of agent-agent communication. Furthermore, the agent policy is regularized to
better exploit communicated messages. Empirically, we show that I2C can not only
reduce communication overhead but also improve the performance in a variety of
multi-agent cooperative scenarios, comparing to existing methods.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has achieved remarkable success in a series of challenging tasks, e.g.,
game playing [12, 16, 23]. However, many real-world applications require multiple agents to learn to
solve tasks collaboratively, such as autonomous driving [15], smart grid control [26], and intelligent
traffic control [25]. Unfortunately, there exist several challenges impeding the breakthroughs in
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). On one hand, during training, the agent policy keeps
updating, leading to non-stationary environment and unstable model convergence. On the other
hand, even for the centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm which is
designed to mitigate non-stationarity, such as MADDPG [10], COMA [4], VDN [20], QMIX [14],
QTRAN [18], and MAAC [5], it is still hard for agents to act cooperatively during execution, since
partial observability and stochasticity can easily break the learned cooperative strategy and result in
catastrophic miscoordination [24].
Communication lays the foundation for human cooperation [2]. It also holds for multi-agent cooperation. Communication could help agents form a good knowledge of cooperative strategies. Recently,
many researches focus on trainable communication channel which agents can use to obtain extra
information during both training and execution to tackle the challenges aforementioned. For most
existing work, such as [19, 17, 1, 27], once the decision of communication is made, messages will
be broadcast to all other/predefined agents. However, this requires lots of bandwidth and incurs
additional delay in practice. More importantly, not every agent can provide useful information and
redundant information could even impair the learning process [21, 8]. These limitations make it
a less than ideal communication paradigm. Furthermore, it has never been the way how humans
†

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

