Implicit Regularization in Deep Learning
May Not Be Explainable by Norms

Noam Razin
Tel Aviv University
noam.razin@cs.tau.ac.il

Nadav Cohen
Tel Aviv University
cohennadav@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Mathematically characterizing the implicit regularization induced by gradientbased optimization is a longstanding pursuit in the theory of deep learning. A
widespread hope is that a characterization based on minimization of norms may
apply, and a standard test-bed for studying this prospect is matrix factorization
(matrix completion via linear neural networks). It is an open question whether
norms can explain the implicit regularization in matrix factorization. The current
paper resolves this open question in the negative, by proving that there exist natural
matrix factorization problems on which the implicit regularization drives all norms
(and quasi-norms) towards infinity. Our results suggest that, rather than perceiving
the implicit regularization via norms, a potentially more useful interpretation is
minimization of rank. We demonstrate empirically that this interpretation extends
to a certain class of non-linear neural networks, and hypothesize that it may be key
to explaining generalization in deep learning.1

1

Introduction

A central mystery in deep learning is the ability of neural networks to generalize when having far
more learnable parameters than training examples. This generalization takes place even in the absence
of any explicit regularization (see [88]), thus a view by which gradient-based optimization induces
an implicit regularization has arisen (see, e.g., [64]). Mathematically characterizing this implicit
regularization is regarded as a major open problem in the theory of deep learning (cf. [66]). A
widespread hope (initially articulated in [65]) is that a characterization based on minimization of
norms (or quasi-norms2 ) may apply. Namely, it is known that for linear regression, gradient-based
optimization converges to solution with minimal `2 norm (see for example Section 5 in [88]), and
the hope is that this result can carry over to neural networks if we allow `2 norm to be replaced by a
different (possibly architecture- and optimizer-dependent) norm (or quasi-norm).
A standard test-bed for studying implicit regularization in deep learning is matrix completion (cf. [34,
8]): given a randomly chosen subset of entries from an unknown matrix W ∗ , the task is to recover
the unseen entries. This may be viewed as a prediction problem, where each entry in W ∗ stands
for a data point: observed entries constitute the training set, and the average reconstruction error
over the unobserved entries is the test error, quantifying generalization. Fitting the observed entries
is obviously an underdetermined problem with multiple solutions. However, an extensive body
of work (see [26] for a survey) has shown that if W ∗ is low-rank, certain technical assumptions
(e.g. “incoherence”) are satisfied and sufficiently many entries are observed, then various algorithms
can achieve approximate or even exact recovery. Of these, a well-known method based upon convex
optimization finds the minimal nuclear norm matrix among those fitting observations (see [15]).
1
Due to lack of space, a significant portion of the paper is deferred to the appendices. We refer the reader to
[72] for a self-contained version of the text.
2
A quasi-norm k·k on a vector space V is a function from V to R≥0 that satisfies the same axioms as a norm,
except for the triangle inequality ∀v1 , v2 ∈ V : kv1 + v2 k ≤ kv1 k + kv2 k, which is replaced by the weaker
requirement ∃c ≥ 1 s.t. ∀v1 , v2 ∈ V : kv1 + v2 k ≤ c · (kv1 k + kv2 k).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

