Compositional Generalization via Neural-Symbolic
Stack Machines
Xinyun Chen
UC Berkeley
xinyun.chen@berkeley.edu

Chen Liang, Adams Wei Yu
Google Brain
{crazydonkey,adamsyuwei}@google.com

Dawn Song
UC Berkeley
dawnsong@cs.berkeley.edu

Denny Zhou
Google Brain
dennyzhou@google.com

Abstract
Despite achieving tremendous success, existing deep learning models have exposed
limitations in compositional generalization, the capability to learn compositional
rules and apply them to unseen cases in a systematic manner. To tackle this issue,
we propose the Neural-Symbolic Stack Machine (NeSS). It contains a neural
network to generate traces, which are then executed by a symbolic stack machine
enhanced with sequence manipulation operations. NeSS combines the expressive
power of neural sequence models with the recursion supported by the symbolic
stack machine. Without training supervision on execution traces, NeSS achieves
100% generalization performance in four domains: the SCAN benchmark of
language-driven navigation tasks, the task of few-shot learning of compositional
instructions, the compositional machine translation benchmark, and context-free
grammar parsing tasks.

1

Introduction

Humans have an exceptional capability of compositional reasoning. Given a set of basic components
and a few demonstrations of their combinations, a person could effectively capture the underlying
compositional rules, and generalize the knowledge to novel combinations [9, 36, 29, 28]. In contrast,
deep neural networks, including the state-of-the-art models for natural language understanding,
typically lack such generalization abilities [26, 24, 32], although they have demonstrated impressive
performance on various applications.
To evaluate the compositional generalization, [26] proposes the SCAN benchmark for natural language
to action sequence generation. When SCAN is randomly split into training and testing sets, neural
sequence models [3, 19] can achieve perfect generalization. However, when SCAN is split such that
the testing set contains unseen combinations of components in the training set, the test accuracies of
these models drop dramatically, though the training accuracies are still nearly 100%. Some techniques
have been proposed to improve the performance on SCAN, but they either still fail to generalize on
some splits [42, 27, 30, 16, 1], or are specialized for SCAN-like grammar learning [38].
In this paper, we propose the Neural-Symbolic Stack machine (NeSS), which integrates a symbolic
stack machine into a sequence-to-sequence generation framework, and learns a neural network as
the controller to operate the machine. NeSS preserves the capacity of existing neural models for
sequence generation; meanwhile, the symbolic stack machine supports recursion [6, 8], so it can break
down the entire sequence into components, process them separately and then combine the results,
encouraging the model to learn the primitives and composition rules. In addition, we propose the
notion of operational equivalence, which formalizes the intuition that semantically similar sentences
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

