Exploiting the Surrogate Gap in Online Multiclass
Classification
Dirk van der Hoeven
Mathematical Institute
Leiden University
dirk@dirkvanderhoeven.com

Abstract
We present G APTRON, a randomized first-order algorithm for online multiclass
classification. In the full information setting we provide expected mistake bounds
for G APTRON with respect to the logistic loss, hinge loss, and the smooth hinge
loss with O(K) regret, where the expectation is with respect to the learner’s
randomness and K is the number of classes. In the bandit classification
setting
√
we show that G APTRON is the first linear time algorithm with O(K T ) expected
regret. Additionally, the expected mistake bound of G APTRON does not depend
√on
the dimension of the feature vector, contrary to previous algorithms with O(K T )
regret in the bandit classification setting. We present a new proof technique
that exploits the gap between the zero-one loss and surrogate losses rather than
exploiting properties such as exp-concavity or mixability, which are traditionally
used to prove logarithmic or constant regret bounds.

1

Introduction

In online multiclass classification a learner has to repeatedly predict the label that corresponds
to a feature vector. Algorithms in this setting have a wide range of applications ranging from
predicting the outcomes of sport matches to recommender systems. In some applications such as
sport forecasting the learner obtains the true label regardless of what outcome the learner predicts,
but in other applications such as recommender systems the learner only learns whether or not the
label he predicted was the true label. The setting in which the learner receives the true label is called
the full information multiclass classification setting and the setting in which the learner only receives
information about the predicted label is called the bandit multiclass classification setting.
In this paper we consider both the full information and bandit multiclass classification settings. In
both settings the environment chooses the true outcome yt ∈ {1, . . . , K} and feature vector xt ∈ Rd .
The environment then reveals the feature vector to the learner, after which the learner issues a
(randomized) prediction yt0 ∈ {1, . . . , K}. The goal of both settings is to minimize the number of
expected mistakes the learner makes with respect to the best offline linear predictor U ∈ RK×d ,
which essentially contains a set of parameters per class. Standard practice in both settings is to upper
bound the non-convex zero-one loss with a convex surrogate loss `t (see for example Bartlett et al.
(2006)). This leads to guarantees of the form
" T
#
" T
#
X
X
E
1[yt0 6= yt ] = E
`t (U ) + RT ,
t=1

t=1

where 1 is the indicator function, yt is the true label, the expectation is taken with respect to the
learner’s randomness, and RT is the regret after T rounds.
We introduce G APTRON, which is a randomized first-order algorithm that exploits the gap between the
zero-one loss and the surrogate loss. In the full information multiclass classification setting G APTRON
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

