FedSplit: an algorithmic framework for fast
federated optimization
Reese Pathak
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
pathakr@berkeley.edu
Martin J. Wainwright
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
wainwrig@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Motivated by federated learning, we consider the hub-and-spoke model of distributed optimization in which a central authority coordinates the computation
of a solution among many agents while limiting communication. We first study
some past procedures for federated optimization, and show that their fixed points
need not correspond to stationary points of the original optimization problem, even
in simple convex settings with deterministic updates. In order to remedy these
issues, we introduce FedSplit, a class of algorithms based on operator splitting
procedures for solving distributed convex minimization with additive structure. We
prove that these procedures have the correct fixed points, corresponding to optima
of the original optimization problem, and we characterize their convergence rates
under different settings. Our theory shows that these methods are provably robust
to inexact computation of intermediate local quantities. We complement our theory
with some experiments that demonstrate the benefits of our methods in practice.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a rapidly evolving application of distributed optimization for learning problems
in large-scale networks of remote clients [13]. These systems present new challenges, as they are
characterized by heterogeneity in computational resources, data across a large, multi-agent network,
unreliable communication, and privacy constraints due to sensitive client data [15].
Although distributed optimization has a rich history and extensive literature (e.g., see the sources [2,
4, 8, 28, 14, 23] and references therein), renewed interest due to federated learning has led to a
flurry of recent work in the area. Notably, McMahan et al. [17] introduced the FedSGD and FedAvg
algorithms, by adapting the classical stochastic gradient method to the federated setting, considering
the possibility that clients may fail and may only be subsampled on each round of computation.
Another recent proposal, FedProx, attempted to mitigate potential device heterogeneity issues by
applying averaged proximal updates to solve federated minimization problems. Currently, a general
convergence theory of these methods is lacking. Moreover, practitioners have documented failures of
convergence in certain settings (e.g., see Figure 3 and related discussion in the work [17]).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

