Modular Meta-Learning with Shrinkage

Yutian Chen∗
David Budden

Abram L. Friesen∗

Feryal Behbahani

Matthew W. Hoffman

Arnaud Doucet
Nando de Freitas

DeepMind
London, UK
{yutianc, abef}@google.com

Abstract
Many real-world problems, including multi-speaker text-to-speech synthesis, can
greatly benefit from the ability to meta-learn large models with only a few taskspecific components. Updating only these task-specific modules then allows the
model to be adapted to low-data tasks for as many steps as necessary without
risking overfitting. Unfortunately, existing meta-learning methods either do not
scale to long adaptation or else rely on handcrafted task-specific architectures.
Here, we propose a meta-learning approach that obviates the need for this often
sub-optimal hand-selection. In particular, we develop general techniques based
on Bayesian shrinkage to automatically discover and learn both task-specific and
general reusable modules. Empirically, we demonstrate that our method discovers
a small set of meaningful task-specific modules and outperforms existing metalearning approaches in domains like few-shot text-to-speech that have little task data
and long adaptation horizons. We also show that existing meta-learning methods
including MAML, iMAML, and Reptile emerge as special cases of our method.

1

Introduction

The goal of meta-learning is to extract shared knowledge from a large set of training tasks to solve
held-out tasks more efficiently. One avenue for achieving this is to learn task-agnostic modules and
reuse or repurpose these for new tasks. Reusing or repurposing modules can reduce overfitting in
low-data regimes, improve interpretability, and facilitate the deployment of large multi-task models
on limited-resource devices as parameter sharing allows for significant savings in memory. It can also
enable batch evaluation of reused modules across tasks, which can speed up inference time on GPUs.
These considerations are important in domains like few-shot text-to-speech synthesis (TTS), characterized by large speaker-adaptable models, limited training data for speaker adaptation, and long
adaptation horizons [1]. Adapting the model to a new task for more optimization steps generally
improves the model capacity without increasing the number of parameters. However, many metalearning methods are designed for quick adaptation, and hence are inapplicable in this few data and
long adaptation regime. For those that are applicable [2–5], adapting the full model to few data can
then fail because of overfitting. To overcome this, modern TTS models combine shared core modules
with handcrafted, adaptable, speaker-specific modules [6, 1, 7, 8]. This hard coding strategy is often
suboptimal. As data increases, these hard-coded modules quickly become a bottleneck for further
improvement, even in a few-shot regime. For this reason, we would like to automatically learn the
smallest set of modules needed to adapt to a new speaker and then adapt these for as long as needed.
Automatically learning reusable and broadly applicable modular mechanisms is an open challenge in
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

