Improving GAN Training with Probability Ratio
Clipping and Sample Reweighting

Yue Wu1 , Pan Zhou2 , Andrew Gordon Wilson3 , Eric P. Xing1,4 , Zhiting Hu1,5
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 National University of Singapore, 3 New York University
4
Petuum Inc., 5 UC San Diego
{ywu5, epxing}@andrew.cmu.edu, pzhou@u.nus.edu, andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu, zhitinghu@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite success on a wide range of problems related to vision, generative adversarial networks (GANs) often suffer from inferior performance due to unstable
training, especially for text generation. To solve this issue, we propose a new
variational GAN training framework which enjoys superior training stability. Our
approach is inspired by a connection of GANs and reinforcement learning under a
variational perspective. The connection leads to (1) probability ratio clipping that
regularizes generator training to prevent excessively large updates, and (2) a sample
re-weighting mechanism that improves discriminator training by downplaying
bad-quality fake samples. Moreover, our variational GAN framework can provably
overcome the training issue in many GANs that an optimal discriminator cannot
provide any informative gradient to training generator. By plugging the training
approach in diverse state-of-the-art GAN architectures, we obtain significantly
improved performance over a range of tasks, including text generation, text style
transfer, and image generation.1

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13] have achieved remarkable success in image and video
synthesis [4, 32, 39]. However, it is usually hard to train a GAN well, because the training process is
commonly unstable, subject to disturbances and even collapses. To alleviate this issue, substantial
efforts have been paid to improve the training stability from different perspectives, e.g., divergence
minimization [36, 37], Wasserstein distance with Lipschitz continuity of the discriminator [2, 15, 52],
energy-based models [3, 58], to name a few.
In spite of the above progresses, the instability in training has not been well resolved [8], since it
is difficult to well balance the strength of the generator and the discriminator. What is worse, such
an instability issue is exacerbated in text generation due to the sequential and discrete nature of
text [6, 12, 22]. Specifically, the high sensitivity of text generation to noise and the underlying errors
caused by sparse discriminator signals in the generated text can often result in destructive updates to
both generator and discriminator, enlarging the instability in GANs.
In this work, we develop a novel variational GAN training framework to improve the training
stability, which is broadly applicable to GANs of a variety of architectures for image and text
generation. This training framework is derived from a variational perspective of GANs [24] and the
resulting connections to reinforcement learning (in particular, RL-as-inference) [1, 44] and other
rich literature [5, 14, 23]. Our approach consists of two stabilization techniques, namely, probability
ratio clipping and sample re-weighting, for stabilizing the generator and discriminator respectively.
(1) Under the variational perspective, the generator update is subject to a KL penalty on the change
1

Code available at: github.com/Holmeswww/PPOGAN

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

