Second Order PAC-Bayesian Bounds
for the Weighted Majority Vote

Andrés R. Masegosa∗
University of Almería
andresma@ual.es

Stephan S. Lorenzen
Christian Igel
Yevgeny Seldin
University of Copenhagen
{lorenzen,igel,seldin}@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We present a novel analysis of the expected risk of weighted majority vote in
multiclass classification. The analysis takes correlation of predictions by ensemble
members into account and provides a bound that is amenable to efficient minimization, which yields improved weighting for the majority vote. We also provide a
specialized version of our bound for binary classification, which allows to exploit
additional unlabeled data for tighter risk estimation. In experiments, we apply the
bound to improve weighting of trees in random forests and show that, in contrast
to the commonly used first order bound, minimization of the new bound typically
does not lead to degradation of the test error of the ensemble.

1

Introduction

Weighted majority vote is a fundamental technique for combining predictions of multiple classifiers.
In machine learning, it was proposed for neural networks by Hansen and Salomon [1990] and became
popular with the works of Breiman [1996, 2001] on bagging and random forests and the work of
Freund and Schapire [1996] on boosting. Zhu [2015] surveys the subsequent development of the field.
Weighted majority vote is now part of the winning strategies in many machine learning competitions
[e.g., Chen and Guestrin, 2016, Hoch, 2015, Puurula et al., 2014, Stallkamp et al., 2012]. Its power
lies in the cancellation of errors effect [Eckhardt and Lee, 1985]: when individual classifiers perform
better than a random guess and make independent errors, the errors average out and the majority vote
tends to outperform the individual classifiers.
A central question in the design of a weighted majority vote is the assignment of weights to individual
classifiers. This question was resolved by Berend and Kontorovich [2016] under the assumptions
that the expected error rates of the classifiers are known and their errors are independent. However,
neither of the two assumptions is typically satisfied in practice.
When the expected error rates are estimated based on a sample, the common way of bounding the
expected error of a weighted majority vote is by twice the error of the corresponding randomized
classifier [Langford and Shawe-Taylor, 2002]. A randomized classifier, a.k.a. Gibbs classifier,
associated with a distribution (weights) ρ over classifiers draws a single classifier at random at each
prediction round according to ρ and applies it to make the prediction. The error rate of the randomized
classifier is bounded using PAC-Bayesian analysis [McAllester, 1998, Seeger, 2002, Langford and
Shawe-Taylor, 2002]. We call this a first order bound. The factor 2 bound on the gap between the
error of the weighted majority vote and the corresponding randomized classifier follows from the
observation that an error by the weighted majority vote implies an error by at least a weighted half of
the base classifiers. The bound is derived using Markov’s inequality. While the PAC-Bayesian bounds
for the randomized classifier are remarkably tight [Germain et al., 2009, Thiemann et al., 2017], the
factor 2 gap is only tight in the worst-case, but loose in most real-life situations, where the weighted
∗

Part of the work was done while AM was visiting the University of Copenhagen.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

