Differentiable Top-k with Optimal Transport
Yujia Xie⇤
College of Computing
Georgia Tech
Xie.Yujia000@gmail.com

Tuo Zhao
College of Engineering
Georgia Tech
tourzhao@gatech.edu

Hanjun Dai
Google Brain
hadai@google.com

Minshuo Chen
College of Engineering
Georgia Tech

Bo Dai
Google Brain
bodai@google.com

mchen393@gatech.edu

Hongyuan Zha†
School of Data Science
Shenzhen Research Institute
of Big Data, CUHK, Shenzhen

Wei Wei
Google Cloud AI
wewei@google.com

zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn

Tomas Pfister
Google Cloud AI
tpfister@google.com

Abstract
The top-k operation, i.e., finding the k largest or smallest elements from a collection
of scores, is an important model component, which is widely used in information
retrieval, machine learning, and data mining. However, if the top-k operation is implemented in an algorithmic way, e.g., using bubble algorithm, the resulting model
cannot be trained in an end-to-end way using prevalent gradient descent algorithms.
This is because these implementations typically involve swapping indices, whose
gradient cannot be computed. Moreover, the corresponding mapping from the input
scores to the indicator vector of whether this element belongs to the top-k set is
essentially discontinuous. To address the issue, we propose a smoothed approximation, namely the SOFT (Scalable Optimal transport-based diFferenTiable) top-k
operator. Specifically, our SOFT top-k operator approximates the output of the
top-k operation as the solution of an Entropic Optimal Transport (EOT) problem.
The gradient of the SOFT operator can then be efficiently approximated based on
the optimality conditions of EOT problem. We apply the proposed operator to
the k-nearest neighbors and beam search algorithms, and demonstrate improved
performance.

1

Introduction

The top-k operation, i.e., finding the k largest or smallest elements from a set, is widely used for
predictive modeling in information retrieval, machine learning, and data mining. For example, in
image retrieval (Babenko et al., 2014; Radenović et al., 2016; Gordo et al., 2016), one needs to query
the k nearest neighbors of an input image under certain metrics; in the beam search (Reddy et al.,
1977; Wiseman and Rush, 2016) algorithm for neural machine translation, one needs to find the k
sequences of largest likelihoods in each decoding step.
⇤

Work done in a Google internship.
Also affliated with Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society. On leave from
College of Computing, Georgia Tech.
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

