Prediction with Corrupted Expert Advice

Idan Amir∗
Tel Aviv University
idanamir@mail.tau.ac.il

Idan Attias∗
Ben-Gurion University
idanatti@post.bgu.ac.il

Tomer Koren
Tel Aviv University and Google
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Roi Livni
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and Google
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract
We revisit the fundamental problem of prediction with expert advice, in a setting
where the environment is benign and generates losses stochastically, but the feedback
observed by the learner is subject to a moderate adversarial corruption. We prove
that a variant of the classical Multiplicative Weights algorithm with decreasing step
sizes achieves constant regret in this setting and performs optimally in a wide range
of environments, regardless of the magnitude of the injected corruption. Our results
reveal a surprising disparity between the often comparable Follow the Regularized
Leader (FTRL) and Online Mirror Descent (OMD) frameworks: we show that for
experts in the corrupted stochastic regime, the regret performance of OMD is in
fact strictly inferior to that of FTRL.

1

Introduction

Prediction with expert advice is perhaps the single most fundamental problem in online learning
and sequential decision making. In this problem, the goal of a learner is to aggregate decisions
from multiple experts and achieve performance that approaches that of the best individual expert in
hindsight. The standard performance criterion is the regret: the difference between the loss of the
learner and that of the best single expert. The experts problem is often considered in the so-called
adversarial setting, where the losses of the individual experts may be virtually arbitrary and even be
chosen by an adversary so as to maximize the learner’s regret. The canonical algorithmpin this setup
is the Multiplicative Weights algorithm [21, 12], that guarantees an optimal regret of Θ ( 𝑇 log 𝑁) in
any problem with 𝑁 experts and 𝑇 decision rounds.
A long line of research in online learning has focused on obtaining better regret guarantees, often
referred to as “fast rates,” on benign problem instances in which the loss generation process behaves
more favourably than in a fully adversarial setup. A prototypical example of such an instance is the
stochastic setting of the experts problem, where the losses of the experts are drawn i.i.d. over time
from a fixed and unknown distribution, and there is a constant gap ∆ between the mean losses of the
best and second-best experts. In this setting, it has been established that the optimal expected regret
scales as Θ (log(𝑁)/∆), and in particular, is bounded by a constant independent of the number of
rounds 𝑇 [7, 20]. More recently, [25] have shown that this optimal regret is in fact achieved by an
∗ Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

