Off-Policy Imitation Learning from Observations

Zhuangdi Zhu
Michigan State University
zhuzhuan@msu.edu

Kaixiang Lin
Michigan State University
linkaixi@msu.edu

Bo Dai
Google Research
bodai@google.com

Jiayu Zhou
Michigan State University
jiayuz@msu.edu

Abstract
Learning from Observations (LfO) is a practical reinforcement learning scenario
from which many applications can benefit through the reuse of incomplete resources. Compared to conventional imitation learning (IL), LfO is more challenging because of the lack of expert action guidance. In both conventional IL
and LfO, distribution matching is at the heart of their foundation. Traditional
distribution matching approaches are sample-costly which depend on on-policy
transitions for policy learning. Towards sample-efficiency, some off-policy solutions have been proposed, which, however, either lack comprehensive theoretical
justifications or depend on the guidance of expert actions. In this work, we propose a sample-efficient LfO approach which enables off-policy optimization in a
principled manner. To further accelerate the learning procedure, we regulate the
policy update with an inverse action model, which assists distribution matching
from the perspective of mode-covering. Extensive empirical results on challenging
locomotion tasks indicate that our approach is comparable with state-of-the-art in
terms of both sample-efficiency and asymptotic performance.

1

Introduction

Imitation Learning (IL) has been widely studied in the reinforcement learning (RL) domain to assist in
learning complex tasks by leveraging the experience from expertise [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Unlike conventional
RL that depends on environment reward feedbacks, IL can purely learn from expert guidance, and is
therefore crucial for realizing robotic intelligence in practical applications, where demonstrations are
usually easier to access than a delicate reward function [6, 7].
Classical IL, or more concretely, Learning from Demonstrations (LfD), assumes that both states
and actions are available as expert demonstrations [8, 2, 3]. Although expert actions can benefit IL
by providing elaborated guidance, requiring such information for IL may not always accord with
the real-world. Actually, collecting demonstrated actions can sometimes be costly or impractical,
whereas observations without actions are more accessible resources, such as camera or sensory logs.
Consequently, Learning from Observations (LfO) has been proposed to address the scenario without
expert actions [9, 10, 11]. On one hand, LfO is more challenging compared with conventional IL, due
to missing finer-grained guidance from actions. On the other hand, LfO is a more practical setting
for IL, not only because it capitalizes previously unusable resources, but also because it reveals the
potential to realize advanced artificial intelligence. In fact, learning without action guidance is an
inherent ability for human being. For instance, a novice game player can improve his skill purely by
watching video records of an expert, without knowing what actions have been taken [12].
Among popular LfD and LfO approaches, distribution matching has served as a principled solution [2,
3, 9, 10, 13], which works by interactively estimating and minimizing the discrepancy between two
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

