Online Algorithms for Multi-shop Ski Rental with
Machine Learned Advice
Shufan Wang
Binghamton University
State University of New York
Binghamton, NY 13902
swang214@binghamton.edu

Jian Li
Binghamton University
State University of New York
Binghamton, NY 13902
lij@binghamton.edu

Shiqiang Wang
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
wangshiq@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We study the problem of augmenting online algorithms with machine learned
(ML) advice. In particular, we consider the multi-shop ski rental (MSSR) problem,
which is a generalization of the classical ski rental problem. In MSSR, each shop
has different prices for buying and renting a pair of skis, and a skier has to make
decisions on when and where to buy. We obtain both deterministic and randomized
online algorithms with provably improved performance when either a single or
multiple ML predictions are used to make decisions. These online algorithms have
no knowledge about the quality or the prediction error type of the ML prediction.
The performance of these online algorithms are robust to the poor performance of
the predictors, but improve with better predictions. Extensive experiments using
both synthetic and real world data traces verify our theoretical observations and
show better performance against algorithms that purely rely on online decision
making.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty plays a critical role in many real world applications where the decision maker is faced
with multiple alternatives with different costs. These decisions arise in our daily lives, such as whether
to rent an apartment or buy a house, which cannot be answered reliably without knowledge of the
future. In a more general setting with multiple alternatives, such as a large number of files with
different execution times in a distributed computing system, it is hard to decide which file should be
executed next without knowing which file will arrive in the future. These decision-making problems
are usually modeled as online rent-or-buy problems, such as the classical ski rental problem and
many of its generalizations [5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 15].
Two paradigms have been widely studied to deal with such uncertainty. On the one hand, online
algorithms are designed without prior knowledge to the problem, and competitive ratio (CR) is used
to characterize the goodness of the algorithm in lack of the future. CR is defined as the ratio between
the cost of the online algorithm (ALG) and that of the offline optimal (OPT), in the worst-case over
all feasible inputs. On the other hand, machine learning is applied to address uncertainty by making
future predictions via building robust models on prior data. Recently, there is a popular trend in the
design of online algorithms by incorporating machine learned (ML) predictions to improving their
performance [2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18]. To that end, two properties are desired: (i) if the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

