RepPoints v2: Verification Meets Regression for
Object Detection

Yihong Chen∗ 14 , Zheng Zhang2 , Yue Cao2 , Liwei Wang13 , Stephen Lin2 , Han Hu2
1
Center of Data Science, Peking University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
4
Zhejiang Lab
{v-yich,zhez,yuecao,stevelin,hanhu}@microsoft.com
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Verification and regression are two general methodologies for prediction in neural
networks. Each has its own strengths: verification can be easier to infer accurately,
and regression is more efficient and applicable to continuous target variables.
Hence, it is often beneficial to carefully combine them to take advantage of their
benefits. In this paper, we take this philosophy to improve state-of-the-art object
detection, specifically by RepPoints. Though RepPoints provides high performance,
we find that its heavy reliance on regression for object localization leaves room
for improvement. We introduce verification tasks into the localization prediction
of RepPoints, producing RepPoints v2, which provides consistent improvements
of about 2.0 mAP over the original RepPoints on the COCO object detection
benchmark using different backbones and training methods. RepPoints v2 also
achieves 52.1 mAP on COCO test-dev by a single model. Moreover, we show
that the proposed approach can more generally elevate other object detection
frameworks as well as applications such as instance segmentation. The code is
available at https://github.com/Scalsol/RepPointsV2.

1

Introduction

Two common methodologies for neural network prediction are verification and regression. While
either can drive network features to fit the final task targets, they each have different strengths. For
the object localization problem, verification can be easier to infer because each feature is spatially
aligned with the target to be verified. On the other hand, regression is often more efficient and it can
also predict continuous target variables that enable subtle localization refinement.
To take advantage of all these benefits, earlier object localization methods [9, 20, 19] combined
verification and regression by first performing coarse localization through verifying several anchor box
hypotheses, and then refining the localization by regressing box offsets. This combination approach
was shown to be effective and led to state-of-the-art performance at the time. However, recent
methods based purely on regression, which directly regress the object extent from each feature map
position [32, 29, 34], could perform competitively or even better, when comparing a representative
regression method, RepPoints, to RetinaNet [19].
In this work, we examine whether pure regression based methods can be enhanced by the inclusion
of verification methodology. We observe that verification has proven to be advantageous when used
in certain ways. In CornerNet [16], feature map points are verified as a bounding box corner or
∗

Most work was done when Yihong Chen was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

