Dynamic Regret of Policy Optimization in
Non-Stationary Environments

1

Yingjie Fei1 Zhuoran Yang2 Zhaoran Wang1 Qiaomin Xie3
Northwestern University; yf275@cornell.edu, zhaoranwang@gmail.com
2
Princeton University; zy6@princeton.edu
3
Cornell University; qiaomin.xie@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider reinforcement learning (RL) in episodic MDPs with adversarial fullinformation reward feedback and unknown fixed transition kernels. We propose
two model-free policy optimization algorithms, POWER and POWER++, and
establish guarantees for their dynamic regret. Compared with the classical notion
of static regret, dynamic regret is a stronger notion as it explicitly accounts for the
non-stationarity of environments. The dynamic regret attained by the proposed
algorithms interpolates between different regimes of non-stationarity, and moreover
satisfies a notion of adaptive (near-)optimality, in the sense that it matches the
(near-)optimal static regret under slow-changing environments. The dynamic regret
bound features two components, one arising from exploration, which deals with the
uncertainty of transition kernels, and the other arising from adaptation, which deals
with non-stationary environments. Specifically, we show that POWER++ improves
over POWER on the second component of the dynamic regret by actively adapting
to non-stationarity through prediction. To the best of our knowledge, our work is
the first dynamic regret analysis of model-free RL algorithms in non-stationary
environments.

1

Introduction

Classical reinforcement learning (RL) literature often evaluates an algorithm by comparing its
performance with that of the best fixed (i.e., stationary) policy in hindsight, where the difference is
commonly known as regret. Such evaluation metric implicitly assumes that the environment is static
so that it is appropriate to compare an algorithm to a single best policy. However, as we advance
towards modern and practical RL problems, we face challenges arising in dynamic and non-stationary
environments for which comparing against a single policy is no longer sufficient.
Two of the most prominent examples of RL for non-stationary environments are continual RL [30]
and meta RL [16, 51] (and more broadly meta learning [20, 21]), which are central topics in the
study of generalizability of RL algorithms. In these settings, an agent encounters a stream of tasks
throughout time and aims to solve each task with knowledge accrued via solving previous tasks.
The tasks can be very different in nature from each other, with potentially increasing difficulties. In
particular, the reward mechanism may vary across tasks, and therefore requires the agent to adapt to
the change of tasks. Another example of RL under non-stationary environments is human-machine
interaction [23, 41]. This line of research studies how humans and machines (or robots) should interact
or collaborate to accomplish certain goals. In one scenario, a human teaches a robot to complete a
task by assigning appropriate rewards to the robot but without intervening its dynamics. The rewards
from the human can depend on the stage of the learning process and the rate of improvement in the
robot’s behaviors. Therefore, the robot has to adjust its policy over time to maximize the rewards it
receives.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

