On the Expressiveness of Approximate Inference in
Bayesian Neural Networks

Andrew Y. K. Foong∗
University of Cambridge
ykf21@cam.ac.uk

David R. Burt∗
University of Cambridge
drb62@cam.ac.uk

Yingzhen Li
Microsoft Research
Yingzhen.Li@microsoft.com

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Microsoft Research
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
While Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) hold the promise of being flexible, wellcalibrated statistical models, inference often requires approximations whose consequences are poorly understood. We study the quality of common variational
methods in approximating the Bayesian predictive distribution. For single-hidden
layer ReLU BNNs, we prove a fundamental limitation in function-space of two of
the most commonly used distributions defined in weight-space: mean-field Gaussian and Monte Carlo dropout. We find there are simple cases where neither method
can have substantially increased uncertainty in between well-separated regions of
low uncertainty. We provide strong empirical evidence that exact inference does
not have this pathology, hence it is due to the approximation and not the model.
In contrast, for deep networks, we prove a universality result showing that there
exist approximate posteriors in the above classes which provide flexible uncertainty
estimates. However, we find empirically that pathologies of a similar form as in
the single-hidden layer case can persist when performing variational inference in
deeper networks. Our results motivate careful consideration of the implications of
approximate inference methods in BNNs.

1

Introduction

Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) [27, 30] aim to combine the strong inductive biases and flexibility
of neural networks (NNs) with the probabilistic framework for uncertainty quantification provided
by Bayesian statistics. However, performing exact inference in BNNs is analytically intractable and
requires approximations. A variety of scalable approximate inference techniques have been proposed,
with mean-field variational inference (MFVI) [15, 4] and Monte Carlo dropout (MCDO) [11] among
the most used methods. These methods have been succesful in applications such as active learning
and out-of-distribution detection [9, 33]. However, it is unclear to what extent the successes (and
failures) of BNNs are attributable to the exact Bayesian predictive, rather than the peculiarities of the
approximation method. From a Bayesian modelling perspective, it is therefore crucial to ask, does
the approximate predictive distribution retain the qualitative features of the exact predictive?
Frequently, BNN approximations define a simple class of distributions over the model parameters,
(an approximating family), and choose a member of this family as an approximation to the posterior.
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

