O(n) Connections are Expressive Enough:
Universal Approximability of Sparse Transformers

Chulhee Yun
MIT
chulheey@mit.edu
Ankit Singh Rawat
Google Research NY
ankitsrawat@google.com

Yin-Wen Chang
Google Research NY
yinwen@google.com
Sashank J. Reddi
Google Research NY
sashank@google.com

Srinadh Bhojanapalli
Google Research NY
bsrinadh@google.com
Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research NY
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
Recently, Transformer networks have redefined the state of the art in many NLP
tasks. However, these models suffer from quadratic computational cost in the
input sequence length n to compute pairwise attention in each layer. This has
prompted recent research into sparse Transformers that sparsify the connections
in the attention layers. While empirically promising for long sequences, fundamental questions remain unanswered: Can sparse Transformers approximate any
arbitrary sequence-to-sequence function, similar to their dense counterparts? How
does the sparsity pattern and the sparsity level affect their performance? In this
paper, we address these questions and provide a unifying framework that captures
existing sparse attention models. We propose sufficient conditions under which we
prove that a sparse attention model can universally approximate any sequence-tosequence function. Surprisingly, our results show that sparse Transformers with
only O(n) connections per attention layer can approximate the same function class
as the dense model with n2 connections. Lastly, we present experiments comparing
different patterns/levels of sparsity on standard NLP tasks.

1

Introduction

Transformer networks [28] and their variants [31] have played a key role in the recent advancement
of the state of the art in many natural language processing tasks, such as machine translation [28],
language modeling [23, 24], and question answering [10, 17, 31]. The key component of these
networks is the self-attention layer [1, 18], which updates the embeddings of the input tokens
based on their context. Naturally, the self-attention layer also plays the key role in the analysis of
Transformers [3, 4, 12, 20, 33]; for example, Yun et al. [33] show that Transformers can approximate
any continuous sequence-to-sequence functions (i.e., universal approximation), by proving that
self-attention layers can compute contextual mappings of the input embeddings.
On the other hand, the self-attention layer is also the main bottleneck in scaling these models. It
involves computation of pairwise inner products between input tokens, which results in quadratic
computational complexity O(n2 ) in the length of the input sequence n. To mitigate this issue,
researchers have developed methods to sparsify the pairwise interactions/connections in self-attention
layers to reduce the computational complexity and/or improve model interpretability, and have shown
successful empirical results on tasks with long sequence lengths [2, 6, 8, 9, 11, 16, 22, 25, 26, 32,
34, 35]. For example, Child et al. [6] propose sparse Transformers for sequence generation. One
of the sparsity patterns considered in [6] is the S TRIDED pattern, where the sparse attention layers
alternate between two patterns: each token attends to only i) w local neighbors, and then ii) one after
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

