No-regret Learning in Price Competitions under
Consumer Reference Effects
Negin Golrezaei
MIT Sloan School of Management
golrezae@mit.edu

Patrick Jaillet
MIT Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
jaillet@mit.edu

Jason Cheuk Nam Liang
MIT Operations Research Center
jcnliang@mit.edu

Abstract
We study long-run market stability for repeated price competitions between two
firms, where consumer demand depends on firms’ posted prices and consumers’
price expectations called reference prices. Consumers’ reference prices vary over
time according to a memory-based dynamic, which is a weighted average of all
historical prices. We focus on the setting where firms are not aware of demand
functions and how reference prices are formed but have access to an oracle that
provides a measure of consumers’ responsiveness to the current posted prices.
We show that if the firms run no-regret algorithms, in particular, online mirror
descent (OMD), with decreasing step sizes, the market stabilizes in the sense that
firms’ prices and reference prices converge to a stable Nash Equilibrium (SNE).
Interestingly, we also show that there exist constant step sizes under which the
market stabilizes. We further characterize the rate of convergence to the SNE for
both decreasing and constant OMD step sizes.

1

Introduction

In markets with repeated consumer-seller interactions, consumers develop price expectations (or
reference prices) based on past observed prices. Such price memories would influence consumers’
willingness-to-pay and hence their purchasing decisions, eventually impacting the overall aggregate
market demand. Due to such memory dependent reference price effects, developing pricing strategies
is challenging because firms may not necessarily know how consumers form and adjust price
expectations. The complexity of pricing is further increased with competition, as competitors’ pricing
decisions impact not only a firm’s immediate demand but also consumers’ reference prices. Such
challenges in pricing under competition and reference price effects make market stability particularly
attractive to firms: under stable markets, long-term organizational planning and business strategy
development can be conducted more effectively (see [14]). Inspired by this, in this paper, we study
the impact of consumer reference prices on the long-term stability of competitive markets.
We examine a simplified market scenario where two firms sequentially set prices to sell goods over
an infinite time horizon, and demand of each firm’s goods are influenced by both firms’ current
prices and the current consumers’ reference price, which is a weighted average of all past price
trajectories. Also, the repeated price competitions occur in an opaque environment, where firms are
not aware of any demand or reference price characteristics, and only have access to an oracle that
returns consumers’ responsiveness to posted prices.1 In such a market scenario, we consider that both
1

We consider a linear demand model, but firms are not aware of the functional form of the demand.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

