How does Weight Correlation Affect the
Generalisation Ability of Deep Neural Networks?
Gaojie Jin1 , Xinping Yi1 , Liang Zhang2,3 , Lijun Zhang2,4 , Sven Schewe1 , Xiaowei Huang1
2

1
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Institute of Intellegence Software, Guangzhou, China
{g.jin3, xinping.yi, svens, xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk
{zhangliang, zhanglj}@ios.ac.cn

Abstract
This paper studies the novel concept of weight correlation in deep neural networks
and discusses its impact on the networks’ generalisation ability. For fully-connected
layers, the weight correlation is defined as the average cosine similarity between
weight vectors of neurons, and for convolutional layers, the weight correlation is
defined as the cosine similarity between filter matrices. Theoretically, we show
that, weight correlation can, and should, be incorporated into the PAC Bayesian
framework for the generalisation of neural networks, and the resulting generalisation bound is monotonic with respect to the weight correlation. We formulate a new
complexity measure, which lifts the PAC Bayes measure with weight correlation,
and experimentally confirm that it is able to rank the generalisation errors of a set
of networks more precisely than existing measures. More importantly, we develop
a new regulariser for training, and provide extensive experiments that show that the
generalisation error can be greatly reduced with our novel approach.

1

Introduction

Evidence in neuroscience has suggested that correlation between neurons plays a key role in the
encoding and computation of information in the brain (Cohen and Kohn, 2011; Kohn and Smith,
2005). In deep neural networks (DNNs), or networks for simplicity, the correlation between neurons
can be materialised as the correlation between weight matrices of either neurons (for fully-connected
layers) or their filters (for convolutional layers), where it is referred to as weight correlation (WC).
WC is, while intriguing, not a concept that is prima facie a primary benchmark for networks. We will,
however, provide evidence that it correlates with the generalisation ability of networks—one of the
most important concepts in machine learning that reflects how accurately a learning algorithm is able
to predict over previously unseen data. The key concept of generalisation ability can be quantified by
the generalisation error (GE). Many factors have been discussed (Zhang et al., 2017) related to the
GE, including the Lipschitz constant, the smoothness of the loss function, and memorisation, to name
but a few. To the best of our knowledge, however, no research that explicitly considers how, and to
what extend, a correlation concept—either the WC or any other correlation—affects the GE has been
conducted yet. Our observation that the WC correlates positively with GE thus opens an exciting new
avenue to reduce the GE, and thus to improve the generalisation ability of networks.
Our hypothesis of positive correlation between WC and GE is motivated by an observation made
from Figure 1, which shows such a correlation between WC and GE. Broadly speaking, the GE
increases with the WCs.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

