A Bayesian Nonparametrics View into
Deep Representations

Michał Jamroż∗
AGH University of Science and Technology
Krakow, Poland
mijamroz@agh.edu.pl

Marcin Kurdziel∗
AGH University of Science and Technology
Krakow, Poland
kurdziel@agh.edu.pl

Mateusz Opala
AGH University of Science and Technology
Krakow, Poland
mo@matthewopala.com

Abstract
We investigate neural network representations from a probabilistic perspective.
Specifically, we leverage Bayesian nonparametrics to construct models of neural
activations in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and latent representations in
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs). This allows us to formulate a tractable complexity measure for distributions of neural activations and to explore global structure of
latent spaces learned by VAEs. We use this machinery to uncover how memorization and two common forms of regularization, i.e. dropout and input augmentation,
influence representational complexity in CNNs. We demonstrate that networks
that can exploit patterns in data learn vastly less complex representations than
networks forced to memorize. We also show marked differences between effects
of input augmentation and dropout, with the latter strongly depending on network
width. Next, we investigate latent representations learned by standard β-VAEs and
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) β-VAEs. We show that aggregated posterior in standard VAEs quickly collapses to the diagonal prior when regularization
strength increases. MMD-VAEs, on the other hand, learn more complex posterior
distributions, even with strong regularization. While this gives a richer sample
space, MMD-VAEs do not exhibit independence of latent dimensions. Finally, we
leverage our probabilistic models as an effective sampling strategy for latent codes,
improving quality of samples in VAEs with rich posteriors.

1

Introduction

Neural networks that differ only in initial parameter values converge to different minima of the cost
function. This observation raises a following question: is this variability simply a manifestation of
a numerical leeway afforded by model overparametrization or, perhaps, a manifestation of a more
fundamental discord in ways neural networks take to make predictions? This question is not only
important from a practical perspective – e.g. in efforts to pinpoint and interpret factors behind specific
network responses – but is also fundamental to our understanding of information processing in neural
models. Recently, Raghu et al. [2017] Morcos et al. [2018] and Kornblith et al. [2019] showed that
under suitable similarity metric neural representations do in fact share some common structure. Yet,
their work is limited to finding representational similarity between pairs of converged networks.
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

