Learning to summarize from human feedback

Nisan Stiennon∗
Chelsea Voss∗

Long Ouyang∗
Alec Radford

Jeff Wu∗

Daniel M. Ziegler∗

Dario Amodei

Ryan Lowe∗

Paul Christiano∗

OpenAI

Abstract
As language models become more powerful, training and evaluation are increasingly bottlenecked by the data and metrics used for a particular task. For example,
summarization models are often trained to predict human reference summaries and
evaluated using ROUGE, but both of these metrics are rough proxies for what we
really care about—summary quality. In this work, we show that it is possible to
significantly improve summary quality by training a model to optimize for human
preferences. We collect a large, high-quality dataset of human comparisons between summaries, train a model to predict the human-preferred summary, and use
that model as a reward function to fine-tune a summarization policy using reinforcement learning. We apply our method to a version of the TL;DR dataset of Reddit
posts [63] and find that our models significantly outperform both human reference
summaries and much larger models fine-tuned with supervised learning alone. Our
models also transfer to CNN/DM news articles [22], producing summaries nearly
as good as the human reference without any news-specific fine-tuning.2 We conduct extensive analyses to understand our human feedback dataset and fine-tuned
models.3 We establish that our reward model generalizes to new datasets, and that
optimizing our reward model results in better summaries than optimizing ROUGE
according to humans. We hope the evidence from our paper motivates machine
learning researchers to pay closer attention to how their training loss affects the
model behavior they actually want.

1

Introduction

Large-scale language model pretraining has become increasingly prevalent for achieving high performance on a variety of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. When applying these models
to a specific task, they are usually fine-tuned using supervised learning, often to maximize the log
probability of a set of human demonstrations.
While this strategy has led to markedly improved performance, there is still a misalignment between
this fine-tuning objective—maximizing the likelihood of human-written text—and what we care
about—generating high-quality outputs as determined by humans. This misalignment has several
causes: the maximum likelihood objective has no distinction between important errors (e.g. making
up facts [41]) and unimportant errors (e.g. selecting the precise word from a set of synonyms); models
∗
This was a joint project of the OpenAI Reflection team. Author order was randomized amongst {LO, JW,
DZ, NS}; CV and RL were full-time contributors for most of the duration. PC is the team lead.
2
Samples from all of our models can be viewed on our website.
3
We provide inference code for our 1.3B models and baselines, as well as a model card and our human
feedback dataset with over 64k summary comparisons, here.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

