Towards Understanding Hierarchical Learning:
Benefits of Neural Representations
Minshuo Chen⇤

Yu Bai† Jason D. Lee⇧ Tuo Zhao⇤ Huan Wang†
Caiming Xiong† Richard Socher†
⇤
Georgia Tech † Salesforce Research ⇧ Princeton University
{mchen393, tourzhao}@gatech.edu
jasonlee@princeton.edu
{yu.bai, huan.wang, cxiong, rsocher}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks can empirically perform efficient hierarchical learning, in
which the layers learn useful representations of the data. However, how they make
use of the intermediate representations are not explained by recent theories that
relate them to “shallow learners” such as kernels. In this work, we demonstrate that
intermediate neural representations add more flexibility to neural networks and can
be advantageous over raw inputs. We consider a fixed, randomly initialized neural
network as a representation function fed into another trainable network. When
the trainable network is the quadratic Taylor model of a wide two-layer network,
we show that neural representation can achieve improved sample complexities
compared with the raw input: For learning a low-rank degree-p polynomial (p 4)
e dp/2e ) samples, while the
in d dimension, neural representation requires only O(d
e p 1 ). We
best-known sample complexity upper bound for the raw input is O(d
contrast our result with a lower bound showing that neural representations do
not improve over the raw input (in the infinite width limit), when the trainable
network is instead a neural tangent kernel. Our results characterize when neural
representations are beneficial, and may provide a new perspective on why depth is
important in deep learning.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been empirically observed to be more powerful than their shallow
counterparts on a variety of machine learning tasks [38]. For example, on the ImageNet classification
task, a 152-layer residual network can achieve 8%-10% better top-1 accuracy than a shallower 18layer ResNet [30]. A widely held belief on why depth helps is that deep neural networks are able to
perform efficient hierarchical learning, in which the layers learn representations that are increasingly
useful for the present task. Such a hierarchical learning ability has been further leveraged in transfer
learning. For example, [28] and [19] show that by combining with additional task-specific layers, the
bottom layers of pre-trained neural networks for image classification and language modeling can be
naturally transferred to other related tasks and achieve significantly improved performance.
Despite significant empirical evidence, we are in the lack of practical theory for understanding the
hierarchical learning abilities of deep neural networks. Classical approximation theory has established
a line of “depth separation” results which show that deep networks are able to approximate certain
functions with much fewer parameters than shallow networks [18, 49, 24, 54, 12]. These work often
manipulates the network parameters in potentially pathological ways, and it is unclear whether the
resulting networks can be efficiently found through gradient-based optimization. A more recent line
of work shows that overparametrized deep networks can be provably optimized and generalize as
well as the so-called Neural Tangent Kernels (NTKs) [35, 21, 22, 3, 4, 7]. However, these results
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

