Theory-Inspired Path-Regularized Differential
Network Architecture Search
Pan Zhou

Caiming Xiong Richard Socher Steven C.H. Hoi
Salesforce Research
{pzhou, cxiong, rsocher, shoi}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Despite its high search efficiency, differential architecture search (DARTS) often
selects network architectures with dominated skip connections which lead to performance degradation. However, theoretical understandings on this issue remain
absent, hindering the development of more advanced methods in a principled way.
In this work, we solve this problem by theoretically analyzing the effects of various
types of operations, e.g. convolution, skip connection and zero operation, to the
network optimization. We prove that the architectures with more skip connections
can converge faster than the other candidates, and thus are selected by DARTS.
This result, for the first time, theoretically and explicitly reveals the impact of skip
connections to fast network optimization and its competitive advantage over other
types of operations in DARTS. Then we propose a theory-inspired path-regularized
DARTS that consists of two key modules: (i) a differential group-structured sparse
binary gate introduced for each operation to avoid unfair competition among operations, and (ii) a path-depth-wise regularization used to incite search exploration
for deep architectures that often converge slower than shallow ones as shown in
our theory and are not well explored during search. Experimental results on image
classification tasks validate its advantages.

1

Introduction

Network architecture search (NAS) [1] is an effective approach for automating network architecture
design, with many successful applications witnessed to image recognition [2–6] and language
modeling [1, 6]. The methodology of NAS is to automatically search for a directed graph and its edges
from a huge search space. Unlike expert-designed architectures which require substantial efforts from
experts by trial and error, the automatic principle in NAS greatly alleviates these design efforts and
possible design bias brought by experts which could prohibit achieving better performance. Thanks
to these advantages, NAS has been widely devised via reinforcement learning (RL) and evolutionary
algorithm (EA), and achieved promising results in many applications, e.g. classification [2, 4].
DARTS [6] is a recently developed leading approach. Different from RL and EA based methods [1–4]
that discretely optimize architecture parameters, DARTS converts the operation selection for each
edge in the directed graph into continuously weighting a fixed set of operations. In this way, it can
optimize the architecture parameters via gradient descent and greatly reduces the high search cost in
RL and EA approaches. However, as observed in the literatures [7–10] and Fig. 1 (a), this differential
NAS family, including DARTS and its variants [11, 12], typically selects many skip connections
which dominate over other types of operations in the network graph. Consequently, the searched
networks are observed to have unsatisfactory performance. To alleviate this issue, some empirical
techniques are developed, e.g. operation-level dropout [7], fair operation-competing loss [8]. But no
attention has been paid to developing theoretical understandings for why skip connections dominate
other types of operations in DARTS. The theoretical answer to this question is important not only for
better understanding DARTS, but also for inspiring new insights for DARTS algorithm improvement.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

