Learning the Linear Quadratic Regulator
from Nonlinear Observations
Zakaria Mhammedi
ANU and Data61

Dylan J. Foster
MIT

Max Simchowitz
UC Berkeley

zak.mhammedi@anu.edu.au

dylanf@mit.edu

msimchow@berkeley.edu

Dipendra Misra
Microsoft Research NYC

Wen Sun
Microsoft Research NYC

Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research NYC

dimisra@microsoft.com

sun.wen@microsoft.com

akshaykr@microsoft.com

Alexander Rakhlin
MIT

John Langford
Microsoft Research NYC

rakhlin@mit.edu

jcl@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce a new problem setting for continuous control called the LQR with
Rich Observations, or RichLQR. In our setting, the environment is summarized
by a low-dimensional continuous latent state with linear dynamics and quadratic
costs, but the agent operates on high-dimensional, nonlinear observations such as
images from a camera. To enable sample-efficient learning, we assume the learner
has access to a class of decoder functions (e.g., neural networks) that is flexible
enough to capture the mapping from observations to latent states. We introduce a
new algorithm, RichID, which learns a near-optimal policy for the RichLQR with
sample complexity scaling only with the dimension of the latent state space and the
capacity of the decoder function class. RichID is oracle-efficient and accesses the
decoder class only through calls to a least-squares regression oracle. Our results
constitute the first provable sample complexity guarantee for continuous control
with an unknown nonlinearity in the system model.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning and control, an agent must learn to minimize its overall cost in a unknown
dynamic environment that responds to its actions. In recent years, the field has developed a comprehensive understanding of the non-asymptotic sample complexity of linear control, where the
dynamics of the environment are determined by a noisy linear system of equations. While studying
linear models has led to a number of new theoretical insights, most practical control tasks are nonlinear. In this paper, we develop efficient algorithms with provable sample complexity guarantees for
nonlinear control with rich, flexible function approximation.
For some control applications, the dynamics themselves are truly nonlinear, but another case—
which is particularly relevant to real-world systems—is where there are (unknown-before-learning)
latent linear dynamics which are identifiable through a nonlinear observation process. For example,
cameras watching a robot may capture enough information to control its actuators, but the optimal
control law is unlikely to be a simple linear function of the pixels. More broadly, with the decrease
in costs of sensing hardware, it is now common to instrument complex control tasks with highthroughput measurement apparatus such as cameras, lidar, contact sensors, or other alternatives.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

