The Wasserstein Proximal Gradient Algorithm

Adil Salim
Visual Computing Center
KAUST
adil.salim@kaust.edu.sa

Anna Korba
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
a.korba@ucl.ac.uk

Giulia Luise
Computer Science Department
University College London
g.luise16@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Wasserstein gradient flows are continuous time dynamics that define curves of
steepest descent to minimize an objective function over the space of probability
measures (i.e., the Wasserstein space). This objective is typically a divergence
w.r.t. a fixed target distribution. In recent years, these continuous time dynamics
have been used to study the convergence of machine learning algorithms aiming
at approximating a probability distribution. However, the discrete-time behavior
of these algorithms might differ from the continuous time dynamics. Besides,
although discretized gradient flows have been proposed in the literature, little
is known about their minimization power. In this work, we propose a Forward
Backward (FB) discretization scheme that can tackle the case where the objective
function is the sum of a smooth and a nonsmooth geodesically convex terms. Using
techniques from convex optimization and optimal transport, we analyze the FB
scheme as a minimization algorithm on the Wasserstein space. More precisely,
we show under mild assumptions that the FB scheme has convergence guarantees
similar to the proximal gradient algorithm in Euclidean spaces.

1

Introduction

The task of transporting an initial distribution µ0 to a target distribution µ? is common in machine
learning. This task can be reformulated as the minimization of a cost functional defined over
the set of probability distributions. Wasserstein gradient flows [2] are suitable continuous time
dynamics to minimize such cost functionals. These flows have found applications in various fields of
machine learning such as reinforcement learning [32,40], sampling [5,12,16,38] and neural networks
optimization [14, 26]. Indeed, Wasserstein gradient flows can be seen as the continuous limit of
several discrete time machine learning algorithms. The analysis of continuous time dynamics is
often easier than the analysis of their discrete time counterparts. Therefore, many works focus solely
on continuous time analyses of machine learning algorithms such as variants of gradient descent
[7, 14, 15, 26, 34, 37]. Besides, although discretized Wasserstein gradient flows have been proposed in
the literature [2, 8, 11, 19, 24, 38], most of them have not been studied as minimization algorithms.
In this paper, we focus on the resolution, by a discrete time algorithm, of a minimization
problem
R
defined on the set P2 (X ) of probability measures µ over X = Rd such that kxk2 dµ(x) < ∞.
More precisely, µ? is defined as a solution to
min G(µ) := EF (µ) + H(µ),

µ∈P2 (X )

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

