Maximum-Entropy Adversarial Data Augmentation
for Improved Generalization and Robustness

Long Zhao1
Ting Liu2
Xi Peng3
Dimitris Metaxas1
2
3
Rutgers University
Google Research
University of Delaware
{lz311,dnm}@cs.rutgers.edu
liuti@google.com
xipeng@udel.edu
1

Abstract
Adversarial data augmentation has shown promise for training robust deep neural
networks against unforeseen data shifts or corruptions. However, it is difficult to
define heuristics to generate effective fictitious target distributions containing “hard”
adversarial perturbations that are largely different from the source distribution. In
this paper, we propose a novel and effective regularization term for adversarial
data augmentation. We theoretically derive it from the information bottleneck
principle, which results in a maximum-entropy formulation. Intuitively, this regularization term encourages perturbing the underlying source distribution to enlarge
predictive uncertainty of the current model, so that the generated “hard” adversarial
perturbations can improve the model robustness during training. Experimental
results on three standard benchmarks demonstrate that our method consistently
outperforms the existing state of the art by a statistically significant margin. Our
code is available at https://github.com/garyzhao/ME-ADA.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks can achieve good performance on the condition that the training and testing
data are drawn from the same distribution. However, this condition might not hold true in practice.
Data shifts caused by mismatches between training and testing domain [6, 41, 51, 65, 76], small
corruptions to data distributions [24, 75], or adversarial attacks [23, 35] are often inevitable in
real-world applications, and lead to significant performance degradation of deep learning models.
Recently, adversarial data augmentation [22, 51, 65] emerges as a strong baseline where fictitious
target distributions are generated by an adversarial loss to resemble unforseen data shifts, and used to
improve model robustness through training. The adversarial loss is leveraged to produce perturbations
that fool the current model. However, as shown in [48], this heuristic loss function is insufficient
to synthesize large data shifts, i.e., “hard” adversarial perturbations from the source domain, which
makes the model still vulnerable to severely shifted or corrupted testing data.
To mitigate this issue, we propose a regularization technique for adversarial data augmentation from
an information theory perspective using the Information Bottleneck (IB) [58] principle. The IB
principle encourages the model to learn an optimal representation by diminishing the irrelevant parts
of the input variable that do not contribute to the prediction. Recently, there has been a surge of
interest in combining the IB method with training of deep neural networks [2, 5, 17, 30, 46, 60],
while its effectiveness for adversarial data augmentation still remains unclear.
In the IB context, a neural network does not generalize well on out-of-domain data often when
the information of the input cannot be well-compressed by the model, i.e., the mutual information
of the input and its associated latent representation is high [50, 59]. Motivated by this conceptual
observation, we aim to regularize adversarial data augmentation through maximizing the IB function.
Specifically, we produce “hard” fictitious target domains that are largely shifted from the source
domain by enlarging the mutual information of the input and latent distribution within the current
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

