A Unified View of Label Shift Estimation
Saurabh Garg, Yifan Wu, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Zachary C. Lipton
Machine Learning Department,
Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Carnegie Mellon University
{sgarg2,yw4,sbalakri,zlipton}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Under label shift, the label distribution p(y) might change but the class-conditional
distributions p(x|y) do not. There are two dominant approaches for estimating the
label marginal. BBSE, a moment-matching approach based on confusion matrices,
is provably consistent and provides interpretable error bounds. However, a maximum likelihood estimation approach, which we call MLLS, dominates empirically.
In this paper, we present a unified view of the two methods and the first theoretical
characterization of MLLS. Our contributions include (i) consistency conditions for
MLLS, which include calibration of the classifier and a confusion matrix invertibility condition that BBSE also requires; (ii) a unified framework, casting BBSE as
roughly equivalent to MLLS for a particular choice of calibration method; and (iii)
a decomposition of MLLS’s finite-sample error into terms reflecting miscalibration
and estimation error. Our analysis attributes BBSE’s statistical inefficiency to a loss
of information due to coarse calibration. Experiments on synthetic data, MNIST,
and CIFAR10 support our findings.

1

Introduction

Supervised algorithms are typically developed and evaluated assuming independent and identically
distributed (iid) data. However, the real world seldom abides, presenting domain adaptation problems
in which the source distribution Ps , from which we sample labeled training examples, differs from
the target distribution Pt , from which we only observe unlabeled data. Absent assumptions on the
nature of shift, the problem is underspecified. Multiple assumptions may be compatible with the
same observations while implying different courses of action. Fortunately, some assumptions can
render shift detection, estimation, and on-the-fly updates to our classifiers possible.
This paper focuses on label shift [22, 18, 16], which aligns with the anticausal setting in which
the labels y cause the features x [19]. Label shift arises in diagnostic problems because diseases
cause symptoms. In this setting, an intervention on p(y) induces the shift, but the process generating
x given y is fixed (ps (x|y) = pt (x|y)). Under label shift, the optimal predictor may change, e.g.,
the probability that a patient suffers from a disease given their symptoms can increase under a
pandemic. Contrast label shift with the better-known covariate shift assumption, which aligns with
the assumption that x causes y, yielding the reverse implication that ps (y|x) = pt (y|x).
Under label shift, our first task is to estimate the ratios w(y) = pt (y)/ps (y) for all labels y. Two
dominant approaches leverage off-the-shelf classifiers to estimate w: (i) Black Box Shift Estimation
(BBSE) [16] and a variant called Regularized Learning under Label Shift (RLLS) [2]: momentmatching based estimators that leverage (possibly biased, uncalibrated, or inaccurate) predictions
to estimate the shift; and (ii) Maximum Likelihood Label Shift (MLLS) [18]: an Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm that assumes access to a classifier that outputs the true source distribution
conditional probabilities ps (y|x).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

