Deep Structural Causal Models
for Tractable Counterfactual Inference
Nick Pawlowski⇤
Imperial College London
np716@imperial.ac.uk

Daniel C. Castro⇤
Imperial College London
dc315@imperial.ac.uk

Ben Glocker
Imperial College London
b.glocker@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We formulate a general framework for building structural causal models (SCMs)
with deep learning components. The proposed approach employs normalising
flows and variational inference to enable tractable inference of exogenous noise
variables—a crucial step for counterfactual inference that is missing from existing
deep causal learning methods. Our framework is validated on a synthetic dataset
built on MNIST as well as on a real-world medical dataset of brain MRI scans. Our
experimental results indicate that we can successfully train deep SCMs that are
capable of all three levels of Pearl’s ladder of causation: association, intervention,
and counterfactuals, giving rise to a powerful new approach for answering causal
questions in imaging applications and beyond. The code for all our experiments is
available at https://github.com/biomedia-mira/deepscm.

1

Introduction

Many questions in everyday life as well as in scientific inquiry are causal in nature: “How would
the climate have changed if we’d had less emissions in the ’80s?”, “How fast could I run if I hadn’t
been smoking?”, or “Will my headache be gone if I take that pill?”. None of those questions can be
answered with statistical tools alone, but require methods from causality to analyse interactions with
our environment (interventions) and hypothetical alternate worlds (counterfactuals), going beyond
joint, marginal, and conditional probabilities [1]. Even though these are natural lines of reasoning,
their mathematical formalisation under a unified theory is relatively recent [2].
In some statistics-based research fields, such as econometrics or epidemiology, the use of causal
inference methods has been established for some time [3, 4]. However, causal approaches have been
introduced into deep learning (DL) only very recently [5]. For example, research has studied the use
of causality for disentanglement [6, 7], causal discovery [8, 9], and for deriving causality-inspired
explanations [10, 11] or data augmentations [12]. Causal DL models could be capable of learning
relationships from complex high-dimensional data and of providing answers to interventional and
counterfactual questions, although current work on deep counterfactuals is limited by modelling only
direct cause-effect relationships [11] or instrumental-variable scenarios [13], or by not providing a
full recipe for tractable counterfactual inference [14].
The integration of causality into DL research promises to enable novel scientific advances as well as
to tackle known shortcomings of DL methods: DL is known to be susceptible to learning spurious
correlations and amplifying biases [e.g. 15], and to be exceptionally vulnerable to changes in the
input distribution [16]. By explicitly modelling causal relationships and acknowledging the difference
between causation and correlation, causality becomes a natural field of study for improving the
transparency, fairness, and robustness of DL-based systems [17, 18]. Further, the tractable inference
of deep counterfactuals enables novel research avenues that aim to study causal reasoning on a
⇤

Joint first authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

