HM-ANN: Efficient Billion-Point Nearest Neighbor
Search on Heterogeneous Memory

Jie Ren

Minjia Zhang

Dong Li

University of California, Merced
jren6@ucmerced.edu

Microsoft Research
minjiaz@microsoft.com

University of California, Merced
dli35@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
The state-of-the-art approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) algorithms face
a fundamental tradeoff between query latency and accuracy, because of small
main memory capacity: To store indices in main memory for fast query response,
They have to limit the number of data points or store compressed vectors, which
hurts search accuracy. The emergence of heterogeneous memory (HM) brings
opportunities to largely increase memory capacity and break the above tradeoff:
Using HM, billions of data points can be placed in main memory on a single
machine without using any data compression. However, HM consists of both fast
(but small) memory and slow (but large) memory, and using HM inappropriately
slows down query time significantly. In this work, we present a novel graph-based
similarity search algorithm called HM-ANN, which takes both memory and data
heterogeneity into consideration and enables billion-scale similarity search on a
single node without using compression. On two billion-sized datasets BIGANN and
DEEP1B, HM-ANN outperforms state-of-the-art compression-based solutions such
as L&C [13] and IMI+OPQ [12] in recall-vs-latency by a large margin, obtaining
46% higher recall under the same search latency. We also extend existing graphbased methods such as HNSW and NSG with two strong baseline implementations
on HM. At billion-point scale, HM-ANN is 2X and 5.8X faster than our HNSW
and NSG baselines respectively to reach the same accuracy.

1

Introduction

Efficient billion-scale nearest neighbor search has become a significant research problem [6, 7, 22, 23],
inspired by the needs of machine learning based applications. Since the number of entities (images,
documents, etc) grows enormously fast, it becomes challenging to find correspondences in large
datasets when there is a requirement for real-time responses (e.g., in several milliseconds). Exhaustive
search is infeasible at billion-point scales, because it is extremely computational demanding. Hence,
practitioners resort to indexing structures that perform the approximate nearest neighbor search
(ANNS) by restricting a query to search only a subset of the dataset that includes the desired
neighbors [10, 19, 25]. Among those ANNS, it has been demonstrated that similarity graphs, such as
Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) [29] and Navigating Spread-out Graph (NSG) [16],
obtain superior performance relative to tree structure based [9, 10, 31, 46], locality sensitive hashing
(LSH) based [18], and inverted multi-index (IMI) based [25] approaches, and they overall provide
the best-in-class latency-vs-accuracy trade-off on most public benchmark datasets.
While obtaining good search speed and accuracy, one major limitation of existing similarity graphs is
that they are very memory consuming and easily run out of memory with a few hundred millions of
vectors. When the dataset becomes too large to fit on a single machine, the compressed representations
of the database points are used, such as Hamming codes [33] and product quantization [13, 17, 21,
24, 32]. However, the performance of these methods deteriorates rapidly at higher recall targets,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

