The Hateful Memes Challenge:
Detecting Hate Speech in Multimodal Memes
Douwe Kiela⇤, Hamed Firooz⇤, Aravind Mohan,
Vedanuj Goswami, Amanpreet Singh, Pratik Ringshia, Davide Testuggine
Facebook AI

{dkiela,mhfirooz,aramohan,vedanuj,asg,tikir,davidet}@fb.com

Abstract
This work proposes a new challenge set for multimodal classification, focusing on
detecting hate speech in multimodal memes. It is constructed such that unimodal
models struggle and only multimodal models can succeed: difficult examples (“benign confounders”) are added to the dataset to make it hard to rely on unimodal
signals. The task requires subtle reasoning, yet is straightforward to evaluate as
a binary classification problem. We provide baseline performance numbers for
unimodal models, as well as for multimodal models with various degrees of sophistication. We find that state-of-the-art methods perform poorly compared to
humans, illustrating the difficulty of the task and highlighting the challenge that
this important problem poses to the community.

1

Introduction

In the past few years there has been a surge of interest in multimodal problems, from image captioning [8, 43, 88, 28, 68] to visual question answering (VQA) [3, 26, 27, 33, 71] and beyond. Multimodal
tasks are interesting because many real-world problems are multimodal in nature—from how humans
perceive and understand the world around them, to handling data that occurs “in the wild” on the
Internet. Many practitioners believe that multimodality holds the key to problems as varied as natural
language understanding [5, 41], computer vision evaluation [23], and embodied AI [64].
Their success notwithstanding, it is not always clear to what extent truly multimodal reasoning
and understanding is required for solving many current tasks and datasets. For example, it has
been pointed out that language can inadvertently impose strong priors that result in seemingly
impressive performance, without any understanding of the visual content in the underlying model [15].
Similar problems were found in VQA [3], where simple baselines without sophisticated multimodal
understanding performed remarkably well [94, 35, 1, 26] and in multimodal machine translation [18,
74], where the image was found to matter relatively little [13, 17, 7]. In this work, we present a
challenge set designed to measure truly multimodal understanding and reasoning, with straightforward
evaluation metrics and a direct real world use case.
Specifically, we focus on hate speech detection in multimodal memes. Memes pose an interesting
multimodal fusion problem: Consider a sentence like “love the way you smell today” or “look how
many people love you”. Unimodally, these sentences are harmless, but combine them with an equally
harmless image of a skunk or a tumbleweed, and suddenly they become mean. See Figure 1 for an
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

