Steering Distortions to Preserve Classes and
Neighbors in Supervised Dimensionality Reduction

Benoît Colange
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INES,
F-73375, Le Bourget du Lac, France
benoit.colange@cea.fr

Jaakko Peltonen
Tampere University, Faculty of Information Technology
and Communication Sciences, Finland
jaakko.peltonen@tuni.fi

Michaël Aupetit
Qatar Computing Research Institute,
Hamad bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar
maupetit@hbku.edu.qa

Denys Dutykh
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Univ. Savoie Mont Blanc,
CNRS, LAMA, 73000 Chambéry, France
denys.dutykh@univ-smb.fr

Sylvain Lespinats
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INES,
F-73375, Le Bourget du Lac France
sylvain.lespinats@cea.fr

Abstract
Nonlinear dimensionality reduction of high-dimensional data is challenging as the
low-dimensional embedding will necessarily contain distortions, and it can be hard
to determine which distortions are the most important to avoid. When annotation of
data into known relevant classes is available, it can be used to guide the embedding
to avoid distortions that worsen class separation. The supervised mapping method
introduced in the present paper, called ClassNeRV, proposes an original stress
function that takes class annotation into account and evaluates embedding quality
both in terms of false neighbors and missed neighbors. ClassNeRV shares the
theoretical framework of a family of methods descending from Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (SNE). Our approach has a key advantage over previous ones: in the
literature supervised methods often emphasize class separation at the price of
distorting the data neighbors’ structure; conversely, unsupervised methods provide
better preservation of structure at the price of often mixing classes. Experiments
show that ClassNeRV can preserve both neighbor structure and class separation,
outperforming nine state of the art alternatives.

1

Introduction

Dimensionality Reduction (DR) methods aim at mapping a high dimensional dataset as points in a
lower dimensional embedding space, while preserving some similarity measure between data points.
DR may be supervised by taking advantage of class information. Hence, supervised methods compute
the mapping both from relative positions of data (also used by non-supervised methods) and from
the class labels. DR techniques [1, 2, 3] can be used as a pre-processing step for classification or
clustering, or to visualize (labeled) data as a scatterplot. When mapping labeled data, there are two
contradictory objectives:
• Classification is typical of supervised DR techniques: class separation is emphasized and
measured with classification accuracy in the embedding space.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

