A Loss Function for Generative Neural Networks
Based on Watson’s Perceptual Model

Steffen Czolbe1
Oswin Krause1
Ingemar Cox1,2
Christian Igel1
1
University of Copenhagen, Department of Computer Science
2
University College London, Department of Computer Science
{per.sc,oswin.krause,ingemar.cox,igel}@di.ku.dk

Abstract
To train Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) to generate realistic imagery requires a
loss function that reflects human perception of image similarity. We propose such
a loss function based on Watson’s perceptual model, which computes a weighted
distance in frequency space and accounts for luminance and contrast masking. We
extend the model to color images, increase its robustness to translation by using
the Fourier Transform, remove artifacts due to splitting the image into blocks, and
make it differentiable. In experiments, VAEs trained with the new loss function
generated realistic, high-quality image samples. Compared to using the Euclidean
distance and the Structural Similarity Index, the images were less blurry; compared
to deep neural network based losses, the new approach required less computational
resources and generated images with less artifacts.

1

Introduction

Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [11] are generative neural networks that learn a probability distribution over X from training data D = {x0 , ..., xn } ⊂ X . New samples are generated by drawing
a latent variable z ∈ Z from a distribution p(z) and using z to sample x ∈ X from a conditional
decoder distribution p(x|z). The distribution of p(x|z) induces a similarity measure on X . A generic
choice is a normal distribution p(x|z) = N (µx (z), σ 2 ) with a fixed variance σ 2 . In this case the
underlying energy-function is L(x, x′ ) = 2σ1 2 kx − x′ k2 . Thus, the model assumes that for two
samples which are sufficiently close to each other (as measured by σ 2 ), the similarity measure can be
well approximated by the squared loss. The choice of L is crucial for the generative model. For image
generation, traditional pixel-by-pixel loss metrics such as the squared loss are popular because of
their simplicity, ease of use and efficiency [5]. However, they perform poorly at modeling the human
perception of image similarity [30]. Most VAEs trained with such losses produce images that look
blurred [3, 5]. Accordingly, perceptual loss functions for VAEs are an active research area. These
loss functions fall into two broad categories, namely explicit models, as exemplified by the Structural
Similarity Index Model (SSIM) [25], and learned models. The latter include models based on deep
feature embeddings extracted from image classification networks [5, 30, 8] as well as combinations
of VAEs with discriminator networks of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [4, 13, 18].
Perceptual loss functions based on deep neural networks have produced promising results. However,
features optimized for one task need not be a good choice for a different task. Our experimental
results suggest that powerful metrics optimized on specific datasets may not generalize to broader
categories of images. We argue that using features from networks pre-trained for image classification
in loss functions for training VAEs for image generation may be problematic, because invariance
properties beneficial for classification make it difficult to capture details required to generate realistic
images.
Code and experiments are available at github.com/SteffenCzolbe/PerceptualSimilarity
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

