Hybrid Variance-Reduced SGD Algorithms For
Minimax Problems with Nonconvex-Linear Function
Quoc Tran-Dinh∗
Deyi Liu∗
Lam M. Nguyen†
∗
Department of Statistics and Operations Research
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Emails: {quoctd@email.unc.edu, deyi.liu@live.unc.edu}
†
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY10598, USA.
Email: lamnguyen.mltd@ibm.com

Abstract
We develop a novel and single-loop variance-reduced algorithm to solve a class
of stochastic nonconvex-convex minimax problems involving a nonconvex-linear
objective function, which has various applications in different fields such as machine learning and robust optimization. This problem class has several computational challenges due to its nonsmoothness, nonconvexity, nonlinearity, and
non-separability of the objective functions. Our approach relies on a new combination of recent ideas, including smoothing and hybrid biased variance-reduced
techniques. Our algorithm and its variants can achieve O(T −2/3 )-convergence rate
and the best known oracle complexity under standard assumptions, where T is the
iteration counter. They have several computational advantages compared to existing methods such as simple to implement and less parameter tuning requirements.
They can also work with both single sample or mini-batch on derivative estimators,
and with constant or diminishing step-sizes. We demonstrate the benefits of our
algorithms over existing methods through two numerical examples, including a
nonsmooth and nonconvex-non-strongly concave minimax model.

1

Introduction

We study the following stochastic minimax problem with nonconvex-linear objective function, which
covers various practical problems in different fields, see, e.g., [4, 10, 12]:
n
o


minp maxn Ψ(x, y) := R(x) + Eξ hKy, F(x, ξ)i − ψ(y) ,
(1)
x∈R y∈R

p

where F : R × Ω → Rq is a stochastic vector function defined on a probability space (Ω, P), K ∈
Rq×n is a given matrix, h·, ·i is an inner product, and ψ : Rn → R∪{+∞} and R : Rp → R∪{+∞}
are proper, closed, and convex functions [3]. Problem (1) is a special case of the nonconvex-concave
minimax problem, where H(x, y) := Eξ hKy, F(x, ξ)i is nonconvex in x and linear in y.
Due to the linearity of H w.r.t. y, (1) can be reformulated into a general stochastic compositional
nonconvex problem of the form:
n
o


minp Ψ0 (x) := φ0 (F (x)) + R(x) ≡ φ0 Eξ F(x, ξ) + R(x) ,
(2)
x∈R

where φ0 is a convex, but possibly nonsmooth function, defined as

φ0 (u) := maxn hK > u, yi − ψ(y) ≡ ψ ∗ (K > u),
y∈R

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(3)

