Linear Disentangled Representations and
Unsupervised Action Estimation

Matthew Painter, Jonathon Hare, Adam Prügel-Bennett
Department of Electronics and Computer Science
Southampton University
{mp2u16, jsh2, apb}@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract
Disentangled representation learning has seen a surge in interest over recent times,
generally focusing on new models which optimise one of many disparate disentanglement metrics. Symmetry Based Disentangled Representation learning
introduced a robust mathematical framework that defined precisely what is meant
by a “linear disentangled representation”. This framework determined that such
representations would depend on a particular decomposition of the symmetry group
acting on the data, showing that actions would manifest through irreducible group
representations acting on independent representational subspaces. Caselles-Dupré
et al. [2019] subsequently proposed the first model to induce and demonstrate a
linear disentangled representation in a VAE model. In this work we empirically
show that linear disentangled representations are not generally present in standard
VAE models and that they instead require altering the loss landscape to induce
them. We proceed to show that such representations are a desirable property with
regard to classical disentanglement metrics. Finally we propose a method to induce
irreducible representations which forgoes the need for labelled action sequences,
as was required by prior work. We explore a number of properties of this method,
including the ability to learn from action sequences without knowledge of intermediate states and robustness under visual noise. We also demonstrate that it can
successfully learn 4 independent symmetries directly from pixels.

1

Introduction

Many learning machines make use of an internal representation [Bengio et al., 2013] to help inform
their decisions. It is often desirable for these representations to be interpretable in the sense that
we can easily understand how individual parts contribute to solving the task at hand. Interpretable
representations have slowly become the major goal in the sub-field of deep learning concerned with
Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) [Kingma and Welling, 2014], seceding from the usual goal of
generative models, accurate/realistic sample generation. In this area, representations generally take
the form of a multi-dimensional vector space (latent space), and the particular form of interpretability
is known as Disentanglement, where each latent dimension (or group of such) is seen to represent an
individual (and independent) generative/explanatory factor of the data. Standard examples of such
factors include the x position, the y position, an object’s rotation, etc. Effectively separating them into
separate subspaces, “disentangling them” is the generally accepted aim of disentanglement research.
Assessing disentangled representations (in the specific case of VAEs) has primarily been based on the
application of numerous “disentanglement metrics”. These metrics operate on disparate understandings of what constitutes ideal disentanglement, and required large scale work [Locatello et al., 2018]
to present correlations between them and solidify the fact that they should be considered jointly and
not as individuals. Symmetry based disentangled representation learning (SBDRL) [Higgins et al.,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

