Adversarial robustness via robust low rank
representations

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research and Rutgers University.
pranjal.awasthi@rutgers.edu.
Ankit Singh Rawat
Google Research.
ankitsrawat@google.com.

Himanshu Jain
Google Research.
himj@google.com.

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan
Northwestern University.
aravindv@northwestern.edu.

Abstract
Adversarial robustness measures the susceptibility of a classifier to imperceptible perturbations made to the inputs at test time. In this work we
highlight the benefits of natural low rank representations that often exist
for real data such as images, for training neural networks with certified
robustness guarantees.
Our first contribution is for certified robustness to perturbations measured
in `2 norm. We exploit low rank data representations to provide improved
guarantees over state-of-the-art randomized smoothing-based approaches
on standard benchmark datasets such as CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100.
Our second contribution is for the more challenging setting of certified robustness to perturbations measured in `∞ norm. We demonstrate empirically
that natural low rank representations have inherent robustness properties,
that can be leveraged to provide significantly better guarantees for certified
robustness to `∞ perturbations in those representations. Our certificate
of `∞ robustness relies on a natural quantity involving the ∞ → 2 matrix
operator norm associated with the representation, to translate robustness
guarantees from `2 to `∞ perturbations. A key technical ingredient for our
certification guarantees is a fast algorithm with provable guarantees based
on the multiplicative weights update method to provide upper bounds on
the above matrix norm. Our algorithmic guarantees improve upon the state
of the art for this problem, and may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

It is now well established across several domains like images, audio and natural language, that
small input perturbations that are imperceptible to humans can fool deep neural networks at
test time [1, 2, 3, 4]. This phenomenon known as adversarial robustness has led to flurry of
research in recent years (see Section A for a discussion of related work). Following most prior
work in this area [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], we will study the setting where adversarial perturbations to
an input x are measured in an `p norm (p = 2 or p = ∞).
In this work, we study methods for certified adversarial robustness in the framework developed
in [10, 11]. The goal is to output a classifier f that on input x ∈ Rn outputs a prediction y in
the label space Y, along with a certified radius rf (x). The classifier is guaranteed to be robust
at x up to the radius rf (x) (with high probability), i.e., ∀z : kzkp ≤ rf (x), f (x + z) = f (x).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

