Meta-Learning through Hebbian Plasticity in
Random Networks
Elias Najarro and Sebastian Risi
IT University of Copenhagen
2300 Copenhagen, Denmark
enaj@itu.dk, sebr@itu.dk

Abstract
Lifelong learning and adaptability are two defining aspects of biological agents.
Modern reinforcement learning (RL) approaches have shown significant progress
in solving complex tasks, however once training is concluded, the found solutions
are typically static and incapable of adapting to new information or perturbations.
While it is still not completely understood how biological brains learn and adapt so
efficiently from experience, it is believed that synaptic plasticity plays a prominent
role in this process. Inspired by this biological mechanism, we propose a search
method that, instead of optimizing the weight parameters of neural networks
directly, only searches for synapse-specific Hebbian learning rules that allow
the network to continuously self-organize its weights during the lifetime of the
agent. We demonstrate our approach on several reinforcement learning tasks with
different sensory modalities and more than 450K trainable plasticity parameters.
We find that starting from completely random weights, the discovered Hebbian
rules enable an agent to navigate a dynamical 2D-pixel environment; likewise
they allow a simulated 3D quadrupedal robot to learn how to walk while adapting
to morphological damage not seen during training and in the absence of any
explicit reward or error signal in less than 100 timesteps. Code is available at
https://github.com/enajx/HebbianMetaLearning.

1

Introduction

Agents controlled by neural networks and trained through reinforcement learning (RL) have proven to
be capable of solving complex tasks [1–3]. However once trained, the neural network weights of these
agents are typically static, thus their behaviour remains mostly inflexible, showing limited adaptability
to unseen conditions or information. These solutions, whether found by gradient-based methods or
black-box optimization algorithms, are often immutable and overly specific for the problem they have
been trained to solve [4, 5]. When applied to a different tasks, these networks need to be retrained,
requiring many extra iterations.
Unlike artificial neural networks, biological agents display remarkable levels of adaptive behavior
and can learn rapidly [6, 7]. Although the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood, it is well
established that synaptic plasticity plays a fundamental role [8, 9]. For example, many animals can
quickly walk after being born without any explicit supervision or reward signals, seamlessly adapting
to their bodies of origin. Different plasticity-regulating mechanisms have been suggested which can
be encompassed in two main ideal-type families: end-to-end mechanisms which involve top-down
feedback propagating errors [10] and local mechanisms, which solely rely on local activity in order
to regulate the dynamics of the synaptic connections. The earliest proposed version of a purely local
mechanism is known as Hebbian plasticity, which in its simplest form states that the synaptic strength
between neurons changes proportionally to the correlation of activity between them [11].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

