Biologically Inspired Mechanisms for Adversarial
Robustness
Manish Reddy Vuyyuru
Institute for Applied Computational Science
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02139
mvuyyuru@g.harvard.edu

Andrzej Banburski∗
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
kappa666@mit.edu

Nishka Pant∗
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
npant@mit.edu

Tomaso Poggio
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
tp@ai.mit.edu

Abstract
A convolutional neural network strongly robust to adversarial perturbations at
reasonable computational and performance cost has not yet been demonstrated.
The primate visual ventral stream seems to be robust to small perturbations in
visual stimuli but the underlying mechanisms that give rise to this robust perception
are not understood. In this work, we investigate the role of two biologically
plausible mechanisms in adversarial robustness. We demonstrate that the nonuniform sampling performed by the primate retina and the presence of multiple
receptive fields with a range of receptive field sizes at each eccentricity improve
the robustness of neural networks to small adversarial perturbations. We verify
that these two mechanisms do not suffer from gradient obfuscation and study their
contribution to adversarial robustness through ablation studies.

1

Introduction

While modern convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance
in visual recognition, they still lag severely behind human vision on several tasks. Notably, despite
intense effort in recent years, these models remain vulnerable to adversarial perturbations [1], even
on standard datasets (e.g. ImageNet). In contrast, human vision appears to be particularly robust to
small perturbations in visual stimuli.
Simultaneously, an increasing body of computational and experimental work demonstrates the
suitability of these artificial neural networks (ANNs) as models of the primate brain’s ventral visual
stream [2, 3, 4, 5]. This suggests an opportunity to investigate if aspects of biological vision, that
are not yet incorporated into current computer vision models, improve adversarial robustness. If
the approach is successful, it will improve the robustness of engineered models and provide strong
support for ANNs being good models of primate vision. If the proposed approach does not find any
way to modify the existing models to reach human-level robustness, it could demonstrate that the
broad family of feedforward deep networks should be rejected as models of primate vision.
Engineering Significance Robust real-world adversarial examples that fool models across a wide
range of views, angles and lighting have been demonstrated [6]. CNNs are increasingly being
∗

A.B. and N.P. contributed equally to each other in this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

