Co-Tuning for Transfer Learning

Kaichao You, Zhi Kou, Mingsheng Long (B), Jianmin Wang
School of Software, BNRist, Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
{ykc20,kz19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs) to a target dataset, also
known as transfer learning, is widely used in computer vision and NLP. Because
task-specific layers mainly contain categorical information and categories vary
with datasets, practitioners only partially transfer pre-trained models by discarding
task-specific layers and fine-tuning bottom layers. However, it is a reckless loss to
simply discard task-specific parameters which take up as many as 20% of the total
parameters in pre-trained models. To fully transfer pre-trained models, we propose
a two-step framework named Co-Tuning: (i) learn the relationship between source
categories and target categories from the pre-trained model with calibrated predictions; (ii) target labels (one-hot labels), as well as source labels (probabilistic labels)
translated by the category relationship, collaboratively supervise the fine-tuning
process. A simple instantiation of the framework shows strong empirical results in
four visual classification tasks and one NLP classification task, bringing up to 20%
relative improvement. While state-of-the-art fine-tuning techniques mainly focus
on how to impose regularization when data are not abundant, Co-Tuning works
not only in medium-scale datasets (100 samples per class) but also in large-scale
datasets (1000 samples per class) where regularization-based methods bring no
gains over the vanilla fine-tuning. Co-Tuning relies on a typically valid assumption
that the pre-trained dataset is diverse enough, implying its broad application areas.

1

Introduction

The practice of fine-tuning pre-trained models, also known as transfer learning, is prevalent in deep
learning. In computer vision, we have models pre-trained on the ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009)
classification task, such as ResNet (He et al., 2016) and DenseNet (Huang et al., 2017). In NLP, we
witness the recent emergence of self-attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) based models pre-trained on a
large-scale corpus for masked language modeling, including BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), XLNet (Yang
et al., 2019), etc. Compared with training from scratch, fine-tuning requires less labeled data, enables
faster training, and usually achieves better performance (He et al., 2019).
The rule of thumb for many deep learning tasks is to (i) start from a pre-trained model, (ii) remove
task-specific top layers, and (iii) fine-tune bottom layers on the target task as a feature extractor.
This way, pre-trained models are partially transferred because only parameters in bottom layers
are transferred. As shown in Table 1, however, parameters in task-specific layers can take up over
20% of the total parameters. Simply discarding these layers is a reckless waste. To make the best of
pre-trained models, task-specific layers should also be transferred to achieve full transfer of DNNs.
Although full transfer of DNNs is appealing, an obvious obstacle of transferring task-specific layers
is that categories vary with datasets and it is difficult to reuse these layers. For example, when
transferring ImageNet pre-trained models to COCO-70 1 , the relationship between 1000 categories
1

A classification dataset constructed from COCO (Lin et al., 2014). See Sec. 5.3 for details.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

