Markovian Score Climbing: Variational Inference
with KL(p||q)

Christian A. Naesseth
Columbia University, USA
christian.a.naesseth@columbia.edu

Fredrik Lindsten
Linköping University, Sweden
fredrik.lindsten@liu.se

David Blei
Columbia University, USA
david.blei@columbia.edu

Abstract
Modern variational inference (VI) uses stochastic gradients to avoid intractable
expectations, enabling large-scale probabilistic inference in complex models.
VI posits a family of approximating distributions q and then finds the member of that family that is closest to the exact posterior p. Traditionally, VI
algorithms minimize the “exclusive Kullback-Leibler (KL)” KL (q k p), often for
computational convenience. Recent research, however, has also focused on
the “inclusive KL” KL (p k q), which has good statistical properties that makes it
more appropriate for certain inference problems. This paper develops a simple
algorithm for reliably minimizing the inclusive KL using stochastic gradients
with vanishing bias. This method, which we call Markovian score climbing
(MSC), converges to a local optimum of the inclusive KL. It does not suffer
from the systematic errors inherent in existing methods, such as Reweighted
Wake-Sleep and Neural Adaptive Sequential Monte Carlo, which lead to bias in
their final estimates. We illustrate convergence on a toy model and demonstrate
the utility of MSC on Bayesian probit regression for classification as well as a
stochastic volatility model for financial data.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) is an optimization-based approach for approximate posterior inference.
It posits a family of approximating distributions q and then finds the member of that family that
is closest to the exact posterior p. Traditionally, VI algorithms minimize the “exclusive KullbackLeibler (KL)” KL (q k p) [28, 6], which leads to a computationally convenient optimization. For
a restricted class of models, it leads to coordinate-ascent algorithms [20]. For a wider class, it
leads to efficient computation of unbiased gradients for stochastic optimization [51, 58, 52].
However, optimizing the exclusive KL results in an approximation that underestimates the posterior uncertainty [42]. To address this limitation, VI researchers have considered alternative
divergences [35, 15]. One candidate is the “inclusive KL” KL (p k q) [22, 7, 19]. This divergence more accurately captures posterior uncertainty, but results in a challenging optimization
problem.
In this paper, we develop Markovian score climbing (MSC), a simple algorithm for reliably
minimizing the inclusive KL. Consider a valid Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method [55],
a Markov chain whose stationary distribution is p. MSC iteratively samples the Markov chain
z[k], and then uses those samples to follow the score function of the variational approximation
r log q(z[k]) with a Robbins-Monro step-size schedule [54]. Importantly, we allow the MCMC
method to depend on the current variational approximation. This enables a gradual improvement
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

