Meta-Gradient Reinforcement Learning with an
Objective Discovered Online

Zhongwen Xu, Hado van Hasselt, Matteo Hessel
Junhyuk Oh, Satinder Singh, David Silver
DeepMind
{zhongwen,hado,mtthss,junhyuk,baveja,davidsilver}@google.com

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning includes a broad family of algorithms that parameterise an internal representation, such as a value function or policy, by a deep neural
network. Each algorithm optimises its parameters with respect to an objective,
such as Q-learning or policy gradient, that defines its semantics. In this work,
we propose an algorithm based on meta-gradient descent that discovers its own
objective, flexibly parameterised by a deep neural network, solely from interactive
experience with its environment. Over time, this allows the agent to learn how to
learn increasingly effectively. Furthermore, because the objective is discovered
online, it can adapt to changes over time. We demonstrate that the algorithm
discovers how to address several important issues in RL, such as bootstrapping,
non-stationarity, and off-policy learning. On the Atari Learning Environment, the
meta-gradient algorithm adapts over time to learn with greater efficiency, eventually
outperforming the median score of a strong actor-critic baseline.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in supervised and unsupervised learning have been driven by a transition from
handcrafted expert features to deep representations [15]; these are typically learned by gradient
descent on a suitable objective function to adjust a rich parametric function approximator. As a field,
reinforcement learning (RL) has also largely embraced the transition from handcrafting features to
handcrafting objectives: deep function approximation has been successfully combined with ideas
such as TD-learning [30, 34], Q-learning [42, 23], double Q-learning [36, 37], n-step updates [32, 14],
general value functions [33, 18], distributional value functions [7, 3], policy gradients [43, 21] and a
variety of off-policy actor-critics [8, 10, 29]. In RL, the agent doesn’t have access a differentiable
performance metric, thus choosing the right proxy is of particular importance: indeed, each of the
aforementioned algorithms differs fundamentally in their choice of objective, designed in each case
by expert human knowledge. The deep RL version of these algorithms is otherwise very similar in
essence: updating parameters via gradient descent on the corresponding objective function.
Our goal is an algorithm that instead learns its own objective, and hence its own deep reinforcement
learning algorithm, solely from experience of interacting with its environment. Following the
principles of deep learning, we parameterise the objective function by a rich function approximator,
and update it by meta-gradient learning [28, 1, 11, 44, 47, 39, 2, 20] – i.e. by gradient descent on
the sequence of gradient descent updates resulting from the choice of objective function – so as to
maximise a naive outer loss function (such as REINFORCE) with minimal initial knowledge.
Importantly, and in contrast to the majority of recent work on meta-learning [11, 2, 20], our metagradient algorithm learns online, on a single task, during a single “lifetime" of training. This online
approach to meta-learning confers several advantages. First, an online learning algorithm can be
applied to any RL environment, and does not require a distribution of related environments, nor the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

