A Robust Functional EM Algorithm for Incomplete
Panel Count Data
Alexander Moreno
Georgia Institute of Technology
alexander.f.moreno@gatech.edu
Cho Lam
University of Utah
cho.lam@hci.utah.edu

Zhenke Wu
University of Michigan
zhenkewu@umich.edu

David W. Wetter
University of Utah
david.wetter@hci.utah.edu

Walter Dempsey
University of Michigan
wdem@umich.edu

Jamie Yap
University of Michigan
jamieyap@umich.edu
Inbal Nahum-Shani
University of Michigan
inbal@umich.edu

James M. Rehg
Georgia Institute of Technology
rehg@gatech.edu

Abstract
Panel count data describes aggregated counts of recurrent events observed at
discrete time points. To understand dynamics of health behaviors and predict
future negative events, the field of quantitative behavioral research has evolved
to increasingly rely upon panel count data collected via multiple self reports, for
example, about frequencies of smoking using in-the-moment surveys on mobile
devices. However, missing reports are common and present a major barrier to
downstream statistical learning. As a first step, under a missing completely at
random assumption (MCAR), we propose a simple yet widely applicable functional
EM algorithm to estimate the counting process mean function, which is of central
interest to behavioral scientists. The proposed approach wraps several popular panel
count inference methods, seamlessly deals with incomplete counts and is robust
to misspecification of the Poisson process assumption. Theoretical analysis of the
proposed algorithm provides finite-sample guarantees by expanding parametric
EM theory [3, 34] to the general non-parametric setting. We illustrate the utility of
the proposed algorithm through numerical experiments and an analysis of smoking
cessation data. We also discuss useful extensions to address deviations from the
MCAR assumption and covariate effects.

1

Introduction

A major goal in behavioral medicine is identifying temporal patterns of risk factors preventing an
individual from successfully modifying a health-related behavior. In smoking cessation, one would
like to know times of day, locations, and other contextual factors such as smoking opportunity [17]
that may precipitate lapse to inform interventions to prevent lapse [24]. A basic task is to describe
when smoking occurs through modeling the counting process of repeated negative events. One goal is
to estimate the mean function of the counting process to characterize the dynamics of health-related
behaviors at the population level.
The counting process mean function can describe population-level temporal patterns of smoking. It
converts the discrete patterns of smoking counts from a population of participants (see Fig. 1) into
a temporally-continuous summary of smoking behavior (see Fig. 2b). However, the missingness
inherent in EMA data makes consistent estimation of the mean function difficult. There are several
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

