TorsionNet: A Reinforcement Learning Approach to
Sequential Conformer Search

Tarun Gogineni1 , Ziping Xu2 , Exequiel Punzalan3 , Runxuan Jiang1 ,
Joshua Kammeraad2,3 , Ambuj Tewari2 , Paul Zimmerman3
1
Department of EECS, University of Michigan
2
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan
3
Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan
{tgog,zipingxu,epunzal,runxuanj,joshkamm,tewaria,paulzim}@umich.edu

Abstract
Molecular geometry prediction of flexible molecules, or conformer search, is a longstanding challenge in computational chemistry. This task is of great importance for
predicting structure-activity relationships for a wide variety of substances ranging
from biomolecules to ubiquitous materials. Substantial computational resources
are invested in Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics methods to generate diverse
and representative conformer sets for medium to large molecules, which are yet
intractable to chemoinformatic conformer search methods. We present TorsionNet,
an efficient sequential conformer search technique based on reinforcement learning
under the rigid rotor approximation. The model is trained via curriculum learning,
whose theoretical benefit is explored in detail, to maximize a novel metric grounded
in thermodynamics called the Gibbs Score. Our experimental results show that
TorsionNet outperforms the highest scoring chemoinformatics method by 4x on
large branched alkanes, and by several orders of magnitude on the previously
unexplored biopolymer lignin, with applications in renewable energy. TorsionNet
also outperforms the far more exhaustive but computationally intensive Self-Guided
Molecular Dynamics sampling method.

1

Introduction

Accurate prediction of likely 3D geometries of flexible molecules is a long standing goal of computational chemistry, with broad implications for drug design, biopolymer research, and QSAR
analysis. However, this is a very difficult problem due to the exponential growth of possible stable
physical structures, or conformers, as a function of the size of a molecule. Levinthal’s infamous
paradox notes that a medium sized protein polypeptide chain exposes around 10143 possible torsion
angle combinations, indicating brute force to be an intractable search method for all but the smallest
molecules [21]. While the conformational space of a molecule’s rotatable bonds is continuous with an
infinite number of possible conformations, there are a finite number of stable, low energy conformers
that lie in a local minimum on the energy surface [26]. Research in pharmaceuticals and bio-polymer
material design can be accelerated by developing efficient methods for low energy conformer search
of large molecules.
Take the example of lignin, a class of chemically complex branched biopolymer that has great potential
as a renewable biofuel [32, 56]. The challenge in taking advantage of lignin is its structural complexity
that makes it hard to selectively break down into useful chemical components [45]. Effective strategies
to make use of lignin require deep understanding of its chemical reaction pathways, which in turn
require accurate sampling of conformational behavior [4, 24]. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
(though expensive) is the usual method for sampling complex molecules such as lignin [37, 54].
Understanding lignin processing on a molecular level using MD appears essential for improving their
degradation efficiencies in mechano-chemical experimental processes [19].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

