Adaptive Probing Policies for Shortest Path Routing
Aditya Bhaskara
School of Computing
University of Utah
bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com

Sreenivas Gollapudi
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
sgollapu@google.com

Kostas Kollias
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
kostaskollias@google.com

Kamesh Munagala
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
kamesh@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Inspired by traffic routing applications, we consider the problem of finding the
shortest path from a source s to a destination t in a graph, when the lengths of
the edges are unknown. Instead, we are given hints or predictions of the edge
lengths from a collection of ML models, trained possibly on historical data and
other contexts in the network. Additionally, we assume that the true length of any
candidate path can be obtained by probing an up-to-date snapshot of the network.
However, each probe introduces a latency, and thus the goal is to minimize the
number of probes while finding a near-optimal path with high probability. We
formalize this problem and show assumptions under which it admits to efficient approximation algorithms. We verify these assumptions and validate the performance
of our algorithms on real data.

1

Introduction

Routing traffic is a prototypical example of using large scale ML for finding shortest paths in graphs
where the state of the graph is constantly changing with time. Given the scale of the road network
with billions of road segments around the world [Strano et al., 2017], and low latency requirements
for the path search algorithms [Goldberg, 2007, Min and Wynter, 2011], integrating ML models that
compute edge or path lengths into the path search algorithms is a challenging problem. Further, the
architecture to serve route recommendations to users needs to deal with network data at different
levels of granularity [Baum et al., 2016, Delling et al., 2017, 2018].
Typically, the lengths, either for edges or paths, are computed by multiple ML models which use
some combination of historical network statistics as well as current state of the network [Yang et al.,
2004, de Fabritiis et al., 2008, Tchrakian et al., 2012]. These predicted lengths are then consumed by
the path searcher to generate route recommendations. The details of the ML models are opaque to
this path searcher. To handle any errors in the predicted lengths gracefully, the path searcher queries
a real-time traffic source that keeps a more accurate representation of the network [Cebecauer et al.,
2018] and gets updated at a much higher frequency and possibly on a much smaller fraction of the
network than the ML predictions. However, access to the traffic server is expensive: it consumes
critical time that affects the latency of serving the user request. Therefore, trading off between
the number of probes to the traffic server and error in the predicted lengths becomes an important
design decision in engineering an efficient and effective routing engine. Figure 1 summarizes the
architecture.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

