Fast Transformers with Clustered Attention
Apoorv Vyas1 2

Angelos Katharopoulos1 2 François Fleuret2 3 ∗
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland
2
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
3
University of Geneva, Switzerland
firstname.lastname@idiap.ch
1

Abstract
Transformers have been proven a successful model for a variety of tasks in sequence
modeling. However, computing the attention matrix, which is their key component,
has quadratic complexity with respect to the sequence length, thus making them
prohibitively expensive for large sequences. To address this, we propose clustered
attention, which instead of computing the attention for every query, groups queries
into clusters and computes attention just for the centroids. To further improve this
approximation, we use the computed clusters to identify the keys with the highest
attention per query and compute the exact key/query dot products. This results
in a model with linear complexity with respect to the sequence length for a fixed
number of clusters. We evaluate our approach on two automatic speech recognition
datasets and show that our model consistently outperforms vanilla transformers
for a given computational budget. Finally, we demonstrate that our model can
approximate arbitrarily complex attention distributions with a minimal number
of clusters by approximating a pretrained BERT model on GLUE and SQuAD
benchmarks with only 25 clusters and no loss in performance.

1

Introduction

Sequence modelling is a fundamental task of machine learning, integral in a variety of applications such as neural machine translation [2], image captioning [29], summarization [18], automatic
speech recognition [9] and synthesis [19] etc. Transformers [27] have been proven a powerful
tool significantly advancing the state-of-the-art for the majority of the aforementioned tasks. In
particular, transformers employ self-attention that allows them to handle long sequences without the
vanishing-gradient problem inherent in RNNs [13, 1].
Nonetheless, despite their impressive performance, the use of self-attention comes with computational
and memory requirements that scale quadratic to the sequence length, limiting their applicability to
long sequences. The quadratic complexity becomes apparent if we consider the core mechanism of
self-attention, namely splitting the input sequence into queries and keys and then each query attending
to all keys. To this end, recently, there has been an increasing interest for developing methods that
address this limitation [8, 26, 6, 14].
These methods can be broadly categorized into two distinct lines of work, those that focus on
improving the asymptotic complexity of the self-attention computation [6, 15, 14, 24, 3] and those
that aim at developing techniques that make transformers applicable to longer sequences without
addressing the quadratic complexity of self-attention [8, 26]. The former limits the amount of keys
that each query attends to, thus reducing the asymptotic complexity. The latter increases the length
of the sequence that a transformer can attend to without altering the underlying complexity of the
self-attention mechanism.
∗

Work done at Idiap

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

