SGD with shuffling: optimal rates without component
convexity and large epoch requirements

Kwangjun Ahn*
Department of EECS
MIT
kjahn@mit.edu

Chulhee Yun*
Department of EECS
MIT
chulheey@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
Department of EECS
MIT
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
We study without-replacement SGD for solving finite-sum optimization problems. Specifically, depending on how the indices of the finite-sum are shuffled,
we consider the R ANDOM S HUFFLE (shuffle at the beginning of each epoch) and
S INGLE S HUFFLE (shuffle only once) algorithms. First, we establish minimax
optimal convergence rates of these algorithms up to poly-log factors. Notably, our
analysis is general enough to cover gradient dominated nonconvex costs, and does
not rely on the convexity of individual component functions unlike existing optimal
convergence results. Secondly, assuming convexity of the individual components,
we further sharpen the tight convergence results for R ANDOM S HUFFLE by removing the drawbacks common to all prior arts: large number of epochs required for
the results to hold, and extra poly-log factor gaps to the lower bound.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [8, 16] is a widely used optimization method for solving finite-sum
optimization problems that arise in many domains such as machine learning:
n

minimize
x∈Rd

F (x) :=

1X
fi (x) .
n i=1

(1.1)

Given an initial iterate x0 , at iteration t ≥ 1, SGD samples a component index i(t) and updates the
current iterate using the (sub)gradient gi(t) of fi(t) at xt−1 :
xt = xt−1 − ηt gi(t) for some step size ηt > 0.
There are two versions of SGD, depending on how we sample the index i(t): with-replacement
and without-replacement. With-replacement SGD samples i(t) uniformly and independently from
the set of indices {1, . . . , n}; hereafter, we use S GD to denote with-replacement SGD. For withoutreplacement SGD, there are two popular versions in practice. Calling one pass over the entire set
of n components an epoch, one version randomly shuffles the indices at each epoch (which we call
R ANDOM S HUFFLE), and the other version shuffles the indices only once and reuses that order for all
the epochs (which we call S INGLE S HUFFLE).
In modern machine learning applications, R ANDOM S HUFFLE and S INGLE S HUFFLE are much more
widely used than S GD, due to their simple implementations and better empirical performance [2, 3].
However, most theoretical analyses have been devoted to S GD for its easy-to-analyze setting: each
stochastic gradient is an i.i.d. unbiased estimate of the full gradient. Whereas for R ANDOM S HUFFLE
and S INGLE S HUFFLE, not only is each stochastic gradient a biased estimate of the full gradient,
*

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

