JAX, M.D.
A Framework for Differentiable Physics

Samuel S. Schoenholz
Google Research: Brain Team
schsam@google.com

Ekin D. Cubuk
Google Research: Brain Team
cubuk@google.com

Abstract
We introduce JAX MD, a software package for performing differentiable physics
simulations with a focus on molecular dynamics. JAX MD includes a number
of physics simulation environments, as well as interaction potentials and neural
networks that can be integrated into these environments without writing any additional code. Since the simulations themselves are differentiable functions, entire
trajectories can be differentiated to perform meta-optimization. These features are
built on primitive operations, such as spatial partitioning, that allow simulations to
scale to hundreds-of-thousands of particles on a single GPU. These primitives are
flexible enough that they can be used to scale up workloads outside of molecular
dynamics. We present several examples that highlight the features of JAX MD
including: integration of graph neural networks into traditional simulations, metaoptimization through minimization of particle packings, and a multi-agent flocking
simulation. JAX MD is available at www.github.com/google/jax-md.

1

Introduction

The past few years have seen an explosion of progress at the intersection of machine learning, automatic differentiation, and the physical sciences [1, 2]. Deep neural network models of quantum
mechanical energies have become ever more accurate [3–11], graph networks have been designed
to simulate systems by observing their dynamics [12–15], and deep networks have improved upon
classical approaches to protein folding [16]. Combining classical simulation environments with
deep learning or optimizing them directly via automatic differentiation has led to significant advances including: end-to-end learning of protein structures [17, 18], the inverse design of photonic
crystals [19], and structural optimization via reparameterization using convolutional networks [20].
Finally, significant progress in developmental psychology has centered around combining intuitive
physics simulations with probabilistic programming [21].
This flurry of excellent research has highlighted a significant source of inefficiency: we lack general
purpose simulation environments that can easily be integrated with existing machine learning tools.
For example, despite the rapid progress developing neural network models of quantum mechanical
systems, it is difficult to incorporate these models into classical simulation environments such as
LAMMPS [22], HOOMD-Blue [23, 24], and OpenMM [25]. Currently, integrating machine learning
models into existing simulations requires the construction of custom software “bridges” [26–31].
This is a significant hindrance to the adoption of machine learning methods in practice. Moreover,
most research into differentiable simulation environments are bespoke pieces of software written
for a single application. As such, currently research at the intersection of simulation and machine
learning requires practitioners to be experts, not only at machine learning, but also at writing the
simulations themselves.
Here we introduce JAX MD, which is a software package that makes it easy to write physics simulations that naturally integrate with machine learning models in the flourishing JAX [32, 33] ecosystem.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

