Provable Online CP/PARAFAC Decomposition of a
Structured Tensor via Dictionary Learning

Sirisha Rambhatla 1
sirishar@usc.edu

Xingguo Li 2
xingguol@cs.princeton.edu

Jarvis Haupt 3
jdhaupt@umn.edu

1

Computer Science Department, University of Southern California
2
Computer Science Department, Princeton University
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota – Twin Cities

Abstract
We consider the problem of factorizing a structured 3-way tensor into its
constituent Canonical Polyadic (CP) factors. This decomposition, which
can be viewed as a generalization of singular value decomposition (SVD)
for tensors, reveals how the tensor dimensions (features) interact with each
other. However, since the factors are a priori unknown, the corresponding
optimization problems are inherently non-convex. The existing guaranteed
algorithms which handle this non-convexity incur an irreducible error (bias),
and only apply to cases where all factors have the same structure. To this
end, we develop a provable algorithm for online structured tensor factorization, wherein one of the factors obeys some incoherence conditions, and
the others are sparse. Specifically we show that, under some relatively mild
conditions on initialization, rank, and sparsity, our algorithm recovers the
factors exactly (up to scaling and permutation) at a linear rate. Complementary to our theoretical results, our synthetic and real-world data evaluations showcase superior performance compared to related techniques.

1

Introduction

Canonical Polyadic (CP) /PARAFAC decomposition aims to express a tensor as a sum of
rank-1 tensors, each of which is formed by the outer-product (denoted by “◦”) of constituent
factors columns. In this work, we consider the online factorization of a structured tensor
3-way tensor Z(t) ∈ Rn×J×K arriving at time t, as
Pm
∗(t)
∗(t)
Z(t) = i=1 A∗i ◦ Bi ◦ Ci = [[A∗ , B∗(t) , C∗(t) ]],
(1)
∗(t)

∗(t)

where A∗i , ◦Bi and Ci are columns of factors A∗ , B∗(t) , and C∗(t) , respectively, and are
a priori unknown. A popular choice for the batch setting (not online) is via the alternating
least squares (ALS) algorithm, where appropriate regularization terms (such as `1 loss for
sparsity) are added to the least-square objective to steer towards specific solutions [1–4].
However, these approaches suffer from three major issues – a) the non-convexity of associated
formulations makes it challenging to establish recovery and convergence guarantees, b) one
may need to solve an implicit model selection problem (e.g., choose the tensor rank m), and
c) regularization may be computationally expensive, and may not scale well in practice.
Recent works for guaranteed tensor factorization – based on tensor power method [5], convex
relaxations [6], sum-of-squares formulations [7–9], and variants of ALS algorithm [10] – have
focused on recovery of tensor factors wherein all factors have a common structure; based
on some notion of incoherence of individual factor matrices such as sparsity, incoherence, or
both [11]. Furthermore, these algorithms a) incur bias in estimation, b) are computationally
expensive in practice, and c) are not amenable for online (streaming) tensor factorization;
See Table 1. Consequently, there is a need to develop fast, scalable provable algorithms for
exact (unbiased) factorization of structured tensors arriving (or processed) in a streaming
fashion (online), generated by heterogeneously structured factors. To this end, we develop
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

