Empirical Likelihood for Contextual Bandits

Nikos Karampatziakis
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI
nikosk@microsoft.com

John Langford
Microsoft Research
jcl@microsoft.com

Paul Mineiro
Microsoft Research
pmineiro@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose an estimator and confidence interval for computing the value of a
policy from off-policy data in the contextual bandit setting. To this end we apply
empirical likelihood techniques to formulate our estimator and confidence interval
as simple convex optimization problems. Using the lower bound of our confidence
interval, we then propose an off-policy policy optimization algorithm that searches
for policies with large reward lower bound. We empirically find that both our
estimator and confidence interval improve over previous proposals in finite sample
regimes. Finally, the policy optimization algorithm we propose outperforms a
strong baseline system for learning from off-policy data.

1

Introduction

Contextual Bandits [3, 17] are now in widespread practical use ([19, 7, 25]). Key to their success
is the ability to do off-policy or counterfactual estimation [12] of the value of any policy enabling
sound train/test regimes similar to supervised learning. However, off-policy evaluation requires more
data than supervised learning to produce estimates of the same accuracy. This is because off-policy
data needs to be importance-weighted and accurate estimation for importance-weighted data is still
an active research area. How can we find a tight confidence interval (CI) on counterfactual estimates?
And since tight CIs are deeply dependent on the form of their estimate, how can we find a tight
estimate? And given what we discover, how can we leverage this for improved learning algorithms?
We discover good answers to these questions through the application of empirical likelihood [24], a
nonparametric maximum likelihood approach that treats the sample as a realization from a multinomial distribution with an infinite number of categories. Like a likelihood method, empirical likelihood
(EL) adapts to the difficulty of the problem in an automatic way and results in efficient estimators.
Unlike parametric likelihood methods, we do not need to make any parametric assumptions about
the data generating process. We do assume that the expected importance weight is 1, a nonparametric moment condition that is supposed to hold for correctly collected off-policy data. Finally,
EL-based estimators and confidence intervals can be computed by efficient algorithms that solve low
dimensional convex optimization problems. Figure 1 shows a preview of our results.
In section 4.2 we introduce our estimator. The estimator is computationally tractable, requiring a
bisection search over a single scalar, has provably low bias (see Theorem 1) and in section 5.1 we
experimentally demonstrate performance exceeding that of popular alternatives.
The estimator leads to an asymptotically exact confidence interval for off-policy estimation which
we describe in section 4.3. Other CIs are either narrow but fail to guarantee prescribed coverage,
or guarantee prescribed coverage but are too wide to be useful. Our interval is narrow and (despite
having only an asymptotic guarantee) empirically approaches nominal coverage from above as in
Figure 1 and Table 3. Finally, in section 4.5, we use our CI to construct a robust counterfactual
learning objective. We experiment with this in section 5.3 and empirically outperform a strong
baseline.
We now highlight several innovations in our approach:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

