Finding the Homology of Decision Boundaries with
Active Learning

Weizhi Li
Arizona State University
weizhili@asu.edu

Gautam Dasarathy
Arizona State University
gautamd@asu.edu

Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy
IBM Research
knatesa@us.ibm.com

Visar Berisha
Arizona State University
visar@asu.edu

Abstract
Accurately and efficiently characterizing the decision boundary of classifiers is
important for problems related to model selection and meta-learning. Inspired by
topological data analysis, the characterization of decision boundaries using their
homology has recently emerged as a general and powerful tool. In this paper,
we propose an active learning algorithm to recover the homology of decision
boundaries. Our algorithm sequentially and adaptively selects which samples it
requires the labels of. We theoretically analyze the proposed framework and show
that the query complexity of our active learning algorithm depends naturally on the
intrinsic complexity of the underlying manifold. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our framework in selecting best-performing machine learning models for datasets
just using their respective homological summaries. Experiments on several standard
datasets show the sample complexity improvement in recovering the homology
and demonstrate the practical utility of the framework for model selection. Source
code for our algorithms and experimental results is available at https://github.
com/wayne0908/Active-Learning-Homology.

1

Introduction

A broadly known meta-learning [1] is to design an model to learn a task learning process and, with
this model, a new task can be adapted to with fewer examples. [2] views meta-learning from another
perspective: The complexity of the data at hand is an important insight that, if gleaned correctly from
past experience, can greatly enhance the performance of a meta-learning procedure. A particularly
useful characterization of data complexity is to understand the topological properties of the decision
boundary; for example, by using topological data analysis (TDA) [3, 4, 5]. This scenario makes sense
in settings where large corpora of labeled training data are available to recover the persistent homology
of the decision boundary for use in downstream machine learning tasks [5, 6, 7, 8]. However the
utility of this family of methods is limited in applications where labeled data is expensive to acquire.
In this paper, we explore the intersection of active learning and topological data analysis for the
purposes of efficiently learning the persistent homology of the decision boundary in classification
problems. In contrast to the standard paradigm, in active learning, the learner has access to unlabeled
data and sequentially selects a set of points for an oracle to label. We propose an efficient active
learning framework that adaptively select points for labeling near the decision boundary. A theoretical
analysis of the algorithm results in an upper bound on the number of samples required to recover the
recover the decision boundary homology. Naturally, this query complexity depends on the intrinsic
complexity of the underlying manifold.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

