Higher-Order Spectral Clustering of Directed Graphs

Steinar Laenen ∗
Oxford Research Group
FiveAI
steinar.laenen@five.ai

He Sun
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
h.sun@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Clustering is an important topic in algorithms, and has a number of applications in
machine learning, computer vision, statistics, and several other research disciplines.
Traditional objectives of graph clustering are to find clusters with low conductance.
Not only are these objectives just applicable for undirected graphs, they are also
incapable to take the relationships between clusters into account, which could be
crucial for many applications. To overcome these downsides, we study directed
graphs (digraphs) whose clusters exhibit further “structural” information amongst
each other. Based on the Hermitian matrix representation of digraphs, we present
a nearly-linear time algorithm for digraph clustering, and further show that our
proposed algorithm can be implemented in sublinear time under reasonable assumptions. The significance of our theoretical work is demonstrated by extensive
experimental results on the UN Comtrade Dataset: the output clustering of our
algorithm exhibits not only how the clusters (sets of countries) relate to each other
with respect to their import and export records, but also how these clusters evolve
over time, in accordance with known facts in international trade.

1

Introduction

Clustering is one of the most fundamental problems in algorithms and has applications in many
research fields including machine learning, network analysis, and statistics. Data can often be
represented by a graph (e.g., users in a social network, servers in a communication network), and this
makes graph clustering a natural choice to analyse these datasets. Over the past three decades, most
studies on undirected graph clustering have focused on the task of partitioning with respect to the
edge densities, i.e., vertices form a cluster if they are better connected to each other than to the rest
of the graph. The well-known normalised cut value [25] and graph conductance [20] capture these
classical definitions of clusters, and have become the objective functions of most undirected graph
clustering algorithms.
While the design of these algorithms has received a lot of research attention from both theoretical
and applied research areas, these algorithms are usually unable to uncover higher-order structural
information among clusters in directed graphs (digraphs). For example, let us look at the international
oil trade network [29], which employs digraphs to represent how mineral fuels and oils are imported
and exported between countries. Although this highly connected digraph presents little cluster
structure with respect to a typical objective function of undirected graph clustering, from an economic
point of view this digraph clearly exhibits a structure of clusters: there is a cluster of countries mainly
exporting oil, a cluster mainly importing oil, and several clusters in the middle of this trade chain.
All these clusters are characterised by the imbalance of the edge directions between clusters, and
further present a clear ordering reflecting the overall trade pattern. This type of structure is not only
found in trade data, but also in many other types of data such as migration data and infectious disease
∗

steinar9@gmail.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

