Exchangeable Neural ODE for Set Modeling
Yang Li∗
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
yangli95@cs.unc.edu

Haidong Yi∗
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
haidyi@cs.unc.edu

Christopher M. Bender
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
bender@cs.unc.edu

Siyuan Shan
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
siyuanshan@cs.unc.edu

Junier B. Oliva
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
joliva@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Reasoning over an instance composed of a set of vectors, like a point cloud, requires
that one accounts for intra-set dependent features among elements. However, since
such instances are unordered, the elements’ features should remain unchanged
when the input’s order is permuted. This property, permutation equivariance, is
a challenging constraint for most neural architectures. While recent work has
proposed global pooling and attention-based solutions, these may be limited in the
way that intradependencies are captured in practice. In this work we propose a
more general formulation to achieve permutation equivariance through ordinary
differential equations (ODE). Our proposed module, Exchangeable Neural ODE
(ExNODE), can be seamlessly applied for both discriminative and generative tasks.
We also extend set modeling in the temporal dimension and propose a VAE based
model for temporal set modeling. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efﬁcacy
of our method over strong baselines.

1

Introduction

The vast majority of machine learning models operate on an independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) vector, x ∈ Rd . In some cases, however, the inputs may contain a set of instances, x = {xi }ni=1 ,
which jointly determine the target. We note that instances within a set may interact with each other.
For instance, the points inside a point cloud jointly determine the global structure. In this work, we
build both discriminative and generative models on sets, which explore the intradependencies within
a set to capture both global and local structures.
A set is a collection of data that does not possess any inherent ordering of its elements. In statistics, a
set is described as an exchangeable sequence of random variables whose joint probability distribution
does not change under any permutation π, i.e.,
p(x1 , . . . , xn ) = p(xπ1 , . . . , xπn ).
∗

equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

