Crush Optimism with Pessimism:
Structured Bandits Beyond Asymptotic Optimality

Kwang-Sung Jun
The University of Arizona
kjun@cs.arizona.edu

Chicheng Zhang
The University of Arizona
chichengz@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study stochastic structured bandits for minimizing regret. The
fact that the popular optimistic algorithms do not achieve the asymptotic instancedependent regret optimality (asymptotic optimality for short) has recently allured
researchers. On the other hand, it is known that one can achieve a bounded regret
(i.e., does not grow indefinitely with n) in certain instances. Unfortunately, existing
asymptotically optimal algorithms rely on forced sampling that introduces an ω(1)
term w.r.t. the time horizon n in their regret, failing to adapt to the “easiness” of
the instance. In this paper, we focus on the finite hypothesis class and ask if one
can achieve the asymptotic optimality while enjoying bounded regret whenever
possible. We provide a positive answer by introducing a new algorithm called
CRush Optimism with Pessimism (CROP) that eliminates optimistic hypotheses by
pulling the informative arms indicated by a pessimistic hypothesis. Our finite-time
analysis shows that CROP (i) achieves a constant-factor asymptotic optimality
and, thanks to the forced-exploration-free design, (ii) adapts to bounded regret,
and (iii) its regret bound scales not with the number of arms K but with an
effective number of arms Kψ that we introduce. We also discuss a problem class
where CROP can be exponentially better than existing algorithms in nonasymptotic
regimes. Finally, we observe that even a clairvoyant oracle who plays according to
the asymptotically optimal arm pull scheme may suffer a linear worst-case regret,
indicating that it may not be the end of optimism.

1

Introduction

We consider the stochastic structured multi-armed bandit problem with a fixed arm set. In this problem,
we are given a known structure that encodes how mean rewards of the arms are inter-dependent.
Specifically, the learner is given a space of arms A and a space of hypotheses F where each f ∈ F
maps each arm a ∈ A to its mean reward f (a). Define [n] ∶= {1, . . . , n}. At each time step t ∈ [n],
the learner chooses an arm at ∈ A and observes a (stochastic) noisy version of its mean reward f ∗ (a)
where f ∗ ∈ F is the ground truth hypothesis determined before the game starts and not known to her.
After n time steps, the learner’s performance is evaluated by her cumulative expected (pseudo-)regret:
⎡
⎤
n
⎢
⎥
E Regn = E ⎢n ⋅ max f ∗ (a) − ∑ f ∗ (at )⎥ .
(1)
⎢ a∈A
⎥
t=1
⎣
⎦
Minimizing this regret poses a well-known challenge in balancing between exploration and exploitation;
we refer to Lattimore and Szepesvári [21] for the backgrounds on bandits. We define our problem
precisely in Section 2.
Linear bandits, a special case of structured bandits, have gained popularity over the last decade with
exciting applications (e.g., news recommendation) [6, 11, 1, 22, 9]. While these algorithms use the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

