Object-Centric Learning with Slot Attention
Francesco Locatello2,3,†,* , Dirk Weissenborn1 , Thomas Unterthiner1 , Aravindh Mahendran1 ,
Georg Heigold1 , Jakob Uszkoreit1 , Alexey Dosovitskiy1,‡ , and Thomas Kipf1,‡,*
1

Google Research, Brain Team
Dept. of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
2

Abstract
Learning object-centric representations of complex scenes is a promising step
towards enabling efficient abstract reasoning from low-level perceptual features.
Yet, most deep learning approaches learn distributed representations that do
not capture the compositional properties of natural scenes. In this paper, we
present the Slot Attention module, an architectural component that interfaces with
perceptual representations such as the output of a convolutional neural network
and produces a set of task-dependent abstract representations which we call slots.
These slots are exchangeable and can bind to any object in the input by specializing
through a competitive procedure over multiple rounds of attention. We empirically
demonstrate that Slot Attention can extract object-centric representations that
enable generalization to unseen compositions when trained on unsupervised object
discovery and supervised property prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Object-centric representations have the potential to improve sample efficiency and generalization of
machine learning algorithms across a range of application domains, such as visual reasoning [1], modeling of structured environments [2], multi-agent modeling [3–5], and simulation of interacting physical systems [6–8]. Obtaining object-centric representations from raw perceptual input, such as an image or a video, is challenging and often requires either supervision [1, 3, 9, 10] or task-specific architectures [2, 11]. As a result, the step of learning an object-centric representation is often skipped entirely.
Instead, models are typically trained to operate on a structured representation of the environment that is
obtained, for example, from the internal representation of a simulator [6, 8] or of a game engine [4, 5].
To overcome this challenge, we introduce the Slot Attention module, a differentiable interface
between perceptual representations (e.g., the output of a CNN) and a set of variables called slots.
Using an iterative attention mechanism, Slot Attention produces a set of output vectors with
permutation symmetry. Unlike capsules used in Capsule Networks [12, 13], slots produced by Slot
Attention do not specialize to one particular type or class of object, which could harm generalization.
Instead, they act akin to object files [14], i.e., slots use a common representational format: each
slot can store (and bind to) any object in the input. This allows Slot Attention to generalize in a
systematic way to unseen compositions, more objects, and more slots.
Slot Attention is a simple and easy to implement architectural component that can be placed, for
example, on top of a CNN [15] encoder to extract object representations from an image and is trained
end-to-end with a downstream task. In this paper, we consider image reconstruction and set prediction
as downstream tasks to showcase the versatility of our module both in a challenging unsupervised
object discovery setup and in a supervised task involving set-structured object property prediction.
†

Work done while interning at Google, ∗ equal contribution, ‡ equal advising. Contact: tkipf@google.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

