The Convex Relaxation Barrier, Revisited:
Tightened Single-Neuron Relaxations for Neural
Network Verification
Christian Tjandraatmadja
Google Research
ctjandra@google.com
Will Ma
Columbia University
wm2428@gsb.columbia.edu

Ross Anderson
Google Research
rander@google.com
Krunal Patel
Polytechnique Montréal˚
krunal.patel@polymtl.ca

Joey Huchette
Rice University
joehuchette@rice.edu
Juan Pablo Vielma
Google Research
jvielma@google.com

Abstract
We improve the effectiveness of propagation- and linear-optimization-based neural
network verification algorithms with a new tightened convex relaxation for ReLU
neurons. Unlike previous single-neuron relaxations which focus only on the
univariate input space of the ReLU, our method considers the multivariate input
space of the affine pre-activation function preceding the ReLU. Using results from
submodularity and convex geometry, we derive an explicit description of the tightest
possible convex relaxation when this multivariate input is over a box domain. We
show that our convex relaxation is significantly stronger than the commonly used
univariate-input relaxation which has been proposed as a natural convex relaxation
barrier for verification. While our description of the relaxation may require an
exponential number of inequalities, we show that they can be separated in linear
time and hence can be efficiently incorporated into optimization algorithms on an
as-needed basis. Based on this novel relaxation, we design two polynomial-time
algorithms for neural network verification: a linear-programming-based algorithm
that leverages the full power of our relaxation, and a fast propagation algorithm
that generalizes existing approaches. In both cases, we show that for a modest
increase in computational effort, our strengthened relaxation enables us to verify a
significantly larger number of instances compared to similar algorithms.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in deep neural networks is to verify or certify that a trained network is
robust, i.e. not susceptible to adversarial attacks [11, 29, 39]. Current approaches for neural
network verification can be divided into exact (complete) methods and relaxed (incomplete) methods.
Exact verifiers are often based on mixed integer programming (MIP) or more generally branchand-bound [3, 4, 9, 10, 12, 14, 17, 24, 25, 31, 41, 48] or satisfiability modulo theories (SMT)
[16, 19, 20, 27, 33] and, per their name, exactly solve the problem, with no false negatives or false
positives. However, exact verifiers are typically based on solving NP-hard optimization problems
[20] which can significantly limit their scalability. In contrast, relaxed verifiers are often based on
polynomially-solvable optimization problems such as convex optimization or linear programming
(LP) [2, 8, 15, 23, 26, 30, 32, 34, 47, 50], which in turn lend themselves to faster propagation-based
methods where bounds are computed by a series of variable substitutions in a backwards pass through
˚

This work was completed while this author was at Google Research.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

