Throughput-Optimal Topology Design
for Cross-Silo Federated Learning

Othmane Marfoq
Inria, Université Côte d’Azur,
Accenture Labs,
Sophia Antipolis, France
othmane.marfoq@inria.fr

Chuan Xu
Inria, Université Côte d’Azur,
Sophia Antipolis, France
chuan.xu@inria.fr

Giovanni Neglia
Inria, Université Côte d’Azur,
Sophia Antipolis, France
giovanni.neglia@inria.fr

Richard Vidal
Accenture Labs,
Sophia Antipolis, France
richard.vidal@accenture.com

Abstract
Federated learning usually employs a server-client architecture where an orchestrator iteratively aggregates model updates from remote clients and pushes them
back a refined model. This approach may be inefficient in cross-silo settings, as
close-by data silos with high-speed access links may exchange information faster
than with the orchestrator, and the orchestrator may become a communication
bottleneck. In this paper we define the problem of topology design for cross-silo
federated learning using the theory of max-plus linear systems to compute the system throughput—number of communication rounds per time unit. We also propose
practical algorithms that, under the knowledge of measurable network characteristics, find a topology with the largest throughput or with provable throughput
guarantees. In realistic Internet networks with 10 Gbps access links at silos, our
algorithms speed up training by a factor 9 and 1.5 in comparison to the server-client
architecture and to state-of-the-art MATCHA, respectively. Speedups are even
larger with slower access links.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) “involves training statistical models over remote devices or siloed data
centers, such as mobile phones or hospitals, while keeping data localized” [56] because of privacy
concerns or limited communication resources. The definition implicitly distinguishes two different
settings [41]: the cross-device scenario including a large number (millions or even more) of unreliable
mobile/edge devices with limited computing capabilities and slow Internet connections, and the crosssilo scenario with at most a few hundreds of reliable data silos with powerful computing resources
and high-speed access links. While the first FL papers [72, 51] emphasized the cross-device setting,
the cross-silo scenario has become popular for distributed training among banks [107], hospitals [19,
93, 69], pharmaceutical labs [67], and manufacturers [74].
In federated learning, clients (e.g., mobile devices or whole organizations) usually train the model
through an iterative procedure under the supervision of a central orchestrator, which, for example,
decides to launch the training process and coordinates training advances. Often—e.g., in FedAvg [72],
SCAFFOLD [45], and FedProx [57]—the orchestrator directly participates to the training, by aggregating clients’ updates, generating a new model, and pushing it back to the clients. Hence, clients
only communicate with a potentially far-away (e.g., in another continent) orchestrator and do not
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

