Reasoning about Uncertainties in Discrete-Time
Dynamical Systems using Polynomial Forms.
Sriram Sankaranarayanan
University of Colorado Boulder, USA
srirams@colorado.edu

Yi Chou
University of Colorado Boulder, USA
yi.chou@colorado.edu

Eric Goubault
LIX, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, IP-Paris, France
goubault@lix.polytechnique.fr
Sylvie Putot
LIX, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, IP-Paris, France
putot@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we propose polynomial forms to represent distributions of state
variables over time for discrete-time stochastic dynamical systems. This problem
arises in a variety of applications in areas ranging from biology to robotics. Our
approach allows us to rigorously represent the probability distribution of state
variables over time, and provide guaranteed bounds on the expectations, moments
and probabilities of tail events involving the state variables. First, we recall
ideas from interval arithmetic, and use them to rigorously represent the state
variables at time t as a function of the initial state variables and noise symbols
that model the random exogenous inputs encountered before time t. Next, we
show how concentration of measure inequalities can be employed to prove rigorous
bounds on the tail probabilities of these state variables. We demonstrate interesting
applications that demonstrate how our approach can be useful in some situations
to establish mathematically guaranteed bounds that are of a different nature from
those obtained through simulations with pseudo-random numbers.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the problem of rigorously quantifying the uncertainty in the states of
a stochastic dynamical system due to the influence of initial state uncertainties and stochastic
disturbance inputs. This problem is fundamental to many applications. For instance, imagine a
stochastic model of an aircraft whose motion is subject to unknown future wind forces. We wish
to understand the distribution of the aircraft’s position at some future time point of interest in order
to make critical decisions whether the aircraft will collide with a building. Solving such problems
requires us to know facts about the distribution of key state variables at some time instants t in the
future. In turn, we wish to use distributions to reason about quantities such as expectations and
moments, as well as probabilities of events.
Our approach in this paper combines ideas from higher order interval arithmetic [19] and concentration
of measure inequalities [11] to arrive at a framework to reason about uncertainties. (a) We represent
state variables as multivariate polynomial forms over so-called noise symbols that represent some
random variables with known, simple distributions. We use intervals that capture uncertainties that
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

