Knowledge Transfer in Multi-Task Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Continuous Control

Zhiyuan Xu† , Kun Wu† , Zhengping Che‡ , Jian Tang†,‡ , Jieping Ye‡
†

Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, Syracuse University
‡
DiDi AI Labs, Didi Chuxing
†
{zxu105, kwu102}@syr.edu
‡
{chezhengping, tangjian, yejieping}@didiglobal.com

Abstract
While Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has emerged as a promising approach
to many complex tasks, it remains challenging to train a single DRL agent that is
capable of undertaking multiple different continuous control tasks. In this paper,
we present a Knowledge Transfer based Multi-task Deep Reinforcement Learning
framework (KTM-DRL) for continuous control, which enables a single DRL agent
to achieve expert-level performance in multiple different tasks by learning from
task-specific teachers. In KTM-DRL, the multi-task agent first leverages an offline
knowledge transfer algorithm designed particularly for the actor-critic architecture
to quickly learn a control policy from the experience of task-specific teachers, and
then it employs an online learning algorithm to further improve itself by learning
from new online transition samples under the guidance of those teachers. We
perform a comprehensive empirical study with two commonly-used benchmarks in
the MuJoCo continuous control task suite. The experimental results well justify
the effectiveness of KTM-DRL and its knowledge transfer and online learning
algorithms, as well as its superiority over the state-of-the-art by a large margin.

1

Introduction

The recent breakthrough of Deep Learning (DL) enables Reinforcement Learning (RL) to deliver
much better performance in real and complex control tasks. Tremendous successes have been made
by Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) with Deep Q-Network (DQN) [12] on various discrete
control tasks (such as Atari games). Recently, DRL has also been extended to the continuous control
domain, which usually leverages an actor-critic based method (such as DDPG [10] and TD3 [4]) to
deal with a continuous action space.
Despite the impressive performance of DRL on individual tasks, it remains challenging to train a
single DRL agent to undertake multiple different tasks. Unlike single-task DRL, which learns a
control policy for an individual task, multi-task DRL requires an agent to learn a single control policy
that could perform well on multiple different tasks. Multi-task DRL is considered as an essential step
towards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) [5]. A straightforward approach is to directly train a
DRL agent for multiple tasks one by one using a traditional single-task learning algorithm, which has
been shown to deliver poor performance and may even fail on some tasks [1, 24], due to differences
and possible interference among multiple tasks. Recent research efforts have been made to address
the challenges of multi-task DRL. An effective approach is to tackle this problem with knowledge
transfer, e.g., Actor-Mimic [14] and policy distillation [15]. These methods usually aimed at training
a single multi-task agent under the guidance of task-specific teachers. Through knowledge transfer,
one or more control policies can be consolidated into a single one, which can achieve the same level
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

