Attack of the Tails:
Yes, You Really Can Backdoor Federated Learning
Hongyi Wangw
, Kartik Sreenivasanw
, Shashank Rajputw
, Harit Vishwakarmaw
w
k
w
Saurabh Agarwal, Jy-yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Dimitris Papailiopoulosw
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
w

k

Abstract
Due to its decentralized nature, Federated Learning (FL) lends itself to adversarial
attacks in the form of backdoors during training. The goal of a backdoor is to
corrupt the performance of the trained model on specific sub-tasks (e.g., by classifying green cars as frogs). A range of FL backdoor attacks have been introduced
in the literature, but also methods to defend against them, and it is currently an
open question whether FL systems can be tailored to be robust against backdoors.
In this work, we provide evidence to the contrary. We first establish that, in the
general case, robustness to backdoors implies model robustness to adversarial
examples, a major open problem in itself. Furthermore, detecting the presence of
a backdoor in a FL model is unlikely assuming first-order oracles or polynomial
time. We couple our theoretical results with a new family of backdoor attacks,
which we refer to as edge-case backdoors. An edge-case backdoor forces a model
to misclassify on seemingly easy inputs that are however unlikely to be part of the
training, or test data, i.e., they live on the tail of the input distribution. We explain
how these edge-case backdoors can lead to unsavory failures and may have serious
repercussions on fairness. We further exhibit that, with careful tuning at the side
of the adversary, one can insert them across a range of machine learning tasks
(e.g., image classification, OCR, text prediction, sentiment analysis), and bypass
state-of-the-art defense mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) offers a new paradigm for decentralized model training, across a set of users,
each holding private data. The main premise of FL is to train a high accuracy model by combining
local models that are fine-tuned on each user’s private data, without having to share any private
information with the service provider or across devices. Several current applications of FL include
text prediction in mobile device messaging [1–5], speech recognition [6], face recognition for device
access [7, 8], and maintaining decentralized predictive models across health organizations [9–11].
Across most FL settings, it is assumed that there is no single, central authority that owns or verifies
the training data or user hardware, and it has been argued by many recent studies that FL lends itself
to new adversarial attacks during decentralized model training [12–25]. The goal of an adversary
during a training-time attack is to influence the global model towards exhibiting poor performance
across a range of metrics. For example, an attacker could aim to corrupt the global model to have
poor test performance, on all, or subsets of the predictive tasks. Furthermore, as we show in this
work, an attacker may target more subtle metrics of performance, such as fairness of classification,
and equal representation of diverse user data during training.
Initiated by the work of Bagdasaryan et al. [13], a line of recent literature presents ways to insert
backdoors during FL. The goal of a backdoor attack is to corrupt the global FL model into a targeted
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

