A Local Temporal Difference Code for Distributional
Reinforcement Learning

Pablo Tano∗
Basic Neurosciences
University of Geneva

Peter Dayan
MPI for Biological Cybernetics
University of Tübingen

Alexandre Pouget
Basic Neurosciences
University of Geneva

Abstract
Recent theoretical and experimental results suggest that the dopamine system implements distributional temporal difference backups, allowing learning of the entire
distributions of the long-run values of states rather than just their expected values.
However, the distributional codes explored so far rely on a complex imputation
step which crucially relies on spatial non-locality: in order to compute reward
prediction errors, units must know not only their own state but also the states of the
other units. It is far from clear how these steps could be implemented in realistic
neural circuits. Here, we introduce the Laplace code: a local temporal difference
code for distributional reinforcement learning that is representationally powerful
and computationally straightforward. The code decomposes value distributions
and prediction errors across three separated dimensions: reward magnitude (related
to distributional quantiles), temporal discounting (related to the Laplace transform
of future rewards) and time horizon (related to eligibility traces). Besides lending
itself to a local learning rule, the decomposition recovers the temporal evolution
of the immediate reward distribution, indicating all possible rewards at all future
times. This increases representational capacity and allows for temporally-flexible
computations that immediately adjust to changing horizons or discount factors.

1

Introduction

In the traditional Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework, agents make decisions by learning and
maximizing the scalar values of states, which quantify the expected sums of discounted future
rewards that will be encountered from those states [1]. Recently, several results have suggested
that humans and animals keep track of richer information about the distribution of future rewards,
besides just its expectation [2–5]. Indeed, recent machine learning advances suggest that, besides
providing more flexibility for decision-making, requiring the entire value distribution to be learned
leads to representations that support improved average performance, since the agent needs to represent
separately states with the same expected value but different value statistics [6–8].
These results naturally pose the question of how such distributional estimators are learned and represented by neural systems. A distributional RL algorithm called Expectile temporal difference (TD)
learning [9] has been recently proposed as a neurally plausible method that extends the conventional
temporal difference reward prediction error (RPE) theory of dopamine activity [10]. Expectile TD
algorithms learn a set of estimators that converge to the expectiles of the value distribution. Importantly, as we explain in the next section, the Expectile algorithms are non-local, which is a critical
problem when considering neurally-plausible implementations of distributional RL.
Here, we show that the non-locality of distributional TD algorithms is not required to learn the value
distribution. We show that an ensemble of independent units performing traditional and local TD
∗

Corresponding author: Pablo.TanoRetamales@unige.ch

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

