Identifying Mislabeled Data using the Area Under the
Margin Ranking

Geoff Pleiss†
Columbia University
gmp2162@columbia.edu

Tianyi Zhang†
Stanford University
tz58@stanford.edu

Ethan Elenberg
ASAPP
eelenberg@asapp.com

Kilian Q. Weinberger
ASAPP, Cornell University

Abstract
Not all data in a typical training set help with generalization; some samples can be
overly ambiguous or outrightly mislabeled. This paper introduces a new method to
identify such samples and mitigate their impact when training neural networks. At
the heart of our algorithm is the Area Under the Margin (AUM) statistic, which
exploits differences in the training dynamics of clean and mislabeled samples. A
simple procedure—adding an extra class populated with purposefully mislabeled
threshold samples—learns a AUM upper bound that isolates mislabeled data.
This approach consistently improves upon prior work on synthetic and real-world
datasets. On the WebVision50 classification task our method removes 17% of
training data, yielding a 1.6% (absolute) improvement in test error. On CIFAR100
removing 13% of the data leads to a 1.2% drop in error.

1

Introduction

As deep networks become increasingly powerful, the potential improvement of novel architectures in
many applications is inherently limited by data quality. In many real-world settings, datasets may
contain samples that are “weakly-labeled” through proxy variables or web scraping [e.g. 28, 35, 60].
Human annotators, especially on crowdsourced platforms, can also be prone to making labeling
mistakes. Even the most celebrated and highly-curated datasets, like MNIST [31] and ImageNet [13],
famously contain harmful examples. See Fig. 1 for suspicious examples detected by our proposed
method—some are clearly mislabeled, others inherently ambiguous. Mislabeled training data are
problematic for overparameterized deep networks, which can achieve zero training error even on
randomly-assigned labels [65]. If a BIRD is mislabeled as a DOG, a model will learn overly specific
filters—only applicable for this one image—which will result in overfitting and worse performance.
Our goal is to automatically identify and subsequently remove mislabeled samples from training
datasets. Discarding these harmful data will reduce memorization and improve generalization.
Perhaps more importantly, identifying mislabeled data allows practitioners to easily audit and curate
their datasets. For example, a company might like to know about common labeling mistakes in order
to reduce systematic error in their annotation pipeline. Large datasets may be too costly to manually
inspect; therefore, an automated method should isolate mislabeled data with high precision and recall.
Prior works have investigated multi-stage pipelines [e.g. 12, 20] or robust loss functions [e.g. 61, 67]
for mislabeled sample identification. We instead wish to create a method that is fully “plug-and-play”
with existing training methods for maximum compatibility and minimal implementation overhead.
†

Work done while at ASAPP.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

