Least Squares Regression with Markovian Data:
Fundamental Limits and Algorithms

Guy Bresler
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, USA 02139
guy@mit.edu

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research
Bengaluru, India 560001
prajain@microsoft.com

Dheeraj Nagaraj
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, USA 02139
dheeraj@mit.edu

Praneeth Netrapalli
Microsoft Research
Bengaluru, India 560001
praneeth@microsoft.com

Xian Wu
Stanford University
Stanford, USA 94305
xwu20@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of least squares linear regression where the datapoints are
dependent and are sampled from a Markov chain. We establish sharp information
theoretic minimax lower bounds for this problem in terms of τmix , the mixing
time of the underlying Markov chain, under different noise settings. Our results
establish that in general, optimization with Markovian data is strictly harder than
optimization with independent data and a trivial algorithm (SGD-DD) that works
with only one in every Θ̃(τmix ) samples, which are approximately independent, is
minimax optimal. In fact, it is strictly better than the popular Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) method with constant step-size which is otherwise minimax optimal
in the regression with independent data setting.
Beyond a worst case analysis, we investigate whether structured datasets seen in
practice such as Gaussian auto-regressive dynamics can admit more efficient optimization schemes. Surprisingly, even in this specific and natural setting, Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) with constant step-size is still no better than SGD-DD. Instead, we propose an algorithm based on experience replay–a popular reinforcement
learning technique–that achieves a significantly better error rate. Our improved
rate serves as one of the first results where an algorithm outperforms SGD-DD on
an interesting Markov chain and also provides one of the first theoretical analyses
to support the use of experience replay in practice.

1

Introduction

Typical machine learning algorithms and their analyses crucially require the training data to be
sampled independently and identically (i.i.d.). However, real-world datapoints collected can be
highly dependent on each other. One model for capturing data dependencies which is popular in
many applications such as Reinforcement Learning (RL) is to assume that the data is generated
by a Markov process. While it is intuitive that the state of the art optimization algorithms with
provable guarantees for iid data will not converge as quickly or as efficiently for dependent data, a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

