Online Robust Regression via SGD on the `1 loss

Scott Pesme
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
scott.pesme@epfl.ch

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
We consider the robust linear regression problem in the online setting where we
have access to the data in a streaming manner, one data point after the other. More
specifically, for a true parameter θ∗ , we consider the corrupted Gaussian linear
model y = hx, θ∗ i + ε + b where the adversarial noise b can take any value with
probability η and equals zero otherwise. We consider this adversary to be oblivious
(i.e., b independent of the data) since this is the only contamination model under
which consistency is possible. Current algorithms rely on having the whole data at
hand in order to identify and remove the outliers. In contrast, we show in this work
that stochastic gradient descent on the `1 loss converges to the true parameter vector
at a Õ(1/(1 − η)2 n) rate which is independent of the values of the contaminated
measurements. Our proof relies on the elegant smoothing of the non-smooth `1 loss
by the Gaussian data and a classical non-asymptotic analysis of Polyak-Ruppert
averaged SGD. In addition, we provide experimental evidence of the efficiency of
this simple and highly scalable algorithm.

1

Introduction

Robust learning is a critical field that seeks to develop efficient algorithms that can recover an
underlying model despite possibly malicious corruptions in the data. In recent decades, being
able to deal with corrupted measurements has become of crucial importance. The applications
are considerable, to name a few settings: computer vision [87, 90, 5], economics [85, 73, 92],
astronomy [72], biology [89, 76] and above all, safety-critical systems [15, 40, 33].
Linear regression being one of the most fundamental statistical model, the robust regression problem
has naturally drawn substantial attention. In this problem, we wish to recover a signal from noisy
linear measurements where an unknown proportion η has been arbitrarily perturbed. Various models
have been proposed to illustrate such contaminations. The broadest is to consider that the adversary is
adaptive and is allowed to inspect the samples before changing a fraction η. In this general framework,
exact model recovery is not possible and several robust algorithms have been proposed [19, 49, 22,
68, 77, 17, 55, 54]. The information-theoretic optimal recovery guarantee has recently been reached
by [28]. Another model is to consider an oblivious adversary, in this simpler context it is possible to
consistently recover the model parameter and several algorithms have been proposed [8, 79].
However, none of these algorithms are suitable for online or large-scale problems [58, 36]. Indeed,
all of the suggested algorithms require handling the complete dataset, which is simply unrealistic in
such settings. This is a considerable problem when we know that modern problems involve colossal
datasets and that current machine learning methods are limited by the computing time rather than the
amount of data [12]. Such considerations advocate the necessity of proposing practical, online and
highly scalable robust algorithms, hence we ask the following question:
Can we design an efficient online algorithm for the robust regression problem ?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

