Stochastic Optimization for Performative Prediction
Celestine Mendler-Dünner⇤, Juan C. Perdomo⇤ , Tijana Zrnic⇤ , Moritz Hardt†
University of California, Berkeley
{mendler,jcperdomo,tijana.zrnic,hardt}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In performative prediction, the choice of a model influences the distribution of
future data, typically through actions taken based on the model’s predictions. We
initiate the study of stochastic optimization for performative prediction. What
sets this setting apart from traditional stochastic optimization is the difference
between merely updating model parameters and deploying the new model. The
latter triggers a shift in the distribution that affects future data, while the former
keeps the distribution as is. Assuming smoothness and strong convexity, we prove
rates of convergence for both greedily deploying models after each stochastic
update (greedy deploy) as well as for taking several updates before redeploying
(lazy deploy). In both cases, our bounds smoothly recover the optimal O(1/k)
rate as the strength of performativity decreases. Furthermore, they illustrate how
depending on the strength of performative effects, there exists a regime where
either approach outperforms the other. We experimentally explore the trade-off on
both synthetic data and a strategic classification simulator.

1

Introduction

Prediction in the social world is often performative in that a prediction triggers actions that influence
the outcome. A forecast about the spread of a disease, for example, can lead to drastic public health
action aimed at deterring the spread of the disease. In hindsight, the forecast might then appear to
have been off, but this may largely be due to the actions taken based on it. Performativity arises
naturally in consequential statistical decision-making problems in domains ranging from financial
markets to online advertising.
Recent work [17] introduced and formalized performative prediction, an extension of the classical
supervised learning setup whereby the choice of a model can change the data-generating distribution.
This perspective leads to an important notion of stability requiring that a model is optimal on the
distribution it entails. Stability prevents a certain cat-and-mouse game in which the learner repeatedly
updates a model, because it no longer is accurate on the observed data. Prior work established
conditions under which stability can be achieved through repeated risk minimization on the full
data-generating distribution.
When samples arrive one-by-one over time, however, the learner faces a new challenge compared
with traditional stochastic optimization. With every new sample that arrives, the learner has to decide
whether to deploy the model, thereby triggering a drift in distribution, or to continue to collect
more samples from the same distribution. Never deploying a model avoids distribution shift, but
forgoes the possibility of converging to a stable point. Deploying the model too greedily could lead
to overwhelming distribution shift that hampers convergence. In fact, it is not even clear that fast
convergence to stability is possible at all in an online stochastic setting.
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
MH is a paid consultant for Twitter.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

