Neural Path Features and Neural Path Kernel :
Understanding the role of gates in deep learning
Chandrashekar Lakshminarayanan⇤ and Amit Vikram Singh⇤,
Indian Institute of Technology Palakkad
chandru@iitpkd.ac.in, amitkvikram@gmail.com

Abstract
Rectified linear unit (ReLU) activations can also be thought of as gates, which,
either pass or stop their pre-activation input when they are on (when the preactivation input is positive) or off (when the pre-activation input is negative)
respectively. A deep neural network (DNN) with ReLU activations has many gates,
and the on/off status of each gate changes across input examples as well as network
weights. For a given input example, only a subset of gates are active, i.e., on, and the
sub-network of weights connected to these active gates is responsible for producing
the output. At randomised initialisation, the active sub-network corresponding to
a given input example is random. During training, as the weights are learnt, the
active sub-networks are also learnt, and could hold valuable information.
In this paper, we analytically characterise the role of gates and active sub-networks
in deep learning. To this end, we encode the on/off state of the gates for a given
input in a novel neural path feature (NPF), and the weights of the DNN are encoded
in a novel neural path value (NPV). Further, we show that the output of network is
indeed the inner product of NPF and NPV. The main result of the paper shows that
the neural path kernel associated with the NPF is a fundamental quantity that characterises the information stored in the gates of a DNN. We show via experiments
(on MNIST and CIFAR-10) that in standard DNNs with ReLU activations NPFs
are learnt during training and such learning is key for generalisation. Furthermore,
NPFs and NPVs can be learnt in two separate networks and such learning also
generalises well in experiments. In our experiments, we observe that almost all the
information learnt by a DNN with ReLU activations is stored in the gates - a novel
observation that underscores the need to investigate the role of the gates in DNNs.

1

Introduction

We consider deep neural networks (DNNs) with rectified linear unit (ReLU) activations. A special
property of the ReLU activation (denoted by ) is that its output can be written as a product of its
pre-activation input, say q 2 R and a gating signal, G(q) = {q>0} , i.e., (q) = q · G(q). While the
weights of a DNN remain the same across input examples, the 1/0 state of the gates (or simply gates)
change across input examples. For each input example, there is a corresponding active sub-network
consisting of those gates which are 1, and the weights which pass through such gates. This active
sub-network can be said to hold the memory for a given input, i.e., only those weights that pass
through such active gates contribute to the output. In this viewpoint, at random initialisation of the
weights, for a given input example, a random sub-network is active and produces a random output.
However, as the weights change during training (say using gradient descent), the gates change, and
hence the active sub-networks corresponding to the various input examples also change. At the end
⇤

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

