Bayesian Pseudocoresets

Dionysis Manousakas
Department of Computer Science & Technology
University of Cambridge
dm754@cam.ac.uk

Zuheng Xu
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
zuheng.xu@stat.ubc.ca

Cecilia Mascolo
Department of Computer Science & Technology
University of Cambridge
cm542@cam.ac.uk

Trevor Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
trevor@stat.ubc.ca

Abstract
Standard Bayesian inference algorithms are prohibitively expensive in the regime
of modern large-scale data. Recent work has found that a small, weighted subset
of data (a coreset) may be used in place of the full dataset during inference, taking
advantage of data redundancy to reduce computational cost. However, this approach
has limitations in the increasingly common setting of sensitive, high-dimensional
data. Indeed, we prove that there are situations in which the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence between the optimal coreset and the true posterior grows with data
dimension; and as coresets include a subset of the original data, they cannot be
constructed in a manner that preserves individual privacy. We address both of these
issues with a single unified solution, Bayesian pseudocoresets—a small weighted
collection of synthetic “pseudodata”—along with a variational optimization method
to select both pseudodata and weights. The use of pseudodata (as opposed to the
original datapoints) enables both the summarization of high-dimensional data
and the differentially private summarization of sensitive data. Real and synthetic
experiments on high-dimensional data demonstrate that Bayesian pseudocoresets
achieve significant improvements in posterior approximation error compared to
traditional coresets, and that pseudocoresets provide privacy without a significant
loss in approximation quality.

1

Introduction

Large-scale data—which has become the norm in many scientific and commercial applications
of statistical machine learning—creates an inherently difficult setting for the modern data analyst.
Exploring such data is difficult because it cannot all be obtained and directly visualized at once; one
is typically limited to accessing potentially nonrepresentative random subsets of data. Exploring
models is similarly hard, as training even a single model can be a computationally expensive, slow,
and unreliable process. And as many sources of large-scale data contain sensitive information about
individuals (e.g., electronic health records and social network data), these challenges are coupled
with growing privacy concerns that preclude direct access to individual datapoints completely.
Large-scale data does offer one reprieve to the analyst: it often exhibits a significant degree of
redundancy. Most data are not unique or particularly informative for modelling and exploration.
Based on this notion, data summarization methods have been developed that provide the practitioner
with a compressed—but still statistically representative—version of the large dataset for analysis.
Summarizations have been developed for a variety of purposes, e.g., reducing the cost of computing
with kernel matrices via Nyström-type approximations [11, 32, 3] or sparse pseudo-input parameterizations [37], Bayesian inference [23, 22, 8, 9, 7], maximum likelihood parameter estimation
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

