Self-supervised Co-training
for Video Representation Learning

Tengda Han, Weidi Xie, Andrew Zisserman
VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
{htd, weidi, az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/CoCLR/.

Abstract
The objective of this paper is visual-only self-supervised video representation learning. We make the following contributions: (i) we investigate the benefit of adding
semantic-class positives to instance-based Info Noise Contrastive Estimation (InfoNCE) training, showing that this form of supervised contrastive learning leads
to a clear improvement in performance; (ii) we propose a novel self-supervised
co-training scheme to improve the popular infoNCE loss, exploiting the complementary information from different views, RGB streams and optical flow, of
the same data source by using one view to obtain positive class samples for the
other; (iii) we thoroughly evaluate the quality of the learnt representation on two
different downstream tasks: action recognition and video retrieval. In both cases,
the proposed approach demonstrates state-of-the-art or comparable performance
with other self-supervised approaches, whilst being significantly more efficient to
train, i.e. requiring far less training data to achieve similar performance.

1

Introduction

The recent progress in self-supervised representation learning for images and videos has demonstrated
the benefits of using a discriminative contrastive loss on data samples [12, 13, 27, 28, 45, 59], such
as NCE [24, 34]. Given a data sample, the objective is to discriminate its transformed version
against other samples in the dataset. The transformations can be artificial, such as those used in data
augmentation [12], or natural, such as those arising in videos from temporal segments within the same
clip. In essence, these pretext tasks focus on instance discrimination: each data sample is treated as a
‘class’, and the objective is to discriminate its own augmented version from a large number of other
data samples or their augmented versions. Representations learned by instance discrimination in this
manner have demonstrated extremely high performance on downstream tasks, often comparable to
that achieved by supervised training [12, 27].
In this paper, we target self-supervised video representation learning, and ask the question: is instance
discrimination making the best use of data? We show that the answer is no, in two respects:
First, we show that hard positives are being neglected in the self-supervised training, and that if
these hard positives are included then the quality of learnt representation improves significantly.
To investigate this, we conduct an oracle experiment where positive samples are incorporated into
the instance-based training process based on the semantic class label. A clear performance gap is
observed between the pure instance-based learning (termed InfoNCE [59]) and the oracle version
(termed UberNCE). Note that the oracle is a form of supervised contrastive learning, as it encourages
linear separability of the feature representation according to the class labels. In our experiments,
training with UberNCE actually outperforms the supervised model trained with cross-entropy, a
phenomenon that is also observed in a concurrent work [36] for image classification.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

