DAGs with No Fears: A Closer Look at Continuous
Optimization for Learning Bayesian Networks

Dennis Wei
IBM Research
dwei@us.ibm.com

Tian Gao
IBM Research
tgao@us.ibm.com

Yue Yu
Lehigh University
yuy214@lehigh.edu

Abstract
This paper re-examines a continuous optimization framework dubbed NOTEARS
for learning Bayesian networks. We first generalize existing algebraic characterizations of acyclicity to a class of matrix polynomials. Next, focusing on a
one-parameter-per-edge setting, it is shown that the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT)
optimality conditions for the NOTEARS formulation cannot be satisfied except in a
trivial case, which explains a behavior of the associated algorithm. We then derive
the KKT conditions for an equivalent reformulation, show that they are indeed
necessary, and relate them to explicit constraints that certain edges be absent from
the graph. If the score function is convex, these KKT conditions are also sufficient
for local minimality despite the non-convexity of the constraint. Informed by the
KKT conditions, a local search post-processing algorithm is proposed and shown
to substantially and universally improve the structural Hamming distance of all
tested algorithms, typically by a factor of 2 or more. Some combinations with local
search are both more accurate and more efficient than the original NOTEARS.

1

Introduction

Bayesian networks are directed probabilistic graphical models used to model joint probability
distributions of data in many applications [20, 25]. Automatic discovery of their directed acyclic
graph (DAG) structure is important to research areas from causal inference to biology. However,
DAG structure learning is in general an NP-hard problem [8]. Many learning algorithms have been
proposed to circumvent exhaustive search in the discrete space of DAGs, including those for discrete
variables [7, 1, 24, 16, 9, 30, 12] and continuous variables [6, 27].
Recently, Zheng et al. [31] proposed a continuous optimization formulation, referred to as NOTEARS,
in which acyclicity of the graph is enforced by a trace of matrix exponential constraint on a weighted
adjacency matrix. Several works have since successfully extended the formulation to nonlinear and
nonparametric models [29, 19, 17, 32].
This paper takes further steps toward fulfilling the promise of [31] in opening the door to continuous
optimization techniques for score-based structure learning. We contribute in particular to theoretical
understanding of this framework, leading to significant algorithmic improvements.
First, in Section 2, the acyclicity constraints of [31, 29] are generalized to a class of matrix polynomials
with positive coefficients whose traces characterize acyclicity. We also provide a characterization
involving the gradient of functions in this class, which is not only essential to proving later results but
also has an intuitive graphical interpretation.
In Section 3.1, we revisit the NOTEARS formulation of [31] in which a weighted adjacency matrix is
obtained by element-wise squaring of the parameter matrix. It is shown that the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker
(KKT) optimality conditions for this constrained optimization cannot be satisfied except in a trivial
case. This negative result is somewhat surprising given the empirical success of the augmented
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

