Discover, Hallucinate, and Adapt: Open Compound
Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation

Kwanyong Park, Sanghyun Woo, Inkyu Shin, In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{pkyong7,shwoo93,dlsrbgg33,iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for semantic segmentation has been attracting attention recently, as it could be beneficial for various label-scarce real-world
scenarios (e.g., robot control, autonomous driving, medical imaging, etc.). Despite
the significant progress in this field, current works mainly focus on a single-source
single-target setting, which cannot handle more practical settings of multiple targets
or even unseen targets. In this paper, we investigate open compound domain adaptation (OCDA), which deals with mixed and novel situations at the same time, for
semantic segmentation. We present a novel framework based on three main design
principles: discover, hallucinate, and adapt. The scheme first clusters compound
target data based on style, discovering multiple latent domains (discover). Then, it
hallucinates multiple latent target domains in source by using image-translation
(hallucinate). This step ensures the latent domains in the source and the target to be
paired. Finally, target-to-source alignment is learned separately between domains
(adapt). In high-level, our solution replaces a hard OCDA problem with much
easier multiple UDA problems. We evaluate our solution on standard benchmark
GTA5 to C-driving, and achieved new state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

Deep learning-based approaches have achieved great success in the semantic segmentation [24,
43, 2, 7, 42, 3, 17, 10], thanks to a large amount of fully annotated data. However, collecting
large-scale accurate pixel-level annotations can be extremely time and cost consuming [6]. An
appealing alternative is to use off-the-shelf simulators to render synthetic data for which groundtruth annotations are generated automatically [33, 34, 32]. Unfortunately, models trained purely
on simulated data often fail to generalize to the real world due to the domain shifts. Therefore, a
number of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) techniques [11, 38, 1] that can seamlessly transfer
knowledge learned from the label-rich source domain (simulation) to an unlabeled new target domain
(real) have been presented.
Despite the tremendous progress of UDA techniques, we see that their experimental settings are
still far from the real-world. In particular, existing UDA techniques mostly focus on a single-source
single-target setting [37, 39, 45, 13, 25, 31, 5, 29]. They do not consider a more practical scenario
where the target consists of multiple data distributions without clear distinctions. To investigate a
continuous and more realistic setting for domain adaptation, we study the problem of open compound
domain adaptation (OCDA) [23]. In this setting, the target is a union of multiple homogeneous
domains without domain labels. The unseen target data also needs to be considered at the test time,
reflecting the realistic data collection from both mixed and novel situations.
A naive way to perform OCDA is to apply the current UDA methods directly, viewing the compound
target as a uni-modal distribution. As expected, this method has a fundamental limitation; It induces
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

