Group Knowledge Transfer:
Federated Learning of Large CNNs at the Edge

Chaoyang He Murali Annavaram Salman Avestimehr
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90007
chaoyang.he@usc.edu annavara@usc.edu avestime@usc.edu

Abstract
Scaling up the convolutional neural network (CNN) size (e.g., width, depth, etc.)
is known to effectively improve model accuracy. However, the large model size
impedes training on resource-constrained edge devices. For instance, federated
learning (FL) may place undue burden on the compute capability of edge nodes,
even though there is a strong practical need for FL due to its privacy and confidentiality properties. To address the resource-constrained reality of edge devices, we
reformulate FL as a group knowledge transfer training algorithm, called FedGKT.
FedGKT designs a variant of the alternating minimization approach to train small
CNNs on edge nodes and periodically transfer their knowledge by knowledge distillation to a large server-side CNN. FedGKT consolidates several advantages into
a single framework: reduced demand for edge computation, lower communication
bandwidth for large CNNs, and asynchronous training, all while maintaining model
accuracy comparable to FedAvg. We train CNNs designed based on ResNet-56 and
ResNet-110 using three distinct datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and CINIC-10)
and their non-I.I.D. variants. Our results show that FedGKT can obtain comparable
or even slightly higher accuracy than FedAvg. More importantly, FedGKT makes
edge training affordable. Compared to the edge training using FedAvg, FedGKT
demands 9 to 17 times less computational power (FLOPs) on edge devices and
requires 54 to 105 times fewer parameters in the edge CNN. Our source code is
released at FedML (https://fedml.ai).

1

Introduction

The size of convolutional neural networks (CNN) matters. As seen in both manually designed neural
architectures (ResNet [1]) and automated architectures discovered by neural architecture search
(DARTS [2], MiLeNAS [3], EfficientNets [4]), scaling up CNN size (e.g., width, depth, etc.) is
known to be an effective approach for improving model accuracy. Unfortunately, training large
CNNs is challenging for resource-constrained edge devices (e.g., smartphones, IoT devices, and
edge servers). The demand for edge-based training is increasing as evinced by a recent surge of
interest in Federated Learning (FL) [5]. FL is a distributed learning paradigm that can collaboratively
train a global model for many edge devices without centralizing any device’s dataset [6, 7, 8]. FL
can boost model accuracy in situations when a single organization or user does not have sufficient
or relevant data. Consequently, many FL services have been deployed commercially. For instance,
Google has improved the accuracy of item ranking and language models on Android smartphones by
using FL [9]. FL is also a promising solution when data centralization is undesirable or infeasible
due to privacy and regulatory constraints [5]. However, one significant impediment in edge training
is the gap between the computational demand of large CNNs and the meager computational power
on edge devices. FL approaches, such as FedAvg [6] can reduce communication frequency by local
SGD and model averaging [10], but they only evaluate the convergence property on small CNNs,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

