SIRI: Spatial Relation Induced Network For Spatial
Description Resolution

Peiyao Wang †
Weixin Luo †
Yanyu Xu
ShanghaiTech University
{wangpy, luowx, xuyy2}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Haojie Li
Dalian University of Technology
hjli@dlut.edu.cn

Shugong Xu
Shanghai University
shugong@shu.edu.cn

Jianyu Yang
Soochow Univerisity
jyyang@suda.edu.cn

Shenghua Gao
gaoshh@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatial Description Resolution, as a language-guided localization task, is proposed for target location in a panoramic street view, given corresponding language
descriptions. Explicitly characterizing an object-level relationship while distilling spatial relationships are currently absent but crucial to this task. Mimicking
humans, who sequentially traverse spatial relationship words and objects with a
first-person view to locate their target, we propose a novel spatial relationship
induced (SIRI) network. Specifically, visual features are firstly correlated at an
implicit object-level in a projected latent space; then they are distilled by each
spatial relationship word, resulting in each differently activated feature representing
each spatial relationship. Further, we introduce global position priors to fix the
absence of positional information, which may result in global positional reasoning
ambiguities. Both the linguistic and visual features are concatenated to finalize the
target localization. Experimental results on the Touchdown show that our method is
around 24% better than the state-of-the-art method in terms of accuracy, measured
by an 80-pixel radius. Our method also generalizes well on our proposed extended
dataset collected using the same settings as Touchdown. The code for this project is
publicly available at https://github.com/wong-puiyiu/siri-sdr.1

1

Introduction

Visual localization tasks aim to locate target positions according to language descriptions, where
many downstream applications have been developed such as visual question answering (1; 22; 23),
visual grounding (20; 18; 28; 6) and spatial description resolution (SDR) (3), etc. These languageguided location tasks can be categorized in terms of input formats, e.g. perspective images in visual
grounding or panoramic images in the recently introduced SDR.
The Challenge of SDR: Both of visual grounding and spatial description resolution tasks need to
explore the correlation between vision and language to locate the target locations. Unlike traditional
visual grounding, the recently proposed spatial description resolution of panoramic images, however,
presents its own difficulties due to the following aspects. (1) As shown in Figure 1, the complicated
1

†: Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

