Adversarial Learning for Robust Deep Clustering

Xu Yang1 Cheng Deng1∗ Kun Wei1 Junchi Yan2 Wei Liu3
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
2
Department of CSE and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
1

{xuyang.xd, chdeng.xd, weikunsk}@gmail.com, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
Deep clustering integrates embedding and clustering together to obtain the optimal nonlinear embedding space, which is more effective in real-world scenarios
compared with conventional clustering methods. However, the robustness of the
clustering network is prone to being attenuated especially when it encounters an
adversarial attack. A small perturbation in the embedding space will lead to diverse clustering results since the labels are absent. In this paper, we propose a
robust deep clustering method based on adversarial learning. Specifically, we first
attempt to define adversarial samples in the embedding space for the clustering
network. Meanwhile, we devise an adversarial attack strategy to explore samples
that easily fool the clustering layers but do not impact the performance of the
deep embedding. We then provide a simple yet efficient defense algorithm to
improve the robustness of the clustering network. Experimental results on two popular datasets show that the proposed adversarial learning method can significantly
enhance the robustness and further improve the overall clustering performance.
Particularly, the proposed method is generally applicable to multiple existing
clustering frameworks to boost their robustness. The source code is available at
https://github.com/xdxuyang/ALRDC.

1

Introduction

As an important tool in unsupervised learning [38], clustering has been widely utilized in image
segmentation [8], image categorization [10], and data mining and analysis. The goal of clustering
is to find a partition to keep similar samples in the same cluster while dissimilar ones in different
clusters. Recently, a large family of clustering algorithms such as K-means clustering [12] and
Gaussian mixture models [1] have been studied intensively. K-means clustering assigns each sample
to the cluster with the closest center iteratively based on similarity measurements and updates the
center of each cluster. However, the estimated similarity measures for high-dimensional samples may
not be accurate, resulting in degraded clustering performances. In practice, many high-dimensional
samples may exhibit a dense grouping property in a low-dimensional representation space. Hence,
clustering methods, such as spectral clustering [26] and subspace clustering [7], have been developed
to capture various cluster structures.
A majority of spectral clustering approaches [36] depend on a linear subspace assumption to construct
affinity matrices, but data does not naturally obey linear models in many cases. Their distance metrics
are only exploited to describe local relationships in the data space, and have a limitation to represent
latent dependencies among all samples. Moreover, these shallow clustering methods mainly rely on
low-level image features such as raw pixels, SIFT [23], or HOG [6]. On the contrary, deep clustering,
which integrates embedding and clustering as a single procedure to obtain the optimal embedding
∗

The corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

