Greedy Optimization Provably Wins the Lottery:
Logarithmic Number of Winning Tickets is Enough
Mao Ye ⇤

UT Austin
my21@cs.utexas.edu

Lemeng Wu *

UT Austin
lmwu@cs.utexas.edu

Qiang Liu

UT Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Despite the great success of deep learning, recent works show that large deep
neural networks are often highly redundant and can be significantly reduced in size.
However, the theoretical question of how much we can prune a neural network
given a specified tolerance of accuracy drop is still open. This paper provides one
answer to this question by proposing a greedy optimization based pruning method.
The proposed method has the guarantee that the discrepancy between the pruned
network and the original network decays with exponentially fast rate w.r.t. the
size of the pruned network, under weak assumptions that apply for most practical
settings. Empirically, our method improves prior arts on pruning various network
architectures including ResNet, MobilenetV2/V3 on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Large-scale deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success on complex cognitive tasks,
including image classification, e.g., He et al. (2016), speech recognition, e.g., Amodei et al. (2016)
and machine translation, e.g.,Wu et al. (2016). However, a drawback of the modern large-scale DNNs
is their low inference speed and high energy cost, which makes it less appealing to deploy those
models on edge devices such as mobile phones and Internet of Things (Cai et al., 2019).
It has been shown that network pruning (Han et al., 2015) is an effective technique to reduce the
size of the DNNs without a significant drop of accuracy. However, most existing works on network
pruning are based on heuristics, leaving the theoretical questions largely open on what kind of network
can be effectively pruned, how much we can prune a DNN given a specified tolerance of accuracy
drop and how to achieve it with a practical and computationally efficient procedure.
Recently, a line of works on network pruning with theoretical guarantees have emerged, including
sensitivity-based methods (Baykal et al., 2019b; Liebenwein et al., 2020), coreset-based methods
(Baykal et al., 2019a; Mussay et al., 2020), greedy forward selection (Ye et al., 2020). Both the
sensitivity-based and coreset-based methods prune the network by sampling and bound the error
caused pruning via concentration inequalities. They show that the error introduced by pruning decays
with an O(n 1 ) rate w.r.t. the size n of pruned network. This is comparable to the asymptotic error
obtained by directly training a neural network of size n with gradient descent descent, which is also
O(n 1 ) following the mean field analysis of Mei et al. (2018); Araújo et al. (2019); Sirignano &
Spiliopoulos (2019). More recently, Ye et al. (2020) proposed the first pruning method that achieves
a faster O(n 2 ) error rate and is hence provably better than direct training with gradient descent. See
Table 1 for a summary on those works.
However, the analysis of Ye et al. (2020) only applies to two-layer networks and requires the original
network to be sufficiently over-parameterized. In this paper, we proposed a new greedy optimization
based pruning method, which learns sub-networks of size n with a significantly smaller O(exp( cn))
⇤

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

