Inverse Reinforcement Learning from a
Gradient-based Learner
Giorgia Ramponi
Politecnico Di Milano
Milan, Italy
giorgia.ramponi@polimi.it

Gianluca Drappo
Politecnico Di Milano
Milan, Italy
gianluca.drappo@mail.polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico Di Milano
Milan, Italy
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
Inverse Reinforcement Learning addresses the problem of inferring an expert’s
reward function from demonstrations. However, in many applications, we not only
have access to the expert’s near-optimal behaviour, but we also observe part of
her learning process. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm for this setting,
in which the goal is to recover the reward function being optimized by an agent,
given a sequence of policies produced during learning. Our approach is based on
the assumption that the observed agent is updating her policy parameters along
the gradient direction. Then we extend our method to deal with the more realistic
scenario where we only have access to a dataset of learning trajectories. For
both settings, we provide theoretical insights into our algorithms’ performance.
Finally, we evaluate the approach in a simulated GridWorld environment and on
the MuJoCo environments, comparing it with the state-of-the-art baseline.

1

Introduction

Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) [20] aims to infer an expert’s reward function from her
demonstrations [21]. In the standard setting, an expert shows behaviour by repeatedly interacting
with the environment. This behaviour, encoded by its policy, is optimizing an unknown reward
function. The goal of IRL consists of finding a reward function that makes the expert’s behaviour
optimal [20]. Compared to other imitation learning approaches [3, 15], which output an imitating
policy (e.g, Behavioral Cloning [3]), IRL explicitly provides a succinct representation of the expert’s
intention. For this reason, it provides a generalization of the expert’s policy to unobserved situations.
However, in some cases, it is not possible to wait for the convergence of the demonstrator’s learning
process. For instance, in multi-agent environments, an agent has to infer the unknown reward
functions that the other agents are learning, before actually becoming “experts”; so that she can either
cooperate or compete with them. On the other hand, in many situations, we can learn something useful
by observing the learning process of an agent. These observations contain important information
about the agent’s intentions and can be used to infer her interests. Imagine a driver who is learning a
new circuit. During her training, we can observe how she behaves in a variety of situations (even
dangerous ones) and this is useful for understanding which states are good and which should be
avoided. Instead, when expert behaviour is observed, only a small sub-region of the state space could
be explored, thus leaving the observer unaware of what to do in situations that are unlikely under the
expert policy.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

