Language as a Cognitive Tool to
Imagine Goals in Curiosity-Driven Exploration

Cédric Colas∗, Tristan Karch∗
Inria - Flowers team
Université de Bordeaux
{firstname.lastname}@inria.fr
Clément Moulin-Frier
Inria - Flowers team
Université de Bordeaux
ENSTA ParisTech

Nicolas Lair∗
Inserm U1093
Cloud Temple
nicolas.lair@inserm.fr

Peter Ford Dominey
Inserm U1093
Université de Dijon

Jean-Michel Dussoux
Cloud Temple
Paris

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
Inria - Flowers team
Université de Bordeaux
ENSTA ParisTech

Abstract
Developmental machine learning studies how artificial agents can model the way
children learn open-ended repertoires of skills. Such agents need to create and
represent goals, select which ones to pursue and learn to achieve them. Recent
approaches have considered goal spaces that were either fixed and hand-defined
or learned using generative models of states. This limited agents to sample goals
within the distribution of known effects. We argue that the ability to imagine
out-of-distribution goals is key to enable creative discoveries and open-ended
learning. Children do so by leveraging the compositionality of language as a
tool to imagine descriptions of outcomes they never experienced before, targeting
them as goals during play. We introduce IMAGINE, an intrinsically motivated
deep reinforcement learning architecture that models this ability. Such imaginative
agents, like children, benefit from the guidance of a social peer who provides
language descriptions. To take advantage of goal imagination, agents must be
able to leverage these descriptions to interpret their imagined out-of-distribution
goals. This generalization is made possible by modularity: a decomposition
between learned goal-achievement reward function and policy relying on deep sets,
gated attention and object-centered representations. We introduce the Playground
environment and study how this form of goal imagination improves generalization
and exploration over agents lacking this capacity. In addition, we identify the
properties of goal imagination that enable these results and study the impacts of
modularity and social interactions.

1

Introduction

Building autonomous machines that can discover and learn open-ended skill repertoires is a longstanding goal in Artificial Intelligence. In this quest, we can draw inspiration from children development [12]. In particular, children exploration seems to be driven by intrinsically motivated brain
processes that trigger spontaneous exploration for the mere purpose of experiencing novelty, surprise
or learning progress [32, 42, 45]. During exploratory play, children can also invent and pursue their
own problems [19].
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

