Joints in Random Forests

Alvaro H. C. Correia
a.h.chaim.correia@tue.nl
Eindhoven University of Technology

Robert Peharz
r.peharz@tue.nl
Eindhoven University of Technology

Cassio de Campos
c.decampos@tue.nl
Eindhoven University of Technology

Abstract
Decision Trees (DTs) and Random Forests (RFs) are powerful discriminative learners and tools of central importance to the everyday machine learning practitioner
and data scientist. Due to their discriminative nature, however, they lack principled
methods to process inputs with missing features or to detect outliers, which requires
pairing them with imputation techniques or a separate generative model. In this
paper, we demonstrate that DTs and RFs can naturally be interpreted as generative
models, by drawing a connection to Probabilistic Circuits, a prominent class of
tractable probabilistic models. This reinterpretation equips them with a full joint
distribution over the feature space and leads to Generative Decision Trees (GeDTs)
and Generative Forests (GeFs), a family of novel hybrid generative-discriminative
models. This family of models retains the overall characteristics of DTs and RFs
while additionally being able to handle missing features by means of marginalisation. Under certain assumptions, frequently made for Bayes consistency results,
we show that consistency in GeDTs and GeFs extend to any pattern of missing
input features, if missing at random. Empirically, we show that our models often
outperform common routines to treat missing data, such as K-nearest neighbour imputation, and moreover, that our models can naturally detect outliers by monitoring
the marginal probability of input features.

1

Introduction

Decision Trees (DTs) and Random Forests (RFs) are probably the most widely used non-linear
machine learning models of today. While Deep Neural Networks are in the lead for image, video,
audio, and text data—likely due to their beneficial inductive bias for signal-like data—DTs and RFs
are, by and large, the default predictive model for tabular, domain-agnostic datasets. Indeed, Kaggle’s
2019 report on the State of Data Science and Machine Learning [20] lists DTs and RFs as second most
widely used techniques, right after linear and logistic regressions. Moreover, a study by Fernandez et
al. [12] found that RFs performed best on 121 UCI datasets against 179 other classifiers. Thus, it is
clear that DTs and RFs are of central importance for the current machine learning practitioner.
DTs and RFs are generally understood as discriminative models, that is, they are solely interpreted as
predictive models, such as classifiers or regression functions, while attempts to additionally interpret
them as generative models are scarce. In a nutshell, the difference between discriminative and
generative models is that the former aim to capture the conditional distribution P (Y | X), while the
latter aim to capture the whole joint distribution P (Y, X), where X are the input features and Y is
the variable to be predicted—discrete for classification and continuous for regression. In this paper,
we focus on classification, but the extension to regression is straightforward.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

