Set2Graph: Learning Graphs From Sets

Hadar Serviansky1
Eilam Gross1
1

Nimrod Segol1

Jonathan Shlomi1

Haggai Maron3

Kyle Cranmer2

Yaron Lipman1

Weizmann Institute of Science 2 New York University 3 NVIDIA Research

Abstract
Many problems in machine learning can be cast as learning functions from sets to
graphs, or more generally to hypergraphs; in short, Set2Graph functions. Examples
include clustering, learning vertex and edge features on graphs, and learning
features on triplets in a collection.
A natural approach for building Set2Graph models is to characterize all linear
equivariant set-to-hypergraph layers and stack them with non-linear activations.
This poses two challenges: (i) the expressive power of these networks is not
well understood; and (ii) these models would suffer from high, often intractable
computational and memory complexity, as their dimension grows exponentially.
This paper advocates a family of neural network models for learning Set2Graph
functions that is both practical and of maximal expressive power (universal), that
is, can approximate arbitrary continuous Set2Graph functions over compact sets.
Testing these models on different machine learning tasks, mainly an application to
particle physics, we find them favorable to existing baselines.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of learning functions taking
sets of vectors in Rdin to graphs, or more generally hypergraphs; we name this problem Set2Graph, or setto-graph. Set-to-graph functions appear in machinelearning applications such as clustering, predicting
features on edges and nodes in graphs, and learning
k-edge information in sets.

Set Set

Set 2-edges

Set graph
F1 , F2

Set 3-edges

F1

F2

F3

Mathematically, we represent each set-to-graph
function as a collection of set-to-k-edge functions,
where each set-to-k-edge function learns features Figure 1: Set-to-graph functions are repreon k-edges. That is, given an input set X = sented as collections of set-to-k-edge functions.
{x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rdin we consider functions Fk attaching feature vectors to k-edges: each k-tuple (xi1 , . . . , xik ) is assigned with an output vector
Fk (X )i1 ,i2 ,...,ik ,: ∈ Rdout . Now, functions mapping sets to hypergraphs with hyper-edges of size
up-to k are modeled by (F1 , F2 , . . . , Fk ). For example, functions mapping sets to standard graphs
are represented by (F1 , F2 ), see Figure 1.
Set-to-graph functions are well-defined if they satisfy a property called equivariance (defined later),
and therefore the set-to-graph problem is an instance of the bigger class of equivariant learning
[3, 27, 16]. A natural approach for learning equivariant set-to-graph model is using out-of-the-box
full equivariant model as in [20].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

