Subgraph Neural Networks
Emily Alsentzer⇤
Harvard University, MIT
emilya@mit.edu

Samuel G. Finlayson⇤
Harvard University, MIT
sgfin@mit.edu

Michelle M. Li
Harvard University
michelleli@g.harvard.edu

Marinka Zitnik
Harvard University
marinka@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Deep learning methods for graphs achieve remarkable performance on many nodelevel and graph-level prediction tasks. However, despite the proliferation of the
methods and their success, prevailing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) neglect
subgraphs, rendering subgraph prediction tasks challenging to tackle in many impactful applications. Further, subgraph prediction tasks present several unique
challenges: subgraphs can have non-trivial internal topology, but also carry a notion
of position and external connectivity information relative to the underlying graph
in which they exist. Here, we introduce S UB GNN, a subgraph neural network to
learn disentangled subgraph representations. We propose a novel subgraph routing
mechanism that propagates neural messages between the subgraph’s components
and randomly sampled anchor patches from the underlying graph, yielding highly
accurate subgraph representations. S UB GNN specifies three channels, each designed to capture a distinct aspect of subgraph topology, and we provide empirical
evidence that the channels encode their intended properties. We design a series of
new synthetic and real-world subgraph datasets. Empirical results for subgraph
classification on eight datasets show that S UB GNN achieves considerable performance gains, outperforming strong baseline methods, including node-level and
graph-level methods, by 19.8% over the strongest baseline. S UB GNN performs exceptionally well on challenging biomedical datasets where subgraphs have complex
topology and even comprise multiple disconnected components.

1

Introduction

Deep learning on graphs and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), in particular, have emerged as the
dominant paradigm for learning compact representations of interconnected data [66, 81, 23]. The
methods condense graph neighborhood connectivity patterns into low-dimensional embeddings that
can be used for a variety of downstream prediction tasks. While graph representation learning has
made tremendous progress in recent years [20, 84], prevailing methods focus on learning useful
representations for nodes [25, 68], edges [21, 37] or entire graphs [6, 27].
Graph-level representations provide an overarching view of the graphs but at the loss of some finer
local structure. In contrast, node-level representations focus instead on the preservation of the local
topological structure (potentially to the detriment of the big picture). It is unclear if the methods
can generate powerful representations for subgraphs and effectively capture the unique topology of
subgraphs. Despite the popularity and importance of subgraphs for machine learning [77, 13, 78],
there is still limited research on subgraph prediction [41], i.e., to predict if a particular subgraph has
⇤

Contributed Equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

