Synthetic Data Generators – Sequential and Private

Roi Livni
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv, Israel
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Olivier Bousquet
Google Research, Brain team
Zürich
obousquet@google.com

Shay Moran
Technion
Haifa, Israel
shaymoran1@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the sample complexity of private synthetic data generation over an
unbounded sized class of statistical queries, and show that any class that is privately
proper PAC learnable admits a private synthetic data generator (perhaps nonefficient). Previous work on synthetic data generators focused on the case that
the query class D is finite and obtained sample complexity bounds that scale
logarithmically with the size |D|. Here we construct a private synthetic data
generator whose sample complexity is independent of the domain size, and we
replace finiteness with the assumption that D is privately PAC learnable (a formally
weaker task, hence we obtain equivalence between the two tasks).

1

Introduction

Generating differentially–private synthetic data [9, 14] is a fundamental task in learning that has won
considerable attention in the last few years [22, 34, 23, 16].
Formally, given a class D of distinguishing functions, a fooling algorithm receives as input IID
samples from an unknown real-life distribution, preal , and outputs a distribution psyn that is -close
to preal w.r.t the Integral Probability Metric ([29]), denoted IPMD :
IPMD (p, q) = sup E [d(x)] − E [d(x)]
d∈D x∼p

x∼q

(1)

A DP-SDG is then simply defined to be a differentially private fooling algorithm.
A fundamental question is then: Which classes D can be privately fooled? In this paper, we focus
on sample complexity bounds and give a first such characterization. We prove that a class D is
DP–foolable if and only if it is privately (proper) PAC learnable. As a corollary, we obtain equivalence
between several important tasks within private learning such as proper PAC Learning [25], Data
Release [14], Sanitization [6] and what we will term here Private Uniform Convergence.
Much focus has been given to the task of synthetic data generation. Also, several papers [5, 23, 16,
20, 21] discuss the reduction of private fooling to private PAC learning. In contrast with previous
work, we assume an arbitrary large domain. In detail, previous existing bounds normally scale
logarithmically with the size of the query class D (or alternatively, depend on the size of the domain).
Here we initiate a study of the sample complexity that does not assume that the size of the domain is
fixed. Instead, we only assume that the class is privately PAC learnable, and obtain sample complexity
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

