Unsupervised Sound Separation
Using Mixture Invariant Training
Scott Wisdom
Google Research
scottwisdom@google.com

Ron J. Weiss
Google Research
ronw@google.com

Efthymios Tzinis⇤
UIUC
etzinis2@illinois.edu

Kevin Wilson
Google Research
kwwilson@google.com

Hakan Erdogan
Google Research
hakanerdogan@google.com

John R. Hershey
Google Research
johnhershey@google.com

Abstract
In recent years, rapid progress has been made on the problem of single-channel
sound separation using supervised training of deep neural networks. In such
supervised approaches, a model is trained to predict the component sources from
synthetic mixtures created by adding up isolated ground-truth sources. Reliance on
this synthetic training data is problematic because good performance depends upon
the degree of match between the training data and real-world audio, especially in
terms of the acoustic conditions and distribution of sources. The acoustic properties
can be challenging to accurately simulate, and the distribution of sound types may
be hard to replicate. In this paper, we propose a completely unsupervised method,
mixture invariant training (MixIT), that requires only single-channel acoustic
mixtures. In MixIT, training examples are constructed by mixing together existing
mixtures, and the model separates them into a variable number of latent sources,
such that the separated sources can be remixed to approximate the original mixtures.
We show that MixIT can achieve competitive performance compared to supervised
methods on speech separation. Using MixIT in a semi-supervised learning setting
enables unsupervised domain adaptation and learning from large amounts of realworld data without ground-truth source waveforms. In particular, we significantly
improve reverberant speech separation performance by incorporating reverberant
mixtures, train a speech enhancement system from noisy mixtures, and improve
universal sound separation by incorporating a large amount of in-the-wild data.

1

Introduction

Audio perception is fraught with a fundamental problem: individual sounds are convolved with
unknown acoustic reverberation functions and mixed together at the acoustic sensor in a way that
is impossible to disentangle without prior knowledge of the source characteristics. It is a hallmark
of human hearing that we are able to hear the nuances of different sources, even when presented
with a monaural mixture of sounds. In recent years significant progress has been made on extracting
estimates of each source from single-channel recordings, using supervised deep learning methods.
These techniques have been applied to important tasks such as speaker-independent enhancement
(separation of speech from nonspeech interference) [19, 46] and speech separation (separation of
speech from speech) [17, 20, 50]. The more general “universal sound separation” problem of
separating arbitrary classes of sound from each other has also recently been addressed [21, 43].
⇤

Work done during an internship at Google.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

