Faithful Embeddings for Knowledge Base Queries

Haitian Sun
Andrew O. Arnold∗
Tania Bedrax-Weiss
Fernando Pereira
William W. Cohen
Google Research
{haitiansun,tbedrax,pereira,wcohen}@google.com
AWS AI
anarnld@amazon.com

Abstract
The deductive closure of an ideal knowledge base (KB) contains exactly the logical
queries that the KB can answer. However, in practice KBs are both incomplete and
over-specified, failing to answer some queries that have real-world answers. Query
embedding (QE) techniques have been recently proposed where KB entities and
KB queries are represented jointly in an embedding space, supporting relaxation
and generalization in KB inference. However, experiments in this paper show
that QE systems may disagree with deductive reasoning on answers that do not
require generalization or relaxation. We address this problem with a novel QE
method that is more faithful to deductive reasoning, and show that this leads to
better performance on complex queries to incomplete KBs. Finally we show that
inserting this new QE module into a neural question-answering system leads to
substantial improvements over the state-of-the-art. 2

1

Introduction

The deductive closure of an ideal knowledge base (KB) contains exactly the logical queries that the
KB can answer. However, in practice KBs are both incomplete and over-specified, failing to answer
queries that have actual real-world answers. Query embedding (QE) methods extend logical queries
to incomplete KBs by representing KB entities and KB queries in a joint embedding space, supporting
relaxation and generalization in KB inference [9, 10, 25, 17]. For instance, graph query embedding
(GQE) [10] encodes a query q and entities x as vectors such that cosine distance represents x’s score
as a possible answer to q. In QE, the embedding for a query q is typically built compositionally; in
particular, the embedding for q = q1 ∧ q2 is computed from the embeddings for q1 and q2 . In past
work, QE has been useful for answering overconstrained logical queries [25] and querying incomplete
KBs [9, 10, 17].
Figure 1 summarizes the relationship between traditional KB embedding (KBE), query embedding
(QE), and logical inference. Traditional logical inference enables a system to find deductively entailed
answers to queries; KBE approaches allow a system to generalize from explicitly-stored KB tuples
to similar tuples; and QE methods combine both of these ideas, providing a soft form of logical
entailment that generalizes.
We say that a QE system is logically faithful if it behaves similarly to a traditional logical inference
system with respect to entailed answers. In this paper, we present experiments illustrating that
QE systems are often not faithful: in particular, experiments with the state-of-the-art QE system
Query2Box [17] show that it performs quite poorly in finding logically-entailed answers. We
conjecture this is because models that generalize well do not have the capacity to model all the
∗
2

Work done while at Google Research.
Code available at https://github.com/google-research/language

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

