Safe Reinforcement Learning
via Curriculum Induction
Matteo Turchetta⇤
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
matteotu@inf.ethz.ch
Shital Shah
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA-98052
shitals@microsoft.com

Andrey Kolobov
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA-98052
akolobov@microsoft.com

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA-98052
alekha@microsoft.com

Abstract
In safety-critical applications, autonomous agents may need to learn in an environment where mistakes can be very costly. In such settings, the agent needs to
behave safely not only after but also while learning. To achieve this, existing
safe reinforcement learning methods make an agent rely on priors that let it avoid
dangerous situations during exploration with high probability, but both the probabilistic guarantees and the smoothness assumptions inherent in the priors are
not viable in many scenarios of interest such as autonomous driving. This paper
presents an alternative approach inspired by human teaching, where an agent learns
under the supervision of an automatic instructor that saves the agent from violating
constraints during learning. In this new model, the instructor needs to know neither
how to do well at the task the agent is learning, nor how the environment works.
Instead, it has a library of reset controllers that it activates when the agent starts
behaving dangerously, preventing it from doing damage. Crucially, the choices of
which reset controller to apply in which situation affect the speed of agent learning.
Based on observing agents’ progress, the teacher itself learns a policy for choosing
the reset controllers, a curriculum, to optimize the agent’s final policy reward.
Our experiments use this framework in two challenging environments to induce
curricula for safe and efficient learning.

1

Introduction

Safety is a major concern that prevents application of reinforcement learning (RL) [45] to many
practical problems [16]. Among the RL safety notions studied in the literature [23], ensuring that
the agent does not violate constraints is perhaps the most important. Consider, for exmple, training
a policy for a self-driving car’s autopilot. Although simulations are helpful, much of the training
needs to be done via a process akin to RL on a physical car [26]. At that stage, it is critical to avoid
damage to property, people, and the car itself. Safe RL techniques aim to achieve this primarily by
imparting the agent with priors about the environment and equipping it with sound ways of updating
this information with observations [17, 9, 12, 13]. Some do this heuristically [2], while others provide
safety guarantees through demonstrations [47], or by assuming access to fairly accurate dynamical
models [4], or at the cost of smoothness assumptions [9, 28, 48, 49]. These assumptions hold, e.g., in
certain drone control scenarios [8] but are violated in settings such as autonomous driving, where a
small delta in control inputs can make a difference between safe passage and collision.
⇤

The author did part of this work while at Microsoft Research, Redmond.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

