Deep Inverse Q-learning with Constraints

Gabriel Kalweit∗
Neurorobotics Lab
University of Freiburg
kalweitg@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Moritz Werling
BMWGroup
Germany
Moritz.Werling@bmw.de

Maria Huegle∗
Neurorobotics Lab
University of Freiburg
hueglem@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Joschka Boedecker
Neurorobotics Lab and BrainLinks-BrainTools
University of Freiburg
jboedeck@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Popular Maximum Entropy Inverse Reinforcement Learning approaches require the
computation of expected state visitation frequencies for the optimal policy under an
estimate of the reward function. This usually requires intermediate value estimation
in the inner loop of the algorithm, slowing down convergence considerably. In this
work, we introduce a novel class of algorithms that only needs to solve the MDP
underlying the demonstrated behavior once to recover the expert policy. This is
possible through a formulation that exploits a probabilistic behavior assumption for
the demonstrations within the structure of Q-learning. We propose Inverse Actionvalue Iteration which is able to fully recover an underlying reward of an external
agent in closed-form analytically. We further provide an accompanying class of
sampling-based variants which do not depend on a model of the environment. We
show how to extend this class of algorithms to continuous state-spaces via function
approximation and how to estimate a corresponding action-value function, leading
to a policy as close as possible to the policy of the external agent, while optionally
satisfying a list of predefined hard constraints. We evaluate the resulting algorithms
called Inverse Action-value Iteration, Inverse Q-learning and Deep Inverse Qlearning on the Objectworld benchmark, showing a speedup of up to several orders
of magnitude compared to (Deep) Max-Entropy algorithms. We further apply Deep
Constrained Inverse Q-learning on the task of learning autonomous lane-changes
in the open-source simulator SUMO achieving competent driving after training on
data corresponding to 30 minutes of demonstrations.

1

Introduction

Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) [4] is a popular approach to imitation learning which generally
reduces the problem of recovering a demonstrated behavior to the recovery of a reward function
that induces the observed behavior, assuming that the demonstrator was (softly) maximizing its
long-term return. Previous work solved this problem with different approaches, such as Linear IRL
[19, 1] and Large-Margin Q-Learning [21]. A very influential approach which addresses the inherent
ambiguity of possible reward functions and induced policies for an observed behavior is Maximum
Entropy Inverse Reinforcement Learning (MaxEnt IRL, [26]), a probabilistic formulation of the
problem which keeps the distribution over actions as non-committed as possible. This approach has
been extended with deep networks as function approximators for the reward function in [25] and
∗

Equal Contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

