Time-Reversal Symmetric ODE Network

In Huh1,2 , Eunho Yang3,4 , Sung Ju Hwang3,4 , Jinwoo Shin3,5
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
2
CSE Team, DIT Center, Samsung Electronics
3
Graduate School of AI, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
4
School of Computing, KAIST
5
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
in.huh@samsung.com, yangeh@gmail.com, {sjhwang82, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Time-reversal symmetry, which requires that the dynamics of a system should not
change with the reversal of time axis, is a fundamental property that frequently
holds in classical and quantum mechanics. In this paper, we propose a novel loss
function that measures how well our ordinary differential equation (ODE) networks
comply with this time-reversal symmetry; it is formally defined by the discrepancy
in the time evolutions of ODE networks between forward and backward dynamics.
Then, we design a new framework, which we name as Time-Reversal Symmetric
ODE Networks (TRS-ODENs), that can learn the dynamics of physical systems
more sample-efficiently by learning with the proposed loss function. We evaluate
TRS-ODENs on several classical dynamics, and find they can learn the desired
time evolution from observed noisy and complex trajectories. We also show that,
even for systems that do not possess the full time-reversal symmetry, TRS-ODENs
can achieve better predictive performances over baselines.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in artificial intelligence allow researchers to recover laws of physics and predict
dynamics of physical systems from observed data by utilizing machine learning techniques, e.g.,
evolutionary algorithms [37, 29], sparse optimizations [35, 4], Gaussian process regressions [40, 8],
and neural networks [18, 1, 15, 46, 34]. Among various models, the neural networks are considered as
one of the most powerful tools to model complicated physical phenomena, owing to their remarkable
ability to approximate arbitrary functions [17]. One notable aspect of the observations in physical
systems is that they manifest some fundamental properties including conservation or invariance
[14, 2]. However, it is not straightforward for neural networks to learn and model the embedded
physical properties from observed data only. Consequently, they often overfit to short-term training
trajectories and fail to predict the long-term behaviors of complex dynamical systems [15, 46].
To overcome these issues, it is important to introduce appropriate inductive biases based on knowledge
of physics, dynamics and their properties [46, 34]. Common approaches to incorporate physics-based
inductive bias include modifying neural network architectures or introducing regularization terms
based on specialized knowledge of physics and natural sciences [31, 28, 38, 39]. These methods
demonstrate impressive performance on their target problems, but such a problem-specific model
suffers from generalizing across domains. Namely, they can be used only when the governing physics
for the target domain is exactly known, e.g., Navier-Stokes equation for fluid mechanics [31, 28]. As
for more general approaches, the authors in [6, 5] propose the ordinary differential equation (ODE)
networks, which view the neural networks as parameterized ODE functions. They are shown to be
able to represent the vast majority of dynamical systems with higher precision over vanilla recurrent
neural networks and their variants [6, 5], but are still unable to learn underlying physics such as the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

