Rethinking Importance Weighting for Deep
Learning under Distribution Shift

Tongtong Fang∗1† Nan Lu∗1,2 Gang Niu2‡ Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1
2
The University of Tokyo, Japan
RIKEN, Japan

Abstract
Under distribution shift (DS) where the training data distribution differs from the
test one, a powerful technique is importance weighting (IW) which handles DS in
two separate steps: weight estimation (WE) estimates the test-over-training density
ratio and weighted classification (WC) trains the classifier from weighted training
data. However, IW cannot work well on complex data, since WE is incompatible
with deep learning. In this paper, we rethink IW and theoretically show it suffers
from a circular dependency: we need not only WE for WC, but also WC for WE
where a trained deep classifier is used as the feature extractor (FE). To cut off the
dependency, we try to pretrain FE from unweighted training data, which leads to
biased FE. To overcome the bias, we propose an end-to-end solution dynamic IW
that iterates between WE and WC and combines them in a seamless manner, and
hence our WE can also enjoy deep networks and stochastic optimizers indirectly.
Experiments with two representative types of DS on three popular datasets show
that our dynamic IW compares favorably with state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Supervised deep learning is extremely successful [12], but the success relies highly on the fact that
training and test data come from the same distribution. A big challenge in the age of deep learning
is distribution/dataset shift (DS) [40, 48, 38], where training and test data come from two different
distributions: the training data are drawn from ptr (x, y), the test data are drawn from pte (x, y), and
ptr (x, y) 6= pte (x, y). Under DS, supervised deep learning can lead to deep classifiers (DC) biased
to the training data whose performance may significantly drop on the test data.
A common practice is to assume under DS that pte (x, y) is absolutely continuous w.r.t. ptr (x, y), i.e.,
ptr (x, y) = 0 implies pte (x, y) = 0. Then, there exists a function w∗ (x, y) = pte (x, y)/ptr (x, y),
such that for any function f of x and y, it holds that
Epte (x,y) [f (x, y)] = Eptr (x,y) [w∗ (x, y)f (x, y)].

(1)

Eq. (1) means after taking proper weights into account, the weighted expectation of f over ptr (x, y)
becomes unbiased no matter if f is a loss to be minimized or a reward to be maximized. Thanks to
Eq. (1), importance weighting (IW) [46, 49, 21, 50, 51, 25] can handle DS in two separate steps:
• weight estimation (WE) with the help of a tiny set of validation data from pte (x, y) or pte (x);
• weighted classification (WC), i.e., classifier training after plugging the WE result into Eq. (1).
IW works very well (e.g., as if there is no DS) if the form of data is simple (e.g., some linear model
suffices), and it has been the common practice of non-deep learning under DS [52].
∗

Equal contribution.
Preliminary work was done when TF was a master student at KTH and an intern student at RIKEN.
‡
Correspondence to: GN <gang.niu@riken.jp>, TF <fang@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp>
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

