Rational neural networks
Nicolas Boullé
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford
Oxford, OX2 6GG, UK
boulle@maths.ox.ac.uk

Yuji Nakatsukasa
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford
Oxford, OX2 6GG, UK
nakatsukasa@maths.ox.ac.uk

Alex Townsend
Department of Mathematics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
townsend@cornell.edu

Abstract
We consider neural networks with rational activation functions. The choice of the
nonlinear activation function in deep learning architectures is crucial and heavily
impacts the performance of a neural network. We establish optimal bounds in
terms of network complexity and prove that rational neural networks approximate
smooth functions more efficiently than ReLU networks with exponentially smaller
depth. The flexibility and smoothness of rational activation functions make them
an attractive alternative to ReLU, as we demonstrate with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has become an important topic across many domains of science due to its recent
success in image recognition, speech recognition, and drug discovery [23, 28, 29, 32]. Deep learning
techniques are based on neural networks, which contain a certain number of layers to perform several
mathematical transformations on the input. A nonlinear transformation of the input determines the
output of each layer in the neural network: x 7→ σ(W x + b), where W is a matrix called the weight
matrix, b is a bias vector, and σ is a nonlinear function called the activation function (also called
activation unit). The computational cost of training a neural network depends on the total number of
nodes (size) and the number of layers (depth). A key question in designing deep learning architectures
is the choice of the activation function to reduce the number of trainable parameters of the network
while keeping the same approximation power [17].
While smooth activation functions such as sigmoid, logistic, or hyperbolic tangent are widely used,
they suffer from the “vanishing gradient problem” [5] because their derivatives are zero for large inputs.
Neural networks based on polynomial activation functions are an alternative [9, 11, 19, 20, 33, 52],
but can be numerically unstable due to large gradients for large inputs [5]. Moreover, polynomials
do not approximate non-smooth functions efficiently [51], which can lead to optimization issues
in classification problems. A popular choice of activation function is the Rectified Linear Unit
(ReLU) defined as ReLU(x) = max(x, 0) [26, 39]. It has numerous advantages, such as being fast
to evaluate and zero for many inputs [16]. Many theoretical studies characterize and understand
the expressivity of shallow and deep ReLU neural networks from the perspective of approximation
theory [13, 31, 36, 49, 53].
ReLU networks also suffer from drawbacks, which are most evident during training. The main
disadvantage is that the gradient of ReLU is zero for negative real numbers. Therefore, its derivative
is zero if the activation function is saturated [34]. To tackle these issues, several adaptations to ReLU
have been proposed such as Leaky ReLU [34], Exponential Linear Unit (ELU) [10], Parametric
Linear Unit (PReLU) [22], and Scaled Exponential Linear Unit (SELU) [27]. These modifications
outperform ReLU in image classification applications, and some of these activation functions have
trainable parameters, which are learned by gradient descent at the same time as the weights and biases
of the network. To obtain significant benefits for image classification and partial differential equation
(PDE) solvers, one can perform an exhaustive search over trainable activation functions constructed
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

