Bootstrapping Neural Processes

Juho Lee1,2∗ , Yoonho Lee2∗ , Jungtaek Kim3 ,
Eunho Yang1,2 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2 , Yee Whye Teh4
KAIST1 , Daejeon, South Korea, AITRICS2 , Seoul, South Korea,
POSTECH3 , Pohang, South Korea, University of Oxford4 , Oxford, England
juholee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Unlike in the traditional statistical modeling for which a user typically hand-specify
a prior, Neural Processs (NPs) implicitly define a broad class of stochastic processes
with neural networks. Given a data stream, NP learns a stochastic process that best
describes the data. While this “data-driven” way of learning stochastic processes
has proven to handle various types of data, NPs still rely on an assumption that
uncertainty in stochastic processes is modeled by a single latent variable, which
potentially limits the flexibility. To this end, we propose the Bootstrapping Neural
Process (BNP), a novel extension of the NP family using the bootstrap. The bootstrap
is a classical data-driven technique for estimating uncertainty, which allows BNP to
learn the stochasticity in NPs without assuming a particular form. We demonstrate
the efficacy of BNP on various types of data and its robustness in the presence of
model-data mismatch.

1

Introduction

Neural Process (NP) [8] is a class of stochastic processes defined by parametric neural networks.
Traditional stochastic processes such as Gaussian Process (GP) [19] are usually derived from mathematical objects based on certain prior beliefs on data (e.g., smoothness of functions quantified by
Gaussian distributions). On the other hand, given a stream of data, NP learns to construct a stochastic
process that might describe the data well. In that sense, NP may be considered as a data-driven
way of defining stochastic processes. When appropriately trained, NP can define a flexible class of
stochastic processes well suited for highly non-trivial functions that are not easily represented by
existing stochastic processes.
Like other stochastic processes, NP induces stochasticity in function realizations. More specifically,
NP defines a function value y for a point x as a conditional distribution p(y|x, . . . ) to model pointwise uncertainty. Additionally, NP further introduces a global latent variable capturing functional
uncertainty - a global uncertainty in the overal structure of the function. The global latent variable
modeling functional uncertainty is empirically demonstrated to improve the predictive performance
and diversity in function realizations [14].
Although it is clear both intuitively and empirically that adding functional uncertainty helps, it remains
unclear whether modeling it with a single Gaussian latent variable is optimal. For instance, [16]
pointed out that the global latent variable acts as a bottleneck. One could introduce more complex
architectures to better capture the functional uncertainty, but that would typically come with an
architectural overhead. Moreover, it contradicts the philosophy behind NP to use minimal modeling
assumptions and let the model learn from data.
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

