Ensembling geophysical models with Bayesian Neural
Networks
Ushnish Sengupta∗
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
us271@cam.ac.uk
Carl Edward Rasmussen
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

Matt Amos∗
Lancaster University
Lancaster, UK
m.amos1@lancaster.ac.uk
Matthew P. Juniper
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK

J. Scott Hosking
British Antarctic Survey
Cambridge, UK

Paul J. Young
Lancaster University
Lancaster, UK

Abstract
Ensembles of geophysical models improve prediction accuracy and express uncertainties. We develop a novel data-driven ensembling strategy for combining
geophysical models using Bayesian Neural Networks, which infers spatiotemporally varying model weights and bias, while accounting for heteroscedastic
uncertainties in the observations. This produces more accurate and uncertaintyaware predictions without sacrificing interpretability. Applied to the prediction
of total column ozone from an ensemble of 15 chemistry-climate models, we
find that the Bayesian neural network ensemble (BayNNE) outperforms existing
methods for ensembling physical models, achieving a 49.4% reduction in RMSE
for temporal extrapolation, and a 67.4% reduction in RMSE for polar data voids,
compared to a weighted mean. Uncertainty is also well-characterized, with 91.9%
of the data points in our extrapolation validation dataset lying within 2 standard
deviations and 98.9% within 3 standard deviations.

1

Introduction

Climate models are the primary tool for predicting the evolution of Earth’s uncertain climate and
their output informs international policy [16]. Based on multi-scale physical and chemical processes
they allow us to simulate conditions outside of the observational record, both spatially and temporally. Coordinated experiments with an ensemble of multiple models [11, 37] are typically used to
increase the accuracy of prediction and to quantify predictive uncertainty, with studies often reporting
predictions based on the ensemble average and uncertainty from the ensemble spread.
Such approaches assume that each separate climate model within the ensemble is independent and
able to simulate the Earth system with equal skill, neither of which are true [12, 19]. Climate
model skill is established through comparisons against a wide variety of remotely-sensed or in situ
observations. Weighted measures of skill from these comparisons provide a more sophisticated
method of combining an ensemble compared to simple averaging, and these weighted means are used
to constrain ensemble predictions for single or multiple variables of interest [3, 20]. However, there
are limitations of these approaches: they assume that historic climate model skills and behaviours can
be translated to a future prediction; they rely on observations with the same spatiotemporal coverage
as the models and cannot learn model weights for regions where data is sparse; they generally, do not
account for the varying quality of observations upon which ensembles are weighted; and they do not
account for spatially-varying skill in individual models.
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work. The order is arbitrary and determined by a coin flip.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

