Self-Adaptive Training: beyond Empirical Risk
Minimization
Lang Huang
Peking University
laynehuang@pku.edu.cn

Chao Zhang∗
Peking University
c.zhang@pku.edu.cn

Hongyang Zhang∗
TTIC
hongyanz@ttic.edu

Abstract
We propose self-adaptive training—a new training algorithm that dynamically
calibrates training process by model predictions without incurring extra computational cost—to improve generalization of deep learning for potentially corrupted
training data. This problem is important to robustly learning from data that are
corrupted by, e.g., random noise and adversarial examples. The standard empirical risk minimization (ERM) for such data, however, may easily overfit noise
and thus suffers from sub-optimal performance. In this paper, we observe that
model predictions can substantially benefit the training process: self-adaptive
training significantly mitigates the overfitting issue and improves generalization
over ERM under both random and adversarial noise. Besides, in sharp contrast
to the recently-discovered double-descent phenomenon in ERM, self-adaptive
training exhibits a single-descent error-capacity curve, indicating that such a phenomenon might be a result of overfitting of noise. Experiments on the CIFAR and
ImageNet datasets verify the effectiveness of our approach in two applications:
classification with label noise and selective classification. The code is available at
https://github.com/LayneH/self-adaptive-training.

1

Introduction

Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) has received significant attention due to its impressive generalization in various fields [36, 16]. However, recent works [46, 23] cast doubt on the traditional views
on ERM: techniques such as uniform convergence might be unable to explain the generalization of
deep neural networks, because ERM easily overfits training data even though the training data are
partially or completely corrupted by random noise.
To take a closer look at this phenomenon, we evaluate the generalization of ERM on the CIFAR10
dataset [18] with 40% of data being corrupted at random (see Section 2 for details). Figure 1a
displays the accuracy curves of ERM that are trained on the noisy training sets under four kinds of
random corruptions: ERM easily overfits noisy training data and achieves nearly perfect training
accuracy. However, the four subfigures exhibit very different generalization behaviors which are
indistinguishable by the accuracy curve on the noisy training set on its own.
Despite a large literature devoted to analyzing the phenomenon either in the theoretical or empirical
manners, many fundamental questions remain unresolved. To name a few, the work of [46] showed
that early stopping can improve generalization. On the theoretical front, the work of [19] considered
the label corruption setting, and proved that the first few training iterations fits the correct labels and
overfitting only occurs in the last few iterations: in Figure 1a, the accuracy increases in the early stage
and the generalization errors grow quickly after certain epochs. Admittedly, stopping at early epoch
improves generalization in the presence of label noise (see the first column in Figure 1a); however, it
∗

Corresponding authors

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

