Truthful Data Acquisition via Peer Prediction

Yiling Chen
Harvard University
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Yiheng Shen
Tsinghua University
shen-yh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Shuran Zheng
Harvard University
shuran_zheng@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of purchasing data for machine learning or statistical
estimation. The data analyst has a budget to purchase datasets from multiple data
providers. She does not have any test data that can be used to evaluate the collected data and can assign payments to data providers solely based on the collected
datasets. We consider the problem in the standard Bayesian paradigm and in two
settings: (1) data are only collected once; (2) data are collected repeatedly and
each day’s data are drawn independently from the same distribution. For both
settings, our mechanisms guarantee that truthfully reporting one’s dataset is always
an equilibrium by adopting techniques from peer prediction: pay each provider
the mutual information between his reported data and other providers’ reported
data. Depending on the data distribution, the mechanisms can also discourage misreports that would lead to inaccurate predictions. Our mechanisms also guarantee
individual rationality and budget feasibility for certain underlying distributions in
the first setting and for all distributions in the second setting.

1

Introduction

Data has been the fuel of the success of machine learning and data science, which is becoming a
major driving force for technological and economic growth. An important question is how to acquire
high-quality data to enable learning and analysis when data are private possessions of data providers.
Naively, we could issue a constant payment to data providers in exchange for their data. But data
providers can report more or less data than they actually have or even misreport values of their data
without affecting their received payments. Alternatively, if we have a test dataset, we could reward
data providers according to how well the model trained on their reported data performs on the test data.
However, if the test dataset is biased, this could potentially incentivize data providers to bias their
reported data toward the test set, which will limit the value of the acquired data for other learning or
analysis tasks. Moreover, a test dataset may not even be available in many settings. In this work, we
explore the design of reward mechanisms for acquiring high-quality data from multiple data providers
when a data buyer doesn’t have access to a test dataset. The ultimate goal is that, with the designed
mechanisms, strategic data providers will find that truthfully reporting their possessed dataset is their
best action and manipulation will lead to lower expected rewards. To make the mechanisms practical,
we also require our mechanisms to always have non-negative and bounded payments so that data
providers will find it beneficial to participate in (a.k.a. individual rationality) and the data buyer can
afford the payments.
In a Bayesian paradigm where data are generated independently conditioned on some unknown
parameters, we design mechanisms for two settings: (1) data are acquired only once, and (2) data
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

