Sufficient dimension reduction for classification using
principal optimal transport direction
Cheng Meng1 Jun Yu2 Jingyi Zhang3 Ping Ma4 Wenxuan Zhong∗4
1

Center for Applied Statistics, Institute of Statistics and Big Data, Renmin University of China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Beijing Institute of Technology
3
Center for Statistical Science, Tsinghua University
4
Department of Statistics, University of Georgia
∗ Corresponding author
chengmeng@ruc.edu.cn, yujunbeta@bit.edu.cn, jingyizhang@tsinghua.edu.cn, pingma@uga.edu,
wenxuan@uga.edu

Abstract
Sufficient dimension reduction is used pervasively as a supervised dimension
reduction approach. Most existing sufficient dimension reduction methods are
developed for data with a continuous response and may have an unsatisfactory
performance for the categorical response, especially for the binary-response. To
address this issue, we propose a novel estimation method of sufficient dimension
reduction subspace (SDR subspace) using optimal transport. The proposed method,
named principal optimal transport direction (POTD), estimates the basis of the
SDR subspace using the principal directions of the optimal transport coupling
between the data respecting different response categories. The proposed method
also reveals the relationship among three seemingly irrelevant topics, i.e., sufficient
dimension reduction, support vector machine, and optimal transport. We study the
asymptotic properties of POTD and show that in the cases when the class labels
contain no error, POTD estimates the SDR subspace exclusively. Empirical studies
show POTD outperforms most of the state-of-the-art linear dimension reduction
methods.

1

Introduction

Sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) has been one of the most popular linear dimension reduction
frameworks in statistics [40, 14, 35]. Given a predictor X ∈ Rp and a response Y ∈ R, sufficient
dimension reduction aims to find a projection matrix B ∈ Rp×q (p ≥ q) such that
Y ⊥
⊥ X|BT X,
(1)
where ⊥
⊥ denotes statistical independence. Model (1) indicates that the projected predictor BT X
preserves all the information about Y contained in X. The column space of B, denoted as S(B)
is called a sufficient dimension reduction subspace (SDR subspace). One special property of the
sufficient dimension reduction framework is that the model (1) does not assume any specific relationship between Y and X. Nowadays, sufficient dimension reduction has played crucial roles in
various statistical and machine learning applications, such as classification problems [33], online
learning [9], medical research [50], and causal inference [45]. Some popular sufficient dimension
reduction techniques include sliced inverse regression (SIR) [40], principal Hessian directions (PHD)
[41], sliced average variance estimator (SAVE) [16], directional regression (DR) [38], among others.
Despite its popularity, the success of most existing SDR methods highly depends on the restricted
conditions that are imposed on the predictors. In practice, these methods may fail to identify the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

