Predictive coding in balanced neural networks with
noise, chaos and delays

Jonathan Kadmon
Department of Applied Physics
Stanford University,CA
kadmonj@stanford.edu

Jonathan Timcheck
Department of Physics
Stanford University,CA

Surya Ganguli
Department of Applied Physics
Stanford University, CA

Abstract
Biological neural networks face a formidable task: performing reliable computations in the face of intrinsic stochasticity in individual neurons, imprecisely
specified synaptic connectivity, and nonnegligible delays in synaptic transmission.
A common approach to combatting such biological heterogeneity involves averaging over large redundant√networks of N neurons resulting in coding errors that
decrease classically as 1/ N . Recent work demonstrated a novel mechanism
whereby recurrent spiking networks could efficiently encode dynamic stimuli,
achieving a superclassical scaling in which coding errors decrease as 1/N . This
specific mechanism involved two key ideas: predictive coding, and a tight balance,
or cancellation between strong feedforward inputs and strong recurrent feedback.
However, the theoretical principles governing the efficacy of balanced predictive
coding and its robustness to noise, synaptic weight heterogeneity and communication delays remain poorly understood. To discover such principles, we introduce
an analytically tractable model of balanced predictive coding, in which the degree of balance and the degree of weight disorder can be dissociated unlike in
previous balanced network models, and we develop a mean field theory of coding
accuracy. Overall, our work provides and solves a general theoretical framework
for dissecting the differential contributions neural noise, synaptic disorder, chaos,
synaptic delays, and balance to the fidelity of predictive neural codes, reveals the
fundamental role that balance plays in achieving superclassical scaling, and unifies
previously disparate models in theoretical neuroscience.

1

Introduction

The early days of computing generated intense interest in how reliable computations could emerge
from unreliable components, a question well articulated by von Neumann [1]. While the rise of
digital technology largely circumvented this issue by making individual physical components highly
reliable and fast, biological evolution, in the case of neural computation, had to directly face this
problem. Indeed neural cortical firing patterns exhibit high levels of Poisson like temporal irregularity
[2–4], external noisy inputs to a circuit can interfere with its operation, synaptic strengths are
imprecisely specified in learning and development [5], and synapses themselves can be slow [6],
resulting in non-negligible communication delays between neurons. Thus von Neumann’s question
still remains central in neuroscience [7]: how can neural circuits perform reliable computations
when their underlying components, connectivity and inputs can be slow and subject to unpredictable
fluctuations?
A conventional approach to this problem involves averaging over large
√ redundant networks of N
neurons, resulting in coding and computation errors that decay as O(1/ N ) as long as neural firing
patterns are weakly correlated, due to the law of large numbers. However, can one do better? Recent
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

