Neural Methods for Point-wise Dependency Estimation

Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai1 , Han Zhao2∗,
Makoto Yamada34 , Louis-Philippe Morency1 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 D.E. Shaw & Co., 3 Kyoto University, 4 RIKEN AIP

Abstract
Since its inception, the neural estimation of mutual information (MI) has demonstrated the empirical success of modeling expected dependency between highdimensional random variables. However, MI is an aggregate statistic and cannot
be used to measure point-wise dependency between different events. In this work,
instead of estimating the expected dependency, we focus on estimating point-wise
dependency (PD), which quantitatively measures how likely two outcomes cooccur. We show that we can naturally obtain PD when we are optimizing MI neural
variational bounds. However, optimizing these bounds is challenging due to its
large variance in practice. To address this issue, we develop two methods (free
of optimizing MI variational bounds): Probabilistic Classifier and Density-Ratio
Fitting.We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approaches in 1) MI estimation, 2)
self-supervised representation learning, and 3) cross-modal retrieval task.

1

Introduction

Mutual Information (MI) measures the average statistical dependency between two random variables,
and it has found abundant applications in practice, such as feature selection [12, 39], interpretable
factor discovery [14, 46], genetic association studies [50], to name a few. Recent work [9, 40]
proposed to use neural networks with gradient descent to estimate MI, which empirically scales better
in high-dimension settings as compared to classic approaches (e.g., Kraskov (KSG) [28] estimator),
which are known to suffer from the curse of dimensionality. Inspired by this line of work, we take a
step further to present neural methods for point-wise dependency (PD) estimation. At a colloquial
level, PD serves to understand the instance-level dependency between a pair of events taken by two
random variables, which gives us a fine-grained understanding of the outcome. Formally, it can be
realized as the ratio between likelihood of their co-occurrence to the likelihood of the product events:
p(x, y)/p(x)p(y) with x and y being the corresponding outcomes.
At first glance, it may seem straightforward to estimate PD by adopting prior density ratio estimation
approaches [43, 44] to directly calculate the ratio between p(x, y) and p(x)p(y). Nonetheless, for the
sake of tractability, previous methods are mainly kernel-based approaches that might be inadequate
to scale to high-dimensional and complex-structured data. In this work, we introduce approaches for
PD estimation that leverage the recent advances in rich and flexible neural networks. We show that
we can naturally obtain PD when we are optimizing MI neural variational bounds [9, 40]. However,
estimating these MI bounds often results in inevitably large variance [41]. To address this concern, we
develop two data-driven approaches: Probabilistic Classifier and Density-Ratio Fitting. Probabilistic
Classifier turns PD estimation into a supervised binary classification task, where we train a classifier
to distinguish the observed joint distribution from the product of marginal distribution. This approach
adopts cross-entropy loss using neural networks, which is favorable for optimization and exhibits
a stable training trajectory with less variance. Density-Ratio Fitting seeks to minimize the leastsquare difference between the true and the estimated PD. Its objective involves no logarithm and
exponentiation; hence, it is practically preferable due to its numerical stability.
∗

Work done at Carnegie Mellon University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

