Generalized Leverage Score Sampling for Neural
Networks∗
Jason D. Lee†

Ruoqi Shen‡

Zhao Song§

Mengdi Wang¶

Zheng Yuk

Abstract
Leverage score sampling is a powerful technique that originates from theoretical
computer science, which can be used to speed up a large number of fundamental
questions, e.g. linear regression, linear programming, semi-definite programming,
cutting plane method, graph sparsification, maximum matching and max-flow. Recently, it has been shown that leverage score sampling helps to accelerate kernel
methods [Avron, Kapralov, Musco, Musco, Velingker and Zandieh 17].
In this work, we generalize the results in [Avron, Kapralov, Musco, Musco, Velingker and Zandieh 17] to a broader class of kernels. We further bring the leverage
score sampling into the field of deep learning theory.
• We show the connection between the initialization for neural network training and approximating the neural tangent kernel with random features.
• We prove the equivalence between regularized neural network and neural tangent kernel ridge regression under the initialization of both classical random
Gaussian and leverage score sampling.

1

Introduction

Kernel method is one of the most common techniques in various machine learning problems. One
classical application is the kernel ridge regression (KRR). Given training data X = [x1 , · · · , xn ]> ∈
Rn×d , corresponding labels Y = [y1 , · · · , yn ] ∈ Rn and regularization parameter λ > 0, the output
estimate of KRR for any given input z can be written as:
f (z) = K(z, X)> (K + λIn )−1 Y,

(1)

where K(·, ·) denotes the kernel function and K ∈ Rn×n denotes the kernel matrix.
Despite being powerful and well-understood, the kernel ridge regression suffers from the costly
computation when dealing with large datasets, since generally implementation of Eq. (1) requires
O(n3 ) running time. Therefore, intensive research have been dedicated to the scalable methods
for KRR [Bac13, AM15, ZDW15, ACW17, MM17, ZNV+ 20]. One of the most popular approach
is the random Fourier features sampling originally proposed by [RR08] for shift-invariant kernels.
They construct a finite dimensional random feature vector φ : Rd → Cs through sampling that
approximates the kernel function K(x, z) ≈ φ(x)∗ φ(z) for data x, z ∈ Rd . The random feature
helps approximately solves KRR in O(ns2 + n2 ) running time, which improves the computational
∗
The authors would like to thank Michael Kapralov for suggestion of this topic. The full version of this
paper is available at https://arxiv.org/pdf/2009.09829.pdf
†
jasonlee@princeton.edu Princeton University. Work done while visiting Institute for Advanced Study.
‡
shenr3@cs.washington.edu University of Washington. Work done while visiting Institute for Advanced Study.
§
zhaos@ias.edu Columbia University, Princeton University and Institute for Advanced Study.
¶
mengdiw@princeton.edu Princeton University.
k
zhengy@princeton.edu Princeton University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

