GramGAN: Deep 3D Texture Synthesis
From 2D Exemplars

Tiziano Portenier1 , Siavash Bigdeli2 , Orcun Goksel1
1: Computer-assisted Applications in Medicine, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2: Swiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology, Switzerland
{tiziano.portenier, orcun.goksel}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
siavash.bigdeli@csem.ch

Abstract
We present a novel texture synthesis framework, enabling the generation of infinite,
high-quality 3D textures given a 2D exemplar image. Inspired by recent advances
in natural texture synthesis, we train deep neural models to generate textures by
non-linearly combining learned noise frequencies. To achieve a highly realistic
output conditioned on an exemplar patch, we propose a novel loss function that
combines ideas from both style transfer and generative adversarial networks. In
particular, we train the synthesis network to match the Gram matrices of deep
features from a discriminator network. In addition, we propose two architectural
concepts and an extrapolation strategy that significantly improve generalization
performance. In particular, we inject both model input and condition into hidden
network layers by learning to scale and bias hidden activations. Quantitative and
qualitative evaluations on a diverse set of exemplars motivate our design decisions
and show that our system performs superior to previous state of the art. Finally, we
conduct a user study that confirms the benefits of our framework.

1

Introduction

Texture synthesis is an important field of research with a multitude of applications in both computer
vision and graphics. While vision applications mainly focus on texture analysis and understanding,
in computer graphics textures are most important in the field of image manipulation and photorealistic rendering. In this context, applications require synthesis techniques that can generate highly
realistic textures. Due to the problem being highly complex, today’s applications largely rely on
techniques that generate textures based on real photos, which is a time-consuming process that
requires expert knowledge. In this work, we present a novel texture synthesis framework that can
generate high-quality 3D textures given an exemplar image as input (See Figure 1).
Techniques for texture synthesis can be classified into photogrammetric and procedural techniques.
Photogrammetry relies on methods that capture the color appearance of physical objects to obtain
(typically several) photos from the target texture. Next, texture mapping algorithms are employed to
supply a digital 3D model, usually a polygon mesh, with texture coordinates that define a mapping
from 3D surface points to 2D texture pixels. Such photogrammetric approaches yield high-quality
textures but rely on time-consuming procedures that require expert knowledge. Moreover, the required
projection from 3D to 2D introduces seam and distortion artifacts, for example when texturing
spherical objects. Nevertheless, this is still a widely used technique, despite its shortcomings.
An entirely different class of techniques is referred to as procedural texturing, where textures are
generated by an algorithm instead of relying on acquired data. Ideally the algorithm takes a 3D
position as input and computes a texture color value as output, omitting the error-prone projection
step entirely. Pioneering work in procedural texturing is the Perlin noise texture model [1], which
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

