Sequence to Multi-Sequence Learning via
Conditional Chain Mapping for Mixture Signals

Jing Shi1,2,∗, Xuankai Chang1,∗ , Pengcheng Guo1,3,∗ , Shinji Watanabe1†, Yusuke Fujita4 ,
Jiaming Xu2 , Bo Xu2 , Lei Xie3
1
Center for Language and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins University, U.S.A
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China
3
ASLP@NPU, School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
4
Hitachi, Ltd. Research & Development Group, Japan
shijing2014@ia.ac.cn, xchang14@jhu.edu, pcguo@nwpu-aslp.org,
shinjiw@ieee.org B, yusuke.fujita.su@hitachi.com

Abstract
Neural sequence-to-sequence models are well established for applications which
can be cast as mapping a single input sequence into a single output sequence.
In this work, we focus on one-to-many sequence transduction problems, such
as extracting multiple sequential sources from a mixture sequence. We extend
the standard sequence-to-sequence model to a conditional multi-sequence model,
which explicitly models the relevance between multiple output sequences with the
probabilistic chain rule. Based on this extension, our model can conditionally infer
output sequences one-by-one by making use of both input and previously-estimated
contextual output sequences. This model additionally has a simple and efficient
stop criterion for the end of the transduction, making it able to infer the variable
number of output sequences. We take speech data as a primary test field to evaluate
our methods since the observed speech data is often composed of multiple sources
due to the nature of the superposition principle of sound waves. Experiments
on several different tasks including speech separation and multi-speaker speech
recognition show that our conditional multi-sequence models lead to consistent
improvements over the conventional non-conditional models.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks can be formulated as a sequence transduction problem, where a system
provides an output sequence given the corresponding input sequence. Examples of such tasks include
machine translation, which maps text from one language to another, automatic speech recognition
(ASR), which receives a speech waveform and produces a transcription, and video captioning, which
generates the descriptions of given video scenes. In recent years, the development of neural sequenceto-sequence (seq2seq) models [9, 40] with attention mechanisms has led to significant progress in
such tasks [2, 51, 44, 48, 10, 5].
In reality, the observed data contains various entangled components, making the one-to-many sequence transduction for mixture signals a common problem in machine learning [37, 18, 32]. This
problem often happens in audio and speech processing due to the sequential properties and superposition principle of sound waves. For example, given the overlapped speech signal, speech separation is
a problem of extracting individual speech sources, and multi-speaker speech recognition is a problem
∗
†

equal contribution
corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

