Reconstructing Perceptive Images from Brain
Activity by Shape-Semantic GAN

Tao Fang1 , Yu Qi1,∗ , Gang Pan2,1,3∗
duolafang@zju.edu.cn, qiyu@zju.edu.cn, gpan@zju.edu.cn
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
3
The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Reconstructing seeing images from fMRI recordings is an absorbing research area
in neuroscience and provides a potential brain-reading technology. The challenge
lies in that visual encoding in brain is highly complex and not fully revealed.
Inspired by the theory that visual features are hierarchically represented in cortex, we propose to break the complex visual signals into multi-level components
and decode each component separately. Specifically, we decode shape and semantic representations from the lower and higher visual cortex respectively, and
merge the shape and semantic information to images by a generative adversarial
network (Shape-Semantic GAN). This ’divide and conquer’ strategy captures visual information more accurately. Experiments demonstrate that Shape-Semantic
GAN improves the reconstruction similarity and image quality, and achieves the
state-of-the-art image reconstruction performance.

1

Introduction

Decoding visual information and reconstructing stimulus images from brain activities is a meaningful
and attractive task in neural decoding. The fMRI signals, which record the variations in blood oxygen
level dependent (BOLD), can reveal the correlation between brain activities and different visual
stimuli by monitoring blood oxygen content. Implementing an fMRI-based image reconstruction
method can help us understand the visual mechanisms of brain and provide a way to ’read mind’.
Previous studies. According to previous studies, the mapping between activities in visual cortex
and visual stimulus is supposed to exist [19], and the perceived images are proved to be decodable
from fMRI recordings [29, 16, 6]. Early approaches estimate the mapping using linear models such
as linear regression [16, 6, 7, 17, 18]. These approaches usually firstly extract specific features
from the images, for instance multi-scale local image bases [16] and features of gabor filters [29],
then learn a linear mapping from fMRI signals to image features. Linear methods mostly focus on
reconstructing low-level features, which is insufficient for reconstructing complex images, such as
natural images. After the homogeneity between the hierarchical representations of the brain and
deep neural networks (DNNs) was revealed [9], methods based on this finding have achieved great
reconstruction performance [23, 28]. Shen et al.[23] used convolutional neural networks (CNN)
models to extract image features and learned the mapping from fMRI signals to the CNN-based
image features, which successfully reconstructed natural images. Recently, the development of DNN
makes it possible to learn nonlinear mappings from brain signals to stimulus images in an end-to-end
manner [24, 1, 30, 14, 3]. The DNN-based approaches have remarkably improved the reconstruction
performance, such as Encoder-Decoder models [1, 26] and Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
∗

Corresponding authors: Yu Qi and Gang Pan

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

