Understanding the Role of Training Regimes
in Continual Learning

Seyed Iman Mirzadeh
Washington State University, USA
seyediman.mirzadeh@wsu.edu

Mehrdad Farajtabar
DeepMind, USA
farajtabar@google.com

Razvan Pascanu
DeepMind, UK
razp@google.com

Hassan Ghasemzadeh
Washington State University, USA
hassan.ghasemzadeh@wsu.edu

Abstract
Catastrophic forgetting affects the training of neural networks, limiting their ability
to learn multiple tasks sequentially. From the perspective of the well established
plasticity-stability dilemma, neural networks tend to be overly plastic, lacking
the stability necessary to prevent the forgetting of previous knowledge, which
means that as learning progresses, networks tend to forget previously seen tasks.
This phenomenon coined in the continual learning literature, has attracted much
attention lately, and several families of approaches have been proposed with different degrees of success. However, there has been limited prior work extensively
analyzing the impact that different training regimes – learning rate, batch size,
regularization method– can have on forgetting. In this work, we depart from the
typical approach of altering the learning algorithm to improve stability. Instead,
we hypothesize that the geometrical properties of the local minima found for each
task play an important role in the overall degree of forgetting. In particular, we
study the effect of dropout, learning rate decay, and batch size, on forming training
regimes that widen the tasks’ local minima and consequently, on helping it not to
forget catastrophically. Our study provides practical insights to improve stability
via simple yet effective techniques that outperform alternative baselines.1

1

Introduction

We study the continual learning problem, where a neural network model should learn a sequence of
tasks rather than a single one. A significant challenge in continual learning (CL) is that during training
on each task, the data from previous ones are unavailable. One consequence of applying typical
learning algorithms under such a scenario is that as the model learns newer tasks, the performance of
the model on older ones degrades. This phenomenon is known as “catastrophic forgetting” [52].
This forgetting problem is closely related to the “stability-plasticity dilemma” [53], which is a
common challenge for both biological and artificial neural networks. Ideally, a model needs plasticity
to obtain new knowledge and adapt to new environments, while it also requires stability to prevent
forgetting the knowledge from previous environments. If the model is very plastic but not stable,
it can learn fast, but it also forgets quickly. Without further modifications in training, a naively
trained neural network tends to be plastic but not stable. Note that plasticity in this scenario does not
necessarily imply that neural nets can learn new tasks efficiently. In fact, they tend to be extremely
data inefficient. By being plastic, we mean a single update can change the function considerably.
1

The code is available at: https://github.com/imirzadeh/stable-continual-learning

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

