STEER: Simple Temporal Regularization For Neural
ODEs
Arnab Ghosh
University of Oxford

Harkirat Singh Behl
University of Oxford

Emilien Dupont
University of Oxford

arnabg@robots.ox.ac.uk

harkirat@robots.ox.ac.uk

emilien.dupont@stats.ox.ac.uk

Philip H. S. Torr
University of Oxford

Vinay Namboodiri
University of Bath

phst@robots.ox.ac.uk

vpn22@bath.ac.uk

Abstract
Training Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) is often computationally
expensive. Indeed, computing the forward pass of such models involves solving
an ODE which can become arbitrarily complex during training. Recent works
have shown that regularizing the dynamics of the ODE can partially alleviate this.
In this paper we propose a new regularization technique: randomly sampling the
end time of the ODE during training. The proposed regularization is simple to
implement, has negligible overhead and is effective across a wide variety of tasks.
Further, the technique is orthogonal to several other methods proposed to regularize
the dynamics of ODEs and as such can be used in conjunction with them. We
show through experiments on normalizing flows, time series models and image
recognition that the proposed regularization can significantly decrease training time
and even improve performance over baseline models.

1

Introduction

Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE)
are an elegant approach for building continuous
depth neural networks [4]. They offer various
advantages over traditional neural networks, for
example a constant memory cost as a function
of depth and invertibility by construction. As
they are inspired by dynamical systems, they
can also take advantage of the vast amount of
mathematical techniques developed in this field.
Incorporating continuous depth also enables efficient density estimation [18] and modeling of
irregularly sampled time series [46].
The aforementioned advantages come at the Figure 1: Flow fields of a standard Neural ODE
expense of a significantly increased computa- (left) vs one equipped with STEER (right). These
tional cost compared with traditional models models transform a simple initial distribution
like Residual Networks [21]. The training dy- p(zt0 ) to the target distribution p(zt ). STEER
namics of Neural ODEs become more compli- learns simpler flows, which enable faster training.
cated as training progresses and the number of
steps taken by the adaptive ODE solver (typically referred to as the number of function evaluations)
can become prohibitively large [14]. In fact, several works have argued that this is one of the most
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

