An Imitation from Observation Approach to Transfer
Learning with Dynamics Mismatch

Siddarth Desai§
Department of Mechanical Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
sidrdesai@utexas.edu
Haresh Karnan §
Department of Mechanical Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
haresh.miriyala@utexas.edu
Josiah P. Hanna ∗
School of Informatics
The University of Edinburgh
josiah.hanna@ed.ac.uk

Ishan Durugkar §
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
ishand@cs.utexas.edu
Garrett Warnell
Army Research Laboratory
garrett.a.warnell.civ@mail.mil

Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
and Sony AI
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We examine the problem of transferring a policy learned in a source environment to
a target environment with different dynamics, particularly in the case where it is critical to reduce the amount of interaction with the target environment during learning.
This problem is particularly important in sim-to-real transfer because simulators
inevitably model real-world dynamics imperfectly. In this paper, we show that
one existing solution to this transfer problem—grounded action transformation—
is closely related to the problem of imitation from observation (IfO): learning
behaviors that mimic the observations of behavior demonstrations. After establishing this relationship, we hypothesize that recent state-of-the-art approaches
from the IfO literature can be effectively repurposed for grounded transfer learning.
To validate our hypothesis we derive a new algorithm—generative adversarial
reinforced action transformation (GARAT)—based on adversarial imitation from
observation techniques. We run experiments in several domains with mismatched
dynamics, and find that agents trained with GARAT achieve higher returns in the
target environment compared to existing black-box transfer methods.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning with dynamics mismatch refers to using experience in a source environment to
more efficiently learn control policies that perform well in a target environment, where the two
environments differ only in their transition dynamics. For example, if the friction coefficient in the
source and target environments is sufficiently different it might cause the action of placing a foot on
the ground to work well in one environment, but cause the foot to slip in the other. One possible
application of such transfer is where the source environment is a simulator and the target environment
∗
§

to be joining the Computer Sciences department at the University of Wisconsin – Madison
Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

