Robustness Analysis of Non-Convex Stochastic
Gradient Descent using Biased Expectations

Kevin Scaman
Cédric Malherbe
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
This work proposes a novel analysis of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for
non-convex and smooth optimization. Our analysis sheds light on the impact of the
probability distribution of the gradient noise on the convergence rate of the norm
of the gradient. In the case of sub-Gaussian and centered noise, we prove that, with
probability 1 − δ, the number of iterations to reach a precision ε for the squared
gradient norm is O(ε−2 ln(1/δ)). In the case of centered and integrable heavytailed noise, we show that, while the expectation of the iterates may be infinite,
the squared gradient norm still converges with probability 1 − δ in O(ε−p δ −q )
iterations, where p, q > 2. This result shows that heavy-tailed noise on the gradient
slows down the convergence of SGD without preventing it, proving that SGD is
robust to gradient noise with unbounded variance, a setting of interest for Deep
Learning. In addition, it indicates that choosing a step size proportional to T −1/b
where b is the tail-parameter of the noise and T is the number of iterations leads to
the best convergence rates. Both results are simple corollaries of a unified analysis
using the novel concept of biased expectations, a simple and intuitive mathematical
tool to obtain concentration inequalities. Using this concept, we propose a new
quantity to measure the amount of noise added to the gradient, and discuss its value
in multiple scenarios.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its variants (Adam [1], RMSProp [2], or Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent [3]) are used in a wide variety of tasks to train Machine Learning models.
Indeed, the scalability of many learning algorithms, such as support vector machines [4], logistic
regression [5], Lasso [6] and more recently deep neural networks [7] essentially rely on the efficiency
(and robustness) of stochastic optimization methods. However, one specificity of SGD is its inherent
noise which originates either from the sampling of training points, the presence of noise in the
gradients computation, or the shape of the target function [8, 9, 10]. While SGD is known to be robust
in practice and its convergence behavior is well-understood in the convex setting [11, 12, 3, 13], many
of its properties are not yet fully understood, and particularly in settings related to Deep Learning
practice where gradients can be extremely noisy and the target function presents many local optima.
In particular, settings with unbounded variance noise were recently shown to appear [14, 15] when
training NLP models such as BERT [16] over large corpora, and vision models such as AlexNet
[17] on Cifar10. As a result, SGD may present instabilities that are often solved by running the
optimization multiple times, a technique refered to as multi-start. Recently, several authors explored
these frameworks by adapting the tools developed in convex analysis to the non-convex setting in
order to explain these phenomena [15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. However, none of these works
proposed a unified framework able to handle both bounded and heavy-tailed noises.
This paper aims at filling this gap by providing a novel unified analysis of the convergence of SGD
in a non-convex and noisy setting. With regards to the above mentioned works, our contribution is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

