Unbalanced Sobolev Descent
Youssef Mroueh, Mattia Rigotti
IBM Research AI
mroueh@us.ibm.com, mrg@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract
We introduce Unbalanced Sobolev Descent (USD), a particle descent algorithm
for transporting a high dimensional source distribution to a target distribution
that does not necessarily have the same mass. We define the Sobolev-Fisher
discrepancy between distributions and show that it relates to advection-reaction
transport equations and the Wasserstein-Fisher-Rao metric between distributions.
USD transports particles along gradient flows of the witness function of the SobolevFisher discrepancy (advection step) and reweighs the mass of particles with respect
to this witness function (reaction step). The reaction step can be thought of
as a birth-death process of the particles with rate of growth proportional to the
witness function. When the Sobolev-Fisher witness function is estimated in a
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS), under mild assumptions we show
that USD converges asymptotically (in the limit of infinite particles) to the target
distribution in the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) sense. We then give two
methods to estimate the Sobolev-Fisher witness with neural networks, resulting
in two Neural USD algorithms. The first one implements the reaction step with
mirror descent on the weights, while the second implements it through a birthdeath process of particles. We show on synthetic examples that USD transports
distributions with or without conservation of mass faster than previous particle
descent algorithms, and finally demonstrate its use for molecular biology analyses
where our method is naturally suited to match developmental stages of populations
of differentiating cells based on their single-cell RNA sequencing profile. Code is
available at http://github.com/ibm/usd.

1

Introduction

Particle flows such as Stein Variational Gradient descent [1], Sobolev descent [2] and MMD flows [3],
allow the transport of a source distribution to a target distribution, following paths that progressively
decrease a discrepancy between distributions (Kernel Stein discrepancy and MMD, respectively).
Particle flows can be seen through the lens of Optimal Transport as gradient flows in the Wasserstein
geometry [4], and they’ve been recently used to analyze the dynamics of gradient descent in overparametrized neural networks in [5] and of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) training [2].
Unbalanced Optimal Tansport [6, 7, 8, 9] is a new twist on the classical Optimal Transport theory [10],
where the total mass between source and target distributions may not be conserved. The Wasserstein
Fisher-Rao (WFR) distance introduced in [7] gives a dynamic formulation similar to the so-called
Benamou-Brenier dynamic form of the Wasserstein-2 distance [11], where the dynamics of the
transport is governed by an advection term with a velocity field Vt and a reaction term with a rate of
growth rt , corresponding to the construction and destruction of mass with the same rate:
Z 1Z
α
2
WFR2 (p, q) = inf
(kVt (x)k + rt2 (x))dqt (x)dt
qt ,Vt ,rt 0
2
∂qt (x)
= −div(qt (x)Vt (x)) + α rt (x)qt (x),
q0 = q, q1 = p.
(1)
s.t
∂t
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

