Latent Bandits Revisited
Joey Hong
Google Research
jxihong@google.com
Yinlam Chow
Google Research
yinlamchow@google.com

Branislav Kveton
Google Research
bkveton@google.com

Manzil Zaheer
Google Research
manzilzaheer@google.com

Amr Ahmed
Google Research
amra@google.com

Craig Boutilier
Google Research
cboutilier@google.com

Abstract
A latent bandit is a bandit problem where the learning agent knows reward distributions of arms conditioned on an unknown discrete latent state. The goal of the
agent is to identify the latent state, after which it can act optimally. This setting
is a natural midpoint between online and offline learning, where complex models
can be learned offline and the agent identifies the latent state online. This is of
high practical relevance, for instance in recommender systems. In this work, we
propose general algorithms for latent bandits, based on both upper confidence
bounds and Thompson sampling. The algorithms are contextual, and aware of
model uncertainty and misspecification. We provide a unified theoretical analysis
of our algorithms, which have lower regret than classic bandit policies when the
number of latent states is smaller than actions. A comprehensive empirical study
showcases the advantages of our approach.

1

Introduction

Many online platforms, such as search engines and recommender systems, display results based on
observed properties of the user and their query. However, the user’s behavior is often influenced
by a latent state not explicitly revealed to the system. This might be user intent (e.g., reflecting a
long-term task) in search, or short- and long-term preferences (e.g., reflecting topic interests) in a
recommender. In each case, the unobserved latent state influences the user response to the displayed
results, and thus the associated reward. A machine learning (ML) system, thus, should take steps to
infer the latent state and tailor its results accordingly.
While many ML models use either heuristic features [1, 4] or recurrent models [33] to capture user
history, explicit exploration for latent state identification (i.e., reducing uncertainty regarding the
true state) is less common in practice. In this paper, we study latent bandits, which model online
interactions of the above type as follows. In each round, the learning agent observes context (e.g.,
query or user demographics), takes an action (e.g., a recommends), and observes its reward (e.g.,
user engagement with the recommendation). The reward depends stochastically on both the context
and user latent state. As a result, it provides information about the unobserved latent state, which
can be used to improve predictions in the future. We are interested in designing exploration policies
that allow the agent to quickly maximize its per-round reward by resolving the relevant latent state
uncertainty. Specifically, we want policies that have low n-round regret.
Our latent state structure allows an agent to quickly adapt its results to new users, or adapt to new
user tasks or intents on a per-session basis. One example of that structure are clusters of users with
similar item preferences [35]. In this example, a system should be able to identify which cluster a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

