Self-Distillation as Instance-Specific Label Smoothing
Zhilu Zhang
Cornell University
zz452@cornell.edu

Mert R. Sabuncu
Cornell Univerisity
msabuncu@cornell.edu

Abstract
It has been recently demonstrated that multi-generational self-distillation can improve generalization [11]. Despite this intriguing observation, reasons for the
enhancement remain poorly understood. In this paper, we first demonstrate experimentally that the improved performance of multi-generational self-distillation is
in part associated with the increasing diversity in teacher predictions. With this in
mind, we offer a new interpretation for teacher-student training as amortized MAP
estimation, such that teacher predictions enable instance-specific regularization.
Our framework allows us to theoretically relate self-distillation to label smoothing,
a commonly used technique that regularizes predictive uncertainty, and suggests the
importance of predictive diversity in addition to predictive uncertainty. We present
experimental results using multiple datasets and neural network architectures that,
overall, demonstrate the utility of predictive diversity. Finally, we propose a novel
instance-specific label smoothing technique that promotes predictive diversity without the need for a separately trained teacher model. We provide an empirical
evaluation of the proposed method, which, we find, often outperforms classical
label smoothing.

1

Introduction

First introduced as a simple method to compress high-capacity neural networks into a low-capacity
counterpart for computational efficiency, knowledge distillation [15] has since gained much popularity
across various application domains ranging from computer vision to natural language processing [19,
22, 28, 39, 41] as an effective method to transfer knowledge or features learned from a teacher
network to a student network. This empirical success is often justified with the intuition that deeper
teacher networks learn better representation with greater model complexity, and the "dark knowledge"
that teacher networks provide facilitates student networks to learn better representations and hence
enhanced generalization performance. Nevertheless, it still remains an open question as to how
exactly student networks benefit from this dark knowledge. The problem is made further puzzling
by the recent observation that even self-distillation, a special case of the teacher-student training
framework in which the teacher and student networks have identical architectures, can lead to better
generalization performance [11]. It was also demonstrated that repeated self-distillation process with
multiple generations can further improve classification accuracy.
In this work, we aim to shed some light on self-distillation. We start off by revisiting the multigenerational self-distillation strategy, and experimentally demonstrate that the performance improvement observed in multi-generational self-distillation is correlated with increasing diversity in teacher
predictions. Inspired by this, we view self-distillation as instance-specific regularization on the neural
network softmax outputs, and cast the teacher-student training procedure as performing amortized
maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation of the softmax probability outputs. The proposed framework provides us with a new interpretation of the teacher predictions as instance-specific priors
conditioned on the inputs. This interpretation allows us to theoretically relate distillation to label
smoothing, a commonly used technique to regularize predictive uncertainty of NNs, and suggests
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

