Certifying Strategyproof Auction Networks

Michael J. Curry∗
curry@cs.umd.edu
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

Ping-Yeh Chiang∗
pchiang@cs.umd.edu
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

Tom Goldstein
tomg@cs.umd.edu
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

John P. Dickerson
john@cs.umd.edu
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

Abstract
Optimal auctions maximize a seller’s expected revenue subject to individual rationality and strategyproofness for the buyers. Myerson’s seminal work in 1981
settled the case of auctioning a single item; however, subsequent decades of work
have yielded little progress moving beyond a single item, leaving the design of
revenue-maximizing auctions as a central open problem in the field of mechanism
design. A recent thread of work in “differentiable economics” has used tools
from modern deep learning to instead learn good mechanisms. We focus on the
RegretNet architecture, which can represent auctions with arbitrary numbers of
items and participants; it is trained to be empirically strategyproof, but the property
is never exactly verified leaving potential loopholes for market participants to
exploit. We propose ways to explicitly verify strategyproofness under a particular
valuation profile using techniques from the neural network verification literature.
Doing so requires making several modifications to the RegretNet architecture in
order to represent it exactly in an integer program. We train our network and
produce certificates in several settings, including settings for which the optimal
strategyproof mechanism is not known.

1

Introduction

Auctions are an important mechanism for allocating scarce goods, and drive billions of dollars of
revenue annually in online advertising Edelman et al. [2007], sourcing Sandholm [2007], spectrum
auctions Cramton [1997], Leyton-Brown et al. [2017], and myriad other verticals Milgrom [2017],
Roth [2018]. In the typical auction setting, agents who wish to bid on one or more items are presumed
to have private valuations of the items, which are drawn at random from some prior valuation
distribution. They then bid in the auction, possibly lying strategically about their valuation while
attempting to anticipate the strategic behavior of others. The result is a potentially complicated
Bayes-Nash equilibrium; even predicting these equilibria can be difficult, let alone designing auctions
that have good equilibria.
This motivates the design of strategyproof auctions: these are auctions where players are incentivized to simply and truthfully reveal their private valuations to the auctioneer. Subject to the
strategyproofness constraint, which makes player behavior predictable, it is then possible to optimize
∗

equal contributions

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

