Distributionally Robust Parametric
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
Viet Anh Nguyen
Xuhui Zhang
José Blanchet
Stanford University, United States
{viet-anh.nguyen, xuhui.zhang, jose.blanchet}@stanford.edu
Angelos Georghiou
University of Cyprus, Cyprus
georghiou.angelos@ucy.ac.cy

Abstract
We consider the parameter estimation problem of a probabilistic generative model
prescribed using a natural exponential family of distributions. For this problem,
the typical maximum likelihood estimator usually overfits under limited training
sample size, is sensitive to noise and may perform poorly on downstream predictive tasks. To mitigate these issues, we propose a distributionally robust maximum
likelihood estimator that minimizes the worst-case expected log-loss uniformly
over a parametric Kullback-Leibler ball around a parametric nominal distribution.
Leveraging the analytical expression of the Kullback-Leibler divergence between
two distributions in the same natural exponential family, we show that the minmax estimation problem is tractable in a broad setting, including the robust training of generalized linear models. Our novel robust estimator also enjoys statistical
consistency and delivers promising empirical results in both regression and classification tasks.

1

Introduction

We are interested in the relationship between a response variable Y and a covariate X governed by
the generative model

Y |X = x ∼ f · |λ(w0 , x) ,
(1)
where λ is a pre-determined function that maps the weight w0 and the covariate X to the parameter
of the conditional distribution of Y given X. The weight w0 is unknown and is the main quantity
of interest to be estimated. Throughout this paper, we assume that the distribution f belongs to
the exponential family of distributions. Given a ground measure ν on Y, the exponential family is
characterized by the density function

f (y|θ) = h(y) exp θ, T (y) − Ψ(θ)
with respect to ν, where · , · denotes the inner product, θ is the natural parameters, Ψ is the logpartition
and T is the sufficient statistics. The space of natural parameters is denoted by
 function
R
Θ = θ : h(y) exp( θ, T (y) ) < ∞ ⊆ Rp . We assume that the exponential family of distributions is regular, hence Θ is an open set, and T1 (y), . . . , Tp (y) are affinely independent [3, Chapter 8].
The generative setting (1) encapsulates numerous models which are suitable for regression and classification [11]. It ranges from logistic regression for classification [18], Poisson counting regression [17], log-linear models [9] to numerous other generalized linear models [11].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

