Coherent Hierarchical Multi-Label
Classification Networks
Eleonora Giunchiglia
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
eleonora.giunchiglia@cs.ox.ac.uk

Thomas Lukasiewicz
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Hierarchical multi-label classification (HMC) is a challenging classification task
extending standard multi-label classification problems by imposing a hierarchy constraint on the classes. In this paper, we propose C-HMCNN(h), a novel approach
for HMC problems, which, given a network h for the underlying multi-label classification problem, exploits the hierarchy information in order to produce predictions
coherent with the constraint and improve performance. We conduct an extensive
experimental analysis showing the superior performance of C-HMCNN(h) when
compared to state-of-the-art models.

1

Introduction

Multi-label classification is a standard machine learning problem in which an object can be associated
with multiple labels. A hierarchical multi-label classification (HMC) problem is defined as a multilabel classification problem in which classes are hierarchically organized as a tree or as a directed
acyclic graph (DAG), and in which every prediction must be coherent, i.e., respect the hierarchy
constraint. The hierarchy constraint states that a datapoint belonging to a given class must also
belong to all its ancestors in the hierarchy. HMC problems naturally arise in many domains, such
as image classification [12–14], text categorization [17, 20, 27], and functional genomics [1, 9, 32].
They are very challenging for two main reasons: (i) they are normally characterized by a great class
imbalance, because the number of datapoints per class is usually much smaller at deeper levels of the
hierarchy, and (ii) the predictions must be coherent. Consider, e.g., the task proposed in [13], where
a radiological image has to be annotated with an IRMA code, which specifies, among others, the
biological system examined. In this setting, we expect to have many more “abdomen” images than
“lung” images, making the label “lung” harder to predict. Furthermore, the prediction “respiratory
system, stomach” should not be possible given the hierarchy constraint stating that “stomach” belongs
to “gastrointestinal system”. While most of the proposed methods directly output predictions that
are coherent with the hierarchy constraint (see, e.g., [3, 22]), there are models that allow incoherent
predictions and, at inference time, require an additional post-processing step to ensure its satisfaction
(see, e.g., [6, 24, 31]). Most of the state-of-the-art models based on neural networks belong to the
second category (see, e.g., [6, 7, 33]).
In this paper, we propose C-HMCNN(h), a novel approach for HMC problems, which, given a
network h for the underlying multi-label classification problem, exploits the hierarchy information to
produce predictions coherent with the hierarchy constraint and improve performance. C-HMCNN(h)
is based on two basic elements: (i) a constraint layer built on top of h, ensuring that the predictions
are coherent by construction, and (ii) a loss function teaching C-HMCNN(h) when to exploit the
prediction on the lower classes in the hierarchy to make predictions on the upper ones. C-HMCNN(h)
has the following four features: (i) its predictions are coherent without any post-processing, (ii)
differently from other state-of-the-art models (see, e.g., [33]), its number of parameters is independent
from the number of hierarchical levels, (iii) it can be easily implemented on GPUs using standard
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

