Learning Strategic Network Emergence Games

Rakshit Trivedi
Georgia Institute of Technology
rstrivedi@gatech.edu

Hongyuan Zha
AIRS and Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
zha@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Real-world networks, especially the ones that emerge due to actions of animate
agents (e.g. humans, animals), are the result of underlying strategic mechanisms
aimed at maximizing individual or collective benefits. Learning approaches built to
capture these strategic insights would gain interpretability and flexibility benefits
that are required to generalize beyond observations. To this end, we consider a
game-theoretic formalism of network emergence that accounts for the underlying strategic mechanisms and take it to the observed data. We propose MINE
(Multi-agent Inverse models of Network Emergence mechanism), a new learning
framework that solves Markov-Perfect network emergence games using multi-agent
inverse reinforcement learning. MINE jointly discovers agents’ strategy profiles
in the form of network emergence policy and the latent payoff mechanism in the
form of learned reward function. In the experiments, we demonstrate that MINE
learns versatile payoff mechanisms that: highly correlates with the ground truth
for a synthetic case; can be used to analyze the observed network structure; and
enable effective transfer in specific settings. Further, we show that the network
emergence game as a learned model supports meaningful strategic predictions,
thereby signifying its applicability to a variety of network analysis tasks.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning methods for network analysis [1, 18, 47, 54] typically operate on the stochastic
assumption about the nature of underlying mechanisms that govern the emergence of observed
networks. Several networks, in spite of their different origins, indicate large commonalities among
their structural properties (e.g. diameter, clustering coefficient, etc.). Solution approaches to learn
from network data, therefore, rely on optimizing the likelihood of observing specific structural
properties and often use surrogate objectives parameterized by modules that capture these properties,
achieving notable success across different areas [6, 7, 9, 23, 27, 39]. On the other hand, many realworld networks, that emerge due to actions of animate agents, are the result of strategic behavior of
individuals rather than based on probabilities. For instance, economic partnerships between financial
organizations, social collaborations at work and trade between countries, all pertain to strategic
actions adopted by individual entities. The network emerging out of such relationships may not
correspond to common structural parameters. Hence, it would be beneficial to model the learning
problem as an equilibrium, an under-explored area within the network learning literature.
Network Emergence (Creation) Games [11] provide a formal interpretable framework to characterize
and analyze the decentralized process among many interacting agents, whose outcome is the observed
network. This process assumes that agents follow strategic behavior in forming links with other
agents and the interacting agents are considered to be inherently selfish with some capacity allowing
for emergent local coordination between neighboring agents. While serving as an elegant theoretical
tool to explain network emergence process, the practical applicability of Network Emergence Games
beyond building stylized simulators is often hindered due to several limitations:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

