BanditPAM: Almost Linear Time k-Medoids
Clustering via Multi-Armed Bandits

Mo Tiwari
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
motiwari@stanford.edu

Martin Jinye Zhang
Department of Epidemiology
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
jinyezhang@hsph.harvard.edu

James Mayclin
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
jmayclin@stanford.edu
Chris Piech
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
piech@cs.stanford.edu

Sebastian Thrun
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
thrun@stanford.edu
Ilan Shomorony
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ilans@illinois.edu

Abstract
Clustering is a ubiquitous task in data science. Compared to the commonly used
k-means clustering, k-medoids clustering requires the cluster centers to be actual data points and supports arbitrary distance metrics, which permits greater
interpretability and the clustering of structured objects. Current state-of-the-art
k-medoids clustering algorithms, such as Partitioning Around Medoids (PAM), are
iterative and are quadratic in the dataset size n for each iteration, being prohibitively
expensive for large datasets. We propose BanditPAM, a randomized algorithm
inspired by techniques from multi-armed bandits, that reduces the complexity of
each PAM iteration from O(n2 ) to O(n log n) and returns the same results with
high probability, under assumptions on the data that often hold in practice. As such,
BanditPAM matches state-of-the-art clustering loss while reaching solutions much
faster. We empirically validate our results on several large real-world datasets,
including a coding exercise submissions dataset from Code.org, the 10x Genomics
68k PBMC single-cell RNA sequencing dataset, and the MNIST handwritten digits
dataset. In these experiments, we observe that BanditPAM returns the same results
as state-of-the-art PAM-like algorithms up to 4x faster while performing up to 200x
fewer distance computations. The improvements demonstrated by BanditPAM
enable k-medoids clustering on a wide range of applications, including identifying
cell types in large-scale single-cell data and providing scalable feedback for students learning computer science online. We also release highly optimized Python
and C++ implementations of our algorithm1 .

1

Introduction

Many modern data science applications require the clustering of very-large-scale data. Due to its
computational efficiency, the k-means clustering algorithm [32, 30] is one of the most widely-used
1

https://github.com/ThrunGroup/BanditPAM

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

