Diverse Image Captioning with
Context-Object Split Latent Spaces

Shweta Mahajan
Stefan Roth
Dept. of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt
{mahajan@aiphes, stefan.roth@visinf}.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Diverse image captioning models aim to learn one-to-many mappings that are
innate to cross-domain datasets, such as of images and texts. Current methods for
this task are based on generative latent variable models, e.g. VAEs with structured
latent spaces. Yet, the amount of multimodality captured by prior work is limited
to that of the paired training data – the true diversity of the underlying generative
process is not fully captured. To address this limitation, we leverage the contextual
descriptions in the dataset that explain similar contexts in different visual scenes.
To this end, we introduce a novel factorization of the latent space, termed contextobject split, to model diversity in contextual descriptions across images and texts
within the dataset. Our framework1 not only enables diverse captioning through
context-based pseudo supervision, but extends this to images with novel objects and
without paired captions in the training data. We evaluate our COS-CVAE approach
on the standard COCO dataset and on the held-out COCO dataset consisting of
images with novel objects, showing significant gains in accuracy and diversity.

1

Introduction

Modeling cross-domain relations such as that of images and texts finds application in many realworld tasks such as image captioning [5, 9, 20, 23, 26, 31, 33, 48]. Many-to-many relationships
are innate to such cross-domain tasks, where a data point in one domain can have multiple possible correspondences in the other domain and vice-versa. In particular for image captioning,
given an image there are many likely
Input image
Context-object split
sentences that can describe the unAnnotated paired data
latent space
A couple of
derlying semantics of the image. It
mountain bikers
A bear sitting on a
sitting on a
chair in a park
is thus desirable to model this multibench in front of
a forest
A black bear
modal conditional distribution of capA couple of <s> sitting on
sitting on a chair in
a <s> in front of a forest
front of a forest
A dog on leash
tions (texts) given an image to generA <s> on leash sitting in
sitting in a park
a park
ate plausible, varied captions.
Contextual descriptions

Diverse captions

in training data
Recent work has, therefore, explored
generating multiple captions condi- Figure 1: Context-object split latent space of our COS-CVAE to extioned on an image to capture these ploit similarities in the contextual annotations for diverse captioning.
diverse relationships in a (conditional) variational framework [6, 14, 32, 42]. These variational frameworks encode the conditional
distribution of texts given the image in a low-dimensional latent space, allowing for efficient sampling.
However, the diversity captured by current state-of-the-art latent variable models, e.g. [6, 42], is
limited to the paired annotations provided for an image. While the recently proposed LNFMM
approach [32] allows for additional unpaired data of images or texts to be incorporated, the amount
of diversity for a given image is again limited to the paired annotated data.

1

Code available at https://github.com/visinf/cos-cvae

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

