Inverse Rational Control with Partially Observable
Continuous Nonlinear Dynamics
Minhae Kwon
School of Electronic Engineering
Soongsil University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
minhae@ssu.ac.kr
Paul Schrater
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota
Minnesota, IN, USA
schrater@umn.edu

Saurabh Daptardar
Google Inc.
Mountain View, CA, USA
saurabh.dptdr@gmail.com

Xaq Pitkow
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, TX, USA
xaq@rice.edu

Abstract
A fundamental question in neuroscience is how the brain creates an internal model
of the world to guide actions using sequences of ambiguous sensory information.
This is naturally formulated as a reinforcement learning problem under partial
observations, where an agent must estimate relevant latent variables in the world
from its evidence, anticipate possible future states, and choose actions that optimize
total expected reward. This problem can be solved by control theory, which allows
us to find the optimal actions for a given system dynamics and objective function.
However, animals often appear to behave suboptimally. Why? We hypothesize that
animals have their own flawed internal model of the world, and choose actions with
the highest expected subjective reward according to that flawed model. We describe
this behavior as rational but not optimal. The problem of Inverse Rational Control
(IRC) aims to identify which internal model would best explain an agent’s actions.
Our contribution here generalizes past work on Inverse Rational Control which
solved this problem for discrete control in partially observable Markov decision
processes. Here we accommodate continuous nonlinear dynamics and continuous
actions, and impute sensory observations corrupted by unknown noise that is private
to the animal. We first build an optimal Bayesian agent that learns an optimal policy
generalized over the entire model space of dynamics and subjective rewards using
deep reinforcement learning. Crucially, this allows us to compute a likelihood
over models for experimentally observable action trajectories acquired from a
suboptimal agent. We then find the model parameters that maximize the likelihood
using gradient ascent. Our method successfully recovers the true model of rational
agents. This approach provides a foundation for interpreting the behavioral and
neural dynamics of animal brains during complex tasks.

1

Introduction

Brains evolved to understand, interpret, and act upon the physical world. To thrive and reproduce in a
harsh and dynamic natural environment, brains, therefore, evolved flexible, robust controllers. To be
the controller, the fundamental function of the brain is to organize sensory data into an internal model
of the outside world. The animals are never able to get complete information about the world. Instead,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

