Inverse Learning of Symmetries

Mario Wieser1,2 , Sonali Parbhoo3 , Aleksander Wieczorek1,2 , Volker Roth1,2
1
University of Basel, Switzerland
2
National Centre for Computational Design and Discovery of Novel Materials MARVEL,
University of Basel, Switzerland
3
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, USA
mario.wieser@unibas.ch

Abstract
Symmetry transformations induce invariances which are frequently described with
deep latent variable models. In many complex domains, such as the chemical space,
invariances can be observed, yet the corresponding symmetry transformation cannot
be formulated analytically. We propose to learn the symmetry transformation with
a model consisting of two latent subspaces, where the first subspace captures the
target and the second subspace the remaining invariant information. Our approach is
based on the deep information bottleneck in combination with a continuous mutual
information regulariser. Unlike previous methods, we focus on the challenging task
of minimising mutual information in continuous domains. To this end, we base
the calculation of mutual information on correlation matrices in combination with
a bijective variable transformation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
model outperforms state-of-the-art methods on artificial and molecular datasets.

1

Introduction

In physics, symmetries are used to model quantities which are retained after applying a certain class
of transformations. From the mathematical perspective, symmetry can be seen as an invariance
property of mappings, where such mappings leave a variable unchanged. Consider the example of
rotational invariance from Figure 1a. We first observe the 3D representation of a specific molecule
m. The molecule is then rotated. For any rotation g, we calculate the distance matrix D between the
atoms of the rotated molecule g(m) with a predefined function f . Note that a rotation is a simple
transformation which admits a straightforward analytical form. As g induces an invariance class, we
obtain the same distance matrix for every rotation g, i.e. f (m) = f (g(m)) for any rotation g.
Now, consider highly complex domains e.g. the chemical space, where analytical forms of symmetry
transformations g are difficult or impossible to find (Figure 1b). The task of discovering novel
molecules for the design of organic solar cells in material science is an example of such a domain.
Here, all molecules must possess specific properties, e.g. a bandgap energy of exactly 1.4 eV [37], in
order to adequately generate electricity from the solar spectrum. In such scenarios, no predefined
symmetry transformation (such as rotation) is known or can be assumed. For example, there exist
various discrete molecular graphs with different atom and bond composition that result in the
equivalent band gap energy. The only available data defining our invariance class are the {m, e}n
numeric point-wise samples from the function f where n is the number of samples, m the molecule
and e = f (m) the bandgap energy. Therefore, no analytical form of a symmetry transformation g
which alters the molecule m and leaves the bandgap energy e unchanged can be assumed.
The goal of our model is thus to learn the class of symmetry transformations g which result in a
symmetry property f of the modelled system. To this end, we learn a continuous data representation
and the corresponding continuous symmetry transformation in an inverse fashion from data samples
{m, e}n only. To do so, we introduce the Symmetry-Transformation Information Bottleneck (STIB)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

