Error Bounds of Imitating Policies and Environments∗
Tian Xu1 , Ziniu Li2,3 , Yang Yu1,3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518172, China
3
Polixir Technologies, Nanjing 210038, China
xut@lamda.nju.edu.cn, ziniuli@link.cuhk.edu.cn, yuy@nju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Imitation learning trains a policy by mimicking expert demonstrations. Various
imitation methods were proposed and empirically evaluated, meanwhile, their
theoretical understanding needs further studies. In this paper, we firstly analyze
the value gap between the expert policy and imitated policies by two imitation
methods, behavioral cloning and generative adversarial imitation. The results
support that generative adversarial imitation can reduce the compounding errors
compared to behavioral cloning, and thus has a better sample complexity. Noticed
that by considering the environment transition model as a dual agent, imitation
learning can also be used to learn the environment model. Therefore, based on
the bounds of imitating policies, we further analyze the performance of imitating
environments. The results show that environment models can be more effectively
imitated by generative adversarial imitation than behavioral cloning, suggesting a
novel application of adversarial imitation for model-based reinforcement learning.
We hope these results could inspire future advances in imitation learning and
model-based reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making under uncertainty is challenging due to the stochastic dynamics and
delayed feedback [27, 8]. Compared to reinforcement learning (RL) [46, 38] that learns from
delayed feedback, imitation learning (IL) [37, 34, 23] learns from expert demonstrations that provide
immediate feedback and thus is efficient in obtaining a good policy, which has been demonstrated in
playing games [45], robotic control [19], autonomous driving [14], etc.
Imitation learning methods have been designed from various perspectives. For instance, behavioral
cloning (BC) [37, 50] learns a policy by directly minimizing the action probability discrepancy with
supervised learning; apprenticeship learning (AL) [1, 47] infers a reward function from expert demonstrations by inverse reinforcement learning [34], and subsequently learns a policy by reinforcement
learning using the recovered reward function. Recently, Ho and Ermon [23] revealed that AL can be
viewed as a state-action occupancy measure matching problem. From this connection, they proposed
the algorithm generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL). In GAIL, a discriminator scores
the agent’s behaviors based on the similarity to the expert demonstrations, and the agent learns to
maximize the scores, resulting in expert-like behaviors.
Many empirical studies of imitation learning have been conducted. It has been observed that, for
example, GAIL often achieves better performance than BC [23, 28, 29]. However, the theoretical
∗

This work is supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018AAA0101100), NSFC (61876077),
and Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization. Yang Yu is the
corresponding author. This work was done when Ziniu Li was an intern in Polixir Technologies.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

