Latent Dynamic Factor Analysis of High-Dimensional
Neural Recordings

Heejong Bong∗, Zongge Liu∗
Carnegie Mellon University
hbong, zonggel@andrew.cmu.edu

Zhao Ren
University of Pittsburgh
zren@pitt.edu

Matthew A. Smith, Valérie Ventura, Robert E. Kass
Carnegie Mellon University
msmith, vventura, kass@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
High-dimensional neural recordings across multiple brain regions can be used to
establish functional connectivity with good spatial and temporal resolution. We
designed and implemented a novel method, Latent Dynamic Factor Analysis of
High-dimensional time series (LDFA-H), which combines (a) a new approach to
estimating the covariance structure among high-dimensional time series (for the
observed variables) and (b) a new extension of probabilistic CCA to dynamic time
series (for the latent variables). Our interest is in the cross-correlations among the
latent variables which, in neural recordings, may capture the flow of information
from one brain region to another. Simulations show that LDFA-H outperforms
existing methods in the sense that it captures target factors even when within-region
correlation due to noise dominates cross-region correlation. We applied our method
to local field potential (LFP) recordings from 192 electrodes in Prefrontal Cortex
(PFC) and visual area V4 during a memory-guided saccade task. The results
capture time-varying lead-lag dependencies between PFC and V4, and display the
associated spatial distribution of the signals.

1

Introduction

New electrode arrays for recording electrical activity generated by large networks of neurons have
created great opportunities, but also great challenges for statistical machine learning (e.g., Steinmetz
et al., 2018). For example, Local Field Potentials (LFPs) are signals that represent the bulk activity in
relatively small volumes of tissue (Buzsáki et al., 2012; Einevoll et al., 2013), and they have been
shown to correlate substantially with the BOLD fMRI brain imaging signal (Logothetis et al., 2001;
Magri et al., 2012). Typical LFP data sets may have dozens to hundreds of time series in each of
two or more brain regions, recorded simultaneously across many experimental trials. A motivating
example in this paper is LFP recordings from a prefrontal cortex (PFC) and visual area V4 during a
visual working memory task. V4 has been reported to retain higher-order information (e.g., color and
shape) and attention in visual processing (Fries et al., 2001; Orban, 2008), while PFC is considered to
exert cognitive control in working memory (Miller and Cohen, 2001). Despite their spatial distance
and functional difference, these regions have been presumed to cooperate during visual working
memory tasks. Various approaches have been used to track the interaction among brain regions
Adhikari et al. (2010); Buesing et al. (2014); Gallagher et al. (2017); Hultman et al. (2018); Jiang
et al. (2015). In particular, delay-specific theta synchrony led by PFC has been discovered during
visual memory tasks (Liebe et al., 2012; Sarnthein et al., 1998).
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

