Normalizing Kalman Filters
for Multivariate Time Series Analysis

Emmanuel de Bézenac1†∗, Syama Sundar Rangapuram2∗ , Konstantinos Benidis2 ,
Michael Bohlke-Schneider2 , Richard Kurle3†, Lorenzo Stella2 ,
Hilaf Hasson2 , Patrick Gallinari1 , Tim Januschowski2
1
Sorbonne Université, 2 AWS AI Labs, 3 Technical University of Munich
Correspondence to: emmanuel.de-bezenac@lip6.fr, rangapur@amazon.de

Abstract
This paper tackles the modelling of large, complex and multivariate time series
panels in a probabilistic setting. To this extent, we present a novel approach reconciling classical state space models with deep learning methods. By augmenting
state space models with normalizing flows, we mitigate imprecisions stemming
from idealized assumptions in state space models. The resulting model is highly
flexible while still retaining many of the attractive properties of state space models,
e.g., uncertainty and observation errors are properly accounted for, inference is
tractable, sampling is efficient and good generalization performance is observed,
even in low data regimes. We demonstrate competitiveness against state-of-the-art
deep learning methods on the tasks of forecasting real world data and handling
varying levels of missing data.

1

Introduction

In most real world applications of time series analysis, e.g., risk management in finance, cannibalization of products in retail or anomaly detection in cloud computing environments, time series are
not mutually independent and an accurate modelling approach must take these dependencies into
account [1]. The classical approach [2] is to extend standard univariate models resulting in vector
autoregression [3], multivariate GARCH [4] and multivariate state space models [5, 6]. Although
these approaches yield useful theoretical properties, they make idealized assumptions like Gaussianity,
linear inter-dependencies, and are not scalable to even moderate number of time series [7] due to the
number of parameters required to be estimated, which is restrictive for many modern applications
involving large panels of time series. Recently, more expressive, scalable deep learning methods [8, 9]
were developed for forecasting applications that learn a joint global model for multiple time series;
however, they still assume that these time series are mutually independent.
In this paper we propose the Normalizing Kalman Filter (NKF), a novel approach for modelling and
forecasting complex multivariate time series by augmenting classical linear Gaussian state space
models (LGM) with normalizing flows [10]. The combined model allows us to leverage the flexibility
of normalizing flows (NF), alleviating strong assumptions of traditional multivariate models, while
still benefiting from the rich set of mathematical properties of LGM. In fact, we prove that despite
modelling non-Gaussian data with nonlinear inter-dependencies, we can achieve exact inference since
our model has closed-form expressions for filtering, smoothing and likelihood computation. We thus
retain the main attractive properties of LGM, in contrast to related methods [11, 12]. Moreover, since
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while at Amazon.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

