Stochastic Optimization with Laggard Data Pipelines
Naman Agarwal
Google AI Princeton
Princeton, NJ 08540
namanagarwal@google.com

Rohan Anil
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
rohananil@google.com

Kunal Talwar
Apple⇤
Cupertino, CA 95014
ktalwar@apple.com

Tomer Koren
Tel Aviv University & Google
Tel Aviv, Israel
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Cyril Zhang
Microsoft Research†
New York, NY 10012
cyrilzhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
State-of-the-art optimization is steadily shifting towards massively parallel pipelines
with extremely large batch sizes. As a consequence, CPU-bound preprocessing and
disk/memory/network operations have emerged as new performance bottlenecks, as
opposed to hardware-accelerated gradient computations. In this regime, a recently
proposed approach is data echoing (Choi et al., 2019), which takes repeated gradient
steps on the same batch while waiting for fresh data to arrive from upstream. We
provide the first convergence analyses of “data-echoed” extensions of common
optimization methods, showing that they exhibit provable improvements over their
synchronous counterparts. Specifically, we show that in convex optimization with
stochastic minibatches, data echoing affords speedups on the curvature-dominated
part of the convergence rate, while maintaining the optimal statistical rate.

1

Introduction

Recent empirical successes in large-scale machine learning have been powered by massive data
parallelism and hardware acceleration, with batch sizes trending beyond 10K+ images [46] or
1M+ tokens [9]. Numerous interdisciplinary sources [5, 12, 24, 33] indicate that the performance
bottlenecks of contemporary deep learning pipelines can lie in many places other than gradient
computation. In other words, since the initial breakthroughs in hardware-accelerated deep learning
[14, 28, 37], GPUs (and TPUs, FPGAs, etc.) have become too fast for upstream data loaders and
preprocessors to keep up with.
Choi et al. [13] propose data echoing, a simple and versatile way to improve training performance in
this regime. Each stage of the data pipeline runs asynchronously, oblivious to whether its input has
been refreshed upstream. In particular, the optimization algorithm may choose to take additional
gradient steps before a minibatch is refreshed, rather than spend idle time waiting for more data. The
authors present a large-scale proof-of-concept empirical study, and find that data echoing affords a
3.25⇥ speedup in a network-bound ImageNet setting.
Some natural curiosities arise from this practice: When might this overfit? How carefully should one
adjust the step size of an echoed gradient? Does acceleration work? A theoretical understanding of
convergence guarantees for these data-echoed optimization algorithms is missing.
⇤ Work performed while at Google Brain.

† Work performed while at Google AI Princeton and Princeton University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

