Neural Star Domain as Primitive Representation

Yuki Kawana1 , Yusuke Mukuta1,2 , Tatsuya Harada1,2
1
The University of Tokyo, 2 RIKEN AIP
{kawana, mukuta, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D objects from 2D images is a fundamental task in computer
vision, and an accurate structured reconstruction by parsimonious and semantic
primitive representations has an even broader application range. When a target
shape is reconstructed using multiple primitives, it is preferable that its fundamental
properties, such as collective volume and surface, can be readily and comprehensively accessed so that the primitives can be treated as if they were a single shape.
This becomes possible by a primitive representation with unified implicit and
explicit representations. However, primitive representations in current approaches
do not satisfy these requirements. To resolve this, we propose a novel primitive
representation termed neural star domain (NSD) that learns primitive shapes in
a star domain. We demonstrate that NSD is a universal approximator of the star
domain; furthermore, it is not only parsimonious and semantic but also an implicit
and explicit shape representation. The proposed approach outperforms existing
methods in image reconstruction tasks in terms of semantic capability as well as
sampling speed and quality for high-resolution meshes.

1

Introduction

Understanding 3D objects by decomposing them into simpler shapes (termed primitives) has been
widely studied in computer vision [1–3]. Decomposing 3D objects into parsimonious and semantic
primitive representations is important for understanding their structure. Constructive solid geometry
[4] uses combinations of primitives to reconstruct complex shapes.
Recently, learning-based approaches have been adopted to primitive based approaches [5–11]. It has
been demonstrated that these approaches enable a semantically consistent part arrangement in various
shapes. Moreover, the use of implicit representations allows the set of primitives to be represented
as a single collective shape by considering a union [5, 6, 12]; this can improve the reconstruction
accuracy during training.
However, the expressiveness of primitives, particularly those with closed shapes, has been limited to
simple shapes (cuboids, superquadrics, and convex shapes). Although primitives can learn semantic
part arrangements, the semantic shapes of the parts cannot be learned using existing methods. In
addition, although the union of primitive volumes could be represented by implicit representations
in previous studies, the lack of immediate access to the union of primitive surfaces during training
results in complex training schemes [5, 6, 12].
It is challenging to define a primitive that addresses all these problems. State-of-the-art expressive
primitives with explicit surfaces do not have implicit representations [13, 7], and thus they cannot
efficiently consider unions of primitives to represent collective shapes. Leading primitive representations by convex shapes [5, 6] with implicit representations involve a tradeoff regarding the number
H of half-space hyperplanes defining a convex. Using more hyperplanes yields more expressive
convex shapes at the expense of a quadratically growing computation cost in extracting differentiable
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

