Fairness constraints can help exact inference in
structured prediction

Kevin Bello
Department of Computer Science
Purdue Univeristy
West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA
kbellome@purdue.edu

Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue Univeristy
West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Abstract
Many inference problems in structured prediction can be modeled as maximizing a
score function on a space of labels, where graphs are a natural representation to
decompose the total score into a sum of unary (nodes) and pairwise (edges) scores.
Given a generative model with an undirected connected graph G and true vector
of binary labels y, it has been previously shown that when G has good expansion
properties, such as complete graphs or d-regular expanders, one can exactly recover
y (with high probability and in polynomial time) from a single noisy observation
of each edge and node. We analyze the previously studied generative model by
Globerson et al. (2015) under a notion of statistical parity. That is, given a fair
binary node labeling, we ask the question whether it is possible to recover the
fair assignment, with high probability and in polynomial time, from single edge
and node observations. We find that, in contrast to the known trade-offs between
fairness and model performance, the addition of the fairness constraint improves
the probability of exact recovery. We effectively explain this phenomenon and
empirically show how graphs with poor expansion properties, such as grids, are
now capable of achieving exact recovery. Finally, as a byproduct of our analysis,
we provide a tighter minimum-eigenvalue bound than that which can be derived
from Weyl’s inequality.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction consists of receiving a structured input and producing a combinatorial structure
such as trees, clusters, networks, sequences, permutations, among others. From the computational
viewpoint, structured prediction is in general considered intractable because of the size of the output
space being exponential in the input size. For instance, in image segmentation tasks, the number of
admissible segments is exponential in the number of pixels. In this work, we focus on the inference
problem, where a common approach is to exploit local features to infer a global structure.
Consider an undirected graph G = (V, E). In graphical models, specifically in Markov random fields,
one generally tries to find a solution to the following optimization problem:
X
X
max
cv (m)1[yv = m] +
cu,v (m1 , m2 )1[yu = m1 , yv = m2 ] , (1)
y∈M|V |

v∈V,m∈M

(u,v)∈E,m1 ,m2 ∈M

where M is the set of possible labels, cu (m) is the cost or potential of assigning label m to node v,
and cu,v (m, n) is the cost or potential of assigning m and n to the neighbors u, v respectively. This
type of inference problem arises in the context of community detection, statistical physics, sociology,
among others. Only a few particular cases of problem 1 are known to be solvable in polynomial time.
To name a few, (Schraudolph & Kamenetsky 2009) and (Chandrasekaran et al. 2008) showed that
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

