The Statistical Complexity of Early-Stopped
Mirror Descent
Tomas Vaškevičius1 , Varun Kanade2 , Patrick Rebeschini1
1
Department of Statistics, 2 Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
{tomas.vaskevicius, patrick.rebeschini}@stats.ox.ac.uk
varunk@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Recently there has been a surge of interest in understanding implicit regularization properties of iterative gradient-based optimization algorithms. In
this paper, we study the statistical guarantees on the excess risk achieved
by early-stopped unconstrained mirror descent algorithms applied to the
unregularized empirical risk with the squared loss for linear models and
kernel methods. By completing an inequality that characterizes convexity
for the squared loss, we identify an intrinsic link between offset Rademacher
complexities and potential-based convergence analysis of mirror descent
methods. Our observation immediately yields excess risk guarantees for the
path traced by the iterates of mirror descent in terms of offset complexities
of certain function classes depending only on the choice of the mirror map,
initialization point, step-size, and the number of iterations. We apply our
theory to recover, in a clean and elegant manner via rather short proofs,
some of the recent results in the implicit regularization literature, while also
showing how to improve upon them in some settings.1

1

Introduction

In a typical statistical learning setup, we observe a dataset Dn of n input-output pairs
(xi , yi ) ∈ Rd × R sampled i.i.d. from some unknown distribution P . When learning with
respect to the quadratic loss, the goal is to output a function gb = gb(Dn ) : Rd → R which
minimizes the risk R(b
g ) defined as follows, for any square-integrable function g:
h
i
2
R(g) = E(X,Y )∼P (g(X) − Y ) .
Among the most studied statistical estimators is the empirical risk minimization (ERM)
algorithm, which given a function class G outputs a function gbG = gbG (Dn ) defined as
n
1X
gbG ∈ arg min Rn (g), where Rn (g) :=
(g(xi ) − yi )2 ,
(1)
n i=1
g∈G
in some cases with a regularization penalty term added to the optimization objective Rn (g),
such as `p norm of the model parameters. We consider the non-realizable or agnostic setting,
i.e., the case in which there is no assumption that E[ Y |X] is determined by a well-specified
model from a reference class of functions. In the agnostic case, a key performance measure
of an estimator gb is its excess risk with respect to some reference class of functions F:
E(b
g , F) = R(b
g ) − inf R(f ).
f ∈F

1

For a full version of this paper see [39].

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

