Towards Neural Programming Interfaces

Zachary C. Brown
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
zac.brown@duke.edu

Nathaniel Robinson
Department of Computer Science
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602
nrobinson@byu.edu

David Wingate
Department of Computer Science
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602
wingated@cs.byu.edu

Nancy Fulda
Department of Computer Science
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602
nfulda@cs.byu.edu

Abstract
It is notoriously difficult to control the behavior of artificial neural networks such
as generative neural language models. We recast the problem of controlling natural
language generation as that of learning to interface with a pretrained language
model, just as Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) control the behavior of
programs by altering hyperparameters. In this new paradigm, a specialized neural
network (called a Neural Programming Interface or NPI) learns to interface with a
pretrained language model by manipulating the hidden activations of the pretrained
model to produce desired outputs. Importantly, no permanent changes are made
to the weights of the original model, allowing us to re-purpose pretrained models
for new tasks without overwriting any aspect of the language model. We also contribute a new data set construction algorithm and GAN-inspired loss function that
allows us to train NPI models to control outputs of autoregressive transformers. In
experiments against other state-of-the-art approaches, we demonstrate the efficacy
of our methods using OpenAI’s GPT-2 model, successfully controlling noun selection, topic aversion, offensive speech filtering, and other aspects of language while
largely maintaining the controlled model’s fluency under deterministic settings.

1

Introduction

Researchers’ ability to automate natural language processing has grown exponentially over the past
few years, particularly with the advent of the Transformer architecture [1]. Despite the fact that recent
machine learning methods achieve impressive and almost human-level performance on tasks such as
dialogue modeling [2, 3, 4] and natural language generation [5, 6, 7], many intelligent voice assistants
still rely on rule-based architectures and cached responses in open domain dialogue [8, 9, 10]. This is
primarily due to the lack of controls in deep learning architectures for producing specific phrases,
tones, or topics, which makes these models inherently unpredictable and therefore too risky for
most entities - corporate or otherwise - who wish to deploy public-facing intelligent agents. For
example, it is often desirable for a conversational agent to maintain a specific identity (comprised of
a name, set of opinions, etc.) throughout an exchange of dialogue and it is currently impossible to
condition deep learning algorithms to maintain a coherent identity across dialogue without training
them on highly specialized (and, by extension, biased and limited) data sets. Fine-tuning on these
specialized data sets comes with an additional, significant cost: it can lead to catastrophic forgetting
of the language model [11]. Despite this aspect of fine-tuning, current state-of-the-art methods [12, 2]
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

