Adversarial Counterfactual Learning and Evaluation
for Recommender System

Da Xu, Chuanwei Ruan ∗
Walmart Labs, Sunnyvale, CA 94086
{Da.Xu, Chuanwei.Ruan}@walmartlabs.com
Evren Korpeoglu, Sushant Kumar, Kannan Achan
Walmart Labs, Sunnyvale, CA 94086
{EKorpeoglu, SKumar4, KAchan}@walmartlabs.com

Abstract
The feedback data of recommender systems are often subject to what was exposed
to the users; however, most learning and evaluation methods do not account for
the underlying exposure mechanism. We first show in theory that applying supervised learning to detect user preferences may end up with inconsistent results in
the absence of exposure information. The counterfactual propensity-weighting
approach from causal inference can account for the exposure mechanism; nevertheless, the partial-observation nature of the feedback data can cause identifiability
issues. We propose a principled solution by introducing a minimax empirical risk
formulation. We show that the relaxation of the dual problem can be converted to
an adversarial game between two recommendation models, where the opponent of
the candidate model characterizes the underlying exposure mechanism. We provide
learning bounds and conduct extensive simulation studies to illustrate and justify
the proposed approach over a broad range of recommendation settings, which shed
insights on the various benefits of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

In the offline learning and evaluation of recommender systems, the dependency of feedback data on
the underlying exposure mechanism is often overlooked. When the users express their preferences on
the products explicitly (such as providing ratings) or implicitly (such as clicking), the feedback are
conditioned on the products to which they are exposed. In most cases, the previous exposures are
decided by some underlying mechanism such as the history recommender system. The dependency
causes two dilemmas for machine learning in recommender systems, and solutions have yet been
found satisfactorily. Firstly, the majority of supervised learning models only handle the dependency
between label (user feedback) and features, yet in the actual feedback data, the exposure mechanism
can alter the dependency pathways (Figure 1). In Section 2, we show from a theoretical perspective
that directly applying supervised learning on feedback data can result in inconsistent detection of
the user preferences. Secondly, an unbiased model evaluation should have the product exposure
determined by the candidate recommendation model, which is almost never satisfied using the
feedback data only. The second dilemma also reveals a major gap between evaluating models by
online experiments and using history data, since the offline evaluations are more likely to bias
toward the history exposure mechanism as it decided to what products the users might express their
preferences. The disagreement between the online and offline evaluations may partly explain the
∗

Both authors contribute equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

