Dynamical mean-field theory for stochastic gradient
descent in Gaussian mixture classification
Francesca Mignacco1

Florent Krzakala2,3

Pierfrancesco Urbani1

Lenka Zdeborová1,4
1

Institut de physique théorique, Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CEA, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
Laboratoire de Physique, CNRS, École Normale Supérieure, PSL University, Paris, France
3
IdePHICS Laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland
4
SPOC Laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland
Correspondence to: francesca.mignacco@ipht.fr

2

Abstract
We analyze in a closed form the learning dynamics of stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) for a single layer neural network classifying a high-dimensional Gaussian
mixture where each cluster is assigned one of two labels. This problem provides a
prototype of a non-convex loss landscape with interpolating regimes and a large
generalization gap. We define a particular stochastic process for which SGD can
be extended to a continuous-time limit that we call stochastic gradient flow. In
the full-batch limit, we recover the standard gradient flow. We apply dynamical
mean field theory from statistical physics to track the dynamics of the algorithm in
the high-dimensional limit via a self-consistent stochastic process. We explore the
performance of the algorithm as a function of control parameters shedding light on
how it navigates the loss landscape.

1

Introduction

Understanding how stochastic gradient descent (SGD) manages to train artificial neural networks
with good generalization capabilities by exploring the high-dimensional non-convex loss landscape is
one of the central problems in theory of machine learning. A popular attempt to explain this behavior
is by showing that the loss landscape itself is simple, with no spurious (i.e. leading to bad test
error) local minima. Some empirical evidence instead leads to the conclusion that the loss landscape
of state-of-the-art deep neural networks actually has spurious local (or even global) minima and
stochastic gradient descent is able to find them [1, 2]. Still, the stochastic gradient descent algorithm,
initialized at random, leads to good generalization properties in practice. It became clear that a theory
that would explain this success needs to account for the whole trajectory of the algorithm. Yet this
remains a challenging task, certainly for the state-of-the art deep networks trained on real datasets.
Related work — A detailed description of the whole trajectory taken by the (stochastic) gradient
descent was so far obtained only in several special cases. First such case are deep linear networks
where the dynamics of gradient descent has been analyzed [3, 4]. While this line of works has
led to very interesting insights about the dynamics, linear networks lack the expressivity of the
non-linear ones and the large time behavior of the algorithm can be obtained with a simple spectral
algorithm. Moreover, the analysis of dynamics in deep linear networks was not extended to the case
of stochastic gradient descent. Second case where the trajectory of the algorithm was understood in
detail is the one-pass (online) stochastic gradient descent for two-layer neural networks with a small
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

