Deep Diffusion-Invariant
Wasserstein Distributional Classification
Sung Woo Park
Dong Wook Shu
Junseok Kwon
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
pswkiki@gmail.com
seowok@naver.com
jskwon@cau.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel classification method called deep diffusioninvariant Wasserstein distributional classification (DeepWDC). DeepWDC represents input data and labels as probability measures to address severe perturbations
in input data. It can output the optimal label measure in terms of diffusion invariance, where the label measure is stationary over time and becomes equivalent
to a Gaussian measure. Furthermore, DeepWDC minimizes the 2-Wasserstein
distance between the optimal label measure and Gaussian measure, which reduces
the Wasserstein uncertainty. Experimental results demonstrate that DeepWDC can
substantially enhance the accuracy of several baseline deterministic classification
methods and outperforms state-of-the-art-methods on 2D and 3D data containing
various types of perturbations (e.g., rotations, impulse noise, and down-scaling).

1

Introduction

The Wasserstein space has been widely used for various machine learning tasks, including generative
adversarial learning (2), policy optimization (30), Gaussian processes (17), statistical learning (14),
data embedding (6; 19), topic modeling (29), Bayesian inference (1), Gaussian mixture modeling
(11), and optimal transport (13; 20; 23). However, the Wasserstein space has not been actively studied
for developing novel classification models. In conventional classification problems, N pairs of input
data xn and its corresponding target label ŷn (i.e., {xn , ŷn }N
n=1 ) are used for training, where the input
data and target label are considered vector-valued points in the Euclidean space, and an objective
function
P is formulated to obtain an inference network f based on the Euclidean distance as follows:
minf n dE (yn = f (xn ), ŷn ). We aim to answer the following questions in this paper.
How can the stochastic properties of input data and labels be appropriately captured to
handle severe perturbations? To answer this question, we represent both input data and
target labels as probability measures (i.e., probability densities), denoted as µn and ν̂n , respectively,
P in the Wasserstein space and solve a distance-based classification problem (i.e.,
minf n W2 (νn = f# [µn ], ν̂n )) based on the 2-Wasserstein distance W2 . Specifically, Euclidean
vectors {xn , ŷn } and inference network f are replaced with probability measures {µn , ν̂n }N
n=1 and
push-forward operation f# [·], respectively. Because probability measures can be spread out and
multi-modal (19), they provide excellent flexibility for handling stochastic perturbation in data.
Each vector-valued point x is recognized to be sampled from object measure µn ; x ∼ µn . Suppose that
perturbations are randomly added to data points at
test and training time (i.e., (x + ε) ∼ µεn for an unknown random perturbation vector ε and perturbed
probability measure µεn ). Then, it is reasonable to represent data using a probability measure µεn rather than
as an individual observed data point x + ε because
data can have multiple locations at every observations (e.g., red points in Fig.1). In this circumstance,
Figure 1: Randomly perturbed data.
we have to minimize the Wasserstein uncertainty of
perturbed data represented as probability measures
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

