Partially View-aligned Clustering

Zhenyu Huang
College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, China
zyhuang.gm@gmail.com

Peng Hu
I2R
A*STAR, Singapore
penghu.ml@gmail.com

Joey Tianyi Zhou
iHPC
A*STAR, Singapore
joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com

Xi Peng∗
College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, China
pengx.gm@gmail.com

Jiancheng Lv
College of Computer Science
Sichuan University, China
lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study one challenging issue in multi-view data clustering. To be
specific, for two data matrices X(1) and X(2) corresponding to two views, we do
not assume that X(1) and X(2) are fully aligned in row-wise. Instead, we assume
that only a small portion of the matrices has established the correspondence in
advance. Such a partially view-aligned problem (PVP) could lead to the intensive
labor of capturing or establishing the aligned multi-view data, which has less
been touched so far to the best of our knowledge. To solve this practical and
challenging problem, we propose a novel multi-view clustering method termed
partially view-aligned clustering (PVC). To be specific, PVC proposes to use a
differentiable surrogate of the non-differentiable Hungarian algorithm and recasts
it as a pluggable module. As a result, the category-level correspondence of the
unaligned data could be established in a latent space learned by a neural network,
while learning a common space across different views using the “aligned” data.
Extensive experimental results show promising results of our method in clustering
partially view-aligned data.

1

Introduction

As one of the most important unsupervised technologies, data clustering has attracted much attention
in recent years [22, 16, 6, 34]. Since most of the real-world data are presented in multiple views or
modals, it is highly expected to explore and exploit the correlation and invariance across different
views for data analysis [33, 30, 14, 27, 41].
In general, most existing multi-view clustering (MVC) approaches jointly learn a common representation to bridge the gap among different views and then achieve clustering using the common
representation. The success of such a learning paradigm highly relies on a “well-established” dataset
which has to satisfy two assumptions: 1) completeness of data: It requires that all examples appear
in all views. Taking two view matrices V(1) and V(2) as a showcase, it assumes that V(1) and
V(2) are with the same number of rows, where each row denotes a data point; 2) correspondence of
views: It requires that V(1) and V(2) have the corrected correspondence in row-wise. In other words,
V(1) and V(2) are fully aligned in advance. With the above two assumptions, the correlation and
correspondence of multi-view data are available, thus making learning the common representation
and clustering possible.
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

