Handling Missing Data with
Graph Representation Learning

Jiaxuan You1∗ Xiaobai Ma2∗ Daisy Yi Ding3∗ Mykel Kochenderfer2
1

Jure Leskovec1

Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
and 3 Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University
{jiaxuan, jure}@cs.stanford.edu
{maxiaoba, dingd, mykel}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Machine learning with missing data has been approached in two different ways,
including feature imputation where missing feature values are estimated based on
observed values and label prediction where downstream labels are learned directly
from incomplete data. However, existing imputation models tend to have strong
prior assumptions and cannot learn from downstream tasks, while models targeting
label prediction often involve heuristics and can encounter scalability issues. Here
we propose G RAPE, a graph-based framework for feature imputation as well as label
prediction. G RAPE tackles the missing data problem using a graph representation,
where the observations and features are viewed as two types of nodes in a bipartite
graph, and the observed feature values as edges. Under the G RAPE framework,
the feature imputation is formulated as an edge-level prediction task and the label
prediction as a node-level prediction task. These tasks are then solved with Graph
Neural Networks. Experimental results on nine benchmark datasets show that
G RAPE yields 20% lower mean absolute error for imputation tasks and 10% lower
for label prediction tasks, compared with existing state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Issues with learning from incomplete data arise in many domains including computational biology,
clinical studies, survey research, finance, and economics [6, 32, 46, 47, 53]. The missing data problem
has previously been approached in two different ways: feature imputation and label prediction.
Feature imputation involves estimating missing feature values based on observed values [8, 9, 11,
14, 15, 17, 22, 34, 44, 45, 47–50, 56], and label prediction aims to directly accomplish a downstream
task, such as classification or regression, with the missing values present in the input data [2, 5, 10,
15, 16, 23, 37, 40, 42, 52, 54].
Statistical methods for feature imputation often provide useful theoretical properties but exhibit
notable shortcomings: (1) they tend to make strong assumptions about the data distribution; (2)
they lack the flexibility for handling mixed data types that include both continuous and categorical
variables; (3) matrix completion based approaches cannot generalize to unseen samples and require
retraining when the model encounters new data samples [8, 9, 22, 34, 44, 47]. When it comes to
models for label prediction, existing approaches such as tree-based methods rely on heuristics [5]
and tend to have scalability issues. For instance, one of the most popular procedures called surrogate
splitting does not scale well, because each time an original splitting variable is missing for some
observation it needs to rank all other variables as surrogate candidates and select the best alternative.
Recent advances in deep learning have enabled new approaches to handle missing data. Existing
imputation approaches often use deep generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

