Trajectory-wise Multiple Choice Learning for
Dynamics Generalization in Reinforcement Learning

arXiv:2010.13303v1 [cs.LG] 26 Oct 2020

Younggyo Seo∗,†

Kimin Lee∗,‡ Ignasi Clavera‡ Thanard Kurutach‡
Jinwoo Shin† Pieter Abbeel‡
†
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
‡
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Model-based reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great potential in various
control tasks in terms of both sample-efficiency and final performance. However,
learning a generalizable dynamics model robust to changes in dynamics remains a
challenge since the target transition dynamics follow a multi-modal distribution. In
this paper, we present a new model-based RL algorithm, coined trajectory-wise
multiple choice learning, that learns a multi-headed dynamics model for dynamics
generalization. The main idea is updating the most accurate prediction head to specialize each head in certain environments with similar dynamics, i.e., clustering environments. Moreover, we incorporate context learning, which encodes dynamicsspecific information from past experiences into the context latent vector, enabling
the model to perform online adaptation to unseen environments. Finally, to utilize
the specialized prediction heads more effectively, we propose an adaptive planning
method, which selects the most accurate prediction head over a recent experience.
Our method exhibits superior zero-shot generalization performance across a variety
of control tasks, compared to state-of-the-art RL methods. Source code and videos
are available at https://sites.google.com/view/trajectory-mcl.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has exhibited wide success in solving sequential decision-making
problems [23, 39, 45]. Early successful deep RL approaches had been mostly model-free, which
do not require an explicit model of the environment, but instead directly learn a policy [25, 28, 38].
However, despite the strong asymptotic performance, the applications of model-free RL have largely
been limited to simulated domains due to its high sample complexity. For this reason, model-based
RL has been gaining considerable attention as a sample-efficient alternative, with an eye towards
robotics and other physics domains.
The increased sample-efficiency of model-based RL algorithms is obtained by exploiting the structure
of the problem: first the agent learns a predictive model of the environment, and then plans ahead with
the learned model [1, 37, 42]. Recently, substantial progress has been made on the sample-efficiency
of model-based RL algorithms [5, 7, 22, 23, 24]. However, it has been evidenced that model-based RL
algorithms are not robust to changes in the dynamics [20, 30], i.e., dynamics models fail to provide
accurate predictions as the transition dynamics of environments change. This makes model-based
RL algorithms unreliable to be deployed into real-world environments where partially unspecified
dynamics are common; for instance, a deployed robot might not know a priori various features of the
terrain it has to navigate.
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to {younggyo.seo@kaist.ac.kr, kiminlee@berkeley.edu}

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

