MetaSDF: Meta-learning Signed Distance Functions

Vincent Sitzmann∗
Stanford University
sitzmann@cs.stanford.edu

Eric R. Chan∗
Stanford University
erchan@stanford.edu

Noah Snavely
Google Research
snavely@google.com

Richard Tucker
Google Research
richardt@google.com

Gordon Wetzstein
Stanford University
gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu

vsitzmann.github.io/metasdf/

Abstract
Neural implicit shape representations are an emerging paradigm that offers many
potential benefits over conventional discrete representations, including memory
efficiency at a high spatial resolution. Generalizing across shapes with such neural
implicit representations amounts to learning priors over the respective function
space and enables geometry reconstruction from partial or noisy observations.
Existing generalization methods rely on conditioning a neural network on a lowdimensional latent code that is either regressed by an encoder or jointly optimized in
the auto-decoder framework. Here, we formalize learning of a shape space as a metalearning problem and leverage gradient-based meta-learning algorithms to solve
this task. We demonstrate that this approach performs on par with auto-decoder
based approaches while being an order of magnitude faster at test-time inference.
We further demonstrate that the proposed gradient-based method outperforms
encoder-decoder based methods that leverage pooling-based set encoders.

1

Introduction

Humans possess an impressive intuition for 3D shapes; given partial observations of an object we can
easily imagine the shape of the complete object. Computer vision and machine learning researchers
have long sought to reproduce this ability with algorithms. An emerging class of neural implicit
shape representations, for example using signed distance functions parameterized by neural networks,
promises to achieve these abilities by learning priors over neural implicit shape spaces [1, 2]. In such
methods, each shape is represented by a function Φ, e.g., a signed distance function. Generalizing
across a set of shapes thus amounts to learning a prior over the space of these functions Φ. Two
questions arise: (1) How do we parameterize functions Φ, and (2) how do we infer the parameters of
such a Φ given a set of (partial) observations?
Existing methods assume that the space of functions Φ is low-dimensional and represent each shape
as a latent code, which parameterizes the full function Φ via concatenation-based conditioning or
hypernetworks. These latent codes are either directly inferred by a 2D or 3D convolutional encoder,
taking either a single image or a classic volumetric representation as input, or via the auto-decoder
framework, where separate latent codes per training sample are treated as free variables at training
time. Convolutional encoders, while fast, require observations on a regular grid, and are not equivariant
to 3D transformations [3]. They further do not offer a straightforward way to accumulate information
from a variable number of observations, usually resorting to permutation-invariant pooling of perobservation latent codes [4]. Recently proposed pooling-based set encoders may encode sets of
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

