Temporal Variability in Implicit Online Learning

Nicolò Campolongo∗
Università di Milano
nicolo.campolongo@unimi.it

Francesco Orabona
Boston University
francesco@orabona.com

Abstract
In the setting of online learning, Implicit algorithms turn out to be highly successful from a practical standpoint. However, the tightest regret analyses only
show marginal improvements over Online Mirror Descent. In this work, we shed
light on this behavior carrying out a careful regret analysis. We prove a novel
static regret bound that depends on the temporal variability of the sequence of
loss functions, a quantity which is often encountered when considering dynamic
competitors. We show, for example, that the regret can be constant if the temporal variability is constant and the learning rate is tuned appropriately, without the
need of smooth losses. Moreover, we present an adaptive algorithm that achieves
this regret bound without prior knowledge of the temporal variability and prove a
matching lower bound. Finally, we validate our theoretical findings on classification and regression datasets.

1

Introduction

The online learning paradigm is a powerful tool to model common scenarios in the real world
when the data comes in a streaming fashion, for example in the case of time series. In the last
two decades there has been a tremendous amount of progress in this field (see, e.g., [30, 13, 24],
for an introduction), which also led to advances in seemingly unrelated areas of machine learning
and computer science. In this setting, a learning agent faces the environment in a game played
sequentially. The protocol is the following: given a time horizon T , in every round t = 1, . . . , T the
agent chooses a model xt from a convex set V . Then, a convex loss function `t is revealed by the
environment and the agent pays a loss `t (xt ). As usual in this setting, we do not make assumptions
about the environment, but allow it to be adversarial. The agent’s goal is to minimize her regret
against any decision maker, i.e., the cumulative sum of her losses compared to the losses of an agent
which always commits to the same choice u. So, formally the regret against any u ∈ V is defined
as
T
T
X
X
RT (u) ,
`t (xt ) −
`t (u) .
t=1

t=1

Much of the progress in this field is driven by the strictly related model of Online Linear Optimization (OLO): exploiting the assumption that the loss functions are convex, we can linearize them
using a first-order approximation through its (sub)gradient and subsequently minimize the linearized
regret. For example, the well-known Online Gradient Descent (OGD) [38] simply uses the direction
of the negative (sub)gradient of the loss function to update its model, multiplied
by a given learning
√
rate. Usually, a properly tuned learning rate gives a regret bound of O( T ), which is also optimal.
On the other hand, we can choose to not use any approximation to the loss function and instead update our model using directly the loss function rather than its subgradient [17]. This type of update is
known as Implicit and algorithms designed in this way are known to have practical advantages [18].
Unfortunately, their theoretical understanding is still limited at this point.
∗

Work done while visiting the OPTIMAL Lab at Boston University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

