Language and Visual Entity Relationship Graph
for Agent Navigation

Yicong Hong1

Cristian Rodriguez-Opazo1
1

Yuankai Qi2

Qi Wu2

Stephen Gould1

Australian National University 2 The University of Adelaide
1,2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision

{yicong.hong, cristian.rodriguez, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au
qykshr@gmail.com, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires an agent to navigate in a realworld environment following natural language instructions. From both the textual
and visual perspectives, we find that the relationships among the scene, its objects,
and directional clues are essential for the agent to interpret complex instructions
and correctly perceive the environment. To capture and utilize the relationships, we
propose a novel Language and Visual Entity Relationship Graph for modelling the
inter-modal relationships between text and vision, and the intra-modal relationships
among visual entities. We propose a message passing algorithm for propagating
information between language elements and visual entities in the graph, which we
then combine to determine the next action to take. Experiments show that by taking
advantage of the relationships we are able to improve over state-of-the-art. On the
Room-to-Room (R2R) benchmark, our method achieves the new best performance
on the test unseen split with success rate weighted by path length (SPL) of 52%.
On the Room-for-Room (R4R) dataset, our method significantly improves the
previous best from 13% to 34% on the success weighted by normalized dynamic
time warping (SDTW).
Code is available at: https://github.com/YicongHong/Entity-Graph-VLN.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-language navigation in the real-world is an important step towards building mobile
agents that perceive their environments and complete specific tasks following human instructions.
A great variety of scenarios have been set up for relevant research, such as long range indoor and
street view navigation with comprehensive instructions [3, 5, 17], communication based visual
navigation [7, 25, 34], and navigation for object localization and visual question answering [6, 29].
The recently proposed R2R navigation task by Anderson et al. [3] has drawn significant research
interest. Here an agent needs to navigate in an unseen photo-realistic environment following a
natural language instruction, such as “Walk toward the white patio table and chairs and go into the
house through the glass sliding doors. Pass the grey couches and go into the kitchen. Wait by the
toaster.”. This task is particularly challenging as the agent needs to learn the step-wise correspondence
between complex visual clues and the natural language instruction without any explicit intermediate
supervision (e.g., matching between sub-instructions and path-segments [12, 41]).
Most previous agents proposed for the R2R navigation task are based on a sequence-to-sequence
network [3] with grounding between vision and language [9, 21, 22, 32, 36]. Instead of explicitly
modelling the relationship between visual features and the orientation of the agent, these methods
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

