Fourier Spectrum Discrepancies in Deep Network
Generated Images

Tarik Dzanic
Department of Ocean Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
tdzanic@tamu.edu

Karan Shah
Department of Computational Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
shah@gatech.edu

Freddie D. Witherden
Department of Ocean Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
fdw@tamu.edu

Abstract
Advancements in deep generative models such as generative adversarial networks
and variational autoencoders have resulted in the ability to generate realistic images
that are visually indistinguishable from real images, which raises concerns about
their potential malicious usage. In this paper, we present an analysis of the highfrequency Fourier modes of real and deep network generated images and show that
deep network generated images share an observable, systematic shortcoming in
replicating the attributes of these high-frequency modes. Using this, we propose a
detection method based on the frequency spectrum of the images which is able to
achieve an accuracy of up to 99.2% in classifying real and deep network generated
images from various GAN and VAE architectures on a dataset of 5000 images
with as few as 8 training examples. Furthermore, we show the impact of image
transformations such as compression, cropping, and resolution reduction on the
classification accuracy and suggest a method for modifying the high-frequency
attributes of deep network generated images to mimic real images.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Left to right: real, StyleGAN [1], StyleGAN2 [2], PGGAN [3], VQ-VAE2 [4], and ALAE
[5] generated images.
In recent years, advances in deep generative models for image synthesis have caused widespread
concern regarding their potential malicious uses. Current state-of-the-art models can generate hyperrealistic images that are visually indistinguishable from real images, as shown in Fig. 1. These
models can be used for unethical purposes, such as misinformation campaigns, fabricating evidence,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

