Generative causal explanations
of black-box classifiers
Matthew O’Shaughnessy, Gregory Canal, Marissa Connor,
Mark Davenport, and Christopher Rozell
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
We develop a method for generating causal post-hoc explanations of black-box
classifiers based on a learned low-dimensional representation of the data. The
explanation is causal in the sense that changing learned latent factors produces
a change in the classifier output statistics. To construct these explanations, we
design a learning framework that leverages a generative model and informationtheoretic measures of causal influence. Our objective function encourages both the
generative model to faithfully represent the data distribution and the latent factors
to have a large causal influence on the classifier output. Our method learns both
global and local explanations, is compatible with any classifier that admits class
probabilities and a gradient, and does not require labeled attributes or knowledge
of causal structure. Using carefully controlled test cases, we provide intuition that
illuminates the function of our objective. We then demonstrate the practical utility
of our method on image recognition tasks.1

1

Introduction

There is a growing consensus among researchers, ethicists, and the public that machine learning
models deployed in sensitive applications should be able to explain their decisions [1, 2]. A powerful
way to make “explain” mathematically precise is to use the language of causality: explanations
should identify causal relationships between certain data aspects — features which may or may
not be semantically meaningful — and the classifier output [3–5]. In this conception, an aspect of
the data helps explain the classifier if changing that aspect (while holding other data aspects fixed)
produces a corresponding change in the classifier output.
Constructing causal explanations requires reasoning about how changing different aspects of the
input data affects the classifier output, but these observed changes are only meaningful if the modified
combination of aspects occurs naturally in the dataset. A challenge in constructing causal explanations
is therefore the ability to change certain aspects of data samples without leaving the data distribution.
In this paper we propose a novel learning-based framework that overcomes this challenge. Our
framework has two fundamental components that we argue are necessary to operationalize a causal
explanation: a method to represent and move within the data distribution, and a rigorous metric for
causal influence of different data aspects on the classifier output.
To do this, we construct a generative model consisting of a disentangled representation of the data
and a generative mapping from this representation to the data space (Figure 1(a)). We seek to learn
this disentangled representation in such a way that each factor controls a different aspect of the data,
and a subset of the factors have a large causal influence on the classifier output. To formalize this
notion of causal influence, we define a structural causal model (SCM) [6] that relates independent
1

Code is available at https://github.com/siplab-gt/generative-causal-explanations.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

