A convex optimization formulation for multivariate
regression

Yunzhang Zhu
Department of Statistics
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
zhu.219@osu.edu

Abstract
Multivariate regression (or multi-task learning) concerns the task of predicting
the value of multiple responses from a set of covariates. In this article, we propose a convex optimization formulation for high-dimensional multivariate linear
regression under a general error covariance structure. The main difficulty with
simultaneous estimation of the regression coefficients and the error covariance
matrix lies in the fact that the negative log-likelihood function is not convex. To
overcome this difficulty, a new parameterization is proposed, under which the
negative log-likelihood function is proved to be convex. For faster computation,
two other alternative loss functions are also considered, and proved to be convex
under the proposed parameterization. This new parameterization is also useful for
covariate-adjusted Gaussian graphical modeling in which the inverse of the error
covariance matrix is of interest. A joint non-asymptotic analysis of the regression
coefficients and the error covariance matrix is carried out under the new parameterization. In particular, we show that the proposed method recovers the oracle
estimator under sharp scaling conditions, and rates of convergence in terms of vector `∞ norm are also established. Empirically, the proposed methods outperform
existing high-dimensional multivariate linear regression methods that are based on
either minimizing certain non-convex criteria or certain two-step procedures.

1

Introduction

Multivariate linear regression concerns the task of predicting the value of one or multiple responses
from a set of predictors. It is commonly used in applications where more than one responses are
recorded for each sample [Reinsel and Velu, 1998]. For example, in longitudinal data analysis, the
response variable is often measured on multiple different time points for the same subject in the
experiment, thus resulting in multiple responses for each subject. In many prediction problems, one
may be interested in predicting multiple quantities of interests. This also results in a regression
problem with multiple responses.
High dimensional multivariate regression has received significant attention recently in the literature.
Some earlier works mainly focus on estimating the regression coefficients while ignoring the error
covariance structure. Certain regularizations are often used to either get a regularized fit or/and
to reduce the model dimension. For example, some classical works [Anderson, 1951, Izenman,
1975, Reinsel and Velu, 1998] impose a low-rank constraint on the regression coefficients, whereas
more recent works Turlach et al. [2005], Yuan et al. [2007], Peng et al. [2010] adopt other forms
of continuous regularization to achieve low-rank or/and group-sparsity structure for the regression
coefficient estimates. Theoretical justifications for the use of group sparsity penalties are provided in
Obozinski et al. [2011].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

