COOT: Cooperative Hierarchical Transformer for
Video-Text Representation Learning

Simon Ging1* , Mohammadreza Zolfaghari1* , Hamed Pirsiavash2 , Thomas Brox1
1
University of Freiburg, 2 University of Maryland Baltimore County
1
{gings, zolfagha, brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de, 2 hpirsiav@umbc.edu

Abstract
Many real-world video-text tasks involve different levels of granularity, such as
frames and words, clip and sentences or videos and paragraphs, each with distinct
semantics. In this paper, we propose a Cooperative hierarchical Transformer
(COOT) to leverage this hierarchy information and model the interactions between
different levels of granularity and different modalities. The method consists of three
major components: an attention-aware feature aggregation layer, which leverages
the local temporal context (intra-level, e.g., within a clip), a contextual transformer
to learn the interactions between low-level and high-level semantics (inter-level,
e.g. clip-video, sentence-paragraph), and a cross-modal cycle-consistency loss to
connect video and text. The resulting method compares favorably to the state of
the art on several benchmarks while having few parameters. All code is available
open-source at https://github.com/gingsi/coot-videotext

1

Introduction

Representation learning based on both vision and language has many potential benefits: visual
grounding[1, 2, 3, 4]; visual learning with a more natural, almost self-supervised annotation process;
and direct applicability to cross-modal tasks, such as video retrieval by text[5, 6, 7, 8, 9], video
summarization [10], and automated indexing. This research direction has recently boomed [11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 8, 16, 17] also due to the success of self-attention in text analysis [18, 19] with
its almost immediate applicability in the cross-modal context. Many different research foci are
currently developing in this area, where some are concerned with large-scale pretraining to leverage
the abundant data available [17, 8, 16, 11] to learn a joint embedding space, and others to bring in
more explicit structure [20, 21, 22] or new losses [17, 23] into the learning process.
In this paper, we focus on long-range temporal dependencies and propose a hierarchical model that
can exploit long-range temporal context both in videos and text when learning the joint cross-modal
embedding. For instance, the action of “making tea” involves boiling water, pouring it into a cup,
and then adding a tea bag. This action can take a long time and may have lots of details that
distinguish a particular style of making tea from other styles. To capture the whole temporal context,
we leverage the idea of a hierarchical model with losses that enforce the interaction within and
between different hierarchy levels. The idea of such a hierarchy is generic and has been explored
by several works [21, 24, 22] in the context of video-text learning. In addition, we use alignment
losses from Zhang et al. [21] and extend our baseline model with a new feature aggregation method
for the intra-level interactions between features and a new transformer-based module for inter-level
interactions (between local and global semantics). We consider three different levels of hierarchy:
frame/word, clip/sentence and video/paragraph, visualized by the three blocks in Figure 1.
* Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

