Model Inversion Networks
for Model-Based Optimization

Aviral Kumar, Sergey Levine
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
aviralk@berkeley.edu

Abstract
This work addresses data-driven optimization problems, where the goal is to find
an input that maximizes an unknown score or reward function given access to a
dataset of inputs with corresponding scores. When the inputs are high-dimensional
and valid inputs consistute a small subset of this space (e.g., valid protein sequences or valid natural images), such model-based optimization problems become
exceptionally difficult, since the optimizer must avoid out-of-distribution and invalid inputs. We propose to address such problem with model inversion networks
(MINs), which learn an inverse mapping from scores to inputs. MINs can scale
to high-dimensional input spaces and leverage offline logged data for both contextual and non-contextual optimization problems. MINs can also handle both
purely offline data sources and active data collection. We evaluate MINs on highdimensional model-based optimization problems over images, protein designs, and
neural network controller parameters, and bandit optimization from logged data.

1

Introduction

Data-driven optimization problems arise in a range of domains: from protein design [4] to automated
aircraft design [13], from the design of robots [18] to the design of neural network architectures [43].
Such problems require optimizing unknown score functions using datasets of input-score pairs,
without direct access to the score function being optimized. This can be especially challenging when
valid inputs lie on a low-dimensional manifold in the space of all inputs, such as the space of valid
aircraft designs or valid images. Existing methods to solve such problems often use derivative-free
optimization [34]. Most of these techniques require active data collection, where the unknown
function is queried at new inputs. However, when function evaluation involves a complex real-world
process, such as testing a new aircraft design or evaluating a new protein, such active methods can be
very expensive. On the other hand, in many cases there is considerable prior data – existing aircraft
and protein designs, and advertisements and user click rates – that could be leveraged to solve the
optimization problem.
In this work, our goal is to develop a method to solve such optimization problems that can (1) readily
operate on high-dimensional inputs comprising a narrow, low-dimensional manifold in the input
space, (2) readily utilize offline static data, and (3) learn with minimal active data collection if needed.
We can define this problem setting formally as the optimization problem
x? = arg max f (x),
x

(1)

where the score/reward function f (x) is unknown, and we have access to a dataset D =
{(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN )}, where yi denotes the value f (xi ). In some cases, which we refer to
as active model-based optimization, we can collect additional data with active queries. However, in
many practical settings, no further data collection is possible. We call this data-driven model-based
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

