High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization
via Nested Riemannian Manifolds
Noémie Jaquier1,2
Idiap Research Institute
1920 Martigny, Switzerland
noemie.jaquier@kit.edu
1

2

Leonel Rozo2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
71272 Renningen, Germany
leonel.rozo@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Despite the recent success of Bayesian optimization (BO) in a variety of applications where sample efficiency is imperative, its performance may be seriously
compromised in settings characterized by high-dimensional parameter spaces. A
solution to preserve the sample efficiency of BO in such problems is to introduce domain knowledge into its formulation. In this paper, we propose to exploit
the geometry of non-Euclidean search spaces, which often arise in a variety of
domains, to learn structure-preserving mappings and optimize the acquisition function of BO in low-dimensional latent spaces. Our approach, built on Riemannian
manifolds theory, features geometry-aware Gaussian processes that jointly learn
a nested-manifold embedding and a representation of the objective function in
the latent space. We test our approach in several benchmark artificial landscapes
and report that it not only outperforms other high-dimensional BO approaches in
several settings, but consistently optimizes the objective functions, as opposed to
geometry-unaware BO methods.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is considered as a powerful machine-learning based optimization method
to globally maximize or minimize expensive black-box functions [50]. Thanks to its ability to model
complex noisy cost functions in a data-efficient manner, BO has been successfully applied in a variety
of applications ranging from hyperparameters tuning for machine learning algorithms [51] to the
optimization of parametric policies in challenging robotic scenarios [11, 16, 41, 49]. However, BO
performance degrades as the search space dimensionality increases, which recently opened the door
to different approaches dealing with the curse of dimensionality.
A common assumption in high-dimensional BO approaches is that the objective function depends
on a limited set of features, i.e. that it evolves along an underlying low-dimensional latent space.
Following this hypothesis, various solutions based either on random embeddings [57, 43, 9] or on
latent space learning [13, 23, 42, 59] have been proposed. Although these methods perform well
on a variety of problems, they usually assume simple bound-constrained domains and may not be
straightforwardly extended to complicatedly-constrained parameter spaces. Interestingly, several
works proposed to further exploit the observed values of the objective function to determine or shape
the latent space in a supervised manner [59, 42, 4]. However, the integration of a priori domain
knowledge related to the parameter space is not considered in the learning process. Moreover, the
aforementioned approaches may not comply easily to recover query points in a complex parameter
space from those computed on the learned latent space.
Other relevant works in high-dimensional BO substitute or combine the low-dimensional assumption
with an additive property, assuming that the objective function is decomposed as a sum of functions of
low-dimensional sets of dimensions [33, 37, 21, 44, 24]. Therefore, each low-dimensional partition
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

