Instance-wise Feature Grouping
∗

Aria Masoomi1 , ∗ Chieh Wu1 , Tingting Zhao1 , Zifeng Wang1 , Peter Castaldi2 , and Jennifer Dy1

masoomi.a@northeastern.edu, wu.chie@northeastern.edu, t.zhao@northeastern.edu
zifengwang@ece.neu.edu, repjc@channing.harvard.edu, jdy@ece.neu.edu
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, US
2
Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, US

Abstract
In many learning problems, the domain scientist is often interested in discovering the groups of features that are redundant and are important for classification.
Moreover, the features that belong to each group, and the important feature groups
may vary per sample. But what do we mean by feature redundancy? In this paper,
we formally define two types of redundancies using information theory: Representation and Relevant redundancies. We leverage these redundancies to design
a formulation for instance-wise feature group discovery and reveal a theoretical
guideline to help discover the appropriate number of groups. We approximate
mutual information via a variational lower bound and learn the feature group and
selector indicators with Gumbel-Softmax in optimizing our formulation. Experiments on synthetic data validate our theoretical claims. Experiments on MNIST,
Fashion MNIST, and gene expression datasets show that our method discovers
feature groups with high classification accuracies.

1

Introduction

Data samples are typically represented by features that domain experts assume to be important for a
learning problem; however, not all features are important. The goal of feature selection is to select
which features are needed to improve learning performance. Moreover, knowing which features are
important helps in understanding learning algorithms.
Traditionally, Feature Selection algorithms find a global set of features for the entire data [1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. While knowing the most important global features are useful, feature importance may
vary across the entire population. For example in images, while one set of pixels may help us identify
a shoe, a vastly different set of pixels would be required to identify a shirt. From this observation,
there is an additional need for Feature Selection to be on a case-by-case basis, an approach also
known as Instance-wise Feature Selection. A novel concept that has only been recently investigated
in the context of explaining black-box models [11, 12, 13, 14]. Learning saliency maps [15] in
some ways also provide some form of instance-wise feature importance by highlighting (weighting)
important pixels in an image.
While Instance-wise Feature Selection focuses on each feature’s relationship to its labels, it ignores
the interaction among features. Multiple features may be equally important and yet redundant in
relation to each other. Traditional feature selection algorithms (such as LASSO [16]) tend to select
just one of these redundant features. However, in some domains such as gene expression applications,
we are interested not only in which genes (features) are important but also in which genes interact
together for disease prediction. Therefore, in addition to Instance-wise Feature Selection, we wish
to also group the features based on their relationship with each other and to the label. There exist
∗

Signifies equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

