Fast and Flexible Temporal Point Processes
with Triangular Maps

Oleksandr Shchur, Nicholas Gao, Marin Biloš, Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{shchur,gaoni,bilos,guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
Temporal point process (TPP) models combined with recurrent neural networks
provide a powerful framework for modeling continuous-time event data. While
such models are flexible, they are inherently sequential and therefore cannot benefit
from the parallelism of modern hardware. By exploiting the recent developments
in the field of normalizing flows, we design TriTPP— a new class of non-recurrent
TPP models, where both sampling and likelihood computation can be done in
parallel. TriTPP matches the flexibility of RNN-based methods but permits orders
of magnitude faster sampling. This enables us to use the new model for variational
inference in continuous-time discrete-state systems. We demonstrate the advantages
of the proposed framework on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Temporal data lies at the heart of many high-impact machine learning applications. Electronic health
records, financial transaction ledgers and server logs contain valuable information. A common
challenge encountered in all these settings is that both the number of events and their times are
variable. The framework of temporal point processes (TPP) allows us to naturally handle data that
consists of variable-number events in continuous time. Du et al. [1] have shown that the flexibility of
TPPs can be improved by combining them with recurrent neural networks (RNN). While such models
are expressive and can achieve good results in various prediction tasks, they are poorly suited for
sampling: sequential dependencies preclude parallelization. We show that it’s possible to overcome
the above limitation and design flexible TPP models without relying on RNNs. For this, we use the
framework of triangular maps [2] and recent developments in the field of normalizing flows [3].
Our main contributions are: (1) We propose a new parametrization for several classic TPPs. This
enables efficient parallel likelihood computation and sampling, which was impossible with existing
parametrizations. (2) We propose TriTPP— a new class of non-recurrent TPPs. TriTPP matches
the flexibility of RNN-based methods, while allowing orders of magnitude faster sampling. (3) We
derive a differentiable relaxation for non-differentiable sampling-based TPP losses. This allows us to
design a new variational inference scheme for Markov jump processes.

2

Background

Temporal point processes (TPP) [4] are stochastic processes that model the distribution of discrete
events on some continuous time interval [0, T ]. A realization of a TPP is a variable-length sequence of
strictly increasing arrival times t = (t1 , . . . , tN ), ti ∈ [0, T ]. We make the standard assumption and
focus our discussion on regular finite TPPs [4]. One way to specify such a TPP is by using the (strictly
positive) conditional intensity function λ∗ (t) := λ(t|Ht ) that defines the rate of arrival of new events
Code and datasets are available under www.daml.in.tum.de/triangular-tpp
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

