The Power of Predictions in Online Control
Chenkai Yu
IIIS, Tsinghua University
yck17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Soon-Jo Chung
CMS, GALCIT, JPL, Caltech
sjchung@caltech.edu

Yisong Yue
CMS, Caltech
yyue@caltech.edu

Guanya Shi
CMS, Caltech
gshi@caltech.edu
Adam Wierman
CMS, Caltech
adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the impact of predictions in online Linear Quadratic Regulator control
with both stochastic and adversarial disturbances in the dynamics. In both settings,
we characterize the optimal policy and derive tight bounds on the minimum cost
and dynamic regret. Perhaps surprisingly, our analysis shows that the conventional
greedy MPC approach is a near-optimal policy in both stochastic and adversarial
settings. Specifically, for length-T problems, MPC requires only O(log T ) predictions to reach O(1) dynamic regret, which matches (up to lower-order terms) our
lower bound on the required prediction horizon for constant regret.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the effect of using predictions for online control in a linear dynamical system
governed by xt+1 = Axt + But + wt , where xt , ut , and wt are the state, control, and disturbance
(or exogenous input) respectively. At each time step t, the controller incurs a quadratic cost c(xt , ut ).
Recently, considerable effort has been made to leverage and integrate ideas from learning, optimization
and control theory to study the design of optimal controllers under various performance criteria,
such as static regret [2, 3, 12, 13, 15, 20, 29], dynamic regret [16, 23] and competitive ratio [17, 28].
However, the study of online convergence when incorporating predictions has been largely absent.
Indeed, a key aspect of online control is considering the amount of available information when
making decisions. Most recent studies focus on the basic setting where only past information,
x0 , w0 , · · · , wt−1 , is available for ut at every time step [2, 13, 15, 28]. However, this basic setting does not effectively characterize situations where we have accurate predictions, e.g., when
x0 , w0 , · · · , wt−1+k are available at step t. These types of accurate predictions are often available in
many applications, including robotics [8, 27], energy systems [30], and data center management [22].
Moreover, there are many practical algorithms that leverage predictions, such as the popular Model
Predictive Control (MPC) [6–9, 18, 19].
While there has been increased interest in studying online guarantees for control with predictions, to
our knowledge, there has been no such study for the case of a finite-time horizon with disturbances.
Several previous works studied the economic MPC problem by analyzing the asymptotic performance
without disturbances [6, 7, 18, 19]. Rosolia and Borrelli [25, 26] studied learning for MPC but
focused on the episodic setting with asymptotic convergence guarantees. Li et al. [23] considered a
linear system where finite predictions of costs are available, and analyzed the dynamic regret of their
new algorithm; however, they neither consider disturbances nor study the more practically relevant
MPC approach. Goel and Hassibi [16] characterized the offline optimal policy (i.e., with infinite
predictions) and cost in LQR control with i.i.d. zero-mean stochastic disturbances, but those results
do not apply to limited predictions or non-i.i.d. disturbances. Other prior works analyze the power of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

