Private Identity Testing for High-Dimensional
Distributions
Clément Canonne
IBM Research, Almaden
ccanonne@cs.columbia.edu

Gautam Kamath
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
g@csail.mit.edu

Audra McMillan
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University
Department of Computer Science, Boston University
audramarymcmillan@gmail.com
Jonathan Ullman
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
jullman@ccs.neu.edu

Lydia Zakynthinou
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
zakynthinou.l@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We present novel differentially private identity (goodness-of-fit) testers for natural
and widely studied classes of multivariate product distributions: product distributions over {±1}d and Gaussians in Rd with known covariance. Our testers have
improved sample complexity compared to those derived from previous techniques,
and are the first testers whose sample matches the order-optimal minimax sample
complexity of O(d1/2 /α2 ) in many parameter regimes. We construct two types
of testers, exhibiting tradeoffs between sample complexity and computational
complexity. Finally, we provide a two-way reduction between testing a subclass
of multivariate product distributions and testing univariate distributions, thereby
obtaining upper and lower bounds for testing this subclass of product distributions.

1

Introduction

A foundation of statistical inference is hypothesis testing: given two disjoint sets of probability
distributions H0 and H1 , we want to design an algorithm T that takes a random sample X from
some distribution P ∈ H0 ∪ H1 and, with high probability, determines whether P is in H0 or
H1 . Hypothesis tests formalize yes-or-no questions about an underlying population given a random
sample from that population, and are ubiquitous in the physical, life, and social sciences, where
hypothesis tests with high confidence are the gold standard for publication in top journals.
In many of these applications—clinical trials, social network analysis, or demographic studies,
to name a few—this sample contains sensitive data belonging to individuals, in which case it is
crucial for the hypothesis test to respect these individuals’ privacy. It is particularly desirable to
guarantee differential privacy [33], which has become the de facto standard for the analysis of private
data. Differential privacy is used as a measure of privacy for data analysis systems at Google [35],
Apple [31], and the U.S. Census Bureau [26]. Differential privacy and related notions of algorithmic
stability are also crucial for statistical validity even when confidentiality is not a direct concern, as
they provide generalization guarantees in an adaptive setting [32, 8, 58].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

