Causal analysis of Covid-19 spread in
Germany

Atalanti A. Mastakouri
Department of Empirical Inference
Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
atalanti.mastakouri@tuebingen.mpg.de

Bernhard Schölkopf
Department of Empirical Inference
Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
In this work, we study the causal relations among German regions in terms
of the spread of Covid-19 since the beginning of the pandemic, taking
into account the restriction policies that were applied by the different
federal states. We loose a strictly formulated assumption for a causal feature
selection method for time series data, robust to latent confounders, which we
subsequently apply on Covid-19 case numbers. We present findings about the
spread of the virus in Germany and the causal impact of restriction measures,
discussing the role of various policies in containing the spread. Since our
results are based on rather limited target time series (only the numbers of
reported cases), care should be exercised in interpreting them. However, it is
encouraging that already such limited data seems to contain causal signals.
This suggests that as more data becomes available, our causal approach
may contribute towards meaningful causal analysis of political interventions
on the development of Covid-19, and thus also towards the development of
rational and data-driven methodologies for choosing interventions.

1

Introduction

The ongoing outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic has rendered the tracking of the virus spread
a problem of major importance, in order to better understand the role of the demographics
and of non pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) made to contain the virus. Until 15/5/2020,
175,699 cases and 8,001 deaths were recorded in Germany, a country with a population of
83 million people, 16 federal states with independent local governments, and 412 districts
(Landkreise). In this paper, we focus on a causal time series analysis of the Covid-19 spread
in Germany, aiming to understand the spatial spread and the causal role of the applied NPIs.
Causal inference from time series is a fundamental problem in data science, and many papers
provide solutions for parts of the problem subject to necessary assumptions [1–6]. The main
difficulty in this research problem is the possibility of hidden confounding in the data, as it
is almost impossible in real datasets to have observed all the necessary information. Another
problem is a characteristic of the time series themselves, which create dependencies due to
connections in the past, hindering the formulation of necessary d-separation statements for
graphical inference [7]. Finally, many known methods cannot handle instantaneous effects
that may exist among the time series.
We consider a problem with small sample size compared to the dimension of its covariates,
yet of significant current importance: the tracking of the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic,
based only on the reported cases. Not having access to all relevant covariates and to all
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

