SOLOv2: Dynamic and Fast Instance Segmentation

Xinlong Wang1
1

Rufeng Zhang2

The University of Adelaide, Australia

Tao Kong3
2

Lei Li3

Tongji University, China

Chunhua Shen1
3

ByteDance AI Lab

Abstract
In this work, we design a simple, direct, and fast framework for instance segmentation with strong performance. To this end, we propose a novel and effective
approach, termed SOLOv2, following the principle of the SOLO method [32].
First, our new framework is empowered by an efficient and holistic instance mask
representation scheme, which dynamically segments each instance in the image,
without resorting to bounding box detection. Specifically, the object mask generation is decoupled into a mask kernel prediction and mask feature learning, which
are responsible for generating convolution kernels and the feature maps to be
convolved with, respectively. Second, SOLOv2 significantly reduces inference
overhead with our novel matrix non-maximum suppression (NMS) technique. Our
Matrix NMS performs NMS with parallel matrix operations in one shot, and yields
better results. We demonstrate that the proposed SOLOv2 achieves the state-of-theart performance with high efficiency, making it suitable for both mobile and cloud
applications. A light-weight version of SOLOv2 executes at 31.3 FPS and yields
37.1% AP on COCO test-dev. Moreover, our state-of-the-art results in object
detection (from our mask byproduct) and panoptic segmentation show the potential
of SOLOv2 to serve as a new strong baseline for many instance-level recognition
tasks. Code is available at https://git.io/AdelaiDet

1

Introduction

Generic object detection aims at localizing individual objects and recognizing their categories. For
representing the object locations, bounding box stands out for its simplicity. Localizing objects
using bounding boxes have been extensively explored, including the problem formulation, network
architecture, post-processing and all those focusing on optimizing and processing the bounding
boxes. The tailored solutions largely boost the performance and efficiency, thus enabling wide
downstream applications recently. However, bounding boxes are coarse and unnatural. Human vision
can effortlessly localize objects by their irregular boundaries. Instance segmentation, i.e., localizing
objects using masks, pushes object localization to the limit at pixel level and opens up opportunities
to more instance-level perception and applications. To date, most existing methods deal with instance
segmentation in the view of bounding boxes, i.e., segmenting objects in (anchor) bounding boxes.
How to develop pure instance segmentation including the supporting facilities, e.g., post-processing,
is largely unexplored compared to bounding box detection and instance segmentation methods built
on top it.
We are motivated by the recently proposed SOLO framework (Segmenting Objects by LOcations) [32].
SOLO formulates the task of instance segmentation as two sub-tasks of pixel-level classification,
solvable using standard FCNs, thus dramatically simplifying the formulation of instance segmentation.
It takes an image as input, directly outputs instance masks and corresponding class probabilities, in a
fully convolutional, box-free and grouping-free paradigm. However, three main bottlenecks limit the
performance of SOLO: a) inefficient mask representation and learning; b) not high enough resolution
for finer mask predictions; c) slow mask NMS. In this work, we eliminate the above bottlenecks all at
once.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

