Neural Power Units
Niklas Heim, Tomáš Pevný, Václav Šmídl
Artificial Intelligence Center
Czech Technical University
Prague, CZ 120 00
{niklas.heim, tomas.pevny, vasek.smidl}@aic.fel.cvut.cz

Abstract
Conventional Neural Networks can approximate simple arithmetic operations, but
fail to generalize beyond the range of numbers that were seen during training.
Neural Arithmetic Units aim to overcome this difficulty, but current arithmetic
units are either limited to operate on positive numbers or can only represent a
subset of arithmetic operations. We introduce the Neural Power Unit (NPU).1 that
operates on the full domain of real numbers R and is capable of learning arbitrary
power functions in a single layer. The NPU thus fixes the shortcomings of existing
arithmetic units and extends their expressivity. We achieve this by using complex
arithmetic without requiring a conversion of the network to complex numbers C. A
simplification of the unit to the RealNPU yields a highly transparent model. We
show that the NPUs outperform their competitors in terms of accuracy and sparsity
on artificial arithmetic datasets, and that the RealNPU can discover the governing
equations of a dynamical system only from data.

1

Introduction

Numbers and simple algebra are essential not only to human intelligence but also to the survival
of many other species [Dehaene, 2011, Gallistel, 2018]. A successful, intelligent agent should,
therefore, be able to perform simple arithmetic. State of the art neural networks are capable of
learning arithmetic, but they fail to extrapolate beyond the ranges seen during training [Suzgun et al.,
2018, Lake and Baroni, 2018]. The inability to generalize to unseen inputs is a fundamental problem
that hints at a lack of understanding of the given task. The model merely memorizes the seen inputs
and fails to abstract the true learning task. The failure of numerical extrapolation on simple arithmetic
tasks has been shown by Trask et al. [2018], who also introduced a new class of Neural Arithmetic
Units with good extrapolation performance on some arithmetic tasks.
Including Neural Arithmetic Units in standard neural networks promises to significantly increase their
extrapolation capabilities due to their inductive bias towards numerical computation. This is especially
important for tasks in which the data generating process contains mathematical relationships. They
also promise to reduce the number of parameters needed for a given task, which can improve the
explainability of the model. We demonstrate this in a Neural Ordinary Differential Equation (NODE,
Chen et al. [2019]), where a handful of neural arithmetic units can outperform a much bigger network
built from dense layers (Sec. 4.1). Moreover, our new unit can be used to directly read out the
correct generating ODE from the fitted model. This is in line with recent efforts to build transparent
models instead of attempting to explain black-box models [Rudin, 2019], like conventional neural
networks. We refer to the terminology by Lipton [2017] which defines the potential of understanding
the parameters of a given model as transparency by decomposability.
1
Implementation of Neural Arithmetic Units: github.com/nmheim/NeuralArithmetic.jl The code to
reproduce our experiments is available at github.com/nmheim/NeuralPowerUnits.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

