A simple normative network approximates
local non-Hebbian learning in the cortex
Siavash Golkar 1

David Lipshutz 1

Anirvan M. Sengupta 1,2
1
2

Yanis Bahroun 1

Dmitri B. Chklovskii 1,3

Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University
3
Neuroscience Institute, NYU Medical Center

{sgolkar,dlipshutz,ybahroun,mitya}@flatironinstitute.org
anirvans.physics@gmail.com

Abstract
To guide behavior, the brain extracts relevant features from high-dimensional data
streamed by sensory organs. Neuroscience experiments demonstrate that the processing of sensory inputs by cortical neurons is modulated by instructive signals
which provide context and task-relevant information. Here, adopting a normative approach, we model these instructive signals as supervisory inputs guiding
the projection of the feedforward data. Mathematically, we start with a family
of Reduced-Rank Regression (RRR) objective functions which include Reduced
Rank (minimum) Mean Square Error (RRMSE) and Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), and derive novel offline and online optimization algorithms, which
we call Bio-RRR. The online algorithms can be implemented by neural networks
whose synaptic learning rules resemble calcium plateau potential dependent plasticity observed in the cortex. We detail how, in our model, the calcium plateau
potential can be interpreted as a backpropagating error signal. We demonstrate
that, despite relying exclusively on biologically plausible local learning rules,
our algorithms perform competitively with existing implementations of RRMSE
and CCA.

1

Introduction

In the brain, extraction of behaviorally-relevant features from high-dimensional data streamed by
sensory organs occurs in multiple stages. Early stages of sensory processing, e.g., the retina, lack
feedback and are naturally modeled by unsupervised learning algorithms [1]. In contrast, subsequent
processing by cortical circuits is modulated by instructive signals from other cortical areas [2], which
provide context and task-related information [3], thus calling for supervised learning models.
Unsupervised models of early sensory processing, despite employing many simplifying assumptions,
have successfully bridged the salient features of biological neural networks, such as the architecture,
synaptic learning rules and receptive field structure, with computational tasks such as dimensionality
reduction, decorrelation, and whitening [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. The success of such models was driven by
two major factors. First, following a normative framework, their synaptic learning rules, network
architecture and activity dynamics were derived by optimizing a principled objective, leading to
an analytic understanding of the circuit computation without the need for numerical simulation [9].
Second, these models went beyond purely theoretical explorations by appealing to and explaining
various experimental observations of early sensory organs available at the time [5, 8, 9].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

