Unsupervised Representation Learning by Invariance
Propagation

Feng Wang, Huaping Liu∗, Di Guo, Fuchun Sun
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
wang-f20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn
guodi.gd@gmail.com,fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised learning methods based on contrastive learning have drawn increasing attention and achieved promising results. Most of them aim to learn representations invariant to instance-level variations, which are provided by different
views of the same instance. In this paper, we propose Invariance Propagation to
focus on learning representations invariant to category-level variations, which are
provided by different instances from the same category. Our method recursively
discovers semantically consistent samples residing in the same high-density regions
in representation space. We demonstrate a hard sampling strategy to concentrate
on maximizing the agreement between the anchor sample and its hard positive
samples, which provide more intra-class variations to help capture more abstract
invariance. As a result, with a ResNet-50 as the backbone, our method achieves
71.3% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet linear classification and 78.2% top-5 accuracy
fine-tuning on only 1% labels, surpassing previous results. We also achieve stateof-the-art performance on other downstream tasks, including linear classification
on Places205 and Pascal VOC, and transfer learning on small scale datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks have gained great progress since the emergence of large-scale
annotated datasets [7, 44]. The learned networks perform well on classification tasks [23, 37, 18],
and can be transfered well to other tasks such as detection [13, 36] and segmentation [27, 17].
However, such progress requires large-scale human-annotated datasets, which are difficult to acquire.
Unsupervised learning is introduced to give us the promise to learn useful representations without
manual annotations. Specifically, many self-supervised methods are proposed to learn representations
by solving handcrafted auxiliary tasks, such as jigsaw puzzle [31], rotation [12], colorization [42],
etc. Although the self-supervised methods have gained remarkable performance, the design of
pretext tasks depends on the domain-specific knowledge, limiting the generality of both the learned
representations and the design of future methods. Recently, methods based on contrastive learning
[39, 33, 38, 16, 1] have drawn increasing attention and achieved promising results. Most of them aim
to learn representations invariant to different views of the same instance, such as data augmentations
[39, 33, 16, 1], color information [38] and context information [33], while ignoring the relations
between different instances which are the key to reflect the global semantic structure.
In this work, we present Invariance Propagation (InvP), a novel method which embodies the relations
between different instances to learn representations with category-level invariance. Specifically, InvP
discovers positive samples by recursively propagating the local invariance through the k-nearest
neighbors graph. We keep k small to preserve a high semantic consistency. By applying transitivity
∗

corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

