A causal view of compositional zero-shot recognition

Yuval Atzmon1 Felix Kreuk 1,2 Uri Shalit 3 Gal Chechik1,2
1
NVIDIA Research, Tel Aviv, Israel
2
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
3
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
yatzmon@nvidia.com, gchechik@nvidia.com,

Abstract
People easily recognize new visual categories that are new combinations of known
components. This compositional generalization capacity is critical for learning
in real-world domains like vision and language because the long tail of new combinations dominates the distribution. Unfortunately, learning systems struggle
with compositional generalization because they often build on features that are
correlated with class labels even if they are not “essential” for the class. This
leads to consistent misclassification of samples from a new distribution, like new
combinations of known components.
Here we describe an approach for compositional generalization that builds on causal
ideas. First, we describe compositional zero-shot learning from a causal perspective, and propose to view zero-shot inference as finding “which intervention caused
the image?”. Second, we present a causal-inspired embedding model that learns
disentangled representations of elementary components of visual objects from
correlated (confounded) training data. We evaluate this approach on two datasets
for predicting new combinations of attribute-object pairs: A well-controlled synthesized images dataset and a real-world dataset which consists of fine-grained types
of shoes. We show improvements compared to strong baselines. Code and data are
provided in https://github.com/nv-research-israel/causal_comp

1

Introduction

Compositional zero-shot recognition is the problem of learning to recognize new combinations
of known components. People seamlessly recognize and generate new compositions from known
elements and Compositional Reasoning is considered a hallmark of human intelligence [33, 34, 6, 4].
As a simple example, people can recognize a purple cauliflower even if they have never seen one,
based on their familiarity with cauliflowers and with other purple objects (Figure 1b). Unfortunately,
although feature compositionality is a key design consideration of deep networks, current deep
models struggle when required to generalize to new label compositions. This limitation has grave
implications for machine learning because the heavy tail of unfamiliar compositions dominates the
distribution of labels in perception, language, and decision-making problems.
Models trained from data tend to fail with compositional generalization for two fundamental reasons:
distribution-shift and entanglement. First, recognizing new combinations is an extreme case of
distribution-shift inference, where label combinations at test time were never observed during training
(zero-shot learning). As a result, models learn correlations during training that hurt inference at
test time. For instance, if all cauliflowers in the training set are white, the correlation between
the color and the class label is predictive and useful. A correlation-based model like (most) deep
networks will learn to associate cauliflowers with the color white during training, and may fail when
presented with a purple cauliflower at test time. For the current scope, we put aside the fundamental
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

