Texture Interpolation for Probing Visual Perception

Jonathan Vacher∗
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Dept. of Systems and Comp. Biology
10461 Bronx, NY, USA
jonathan.vacher@ens.fr

Aida Davila
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Dominick P. Purpura Dept. of Neuroscience
10461 Bronx, NY, USA
adavila@mail.einstein.yu.edu

Adam Kohn Ruben Coen-Cagli
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Dept. of Systems and Comp. Biology, and
Dominick P. Purpura Dept. of Neuroscience
10461 Bronx, NY, USA
adam.kohn@einsteinmed.org
ruben.coen-cagli@einsteinmed.org

Abstract
Texture synthesis models are important tools for understanding visual processing.
In particular, statistical approaches based on neurally relevant features have been
instrumental in understanding aspects of visual perception and of neural coding.
New deep learning-based approaches further improve the quality of synthetic
textures. Yet, it is still unclear why deep texture synthesis performs so well, and
applications of this new framework to probe visual perception are scarce. Here, we
show that distributions of deep convolutional neural network (CNN) activations
of a texture are well described by elliptical distributions and therefore, following
optimal transport theory, constraining their mean and covariance is sufficient to
generate new texture samples. Then, we propose the natural geodesics (i.e. the
shortest path between two points) arising with the optimal transport metric to
interpolate between arbitrary textures. Compared to other CNN-based approaches,
our interpolation method appears to match more closely the geometry of texture
perception, and our mathematical framework is better suited to study its statistical
nature. We apply our method by measuring the perceptual scale associated to the
interpolation parameter in human observers, and the neural sensitivity of different
areas of visual cortex in macaque monkeys.

1

Introduction

Texture synthesis Among existing texture synthesis algorithms [41], few have been inspired by
visual neuroscience and visual perception. One theory assumed that there exists a fundamental
perceptual feature that composes a texture, termed “texton”. Despite being falsified, this led to
the formulation of the theory of stationary Gaussian textures, which can be obtained by phase
randomization [15, 53]. A complementary view, inspired by the primary visual cortex (V1) [25],
is that textures perception only depends on the statistics of the wavelet coefficients of the texture
(wavelets can be viewed as a standardized collection of “textons” [26]). An implementation of this
hypothesis allows for the synthesis of textures by matching the marginal statistics (histograms) of the
wavelet coefficients of a white noise image to those of a texture example [22, 6]. Pursuing this idea,
Portilla and Simoncelli (PS) obtained high quality new texture samples by iteratively matching a set
of higher-order summary statistics of the wavelet coefficients [39, 54]. The PS approach has also been
successful in synthesizing sound textures [33]. These algorithms have been further improved with a
proper mathematical framework to ensure convergence [49, 50]. A more recent approach uses deep
learning to synthesize high-quality textures [16]. This approach is similar to PS [39], but instead of
∗
JV is now based at Laboratoire des Systèmes Perceptifs (LSP), Département d’études cognitives, École
Normale Supérieure, PSL University, 75005 Paris, France
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

