Cross-lingual Retrieval for Iterative Self-Supervised
Training

Chau Tran
Facebook AI
chau@fb.com

Yuqing Tang
Facebook AI
yuqtang@fb.com

Xian Li
Facebook AI
xianl@fb.com

Jiatao Gu
Facebook AI
jgu@fb.com

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated the cross-lingual alignment ability of multilingual
pretrained language models. In this work, we found that the cross-lingual alignment
can be further improved by training seq2seq models on sentence pairs mined using
their own encoder outputs. We utilized these findings to develop a new approach —
cross-lingual retrieval for iterative self-supervised training (CRISS), where mining
and training processes are applied iteratively, improving cross-lingual alignment
and translation ability at the same time. Using this method, we achieved stateof-the-art unsupervised machine translation results on 9 language directions with
an average improvement of 2.4 BLEU, and on the Tatoeba sentence retrieval
task in the XTREME benchmark on 16 languages with an average improvement
of 21.5% in absolute accuracy. Furthermore, CRISS also brings an additional
1.8 BLEU improvement on average compared to mBART, when finetuned on
supervised machine translation downstream tasks. Our code and pretrained models
are publicly available. 1

1

Introduction

Pretraining has demonstrated success in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks. In particular,
self-supervised pretraining can learn useful representations by training with pretext task, such as cloze
and masked language modeling, denoising autoencoder, etc. on large amounts of unlabelled data
[11, 25, 28, 32, 35, 51]. Such learned “universal representations" can be finetuned on task-specific
training data to achieve good performance on downstream tasks.
More recently, new pretraining techniques have been developed in the multilingual settings, pushing
the state-of-the-art on cross-lingual understandin, and machine translation. Since the access to labeled
parallel data is very limited, especially for low resource languages, better pretraining techniques that
utilizes unlabeled data is the key to unlock better machine translation performances [9, 27, 42].
In this work, we propose a novel self-supervised pretraining method for multilingual sequence generation: Cross-lingual Retrieval for Iterative Self-Supervised training (CRISS). CRISS is developed
based on the finding that the encoder outputs of multilingual denoising autoencoder can be used as
language agnostic representation to retrieve parallel sentence pairs, and training the model on these
retrieved sentence pairs can further improve its sentence retrieval and translation capabilities in an
iterative manner. Using only unlabeled data from many different languages, CRISS iteratively mines
1

https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq/blob/master/examples/criss

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

