Certified Defense to Image Transformations via
Randomized Smoothing

Marc Fischer, Maximilian Baader, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
{marc.fischer, mbaader, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We extend randomized smoothing to cover parameterized transformations (e.g.,
rotations, translations) and certify robustness in the parameter space (e.g., rotation
angle). This is particularly challenging as interpolation and rounding effects mean
that image transformations do not compose, in turn preventing direct certification of
the perturbed image (unlike certification with `p norms). We address this challenge
by introducing three different defenses, each with a different guarantee (heuristic, distributional and individual) stemming from the method used to bound the
interpolation error. Importantly, in the individual case, we show how to efficiently
compute the inverse of an image transformation, enabling us to provide individual
guarantees in the online setting. We provide an implementation of all methods at
https://github.com/eth-sri/transformation-smoothing.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples [1] – small changes that preserve
semantics (e.g., `p -noise or geometric transformations such as rotations) [2], but can affect the output
of a network in undesirable ways. As a result, there has been substantial recent interest in methods
which aim to ensure the network is certifiably robust to adversarial examples [3–13].
Certification guarantees There are two principal robustness guarantees a certified defense can
provide at inference time: (i) the (standard) distributional guarantee, where a robustness score is
computed offline on the test set to be interpreted in expectation for images drawn from the data
distribution, and (ii) an individual guarantee, where a certificate is computed online for the (possibly
perturbed) input. The choice of guarantee depends on the application and regulatory constraints.
Guarantees with `p norms When considering `p norms, existing certification methods can be
directly used to obtain either of the above two guarantees: for an image x and adversarial noise
δ, kδkp < r, proving that a classifier f is r-robust around x0 := x + δ is enough to guarantee
f (x) = f (x0 ). That is, it suffices to prove robustness of a perturbed input in order to certify that the
perturbation did not change the classification, as the r-ball around x0 includes x.
Key challenge: guarantees for geometric perturbations Perhaps not intuitively, however, for
more complex perturbations such as geometric transformations, proving robustness around an image
x0 via existing methods (e.g., [9–12]) does not imply that f (x) = f (x0 ) for the original image x. To
illustrate this issue, consider the rotation Rγ , by angle γ of an image x, followed by an interpolation
I. Certifying that the classification of the rotated image x0 := I ◦ Rγ (x) for kγk < r is robust under
further rotations I ◦ Rβ for kβk < r is not sufficient to imply that x and x0 classify the same, as
rotating x0 back by β = −γ does not return the original image x due to interpolation. A central
challenge then is to develop techniques that are able to handle more involved perturbations.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

