Expert-Supervised Reinforcement Learning for
Offline Policy Learning and Evaluation

Aaron Sonabend-W
Harvard University
asonabend@g.harvard.edu

Junwei Lu
Harvard University
junweilu@hsph.harvard.edu

Tianxi Cai
Harvard University
tcai@hsph.harvard.edu

Leo A. Celi
MIT
lceli@mit.edu

Peter Szolovits
MIT
psz@mit.edu

Abstract
Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a promising approach for learning optimal
policies in environments where direct exploration is expensive or unfeasible. However, the adoption of such policies in practice is often challenging, as they are hard
to interpret within the application context, and lack measures of uncertainty for the
learned policy value and its decisions. To overcome these issues, we propose an
Expert-Supervised RL (ESRL) framework which uses uncertainty quantification
for offline policy learning. In particular, we have three contributions: 1) the method
can learn safe and optimal policies through hypothesis testing, 2) ESRL allows for
different levels of risk averse implementations tailored to the application context,
and finally, 3) we propose a way to interpret ESRL’s policy at every state through
posterior distributions, and use this framework to compute off-policy value function
posteriors. We provide theoretical guarantees for our estimators and regret bounds
consistent with Posterior Sampling for RL (PSRL). Sample efficiency of ESRL
is independent of the chosen risk aversion threshold and quality of the behavior
policy.

1

Introduction

With increasing success in reinforcement learning (RL), there is broad interest in applying these
methods to real-world settings. This has brought exciting progress in offline RL and off-policy
policy evaluation (OPPE). These methods allow one to leverage observed data sets collected by
expert exploration of environments where, due to costs or ethical reasons, direct exploration is not
feasible. Sample-efficiency, reliability, and ease of interpretation are characteristics that offline RL
methods must have in order to be used for real-world applications with high risks, where a tendency
is exhibited towards sampling bias. In particular there is a need for policies that shed light into the
decision-making at all states and actions, and account for the uncertainty inherent in the environment
and in the data collection process. In healthcare data for example, there is a common bias that arises:
drugs are mostly prescribed only to sick patients; and so naive methods can lead agents to consider
them harmful. Actions need to be limited to policies which are similar to the expert behavior and
sample size should be taken into account for decision-making [1, 2].
To address these deficits we propose an Expert-Supervised RL (ESRL) approach for offline learning
based on Bayesian RL. This method yields safe and optimal policies as it learns when to adopt the
expert’s behavior and when to pursue alternative actions. Risk aversion might vary across applications
as errors may entail a greater cost to human life or health, leading to variation in tolerance for the
target policy to deviate from expert behavior. ESRL can accommodate different risk aversion levels.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

