Label-Aware Neural Tangent Kernel:
Toward Better Generalization and Local Elasticity
Shuxiao Chen

Hangfeng He

Weijie J. Su

University of Pennsylvania
{shuxiaoc@wharton, hangfeng@seas, suw@wharton}.upenn.edu

Abstract
As a popular approach to modeling the dynamics of training overparametrized
neural networks (NNs), the neural tangent kernels (NTK) are known to fall behind
real-world NNs in generalization ability. This performance gap is in part due to the
label agnostic nature of the NTK, which renders the resulting kernel not as locally
elastic as NNs (He & Su, 2020). In this paper, we introduce a novel approach from
the perspective of label-awareness to reduce this gap for the NTK. Specifically,
we propose two label-aware kernels that are each a superimposition of a labelagnostic part and a hierarchy of label-aware parts with increasing complexity of
label dependence, using the Hoeffding decomposition. Through both theoretical
and empirical evidence, we show that the models trained with the proposed kernels
better simulate NNs in terms of generalization ability and local elasticity.1

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed the huge success of deep neural networks (NNs) in various machine
learning tasks (LeCun et al., 2015). Contrary to its empirical success, however, the theoretical
understanding of real-world NNs is still far from complete, hindering its applicability to many
domains where interpretability is of great importance, such as autonomous driving and biological
research (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017).
More recently, a venerable line of work relates overparametrized NNs to kernel regression from
the perspective of their training dynamics, providing positive evidence towards understanding the
optimization and generalization of NNs (Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat & Bach, 2018; Cao & Gu, 2019;
Lee et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019a; Chizat et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Zou et al.,
2020). To briefly introduce this approach, let xi , yi be the feature andP
label, respectively, of the ith
n
data point, and consider the problem of minimizing the squared loss n1 i=1 (yi f (xi , w))2 using
gradient descent, where f (x, w) denotes the prediction of NNs and w are the weights. Starting from
an random initialization, researchers demonstrate that the evolution of NNs in terms of predictions
can be well captured by the following kernel gradient descent
d
f (x, wt ) =
dt

n

1X
K(x, xi ) f (xi , wt )
n i=1

yi

(1)

in the infinite width limit, where wt is the weights at time t. Above, K(·, ·), referred to as neural
tangent kernel (NTK), is time-independent and associated with the architecture of the NNs. As a
profound implication, an infinitely wide NNs is “equivalent” to kernel regression with a deterministic
kernel in the training process.
1

Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/HornHehhf/LANTK.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

