Estimating Training Data Influence
by Tracing Gradient Descent
Garima⇤
Google
pruthi@google.com

Frederick Liu⇤
Google
frederickliu@google.com

Satyen Kale
Google
satyenkale@google.com

Mukund Sundararajan †
Google
mukunds@google.com

Abstract
We introduce a method called TracIn that computes the influence of a training
example on a prediction made by the model. The idea is to trace how the loss on
the test point changes during the training process whenever the training example of
interest was utilized. We provide a scalable implementation of TracIn via: (a) a
first-order gradient approximation to the exact computation, (b) saved checkpoints
of standard training procedures, and (c) cherry-picking layers of a deep neural
network. In contrast with previously proposed methods, TracIn is simple to
implement; all it needs is the ability to work with gradients, checkpoints, and loss
functions. The method is general. It applies to any machine learning model trained
using stochastic gradient descent or a variant of it, agnostic of architecture, domain
and task. We expect the method to be widely useful within processes that study
and improve training data. Code is available at [1].

1

Motivation

Deep learning has been used to solve a variety of real-world problems. A common form of machine
learning is supervised learning, where the model is trained on labelled data. Controlling the training
data input to the model is one of the main quality knobs to improve the quality of the deep learning
model. For instance, such a technique could be used to identify and fix mislabelled data using the
workflow described in Section 4.1. Our main motivation is to identify practical techniques to improve
the analysis of the training data. Specifically, we study the problem of identifying the influence
of training examples on the prediction of a test example. We propose a method called TracIn for
computing this influence, provide a scalable implementation, and evaluate the method experimentally.

2

Related Work

[2, 3] tackle influential training examples in the context of deep learning. We discuss these methods
in detail in Section 4.4.
There are related notions of influence used to explain deep learning models that differ in either the
target of the explanation or the choice of influencer or both. For instance, [4, 5, 6] identify the
influence of features on an individual prediction. [7, 8] identify the influence of features on the
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

