UnModNet: Learning to Unwrap a Modulo Image for
High Dynamic Range Imaging

Chu Zhou1 Hang Zhao2 Jin Han1 Chang Xu3 Chao Xu1 Tiejun Huang4,5 Boxin Shi4,5∗
1
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney
4
NELVT, Dept. of Computer Science, Peking University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{zhou_chu, hanjin1619, tjhuang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn,
zhaohang0124@gmail.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
A conventional camera often suffers from over- or under-exposure when recording
a real-world scene with a very high dynamic range (HDR). In contrast, a modulo camera with a Markov random field (MRF) based unwrapping algorithm can
theoretically accomplish unbounded dynamic range but shows degenerate performances when there are modulus-intensity ambiguity, strong local contrast, and
color misalignment. In this paper, we reformulate the modulo image unwrapping
problem into a series of binary labeling problems and propose a modulo edge-aware
model, named as UnModNet, to iteratively estimate the binary rollover masks of
the modulo image for unwrapping. Experimental results show that our approach
can generate 12-bit HDR images from 8-bit modulo images reliably, and runs much
faster than the previous MRF-based algorithm thanks to the GPU acceleration.

1

Introduction

Real-world scenes have a very high dynamic range (HDR) so that object contours are mostly lost in
the over-exposed and under-exposed regions when captured by a conventional camera with a limited
dynamic range and saved as an 8-bit image. To increase the dynamic range of captured images, many
HDR reconstruction approaches have been proposed to increase the camera bit depth via hardware
modifications [22, 36], as well as using computational methods to merge multi-bracketed captures
[5] or a series of bursts [17]. Yet the dynamic range they can achieve is limited and the details of the
HDR content often cannot be faithfully recovered. A modulo camera [59] can theoretically achieve
unbounded dynamic range by recording the least significant bits of the irradiance signal, i.e., the
camera hardware “resets” the scene radiance arriving at the sensor before reading it out whenever
it reaches saturation (e.g., for an 8-bit image, 256 will be reset to 0 and re-start the counting again
as long as the shutter keeps open). By unwrapping the captured modulo image with a customized
Markov random field (MRF) based algorithm, the HDR image could be practically restored, as
shown in Figure 1 (top left). We denote the irradiance of an HDR image as I = {I(x, y, c)}, and
its corresponding modulo image as Im = {Im (x, y, c)}, where (x, y) is the pixel coordinate and c
denotes the color channel index. Im is equivalent to the least significant N bits of I. As illustrated in
the bottom row of Figure 1, their relationship can be expressed as:
Im = mod(I, 2N ) or I = Im + 2N · K,
where K = {K(x, y, c)} is the number of rollovers per pixel.
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

