Adversarial Training is a Form of Data-dependent
Operator Norm Regularization
Kevin Roth˚
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Yannic Kilcher˚
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

Thomas Hofmann
Dept of Computer Science
ETH Zürich

kevin.roth@inf.ethz.ch

yannic.kilcher@inf.ethz.ch

thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We establish a theoretical link between adversarial training and operator norm
regularization for deep neural networks. Specifically, we prove that `p -norm
constrained projected gradient ascent based adversarial training with an `q -norm
loss on the logits of clean and perturbed inputs is equivalent to data-dependent
(p, q) operator norm regularization. This fundamental connection confirms the
long-standing argument that a network’s sensitivity to adversarial examples is tied
to its spectral properties and hints at novel ways to robustify and defend against
adversarial attacks. We provide extensive empirical evidence on state-of-the-art
network architectures to support our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

While deep neural networks are known to be robust to random noise, it has been shown that their
accuracy dramatically deteriorates in the face of so-called adversarial examples [4, 43, 17], i.e. small
perturbations of the input signal, often imperceptible to humans, that are sufficient to induce large
changes in the model output. This apparent vulnerability is worrisome as deep nets start to proliferate
in the real-world, including in safety-critical deployments.
The most direct strategy of robustification, called adversarial training, aims to robustify a machine
learning model by training it against an adversary that perturbs the examples before passing them to
the model [17, 24, 30, 29, 26]. A different strategy of defense is to detect whether the input has been
perturbed, by detecting characteristic regularities either in the adversarial perturbations themselves or
in the network activations they induce [18, 14, 49, 27, 7, 38].
Despite practical advances in finding adversarial examples and defending against them, it is still
an open question whether (i) adversarial examples are unavoidable, i.e. no robust model exists, cf.
[11, 16], (ii) learning a robust model requires too much training data, cf. [40], (iii) learning a robust
model from limited training data is possible but computationally intractable [6], or (iv) we just have
not found the right model / training algorithm yet.

J

ṽk – Jf pxq uk

ũk – Jf pxqvk´1

Figure 1: Our theoretical results suggest to think of iterative adversarial attacks as power-method-like
forward-backward passes (indicated by the arrows) through (the Jacobian Jf pxq of) the network.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

