UCLID-Net: Single View Reconstruction in Object
Space

Benoit Guillard

Edoardo Remelli
CVLab
EPFL, Switzerland
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Pascal Fua

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art deep geometric learning single-view reconstruction approaches rely on encoder-decoder architectures that output either shape parametrizations [7, 8, 23] or implicit representations [14, 26, 4]. However, these representations rarely preserve the Euclidean structure of the 3D space objects exist in. In
this paper, we show that building a geometry preserving 3-dimensional latent space
helps the network concurrently learn global shape regularities and local reasoning
in the object coordinate space and, as a result, boosts performance.
We demonstrate both on ShapeNet synthetic images, which are often used for
benchmarking purposes, and on real-world images that our approach outperforms
state-of-the-art ones. Furthermore, the single-view pipeline naturally extends to
multi-view reconstruction, which we also show.

1

Introduction

Most state-of-the-art deep geometric learning Single-View Reconstruction approaches (SVR) rely on
encoder-decoder architectures that output either explicit shape parametrizations [7, 8, 23] or implicit
representations [14, 26, 4]. However, the representations they learn rarely preserve the Euclidean
structure of the 3D space objects exist in, and rather rely on a global vector embedding of the input
image at a semantic level. In this paper, we show that building a geometry preserving 3-dimensional
representation helps the network concurrently learn global shape regularities and local reasoning in
the object coordinate space and, as a result, boosts performance. This corroborates the observation
that choosing the right coordinate frame for the output of a deep network matters a great deal [21].
In our work, we use camera projection matrices to explicitly link camera- and object-centric coordinate
frames. This allows us to reason about geometry and learn object priors in a common 3D coordinate
system. More specifically, we use regressed camera pose information to back-project 2D feature maps
to 3D feature grids at several scales. This is achieved within our novel architecture that comprises a
2D image encoder and a 3D shape decoder. They feature symmetrical downsampling and upsampling
parts and communicate through multi-scale skip connections, as in the U-Net architecture [16].
However, unlike in other approaches, the bottleneck is made of 3D feature grids and we use backprojection layers [12, 11, 17] to lift 2D feature maps to 3D grids. As a result, feature localization
from the input view is preserved. In other words, our feature embedding has a Euclidean structure and
is aligned with object coordinate frame. Fig. 1 depicts this process. In reference to its characteristics,
we dub our architecture UCLID-Net.
Earlier attempts at passing 2D features to a shape decoder via local feature extraction [24, 26] enabled
spatial information to flow to the decoder in a non semantic manner, often with limited impact on
the final result. In these approaches, the same local feature is attributed to all points lying along a
camera ray. By contrast, UCLID-Net uses 3D convolutions to volumetrically process local features
before passing them to the local shape decoders. This allows them to make different contributions at
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

