Few-shot Image Generation with
Elastic Weight Consolidation

Yijun Li

Richard Zhang

Jingwan Lu

Eli Shechtman

Adobe Research
{yijli, rizhang, jlu, elishe}@adobe.com

https://yijunmaverick.github.io/publications/ewc/

Abstract
Few-shot image generation seeks to generate more data of a given domain, with
only few available training examples. As it is unreasonable to expect to fully infer
the distribution from just a few observations (e.g., emojis), we seek to leverage a
large, related source domain as pretraining (e.g., human faces). Thus, we wish to
preserve the diversity of the source domain, while adapting to the appearance of the
target. We adapt a pretrained model, without introducing any additional parameters,
to the few examples of the target domain. Crucially, we regularize the changes
of the weights during this adaptation, in order to best preserve the “information”
of the source dataset, while fitting the target. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our algorithm by generating high-quality results of different target domains,
including those with extremely few examples (e.g., ≤10). We also analyze the
performance of our method with respect to some important factors, such as the
number of examples and the dissimilarity between the source and target domain.

1

Introduction

The success of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8] has typically been illustrated with large
amounts of training data, for example, 70,000 images for just a specific domain (aligned faces) [16]
or 1.3M images across different classes [34]. However, many practical use cases provide limited data.
For example, in the artistic domain, it is at best cumbersome, and at times prohibitive, to hire artists
to make thousands of creations. While generative models currently struggle in this low-data regime,
our goal is to generalize from a few, new examples.
A key component to this is the ability to leverage prior experience. For example, we can use our
knowledge of variations in the appearance of natural faces to easily imagine variations of a specific,
given cartoon face. In this work, we aim to give generative models the same ability, as shown
in Figure 1. More formally, we study the problem of few-shot image generation in a continuous
learning framework – training an algorithm to generate more data of a target domain, given only a few
examples. An underlying assumption with this setup is that the source and target domains share some
latent factors, with some differences related to their distinct difference in appearance. For example,
when transferring from real natural faces to emojis, variations in pose and expression can be naturally
extended to the target domain.
To achieve this goal, we propose a straightforward and effective adaptation technique. That is,
we adapt the pretrained model’s weights, without introducing additional parameters. Fixing the
architecture implies that tedious manual designs on new parameters (e.g., number of parameters,
their position, etc.) are not necessary. Instead, the challenge is how to adapt the weights to fit the
appearance of the limited target domain data, while retaining as much transferred knowledge, or
diversity from the source.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

