LAPAR: Linearly-Assembled Pixel-Adaptive
Regression Network for Single Image
Super-Resolution and Beyond

Wenbo Li1∗ Kun Zhou2∗ Lu Qi1 Nianjuan Jiang2 Jiangbo Lu2† Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Smartmore Technology
{wenboli,luqi,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
{kun.zhou,nianjuan.jiang,jiangbo}@smartmore.com

Abstract
Single image super-resolution (SISR) deals with a fundamental problem of upsampling a low-resolution (LR) image to its high-resolution (HR) version. Last
few years have witnessed impressive progress propelled by deep learning methods.
However, one critical challenge faced by existing methods is to strike a sweet spot
of deep model complexity and resulting SISR quality. This paper addresses this
pain point by proposing a linearly-assembled pixel-adaptive regression network
(LAPAR), which casts the direct LR to HR mapping learning into a linear coefficient regression task over a dictionary of multiple predefined filter bases. Such a
parametric representation renders our model highly lightweight and easy to optimize while achieving state-of-the-art results on SISR benchmarks. Moreover, based
on the same idea, LAPAR is extended to tackle other restoration tasks, e.g., image
denoising and JPEG image deblocking, and again, yields strong performance.

1

Introduction

Single image super-resolution aims at reconstructing a high-resolution (HR) image from a lowresolution (LR) one. Due to its wide applications, intensive research efforts and great progress have
been made in the past decades. Among existing methods, the simplest one is to adopt basic spatially
invariant nearest-neighbor, bilinear and bicubic interpolation. However, these simple linear methods
neglect the content variety of natural images, and usually overly smooth the structures and details.
To better adapt to different image elements, sparse dictionary learning processes pixels (or patches)
individually. Early work [1, 2, 3, 4] learned a pair of dictionaries of LR and HR patches where sparse
coding is shared in the LR and HR space. During inference, given trained dictionaries, only sparse
coding is optimized to complete estimation. Dictionary-based methods generally yield stable results.
However, the difficulty of joint optimization in the training process still affects recovery performance.
Taking an example-based learning approach, Romano et al. [5] hashed image patches into clusters
based on local gradient statistics, and a single filter is constructed and applied per cluster. Despite
simple, such a hard-selection operation is discontinuous and non-differential. Meanwhile, it only
provides compromised rather than optimal solutions for varying input patterns.
Recently, a great number of deep learning methods [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] were
proposed to predict the LR-HR mapping. The challenge lies in the unconstrained nature of image
contents [17], where training can be unstable when largely varying stochastic gradients exist. It
causes annoying artifacts. Residual learning, attention mechanism and other strategies were used to
alleviate these issues. Also, this line of methods is highly demanding on computational resources.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

