Neutralizing Self-Selection Bias in
Sampling for Sortition

Bailey Flanigan,
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Anupam Gupta
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Paul Gölz
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Ariel D. Procaccia
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University

Abstract
Sortition is a political system in which decisions are made by panels of randomly
selected citizens. The process for selecting a sortition panel is traditionally thought
of as uniform sampling without replacement, which has strong fairness properties.
In practice, however, sampling without replacement is not possible since only a
fraction of agents is willing to participate in a panel when invited, and different
demographic groups participate at different rates. In order to still produce panels
whose composition resembles that of the population, we develop a sampling
algorithm that restores close-to-equal representation probabilities for all agents
while satisfying meaningful demographic quotas. As part of its input, our algorithm
requires probabilities indicating how likely each volunteer in the pool was to
participate. Since these participation probabilities are not directly observable, we
show how to learn them, and demonstrate our approach using data on a real sortition
panel combined with information on the general population in the form of publicly
available survey data.

1

Introduction

What if political decisions were made not by elected politicians but by a randomly selected panel
of citizens? This is the core idea behind sortition, a political system originating in the Athenian
democracy of the 5th century BC [24]. A sortition panel is a randomly selected set of individuals
who are appointed to make a decision on behalf of population from which they were drawn. Ideally,
sortition panels are selected via uniform sampling without replacement — that is, if a panel of size k
is selected from a population of size n, then each member of the population has a k/n probability of
being selected. This system offers appealing fairness properties for both individuals and subgroups
of the population: First, each individual knows that she has the same probability of being selected
as anyone else, which assures her an equal say in decision making. The resulting panel is also, in
expectation, proportionally representative to all groups in the population: if a group comprises x%
of the population, they will in expectation comprise x% of the panel as well. In fact, if k is large
enough, concentration of measure makes it likely that even a group’s ex post share of the panel will
be close to x%. Both properties stand in contrast to the status quo of electoral democracy, in which
the equal influence of individuals and the fair participation of minority groups are often questioned.
Due to the evident fairness properties of selecting decision makers randomly, sortition has seen a
recent surge in popularity around the world. Over the past year, we have spoken with several nonprofit
organizations whose role it is to sample and facilitate sortition panels [8]. One of these nonprofits, the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

