Spectral Temporal Graph Neural Network for
Multivariate Time-series Forecasting
∗†

†

Defu Cao1, , Yujing Wang1,2, , Juanyong Duan2 , Ce Zhang3 , Xia Zhu2
Conguri Huang2 , Yunhai Tong1 , Bixiong Xu2 , Jing Bai2 , Jie Tong2 , Qi Zhang2
1
Peking University 2 Microsoft 3 ETH Zürich
{cdf, yujwang, yhtong}@pku.edu.cn
ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch
{juaduan, zhuxia, conhua, bix, jbai, jietong, qizhang}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Multivariate time-series forecasting plays a crucial role in many real-world applications. It is a challenging problem as one needs to consider both intra-series
temporal correlations and inter-series correlations simultaneously. Recently, there
have been multiple works trying to capture both correlations, but most, if not
all of them only capture temporal correlations in the time domain and resort to
pre-defined priors as inter-series relationships.
In this paper, we propose Spectral Temporal Graph Neural Network (StemGNN) to
further improve the accuracy of multivariate time-series forecasting. StemGNN
captures inter-series correlations and temporal dependencies jointly in the spectral
domain. It combines Graph Fourier Transform (GFT) which models inter-series
correlations and Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) which models temporal dependencies in an end-to-end framework. After passing through GFT and DFT,
the spectral representations hold clear patterns and can be predicted effectively by
convolution and sequential learning modules. Moreover, StemGNN learns interseries correlations automatically from the data without using pre-defined priors.
We conduct extensive experiments on ten real-world datasets to demonstrate the
effectiveness of StemGNN.

1

Introduction

Time-series forecasting plays a crucial role in various real-world scenarios, such as traffic forecasting,
supply chain management and financial investment. It helps people to make important decisions if
the future evolution of events or metrics can be estimated accurately. For example, we can modify
our driving route or reschedule an appointment if there is a severe traffic jam anticipated in advance.
Moreover, if we can forecast the trend of COVID-19 in advance, we are able to reschedule important
events and take quick actions to prevent the spread of epidemic.
Making accurate forecasting based on historical time-series data is challenging, as both intra-series
temporal patterns and inter-series correlations need to be modeled jointly. Recently, deep learning
models shed new lights on this problem. On one hand, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [10],
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) [6], Gated Linear Units (GLU) [7] and Temporal Convolution Networks
(TCN) [3] have achieved promising results in temporal modeling. At the same time, Discrete Fourier
Transform (DFT) is also useful for time-series analysis. For instance, State Frequency Memory
(SFM) network [32] combines the advantages of DFT and LSTM jointly for stock price prediction;
Spectral Residual (SR) model [23] leverages DFT and achieves state-of-the-art performances in
∗
†

The work was done when the author did internship at Microsoft.
Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

