Fairness without Demographics through
Adversarially Reweighted Learning

Preethi Lahoti ∗
plahoti@mpi-inf.mpg.de
Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Kang Lee, Flavien Prost,
Nithum Thain, Xuezhi Wang, Ed H. Chi
Google Research

Abstract
Much of the previous machine learning (ML) fairness literature assumes that
protected features such as race and sex are present in the dataset, and relies upon
them to mitigate fairness concerns. However, in practice factors like privacy
and regulation often preclude the collection of protected features, or their use
for training or inference, severely limiting the applicability of traditional fairness
research. Therefore we ask: How can we train an ML model to improve fairness
when we do not even know the protected group memberships? In this work we
address this problem by proposing Adversarially Reweighted Learning (ARL). In
particular, we hypothesize that non-protected features and task labels are valuable
for identifying fairness issues, and can be used to co-train an adversarial reweighting
approach for improving fairness. Our results show that ARL improves Rawlsian
Max-Min fairness, with notable AUC improvements for worst-case protected
groups in multiple datasets, outperforming state-of-the-art alternatives.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) systems are increasingly used for decision making in high-stakes scenarios,
it is vital that they do not exhibit discrimination. However, recent research [19, 5, 30] has raised
several fairness concerns, with researchers finding significant accuracy disparities across demographic
groups in face detection [9], health-care systems [22], and recommendation systems [15]. In response,
there has been a flurry of research on fairness in ML, largely focused on proposing formal notions of
fairness [19, 20, 54, 20], and offering “de-biasing” methods to achieve these goals. However, most of
these works assume that the model has access to protected features (e.g., race and gender), at least at
training [55, 13], if not at inference [20, 24].
In practice, however, many situations arise where it is not feasible to collect or use protected features
for decision making due to privacy, legal, or regulatory restrictions. For instance, GDPR imposes
heightened prerequisites to collect and use protected features. Yet, in spite of these restrictions on
access to protected features, and their usage in ML models, it is often imperative for our systems to
promote fairness. For instance, regulators like CFBP require that creditors comply by fairness, yet
prohibit them from using demographic information for decision-making.2 Recent surveys of ML
practitioners from both public-sector [50] and industry [24] highlight this conundrum, and identify
“addressing fairness without demographics” as a crucial open-problem with high significance to ML
practitioners. Therefore, in this paper, we ask the research question:
How can we train a ML model to improve fairness when we do not have access to protected features
neither at training nor inference time, i.e., we do not know protected group memberships?
∗

This work was conducted while the author was an intern at Google Research, Mountain View.
Creditors may not request or collect information about an applicant’s race, color, religion, national origin,
or sex. Exceptions to this rule generally involve situations in which the information is necessary to test for
compliance with fair lending rules. [CFBP Consumer Law and Regulations, 12 CFR §1002.5]
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

