Acceleration with a Ball Optimization Oracle

Yair Carmon∗ †

Arun Jambulapati∗

Qijia Jiang∗

Aaron Sidford∗

Yujia Jin∗

Yin Tat Lee‡

Kevin Tian∗

Abstract
Consider an oracle which takes a point x and returns the minimizer of a convex
function f in an `2 ball of radius r around x. It is straightforward to show that
roughly r−1 log 1 calls to the oracle suffice to find an -approximate minimizer of f
in an `2 unit ball. Perhaps surprisingly, this is not optimal: we design an accelerated
algorithm which attains an -approximate minimizer with roughly r−2/3 log 1
oracle queries, and give a matching lower bound. Further, we implement ball
optimization oracles for functions with locally stable Hessians using a variant of
Newton’s method and, in certain cases, stochastic first-order methods. The resulting
algorithm applies to a number of problems of practical and theoretical import,
improving upon previous results for logistic and `∞ regression and achieving
guarantees comparable to the state-of-the-art for `p regression.

1

Introduction

We study unconstrained minimization of a smooth convex objective f : Rd → R, which we access
through a ball optimization oracle Oball , that when queried at any point x, returns the minimizer of f
restricted a ball of radius r around x, i.e.,1
Oball (x) = arg min f (x0 ).
x0 s.t. kx0 −xk≤r

Such oracles underlie trust-region methods [15] and, as we demonstrate via applications, encapsulate
problems with local stability. Iterating xk+1 ← Oball (xk ) minimizes f in e
O(R/r) iterations (see Ap∗
e
pendix A), where R is the initial distance to the minimizer, x , and O(·) hides polylogarithmic factors
in problem parameters, including the desired accuracy.
Given the fundamental geometric nature of the ball optimization abstraction, the central question
e
motivating our work is whether it is possible to improve upon this O(R/r)
query complexity. It is
natural to conjecture that the answer is negative: we require R/r oracle calls to observe the entire line
from x0 to the optimum, and therefore finding a solution using less queries would require jumping
into completely unobserved regions. Nevertheless, we prove that the optimal query complexity scales
as (R/r)2/3 . This result has positive implications for the complexity for several key regression tasks,
for which we can efficiently implement the ball optimization oracles.
1.1 Our contributions
We overview our main contributions: accelerating ball optimization oracles (with a matching lower
bound), implementing them under Hessian stability, and applying our results to regression problems.
∗

Stanford University, {yairc,jmblpati,qjiang2,yujiajin,sidford,kjtian}@stanford.edu.
Tel Aviv University, ycarmon@cs.tau.ac.il.
‡
University of Washington, yintat@uw.edu.
1
In the introduction we discuss exact oracles for simplicity, but
√ our results account for inexactness. Our
results hold for any weighted Euclidean (semi)norm, i.e., kxk = x> Mx for M  0, which we sometimes
write explicitly as kxkM .
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

