The Convolution Exponential and
Generalized Sylvester Flows
Emiel Hoogeboom
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
e.hoogeboom@uva.nl

Victor Garcia Satorras
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
v.garciasatorras@uva.nl

Jakub M. Tomczak
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
The Netherlands
j.m.tomczak@vu.nl

Max Welling
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
The Netherlands
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
This paper introduces a new method to build linear flows, by taking the exponential
of a linear transformation. This linear transformation does not need to be invertible
itself, and the exponential has the following desirable properties: it is guaranteed
to be invertible, its inverse is straightforward to compute and the log Jacobian
determinant is equal to the trace of the linear transformation. An important insight
is that the exponential can be computed implicitly, which allows the use of convolutional layers. Using this insight, we develop new invertible transformations
named convolution exponentials and graph convolution exponentials, which retain
the equivariance of their underlying transformations. In addition, we generalize
Sylvester Flows and propose Convolutional Sylvester Flows which are based on the
generalization and the convolution exponential as basis change. Empirically, we
show that the convolution exponential outperforms other linear transformations in
generative flows on CIFAR10 and the graph convolution exponential improves the
performance of graph normalizing flows. In addition, we show that Convolutional
Sylvester Flows improve performance over residual flows as a generative flow
model measured in log-likelihood.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models aim to learn a distribution pX (x) for a high-dimensional variable x. Flowbased generative models (Dinh et al., 2015, 2017) are particularly attractive because they admit exact
likelihood optimization and straightforward sampling. Since normalizing flows are based on the
change of variable formula, they require the flow transformation to be invertible. In addition, the
Jacobian determinant needs to be tractable to compute the likelihood.
In practice, a flow is composed of multiple invertible layers. Since the Jacobian determinant is
required to compute the likelihood, many flow layers are triangular maps, as the determinant is then
the product of the diagonal elements. However, without other transformations, the composition of
triangular maps will remain triangular. For that reason, triangular flows are typically interleaved
with linear flows that mix the information over dimensions. Existing methods include permutations
(Dinh et al., 2015) and 1 ⇥ 1 convolutions (Kingma and Dhariwal, 2018) but these do not operate
over feature maps spatially. Alternatives are emerging convolutions (Hoogeboom et al., 2019a) and
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

