Contextual Games:
Multi-Agent Learning with Side Information
Pier Giuseppe Sessa
ETH Zürich
sessap@ethz.ch

Ilija Bogunovic
ETH Zürich
ilijab@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Maryam Kamgarpour
ETH Zürich
maryamk@ethz.ch

Abstract
We formulate the novel class of contextual games, a type of repeated games driven
by contextual information at each round. By means of kernel-based regularity
assumptions, we model the correlation between different contexts and game outcomes and propose a novel online (meta) algorithm that exploits such correlations
to minimize the contextual regret of individual players. We define game-theoretic
notions of contextual Coarse Correlated Equilibria (c-CCE) and optimal
contextual welfare for this new class of games and show that c-CCEs and optimal
welfare can be approached whenever players’ contextual regrets vanish. Finally, we
empirically validate our results in a traffic routing experiment, where our algorithm
leads to better performance and higher welfare compared to baselines that do not
exploit the available contextual information or the correlations present in the game.

1

Introduction

Several important real-world problems, ranging from economics, engineering, and computer science
involve multiple interactions of self-interested agents with coupled objectives. They can be modeled
as repeated games and have received recent attention due to their connection with learning (e.g., [11]).
An important line of research has focused, on the one hand, on characterizing game-theoretic equilibria
and their efficiency and, on the other hand, on deriving fast learning algorithms that converge to
equilibria and efficient outcomes. Most of these results, however, are based on the assumption that the
players always face the exact same game, repeated over time. While this leads to strong theoretical
guarantees, it is often unrealistic in practical scenarios: In routing games [30], for instance, the agents’
travel times and hence the ‘rules’ of the game are governed by many time-changing factors such as
network’s capacities, weather conditions, etc. Often, players can observe such factors, and hence
could take better decisions depending on the circumstances.
Motivated by these considerations, we introduce the new class of contextual games. Contextual games
define a more general class of repeated games described by different contextual, or side, information
at each round, denoted also as contexts in analogy with the bandit optimization literature (e.g., [24]).
Importantly, in contextual games players can observe the current context before playing an action,
which allows them to achieve better performance, and converge to stronger notions of equilibria and
efficiency than in standard repeated games.
Related work. Learning in repeated static games has been extensively studied in the literature. The
seminal works [17, 18] show that simple no-regret strategies for the players converge to the set of
Coarse Correlated Equilibria (CCEs), while the efficiency of such equilibria and learning dynamics
has been studied in [6, 31]. Exploiting the static game structure, moreover, [38, 15] propose faster
learning algorithms, and a long array of works (e.g., [35, 7, 4]) study convergence to Nash equilibria.
Learning in time-varying games, instead, has been recently considered [14], where the authors show
that dynamic regret minimization allows players to track the sequence of Nash equilibria, provided
that the stage games are monotone and slowly-varying. Adversarially changing zero-sum games have
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

