Analytic Characterization of the Hessian
in Shallow ReLU Models: A Tale of Symmetry

Yossi Arjevani
NYU
yossi.arjevani@gmail.com

Michael Field
UCSB
mikefield@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider the optimization problem associated with fitting two-layers ReLU
networks with respect to the squared loss, where labels are generated by a target
network. We leverage the rich symmetry structure to analytically characterize the
Hessian at various families of spurious minima in the natural regime where the
number of inputs d and the number of hidden neurons k is finite. In particular,
we prove that for d ≥ k standard Gaussian inputs: (a) of the dk eigenvalues of
the Hessian, dk − O(d) concentrate near zero, (b) Ω(d) of the eigenvalues grow
linearly with k. Although this phenomenon of extremely skewed spectrum has been
observed many times before, to our knowledge, this is the first time it has been established rigorously. Our analytic approach uses techniques, new to the field, from
symmetry breaking and representation theory, and carries important implications
for our ability to argue about statistical generalization through local curvature.

1

Introduction

Much of the current effort in understanding the empirical success of artificial neural networks is
concerned with the geometry of the associated nonconvex optimization landscapes. Of particular
importance is the Hessian spectrum which characterizes the local curvature of the loss at different
points in the space. This, in turn, allows one to closely examine the dynamics of stochastic first
order methods [1, 2], design potentially better optimization methods [3, 4], and argue about various
challenging aspects of the network generalization capabilities [5, 6, 7]. Unfortunately, the excessively
high cost involved in an exact computation of the Hessian spectrum renders this task prohibitive
already for moderate-sized problems.
Existing approaches for addressing this computational barrier use numerical methods for approximating the Hessian spectrum [2, 8], study the limiting spectral density of shallow models w.r.t. randomly
drawn weights [9, 10, 11], or employ various simplified indirect curvature metrics [12, 5, 7, 13, 14].
Notably, none of these techniques is able to yield an analytic characterization of the Hessian at critical
points in high-dimensional spaces.
In this paper, we develop a novel approach for studying the Hessian in a class of student-teacher (ST)
models. Concretely, we focus on the squared loss of fitting the ReLU network x 7→ 1>
k φ(W x),


1
>
2
L(W ) =
˙ Ex∼N (0,Id ) (1>
k φ(W x) − 1k φ(V x)) ,
2

W ∈ M (k, d),

(1.1)

where φ(z) =
˙ max{0, z} is the ReLU activation acting coordinate-wise, 1k is the k-dimensional
vector of all ones, M (k, d) denotes the space of all k × d matrices, and V ∈ M (k, d) denotes
the weight matrix of the target network. The ST framework offers a clean venue for analyzing
optimization- and generalization-related aspects of neural network models, and has consequently
enjoyed a surge of interest in recent years, e.g., [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22], to name a few.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

