Further Analysis of Outlier Detection with
Deep Generative Models
Ziyu Wang1,2 , Bin Dai3 , David Wipf4 and Jun Zhu1,2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Jiangsu Normal University
3
Samsung Research China, Beijing, China
4
AWS AI Lab, Shanghai, China
{wzy196,daib09physics,davidwipf}@gmail.com, dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The recent, counter-intuitive discovery that deep generative models (DGMs) can
frequently assign a higher likelihood to outliers has implications for both outlier
detection applications as well as our overall understanding of generative modeling.
In this work, we present a possible explanation for this phenomenon, starting from
the observation that a model’s typical set and high-density region may not conincide.
From this vantage point we propose a novel outlier test, the empirical success of
which suggests that the failure of existing likelihood-based outlier tests does not
necessarily imply that the corresponding generative model is uncalibrated. We also
conduct additional experiments to help disentangle the impact of low-level texture
versus high-level semantics in differentiating outliers. In aggregate, these results
suggest that modifications to the standard evaluation practices and benchmarks
commonly applied in the literature are needed.

1

Introduction

Outlier detection is an important problem in machine learning and data science. While it is natural to
consider applying density estimates from expressive deep generative models (DGMs) to detect outliers,
recent work has shown that certain DGMs, such as variational autoencoders (VAEs [1]) or flow-based
models [2], often assign similar or higher likelihood to natural images with significantly different
semantics than the inliers upon which the models were originally trained [3, 4]. For example, a model
trained on CIFAR-10 may assign higher likelihood to SVHN images. This observation seemingly
points to the infeasibility of directly applying DGMs to outlier detection problems. Moreover, it also
casts doubt on the corresponding DGMs: One may justifiably ask whether these models are actually
well-calibrated to the true underlying inlier distribution, and whether they capture the high-level
semantics of real-world image data as opposed to merely learning low-level image statistics [3].
Building on these concerns, various diagnostics have been deployed to evaluate the calibration of
newly proposed DGMs [5–9], or applied when revisiting older modeling practices [10].
As we will review in Section 5, many contemporary attempts have been made to understand this
ostensibly paradoxical observation. Of particular interest is the argument from typicality. Samples
from a high-dimensional distribution will often fall on a typical set with high probability, but the
typical set itself does not necessarily have the highest probability density at any given point. Per this
line of reasoning, to determine if a test sample is an outlier, we should check if it falls on the typical
set of the inlier distribution rather than merely examining its likelihood under a given DGM. However,
previous efforts to utilize similar ideas for outlier detection have not been consistently successful
[3, 11]. Thus it is unclear whether the failure of the likelihood tests studied in [3] should be attributed
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

