Learning with Operator-valued Kernels in
Reproducing Kernel Krein Spaces

Akash Saha
IEOR, IIT Bombay
Mumbai, India
akashsaha@iitb.ac.in

P. Balamurugan
IEOR, IIT Bombay
Mumbai, India
balamurugan.palaniappan@iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Operator-valued kernels have shown promise in supervised learning problems
with functional inputs and functional outputs. The crucial (and possibly restrictive)
assumption of positive definiteness of operator-valued kernels has been instrumental
in developing efficient algorithms. In this work, we consider operator-valued
kernels which might not be necessarily positive definite. To tackle the indefiniteness
of operator-valued kernels, we harness the machinery of Reproducing Kernel Krein
Spaces (RKKS) of function-valued functions. A representer theorem is illustrated
which yields a suitable loss stabilization problem for supervised learning with
function-valued inputs and outputs. Analysis of generalization properties of the
proposed framework is given. An iterative Operator based Minimum Residual
(OpMINRES) algorithm is proposed for solving the loss stabilization problem.
Experiments with indefinite operator-valued kernels on synthetic and real data sets
demonstrate the utility of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of learning a function-valued function F : X → Y between an input
space X and an output space Y of functions. Sometimes this problem is called functional regression
(Morris, 2015). Several applications (e.g. audio-visual apps, weather forecasting) motivate the
need for considering data as functions. Though practical data is typically discrete, the need to
consider inherent time-based correlations and its potential smoothness might be fruitful (Ramsay and
Silverman, 2007; Kokoszka and Reimherr, 2018). Among the machine learning methods to solve
the functional regression problem, we are interested in the functional reproducing kernel Hilbert
space (functional RKHS) idea introduced in (Lian, 2007) and substantially developed in (Kadri
et al., 2016). Functional RKHS extends the RKHS framework popularly used for multivariate data
(Schölkopf et al., 1999) to functional data. Similar to RKHS which is associated with a non-negative
(or positive) scalar-valued kernel with the so-called reproducing property, a representer theorem for
functional RKHS allows it to be associated with a corresponding non-negative (or positive definite)
operator-valued kernel with reproducing property (see (Lian, 2007) and Appendix A). However
construction of non-negative or positive definite operator-valued kernels is not straightforward and
particular examples with separable structure are provided in (Lian, 2007; Kadri et al., 2016). The
positive definiteness of operator-valued kernels is crucial for establishing technical results associated
with functional RKHS and also helps in designing efficient algorithms (Lian, 2007; Kadri et al.,
2016).
Note that demonstrating the positive definiteness property of operator-valued kernels (even for
particular cases) might be a difficult exercise in itself. Demanding the non-negativeness or positive
definiteness of operator-valued kernels effectively restricts practitioners from trying other useful
operator-valued kernels which might be indefinite, yet potentially useful for some applications (e.g.
similarity computation between function-valued data can involve indefinite operator-valued kernels).
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

