Off-Policy Interval Estimation with
Lipschitz Value Iteration

Ziyang Tang
University of Texas at Austin
ztang@utexas.edu
Na Zhang
Tsinghua University
zhangna@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yihao Feng
University of Texas at Austin
yihao@cs.utexas.edu
Jian Peng
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
jianpeng@illinois.edu

Qiang Liu
University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation provides an essential tool for evaluating the effects of different
policies or treatments using only observed data. When applied to high-stakes
scenarios such as medical diagnosis or financial decision-making, it is crucial to
provide provably correct upper and lower bounds of the expected reward, not just
a classical single point estimate, to the end-users, as executing a poor policy can
be very costly. In this work, we propose a provably correct method for obtaining
interval bounds for off-policy evaluation in a general continuous setting. The idea is
to search for the maximum and minimum values of the expected reward among all
the Lipschitz Q-functions that are consistent with the observations, which amounts
to solving a constrained optimization problem on a Lipschitz function space. We
go on to introduce a Lipschitz value iteration method to monotonically tighten the
interval, which is simple yet efficient and provably convergent. We demonstrate
the practical efficiency of our method on a range of benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) (e.g., Sutton & Barto, 1998) has become widely used in tasks like
recommendation system, robotics, trading and healthcare (Murphy et al., 2001; Li et al., 2011; Bottou
et al., 2013; Thomas et al., 2017). The current success of RL highly relies on excessive amount
of data, which, however, is usually not available in many real world tasks where deploying a new
policy is very costly or even risky. Off-policy evaluation (OPE) (e.g., Fonteneau et al., 2013; Jiang &
Li, 2016; Liu et al., 2018a), estimating the expected reward of a target policy using observational
data gathered from previous behavior policies, therefore holds tremendous promise for designing
data-efficient RL algorithms by leveraging on previously collected data.
Existing OPE methods mainly focus on point estimation, which only provides a single point estimation
of the expected reward. However, such point estimate can be rather unreliable as OPE often suffers
from high error due to the lack of historical samples, policy shift or model misspecification. Further,
for applications in high-stakes areas such as medical diagnosis and financial investment, a point
estimate itself is far from enough and can even be dangerous if it is unreliable. Hence, it is essential
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

