Compositional Visual Generation with Energy Based
Models
Yilun Du
MIT CSAIL
yilundu@mit.edu

Shuang Li
MIT CSAIL
lishuang@mit.edu

Igor Mordatch
Google Brain
imordatch@google.com

Abstract
A vital aspect of human intelligence is the ability to compose increasingly complex
concepts out of simpler ideas, enabling both rapid learning and adaptation of
knowledge. In this paper we show that energy-based models can exhibit this
ability by directly combining probability distributions. Samples from the combined
distribution correspond to compositions of concepts. For example, given one
distribution for smiling face images, and another for male faces, we can combine
them to generate smiling male faces. This allows us to generate natural images that
simultaneously satisfy conjunctions, disjunctions, and negations of concepts. We
evaluate compositional generation abilities of our model on the CelebA dataset of
natural faces and synthetic 3D scene images. We showcase the breadth of unique
capabilities of our model, such as the ability to continually learn and incorporate
new concepts, or infer compositions of concept properties underlying an image.

1

Introduction

Humans are able to rapidly learn new concepts and continuously integrate them among prior knowledge. The core component in enabling this is the ability to compose increasingly complex concepts
out of simpler ones as well as recombining and reusing concepts in novel ways [5]. By combining a
finite number of primitive components, humans can create an exponential number of new concepts,
and use them to rapidly explain current and past experiences [16]. We are interested in enabling such
capabilities in machine learning systems, particularly in the context of generative modeling.
Past efforts have attempted to enable compositionality in several ways. One approach decomposes
data into disentangled factors of variation and situate each datapoint in the resulting - typically
continuous - factor vector space [29, 9]. The factors can either be explicitly provided or learned in
an unsupervised manner. In both cases, however, the dimensionality of the factor vector space is
fixed and defined prior to training. This makes it difficult to introduce new factors of variation, which
may be necessary to explain new data, or to taxonomize past data in new ways. Another approach
to incorporate the compositionality is to spatially decompose an image into a collection of objects,
each object slot occupying some pixels of the image defined by a segmentation mask [28, 6]. Such
approaches can generate visual scenes with multiple objects, but may have difficulty in generating
interactions between objects. These two incorporations of compositionality are considered distinct,
with very different underlying implementations.
In this work∗ , we propose to implement the compositionality via energy based models (EBMs).
Instead of an explicit vector of factors that is input to a generator function, or object slots that are
blended to form an image, our unified treatment defines factors of variation and object slots via energy
functions. Each factor is represented by an individual scalar energy function that takes as input an
image and outputs a low energy value if the factor is exhibited in the image. Images that exhibit the
∗
Code
and
data
available
compositional-generation-inference/

at

https://energy-based-model.github.io/

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

