What Did You Think Would Happen? Explaining
Agent Behaviour through Intended Outcomes

Herman Yau
CVSSP, University of Surrey

Chris Russell ∗
Amazon Web Services

Simon Hadfield
CVSSP, University of Surrey

Abstract
We present a novel form of explanation for Reinforcement Learning, based around
the notion of intended outcome. These explanations describe the outcome an agent
is trying to achieve by its actions. We provide a simple proof that general methods
for post-hoc explanations of this nature are impossible in traditional reinforcement
learning. Rather, the information needed for the explanations must be collected in
conjunction with training the agent. We derive approaches designed to extract local
explanations based on intention for several variants of Q-function approximation
and prove consistency between the explanations and the Q-values learned. We
demonstrate our method on multiple reinforcement learning problems, and provide
code1 to help researchers introspecting their RL environments and algorithms.

1

Introduction

Explaining the behaviour of machine learning algorithms or AI remains a key challenge in machine
learning. With the guidelines of the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
[1] calling for explainable AI, it has come to the machine learning community’s attention that better
understanding of black-box models is needed. Despite substantial research in explaining the behaviour
of supervised machine-learning, it is unclear what should constitute an explanation for Reinforcement
Learning (RL). Current works in explainable reinforcement learning use similar techniques as those
used to explain a supervised classifier [22], as such their explanations highlight what in the current
environment drives an agent to take an action, but not what the agent expects the action to achieve.
Frequently, the consequences of the agent’s actions are not immediate and a chain of many decisions
all contribute to a single desired outcome.
This paper addresses this problem by asking what chain of events the agent intended to happen as
a result of a particular action choice. The importance of such explanations based around intended
outcome in day-to-day life is well-known in psychology with Malle [20] estimating that around 70%
of these day-to-day explanations are intent-based. While the notion of intent makes little sense in the
context of supervised classification, it is directly applicable to agent-based reasoning, and it is perhaps
surprising that we are the first work in explainable RL to directly address this. Recent work [18] has
called for these introspective abilities which they refer to as “Explainable Agency”.
We present a simple addition to standard value-based RL frameworks which allows us to obtain a
projection of predicted future trajectories from a current observation and proposed action. Unlike
existing approaches such as [33] that predict an agent’s future states by rerunning repeated forward
simulations from the same initial state; we instead recover sum of the past events, weighted by the
importance that the agent put on them when learning a Q-values, that lead to the agents current
behaviour, and mathematically guarantee that this sum is consistent with the agent’s Q-values.
This allows for local interpretation of the agent’s intention based on its behavioural policy. We
∗
1

Part of this work was done while at the Alan Turing Institute and University of Surrey.
https://github.com/hmhyau/rl-intention

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

