Optimal Approximation - Smoothness Tradeoffs for
Soft-Max Functions
Alessandro Epasto
Google Research
aepasto@google.com

Mohammad Mahdian
Google Research
mahdian@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Manolis Zampetakis
MIT
mzampet@mit.edu

Abstract
A soft-max function has two main efficiency measures: (1) approximation - which
corresponds to how well it approximates the maximum function, (2) smoothness
- which shows how sensitive it is to changes of its input. Our goal is to identify
the optimal approximation-smoothness tradeoffs for different measures of approximation and smoothness. This leads to novel soft-max functions, each of which is
optimal for a different application. The most commonly used soft-max function,
called exponential mechanism, has optimal tradeoff between approximation measured in terms of expected additive approximation and smoothness measured with
respect to Rényi Divergence. We introduce a soft-max function, called piecewise
linear soft-max, with optimal tradeoff between approximation, measured in terms
of worst-case additive approximation and smoothness, measured with respect to
ℓ𝑞 -norm. The worst-case approximation guarantee of the piecewise linear mechanism enforces sparsity in the output of our soft-max function, a property that is
known to be important in Machine Learning applications [14, 12] and is not satisfied by the exponential mechanism. Moreover, the ℓ𝑞 -smoothness is suitable for
applications in Mechanism Design and Game Theory where the piecewise linear
mechanism outperforms the exponential mechanism. Finally, we investigate another soft-max function, called power mechanism, with optimal tradeoff between
expected multiplicative approximation and smoothness with respect to the Rényi
Divergence, which provides improved theoretical and practical results in differentially private submodular optimization.

1

Introduction

A soft-max function is a mechanism for choosing one out of a number of options, given the value
of each option. Such functions have applications in many areas of computer science and machine
learning, such as deep learning (as the final layer of a neural network classifier) [3, 2, 8], reinforcement learning (as a method for selecting an action) [20], learning from mixtures of experts [11],
differential privacy [6, 15], and mechanism design [15, 10]. The common requisite in these applications is for the soft-max function to pick an option with close-to-maximum value, while behaving
smoothly as the input changes.
The soft-max function that has come to dominate these applications is the exponential function.
Given 𝑑 options with values 𝑥1 , 𝑥2 , . . . , 𝑥𝑑 , the exponential mechanism picks 𝑖 with probability
∑︀𝑑
exp(𝜆𝑥𝑖 )/( 𝑗=1 exp(𝜆𝑥𝑗 )) for a parameter 𝜆 > 0. This function has a long history: It has been
proposed as a model in decision theory in 1959 by Luce [13], and has its roots in the Boltzman (also
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

