Probabilistic Fair Clustering
Seyed A. Esmaeili1,3 , Brian Brubach2,4 , Leonidas Tsepenekas1,3 , and John P. Dickerson 1,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park
2
Department of Computer Science, Wellesley College
3
{esmaeili,ltsepene,john}@cs.umd.edu
4
bb100@wellesley.edu

Abstract
In clustering problems, a central decision-maker is given a complete metric graph
over vertices and must provide a clustering of vertices that minimizes some objective function. In fair clustering problems, vertices are endowed with a color
(e.g., membership in a group), and the requirements of a valid clustering might also
include the representation of colors in the solution. Prior work in fair clustering
assumes complete knowledge of group membership. In this paper, we generalize
this by assuming imperfect knowledge of group membership through probabilistic
assignments, and present algorithms in this more general setting with approximation ratio guarantees. We also address the problem of “metric membership”,
where group membership has a notion of order and distance. Experiments are
conducted using our proposed algorithms as well as baselines to validate our approach, and also surface nuanced concerns when group membership is not known
deterministically.

1

Introduction

Machine-learning-based decisioning systems are increasingly used in high-stakes situations, many
of which directly or indirectly impact society. Examples abound of automated decisioning systems
resulting in, arguably, morally repugnant outcomes: hiring algorithms may encode the biases of
human reviewers’ training data Bogen and Rieke [2018], advertising systems may discriminate based
on race and inferred gender in harmful ways Sweeney [2013], recidivism risk assessment software
may bias its risk assessment improperly by race Angwin et al. [2016], and healthcare resource
allocation systems may be biased against a specific race Ledford [2019]. A myriad of examples such
as these and others motivate the growing body of research into defining, measuring, and (partially)
mitigating concerns of fairness and bias in machine learning. Different metrics of algorithmic fairness
have been proposed, drawing on prior legal rulings and philosophical concepts; Mehrabi et al. [2019]
give a recent overview of sources of bias and fairness as presently defined by the machine learning
community.
The earliest work in this space focused on fairness in supervised learning Luong et al. [2011], Hardt
et al. [2016] as well as online learning Joseph et al. [2016]; more recently, the literature has begun
expanding into fairness in unsupervised learning Chierichetti et al. [2017]. In this work, we address
a novel model of fairness in clustering—a fundamental unsupervised learning problem. Here, we
are given a complete metric graph where each vertex also has a color associated with it, and we are
concerned with finding a clustering that takes both the metric graph and vertex colors into account.
Most of the work in this area (e.g., Ahmadian et al. [2019a], Bercea et al. [2018], Chierichetti et al.
[2017]) has defined a fair clustering to be one that minimizes the cost function subject to the constraint
that each cluster satisfies a lower and an upper bound on the percentage of each color it contains—a
form of approximate demographic parity or its closely-related cousin, the p%-rule Biddle [2006].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

