Adaptive Online Estimation of Piecewise Polynomial
Trends
Yu-Xiang Wang
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Dheeraj Baby
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
dheeraj@ucsb.edu

Abstract
We consider the framework of non-stationary stochastic optimization [Besbes
et al., 2015] with squared error losses and noisy gradient feedback where the
dynamic regret of an online learner against a time varying comparator sequence
is studied. Motivated from the theory of non-parametric regression, we introduce
a new variational constraint that enforces the comparator sequence to belong to
a discrete k th order Total Variation ball of radius Cn . This variational constraint
models comparators that have piecewise polynomial structure which has many
relevant practical applications [Tibshirani, 2014]. By establishing connections to
the theory of wavelet based non-parametric regression, we design a polynomial
1

2

time algorithm that achieves the nearly optimal dynamic regret of Õ(n 2k+3 Cn2k+3 ).
The proposed policy is adaptive to the unknown radius Cn . Further, we show that
the same policy is minimax optimal for several other non-parametric families of
interest.

1

Introduction

In time series analysis, estimating and removing the trend are often the first steps taken to make
the sequence “stationary”. The non-parametric assumption that the underlying trend is a piecewise
polynomial or a spline [de Boor, 1978], is one of the most popular choices, especially when we do not
know where the “change points” are and how many of them are appropriate. The higher order Total
Variation (see Assumption A3) of the trend can capture in some sense both the sparsity and intensity
of changes in underlying dynamics. A non-parametric regression method that penalizes this quantity
— trend filtering [Tibshirani, 2014] — enjoys a superior local adaptivity over traditional methods such
as the Hodrick-Prescott Filter [Hodrick and Prescott, 1997]. However, Trend Filtering is an offline
algorithm which limits its applicability for the inherently online time series forecasting problem. In
this paper, we are interested in designing an online forecasting strategy that can essentially match
the performance of the offline methods for trend estimation, hence allowing us to apply time series
models forecasting on-the-fly. In particular, our problem setup (see Figure 1) and algorithm are
applicable to all online variants of trend filtering problem such as predicting stock prices, server
payloads, sales etc.
Let’s describe the notations that will be used throughout the paper. All vectors and matrices will be
written in bold face letters. For a vector x ∈ Rm , x[i] or xi denotes its value at the ith coordinate.
x[a : b] or xa:b is the vector [x[a], . . . , x[b]]. k·kp denotes finite dimensional Lp norms. kxk0 is the
number of non-zero coordinates of a vector x. [n] represents the set {1, . . . , n}. D i ∈ R(n−i)×n
denotes the discrete difference operator of order i defined as in [Tibshirani, 2014] and reproduced

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

