A Study on Encodings for Neural Architecture Search

Colin White
Abacus.AI
San Francisco, CA 94103
colin@abacus.ai

Willie Neiswanger
Stanford University and Petuum, Inc.
Stanford, CA 94305
neiswanger@cs.stanford.edu

Sam Nolen
Abacus.AI
San Francisco, CA 94103
sam@abacus.ai

Yash Savani
Abacus.AI
San Francisco, CA 94103
yash@abacus.ai

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) has been extensively studied in the past few years.
A popular approach is to represent each neural architecture in the search space as
a directed acyclic graph (DAG), and then search over all DAGs by encoding the
adjacency matrix and list of operations as a set of hyperparameters. Recent work
has demonstrated that even small changes to the way each architecture is encoded
can have a significant effect on the performance of NAS algorithms [22, 24].
In this work, we present the first formal study on the effect of architecture encodings
for NAS, including a theoretical grounding and an empirical study. First we
formally define architecture encodings and give a theoretical characterization on
the scalability of the encodings we study. Then we identify the main encodingdependent subroutines which NAS algorithms employ, running experiments to show
which encodings work best with each subroutine for many popular algorithms. The
experiments act as an ablation study for prior work, disentangling the algorithmic
and encoding-based contributions, as well as a guideline for future work. Our
results demonstrate that NAS encodings are an important design decision which
can have a significant impact on overall performance.1

1

Introduction

In the past few years, the field of neural architecture search (NAS) has seen a steep rise in interest [2],
due to the promise of automatically designing specialized neural architectures for any given problem. Techniques for NAS span evolutionary search, Bayesian optimization, reinforcement learning,
gradient-based methods, and neural predictor methods. Many NAS instantiations can be described by
the optimization problem mina∈A f (a), where A denotes a large set of neural architectures, and f (a)
denotes the objective function of interest for a, which is usually a combination of validation accuracy,
latency, or number of parameters. A popular approach is to describe each neural architecture a as a
labeled directed acyclic graph (DAG), where each node or edge represents an operation.
Due to the complexity of DAG structures and the large size of the space, neural architecture search
is typically a highly non-convex, challenging optimization problem. A natural consideration when
designing a NAS algorithm is therefore, how should we encode the neural architectures to maximize
performance? For example, NAS algorithms may involve manipulating or perturbing architectures, or
training a model to predict the accuracy of a given architecture; as a consequence, the representation
1

See the full-length paper here: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.04965. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/naszilla/naszilla.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

