Group Contextual Encoding for 3D Point Clouds

1

Xu Liu1,2∗ Chengtao Li3 Jian Wang4 Jingbo Wang5 Boxin Shi6† Xiaodong He2†
The University of Tokyo 2 JD AI Research 3 MIT 4 Snap Inc. 5 CUHK 6 Peking University

Abstract
Global context is crucial for 3D point cloud scene understanding tasks. In this
work, we extend the contextual encoding layer that was originally designed for 2D
tasks to 3D point cloud scenarios. The encoding layer learns a set of code words in
feature space of the 3D point cloud to characterize the global semantic context, and
then based on these code words, the method learns a global contextual descriptor to
reweight the feature maps accordingly. Moreover, compared to 2D scenarios, data
sparsity becomes a major issue in 3D point cloud scenarios, and the performance
of contextual encoding quickly saturates when the number of code words increases.
To mitigate this problem, we further propose a group contextual encoding method,
which divides the channel into groups and then performs encoding on group-divided
feature vectors. This method facilitates learning of global context in grouped
subspace for 3D point clouds. We evaluate the effectiveness and generalizability
of our method on three widely-studied 3D point cloud tasks. Experimental results
have shown that the proposed method outperformed the VoteNet remarkably with
3 mAP on the benchmark of SUN-RGBD, with the metrics of mAP@0.25, and
a much greater margin of 6.57 mAP on ScanNet with the metrics of mAP@0.5.
Compared to the baseline of PointNet++, the proposed method leads to an accuracy
of 86%, outperforming the baseline by 1.5%.

1

Introduction

Object detection in 3D point clouds is a challenging problem because it requires localizing and
classifying objects from sparse and irregularly-distributed points. Conventional methods such as
PointNet++ [16] and ASIS-PointNet++ [18] were proposed to solve this problem, which can learn
the local features hierarchically. However, due to lack of global context modeling, the performance
of PointNet [15] and PointNet++ [16] is limited. To resolve this issue, LG-PointNet++ [21] and
PointWeb [27] proposed to model the global context by computing the pair-wise relations of points.
However, their complexity is a quadratic function of the number of points, which is prohibitively
expensive when dealing with large-scale point clouds.
On the other hand, for 2D Semantic Segmentation, Zhang et al., [24] proposed a contextual encoding
layer to learn a descriptor to model the global context by encoding features with a dictionary with
only a few code words and then aggregating the encoded information. In this paper, we extend
the encoding approach to 3D point cloud, in which a dictionary containing only a few code words
is learned to characterize the global semantic context, and then based on these code words, the
method learns a global contextual descriptor to reweight the feature maps accordingly. Since the
number of code words is constrained and much smaller than the number of data points, this method
is computationally efficient. However, directly applying the encoding layer to 3D point clouds is
inadequate. Compared to 2D scenarios, data sparsity becomes a major issue in 3D point cloud
scenarios, and the performance of global contextual encoding quickly saturates when the number of
∗
†

This work is done in JD AI Research
Corresponding authors: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn, xiaodong.he@jd.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

