Graphon Neural Networks and the Transferability of
Graph Neural Networks

Luana Ruiz
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Eng.
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19143
rubruiz@seas.upenn.edu

Luiz F. O. Chamon
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Eng.
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19143
luizf@seas.upenn.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Eng.
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19143
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) rely on graph convolutions to extract local features
from network data. These graph convolutions combine information from adjacent
nodes using coefficients that are shared across all nodes. Since these coefficients are
shared and do not depend on the graph, one can envision using the same coefficients
to define a GNN on another graph. This motivates analyzing the transferability
of GNNs across graphs. In this paper we introduce graphon NNs as limit objects
of GNNs and prove a bound on the difference between the output of a GNN and
its limit graphon-NN. This bound vanishes with growing number of nodes if the
graph convolutional filters are bandlimited in the graph spectral domain. This result
establishes a tradeoff between discriminability and transferability of GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are the counterpart of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to
learning problems involving network data. Like CNNs, GNNs have gained popularity due to their
superior performance in a number of learning tasks (Bronstein et al., 2017; Defferrard et al., 2016;
Gama et al., 2018; Kipf and Welling, 2017). Aside from the ample amount of empirical evidence,
GNNs are proven to work well because of properties such as invariance and stability (Gama et al.,
2019a; Ruiz et al., 2019), which are also shared with CNNs (Bruna and Mallat, 2013).
A defining characteristic of GNNs is that their number of parameters does not depend on the size (i.e.,
the number of nodes) of the underlying graph. This is because graph convolutions are parametrized
by graph shifts in the same way that time and spatial convolutions are parametrized by delays and
translations. From a complexity standpoint, the independence between the GNN parametrization and
the graph is beneficial because there are less parameters to learn. Perhaps more importantly, the fact
that its parameters are not tied to the underlying graph suggests that a GNN can be transferred from
graph to graph. It is then natural to ask to what extent the performance of a GNN is preserved when
its graph changes. The ability to transfer a machine learning model with performance guarantees is
usually referred to as transfer learning or transferability.
In GNNs, there are two typical scenarios where transferability is desirable. The first involves
applications in which we would like to reproduce a previously trained model on a graph of different
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

