Optimal Adaptive Electrode Selection to Maximize
Simultaneously Recorded Neuron Yield

John Choi
Center for Neural Science
New York University
jc4007@nyu.edu

Krishan Kumar
Center for Neural Science
New York University
ksk434@nyu.edu

Katie Wingel
Center for Neural Science
New York University
kew445@nyu.edu

Mohammad Khazali
Center for Neural Science
New York University
m.khazali@nyu.edu

Mahdi Choudhury
Center for Neural Science
New York University
mc5368@nyu.edu

Adam Charles
Department of Biomedical Engineering
Johns Hopkins University
adamsc@jhu.edu

Bijan Pesaran
Center for Neural Science
New York University
bijan@nyu.edu

Abstract
Neural-Matrix style, high-density electrode arrays for brain-machine interfaces
(BMIs) and neuroscientific research require the use of multiplexing: Each recording
channel can be routed to one of several electrode sites on the array. This capability
allows the user to flexibly distribute recording channels to the locations where the
most desirable neural signals can be resolved. For example, in the Neuropixel probe,
960 electrodes can be addressed by 384 recording channels. However, currently
no adaptive methods exist to use recorded neural data to optimize/customize the
electrode selections per recording context. Here, we present an algorithm called
classification-based selection (CBS) that optimizes the joint electrode selections
for all recording channels so as to maximize isolation quality of detected neurons.
We show, in experiments using Neuropixels in non-human primates, that this
algorithm yields a similar number of isolated neurons as would be obtained if all
electrodes were recorded simultaneously. Neuron counts were 41-85% improved
over previously published electrode selection strategies. The neurons isolated from
electrodes selected by CBS were a 73% match, by spike timing, to the complete
set of recordable neurons around the probe. The electrodes selected by CBS
exhibited higher average per-recording-channel signal-to-noise ratio. CBS, and
selection optimization in general, could play an important role in development of
neurotechnologies for BMI, as signal bandwidth becomes an increasingly limiting
factor. Code and experimental data have been made available1 .

1

Introduction

Modern neurotechnologies operate across a range of physical modalities (such as light, electricity,
magnetism) and offer the potential to record the activity of thousands or even millions of neurons [7].
High performing brain-machine interfaces (BMIs), a type of neurotechnology, require simultaneous
1

https://github.com/pesaranlab/neuro_cbs

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

