ExpandNets: Linear Over-parameterization
to Train Compact Convolutional Networks

Shuxuan Guo
CVLab, EPFL
Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
shuxuan.guo@epfl.ch

Jose M. Alvarez
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, CA 95051, USA
josea@nvidia.com

Mathieu Salzmann
CVLab, EPFL
Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
We introduce an approach to training a given compact network. To this end, we
leverage over-parameterization, which typically improves both neural network
optimization and generalization. Specifically, we propose to expand each linear
layer of the compact network into multiple consecutive linear layers, without
adding any nonlinearity. As such, the resulting expanded network, or ExpandNet,
can be contracted back to the compact one algebraically at inference. In particular,
we introduce two convolutional expansion strategies and demonstrate their benefits
on several tasks, including image classification, object detection, and semantic
segmentation. As evidenced by our experiments, our approach outperforms both
training the compact network from scratch and performing knowledge distillation
from a teacher. Furthermore, our linear over-parameterization empirically reduces
gradient confusion during training and improves the network generalization.

1

Introduction

With the growing availability of large-scale datasets and advanced computational resources, convolutional neural networks have achieved tremendous success in a variety of tasks, such as image
classification [17, 28], object detection [39, 40, 42] and semantic segmentation [35, 45]. Over the
past few years, “Wider and deeper are better” has become the rule of thumb to design network architectures [17, 22, 51, 52]. This trend, however, raises memory- and computation-related challenges,
especially in the context of constrained environments, such as embedded platforms.
Deep and wide networks are well-known to be heavily over-parameterized, and thus a compact
network, both shallow and thin, should often be sufficient. Unfortunately, compact networks are
notoriously hard to train from scratch. As a consequence, designing strategies to train a given
compact network has drawn growing attention, the most popular approach consisting of transferring
the knowledge of a deep teacher network to the compact one of interest [19, 18, 20, 37, 44, 54, 60, 61].
In this paper, we introduce an alternative approach to training compact neural networks, complementary to knowledge transfer. To this end, building upon the observation that network overparameterization improves both optimization and generalization [1, 2, 5, 26, 41, 49, 62], we propose
to increase the number of parameters of a given compact network by incorporating additional layers.
However, instead of separating every two layers with a nonlinearity, we advocate introducing consecutive linear layers. In other words, we expand each linear layer of a compact network into a succession
of multiple linear layers, without any nonlinearity in between. Since consecutive linear layers are
equivalent to a single one [50], such an expanded network, or ExpandNet, can be algebraically
contracted back to the original compact one without any information loss.
While the use of successive linear layers appears in the literature, existing work [5, 6, 25, 29, 50, 63]
has been mostly confined to fully-connected networks without any nonlinearities and to the theoretical
study of their behavior under fairly unrealistic statistical assumptions. In particular, these studies aim
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

