Reconciling Modern Deep Learning with Traditional
Optimization Analyses: The Intrinsic Learning Rate
Zhiyuan Li⇤
Princeton University
zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu

Kaifeng Lyu ⇤
Tsinghua University
vfleaking@gmail.com

Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University & IAS
arora@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Recent works (e.g., (Li and Arora, 2020)) suggest that the use of popular normalization schemes (including Batch Normalization) in today’s deep learning can
move it far from a traditional optimization viewpoint, e.g., use of exponentially
increasing learning rates. The current paper highlights other ways in which behavior of normalized nets departs from traditional viewpoints, and then initiates
a formal framework for studying their mathematics via suitable adaptation of the
conventional framework namely, modeling SGD-induced training trajectory via
a suitable stochastic differential equation (SDE) with a noise term that captures
gradient noise. This yields: (a) A new “intrinsic learning rate” parameter that is the
product of the normal learning rate ⌘ and weight decay factor . Analysis of the
SDE shows how the effective speed of learning varies and equilibrates over time
under the control of intrinsic LR. (b) A challenge—via theory and experiments—to
popular belief that good generalization requires large learning rates at the start
of training. (c) New experiments, backed by mathematical intuition, suggesting
the number of steps to equilibrium (in function space) scales as the inverse of
the intrinsic learning rate, as opposed to the exponential time convergence bound
implied by SDE analysis. We name it the Fast Equilibrium Conjecture and suggest
it holds the key to why Batch Normalization is effective.

1

Introduction

The training of modern neural networks involves Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with an appropriate learning rate schedule. The formula of SGD with weight decay can be written as:
wt+1
(1 ⌘t )wt ⌘t rLt (wt ),
2
where is the weight decay factor (or L -regularization coefficient), ⌘t and rLt (wt ) are the learning
rate and batch gradient at the t-th iteration.
Traditional analysis shows that SGD approaches a stationary point of the training loss if the learning
rate is set to be sufficiently small depending on the smoothness constant and noise scale. In this
viewpoint, if we reduce the learning rate by a factor 10, the end result is the same, and just takes 10
times as many steps. SGD with very tiny step sizes can be thought of as Gradient Descent (GD) (i.e.,
gradient descent with full gradient), which in the limit of infinitesimal step size approaches Gradient
Flow (GF).
However, it is well-known that using only small learning rates or large batch sizes (while fixing other
hype-parameters) may lead to worse generalization (Bengio, 2012; Keskar et al., 2017). From this
one concludes that finite (not too small) learning rate —alternatively, noise in the gradient estimate,
or small batch sizes— play an important role in generalization, and many authors have suggested that
the noise helps avoid sharp minima (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2017; Li et al.,
⇤

These authors contribute equally.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

