Robust Correction of Sampling Bias using
Cumulative Distribution Functions
Bijan Mazaheri
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences,
California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA 91125
bmazaher@caltech.edu
Siddharth Jain
Department of Electrical Engineering,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 91125
sidjain@caltech.edu
Jehoshua Bruck
Department of Electrical Engineering,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 91125
bruck@caltech.edu

Abstract
Varying domains and biased datasets can lead to differences between the training
and the target distributions, known as covariate shift. Current approaches for alleviating this often rely on estimating the ratio of training and target probability density
functions. These techniques require parameter tuning and can be unstable across
different datasets. We present a new method for handling covariate shift using the
empirical cumulative distribution function estimates of the target distribution by a
rigorous generalization of a recent idea proposed by Vapnik and Izmailov. Further,
we show experimentally that our method is more robust in its predictions, is not
reliant on parameter tuning and shows similar classification performance compared
to the current state-of-the-art techniques on synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Traditional machine learning approaches assume that training data and target data are drawn from
the same distribution. Under this assumption, finding the model which minimizes the error on the
training dataset also minimizes the expected error in the target domain.
arg min Ex∈Xtarget [L(f (x), y)] ≈ arg min L(f (Xtrain ), ytrain )
f

(1)

f

In practice, sampling bias can lead to a breakdown of the assumption in Eq.1. Certain populations may
be more likely to answer a survey or seek a test, leading to over-representation in these demographics.
In addition, researchers may wish to re-purpose data outside of an easily sampled domain. For
example, a cancer researcher may use European data with a target domain of North America. In these
situations, the errors of over-represented regions exert excessive influence on the selection of the
model when minimizing training error (see Figure 1a).
Formally, let the joint distribution of input x and output y on the training and target distributions
be given by p(x, y) and q(x, y) respectively. We note that p(x, y) = p(x)p(y|x) and q(x, y) =
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

