Sample complexity and effective dimension for
regression on manifolds

Andrew D. McRae Justin Romberg Mark A. Davenport
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
admcrae@gatech.edu, jrom@ece.gatech.edu, mdav@gatech.edu

Abstract
We consider the theory of regression on a manifold using reproducing kernel
Hilbert space methods. Manifold models arise in a wide variety of modern machine
learning problems, and our goal is to help understand the effectiveness of various implicit and explicit dimensionality-reduction methods that exploit manifold
structure. Our first key contribution is to establish a novel nonasymptotic version
of the Weyl law from differential geometry. From this we are able to show that
certain spaces of smooth functions on a manifold are effectively finite-dimensional,
with a complexity that scales according to the manifold dimension rather than any
ambient data dimension. Finally, we show that given (potentially noisy) function
values taken uniformly at random over a manifold, a kernel regression estimator
(derived from the spectral decomposition of the manifold) yields minimax-optimal
error bounds that are controlled by the effective dimension.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional data is ubiquitous in modern machine learning. Examples include images (2-D
and 3-D), document texts, DNA, and neural recordings. In many cases, the number of dimensions
in the data is much larger than the number of actual data samples. Traditional statistical methods
cannot handle such cases, so researchers have turned to a variety of explicit dimensionality-reduction
techniques—which make inference more tractable—and to tools such as neural networks that often implicitly transform the data into a much lower-dimensional feature space. These techniques
inherently assume that the data have an intrinsic dimension that is much lower than that of the data’s
original representation. Our goal in this paper is to show that the difficulty of a supervised learning
problem depends only on this intrinsic dimension and not on the (potentially much larger) ambient
dimension. In particular, we consider the common assumption that the data lie on a low-dimensional
manifold embedded in Euclidean space (see [1–4] for some of the many example applications).
As an illustration of the kind of results we hope to obtain, we first consider a simple example: a
function on the circle S 1 (or, equivalently, a periodic function on the real line). Specifically, suppose
that we want to estimate a function f ∗ on the circle from random samples. In general, it is intractable
to estimate an arbitrary function from finitely many samples, but it becomes possible if we assume f ∗
is structured. For example, f ∗ may exhibit a degree of smoothness, which can be readily characterized
via the FourierP
series for f ∗ . Specifically, recall that we can write f ∗ as the Fourier series sum
∗
f (x) = a0 + `≥1 (a` cos(2π`x) + b` sin(2π`x)). One common notion of smoothness in signal
processing is that f ∗ is bandlimited, meaning that this sum can be truncated at some largest frequency
Ω. In this case, f ∗ lies in a subspace of dimension at most p(Ω) = 2bΩ/2πc + 1. We know (see,
e.g., [5, Chapter 12] or [6]) that we can recover such a function exactly, with high probability,
from n & p(Ω) log p(Ω) samples placed uniformly at random. If there is measurement noise, the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

