Improving Policy-Constrained Kidney Exchange
via Pre-Screening

Duncan C McElfresh
Mathematics Department
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
dmcelfre@umd.edu

Michael Curry
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
curry@cs.umd.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.

John P Dickerson
Computer Science Department
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
john@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
In barter exchanges, participants swap goods with one another without exchanging
money; these exchanges are often facilitated by a central clearinghouse, with the
goal of maximizing the aggregate quality (or number) of swaps. Barter exchanges
are subject to many forms of uncertainty–in participant preferences, the feasibility
and quality of various swaps, and so on. Our work is motivated by kidney exchange,
a real-world barter market in which patients in need of a kidney transplant swap
their willing living donors, in order to find a better match. Modern exchanges
include 2- and 3-way swaps, making the kidney exchange clearing problem NPhard. Planned transplants often fail for a variety of reasons–if the donor organ is
rejected by the recipient’s medical team, or if the donor and recipient are found
to be medically incompatible. Due to 2- and 3-way swaps, failed transplants can
“cascade” through an exchange; one US-based exchange estimated that about 85%
of planned transplants failed in 2019. Many optimization-based approaches have
been designed to avoid these failures; however most exchanges cannot implement
these methods, due to legal and policy constraints. Instead, we consider a setting
where exchanges can query the preferences of certain donors and recipients–asking
whether they would accept a particular transplant. We characterize this as a twostage decision problem, in which the exchange program (a) queries a small number
of transplants before committing to a matching, and (b) constructs a matching
according to fixed policy. We show that selecting these edges is a challenging
combinatorial problem, which is non-monotonic and non-submodular, in addition to
being NP-hard. We propose both a greedy heuristic and a Monte Carlo tree search,
which outperforms previous approaches, using experiments on both synthetic data
and real kidney exchange data from the United Network for Organ Sharing.

1

Introduction

We consider a multi-stage decision problem in which a decision-maker uses a fixed policy to solve
a hard (stochastic) problem. Before using the policy, the decision-maker can first measure some of
the uncertain problem parameters–in a sense, guiding the policy toward a better solution. Our primary
motivation is kidney exchange, a process where patients in need of a kidney transplant swap their
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

