Counterfactual Predictions under Runtime
Confounding

Amanda Coston
Heinz College & Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
acoston@cs.cmu.edu

Edward H. Kennedy
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
edward@stat.cmu.edu

Alexandra Chouldechova
Heinz College
Carnegie Mellon University
achould@cmu.edu

Abstract
Algorithms are commonly used to predict outcomes under a particular decision or
intervention, such as predicting likelihood of default if a loan is approved. Generally, to learn such counterfactual prediction models from observational data on
historical decisions and corresponding outcomes, one must measure all factors that
jointly affect the outcome and the decision taken. Motivated by decision support
applications, we study the counterfactual prediction task in the setting where all
relevant factors are captured in the historical data, but it is infeasible, undesirable,
or impermissible to use some such factors in the prediction model. We refer to
this setting as runtime confounding. We propose a doubly-robust procedure for
learning counterfactual prediction models in this setting. Our theoretical analysis
and experimental results suggest that our method often outperforms competing
approaches. We also present a validation procedure for evaluating the performance
of counterfactual prediction methods.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic tools are increasingly prevalent in domains such as health care, education, lending,
criminal justice, and child welfare [4, 38, 18, 15, 9]. In many cases, the tools are not intended to
replace human decision-making, but rather to distill rich case information into a simpler form, such
as a risk score, to inform human decision makers [3, 11]. The type of information that these tools
need to convey is often counterfactual in nature. Decision-makers need to know what is likely to
happen if they choose to take a particular action. For instance, an undergraduate program advisor
determining which students to recommend for a personalized case management program might wish
to know the likelihood that a given student will graduate if enrolled in the program. In child welfare,
case workers and their supervisors may wish to know the likelihood of positive outcomes for a family
under different possible types of supportive service offerings.
A common challenge to developing valid counterfactual prediction models is that all the data available
for training and evaluation is observational: the data reflects historical decisions and outcomes under
those decisions rather than randomized trials intended to assess outcomes under different policies. If
the data is confounded—that is, if there are factors not captured in the data that influenced both the
outcome of interest and historical decisions—valid counterfactual prediction may not be possible. In
this paper we consider the setting where all relevant factors are captured in the data, and so historical
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

