Calibrating CNNs for Lifelong Learning

Pravendra Singh∗1 , Vinay Kumar Verma∗2 , Pratik Mazumder1 ,
Lawrence Carin2 , Piyush Rai1
1
2
CSE Department, IIT Kanpur, India
Duke University, USA
psingh@cse.iitk.ac.in, vinaykumar.verma@duke.edu,
pratikm@cse.iitk.ac.in, lcarin@duke.edu, piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract
We present an approach for lifelong/continual learning of convolutional neural
networks (CNN) that does not suffer from the problem of catastrophic forgetting when moving from one task to the other. We show that the activation maps
generated by the CNN trained on the old task can be calibrated using very few
calibration parameters, to become relevant to the new task. Based on this, we
calibrate the activation maps produced by each network layer using spatial and
channel-wise calibration modules and train only these calibration parameters for
each new task in order to perform lifelong learning. Our calibration modules introduce significantly less computation and parameters as compared to the approaches
that dynamically expand the network. Our approach is immune to catastrophic
forgetting since we store the task-adaptive calibration parameters, which contain
all the task-specific knowledge and is exclusive to each task. Further, our approach
does not require storing data samples from the old tasks, which is done by many
replay based methods. We perform extensive experiments on multiple benchmark
datasets (SVHN, CIFAR, ImageNet, and MS-Celeb), all of which show substantial improvements over state-of-the-art methods (e.g., a 29% absolute increase in
accuracy on CIFAR-100 with 10 classes at a time). On large-scale datasets, our
approach yields 23.8% and 9.7% absolute increase in accuracy on ImageNet-100
and MS-Celeb-10K datasets, respectively, by employing very few (0.51% and
0.35% of model parameters) task-adaptive calibration parameters.

1

Introduction

Humans are adept at continual/lifelong learning of multiple tasks in a sequence, while not forgetting
the knowledge acquired from earlier tasks when subjected to new learning tasks. Unfortunately, deep
neural networks do not have such an inherent property. It has been well-recognized that deep neural
networks suffer from the problem of catastrophic forgetting [1], e.g., in a categorization task, the
network performance on the previously trained categories tends to fall drastically as if the network
has “forgotten” those categories of data.
Continual learning [2, 3] involves training the network in such a way that it can continually learn from
tasks that arrive sequentially and add to its existing knowledge base instead of replacing knowledge
about the older tasks. A trivial solution to this is to simply store all the data from all the tasks as and
when they arrive so that whenever a new task arrives, we can train the network on all the previous
task data and the current task data. However, deep learning is used in many diverse applications,
where storing such a large amount of data is not feasible. Therefore, an incrementally trained model
must be able to learn from new tasks that arrive sequentially by only training on that task and still
retain the knowledge gained from the previous task without having to re-train on all the previously
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

