Funnel-Transformer: Filtering out Sequential
Redundancy for Efficient Language Processing

Zihang Dai∗12 , Guokun Lai∗1 , Yiming Yang1 , Quoc V. Le2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Google AI Brain Team
{dzihang,guokun,yiming}@cs.cmu.edu, qvl@google.com

Abstract
With the success of language pretraining, it is highly desirable to develop more
efficient architectures of good scalability that can exploit the abundant unlabeled
data at a lower cost. To improve the efficiency, we examine the much-overlooked
redundancy in maintaining a full-length token-level presentation, especially for
tasks that only require a single-vector presentation of the sequence. With this intuition, we propose Funnel-Transformer which gradually compresses the sequence
of hidden states to a shorter one and hence reduces the computation cost. More
importantly, by re-investing the saved FLOPs from length reduction in constructing
a deeper or wider model, we further improve the model capacity. In addition, to
perform token-level predictions as required by common pretraining objectives,
Funnel-Transformer is able to recover a deep representation for each token from
the reduced hidden sequence via a decoder. Empirically, with comparable or fewer
FLOPs, Funnel-Transformer outperforms the standard Transformer on a wide
variety of sequence-level prediction tasks, including text classification, language
understanding, and reading comprehension.1

1

Introduction

With the recent success of unsupervised language pretraining [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12],
the power of neural self-attention models (a.k.a. Transformer) [13] has been pushed to a new level,
leading to dramatic advancements in machine learning and natural language processing (NLP). More
importantly, it has been observed that with more FLOPs invested in longer pretraining and/or larger
models, the performance of pretrained Transformer models consistently improve. However, it is
extremely expensive to pretrain or even just to finetune the state-of-the-art self-attention models, as
they require much more FLOPs and memory resources compared to traditional models in NLP. This
largely limits their applications and success in more fields.
Given this challenge, there has been an increasing amount of efforts to reduce the costs of pretraining
and finetuning self-attention models. From the perspective of post-pretraining processing, typical
approaches include distillation, pruning and quantization of various kinds, which try to derive a
lighter model from an well-pretrained model by taking advantage of the richer signals in the larger
model or learning to remove less important operations. Another line of research aims at designing
an architecture that not only has a lower resource-to-performance ratio (more efficient) but also
scales as well as the Transformer, at least in certain domains. Most of such methods build upon
the Transformer backbone and focus on redesigning its building blocks. Representative solutions
include searching for better micro operation or macro module designs [14, 15], replacing the full
pairwise attention with local operations such as convolution [16] and dynamic convolution [17], and
optimizing the hidden size combinations for existing blocks [18].
∗
1

Equal contribution.
The code and pretrained checkpoints are available at github.com/laiguokun/Funnel-Transformer.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

