Improving model calibration with accuracy versus
uncertainty optimization

Ranganath Krishnan
Intel Labs
ranganath.krishnan@intel.com

Omesh Tickoo
Intel Labs
omesh.tickoo@intel.com

Abstract
Obtaining reliable and accurate quantification of uncertainty estimates from deep
neural networks is important in safety-critical applications. A well-calibrated
model should be accurate when it is certain about its prediction and indicate high
uncertainty when it is likely to be inaccurate. Uncertainty calibration is a challenging problem as there is no ground truth available for uncertainty estimates.
We propose an optimization method that leverages the relationship between accuracy and uncertainty as an anchor for uncertainty calibration. We introduce a
differentiable accuracy versus uncertainty calibration (AvUC) loss function that
allows a model to learn to provide well-calibrated uncertainties, in addition to
improved accuracy. We also demonstrate the same methodology can be extended to
post-hoc uncertainty calibration on pretrained models. We illustrate our approach
with mean-field stochastic variational inference and compare with state-of-the-art
methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate our approach yields better model
calibration than existing methods on large-scale image classification tasks under
distributional shift.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic deep neural networks (DNNs) enable quantification of principled uncertainty estimates,
which are essential to understand the model predictions for reliable decision making in safety critical
applications [1]. In addition to obtaining accurate predictions from the model, it is important for
the model to indicate when it is likely to make incorrect predictions. Various probabilistic methods
have been proposed to capture uncertainty estimates from DNNs including Bayesian [2–8] and
non-Bayesian [9, 10] formulations. In spite of recent advances in probabilistic deep learning to
improve model robustness, obtaining accurate quantification of uncertainty estimates from DNNs is
still an open research problem. A well-calibrated model should be confident about its predictions
when it is accurate and indicate high uncertainty when making inaccurate predictions. Modern neural
networks are poorly calibrated [11, 12] as they tend to be overconfident on incorrect predictions.
Negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss is conventionally used for training the neural networks in multiclass classification tasks. Miscalibration in DNNs has been linked to overfitting of NLL [11, 13].
Probabilistic DNNs fail to provide calibrated uncertainty in between separated regions of observations
due to model misspecification and the use of approximate inference [14–16]. Overcoming the problem
of poor calibration in modern neural networks is an active area of research [11–21].
In real-world settings, the observed data distribution may shift from training distribution (dataset
shift [22]) and there are possibilities of observing novel inputs that are far-off from training data
manifold (out-of-distribution). DNN model predictions have been shown to be unreliable under
such distributional shift [20, 23, 24]. Obtaining reliable uncertainties even under distributional
shift is important to build robust AI systems for successful deployment in the real-world [25, 26].
Uncertainty calibration will also help in detecting distributional shift to caution AI practitioners,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

