GANSpace: Discovering Interpretable GAN Controls

Erik Härkönen1,2
1

Aaron Hertzmann2

Aalto University

2

Jaakko Lehtinen1,3

Adobe Research

3

Sylvain Paris2

NVIDIA

Abstract
This paper describes a simple technique to analyze Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and create interpretable controls for image synthesis, such as change
of viewpoint, aging, lighting, and time of day. We identify important latent directions based on Principal Component Analysis (PCA) applied either in latent space
or feature space. Then, we show that a large number of interpretable controls can
be defined by layer-wise perturbation along the principal directions. Moreover, we
show that BigGAN can be controlled with layer-wise inputs in a StyleGAN-like
manner. We show results on different GANs trained on various datasets, and demonstrate good qualitative matches to edit directions found through earlier supervised
approaches.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8], like BigGAN [5] and StyleGAN [10, 11], are powerful
image synthesis models that can generate a wide variety of high-quality images, and have already
been adopted by digital artists [2]. Unfortunately, such models provide little direct control over image
content, other than selecting image classes or adjusting StyleGAN’s style vectors. Current attempts
to add user control over the output focus on supervised learning of latent directions [9, 7, 25, 19, 16],
GAN training with labeled images [12, 22, 21]. However, this requires expensive manual supervision
for each new control to be learned. A few methods provide useful control over spatial layout of the
generated image [14, 26, 4, 3], provided a user is willing to paint label or edge maps.
This paper shows how to identify new interpretable control directions for existing GANs, without requiring post hoc supervision or expensive optimization: rather than setting out to find a representation
for particular concepts (“show me your representation for smile”), our exploratory approach makes it
easy to browse through the concepts that the GAN has learned. We build on two main discoveries.
First, we show that important directions in GAN latent spaces can be found by applying Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) in latent space for StyleGAN, and feature space for BigGAN. Second,
we show how BigGAN can be modified to allow StyleGAN-like layer-wise style mixing and control,
without retraining. Using these ideas, we show that layer-wise decomposition of PCA edit directions
leads to many interpretable controls. Identifying useful control directions then involves an optional
one-time user labeling effort.
These mechanisms are algorithmically extremely simple, but lead to surprisingly powerful controls.
They allow control over image attributes that vary from straightforward high-level properties such
as object pose and shape, to many more-nuanced properties like lighting, facial attributes, and
landscape attributes (Figure 1). These directions, moreover, provide understanding about how the
GAN operates, by visualizing its “EiGANspace.” We show results with BigGAN512-deep and many
different StyleGAN and StyleGAN2 models, and demonstrate many novel types of image controls.
One approach is to attempt to train new GANs to be disentangled, e.g., [17]. However, training general
models like BigGAN requires enormous computational resources beyond the reach of nearly all
potential researchers and users. Hence, we expect that research to interpret and extend the capabilities
of existing GANs will become increasingly important.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

