Ultrahyperbolic Representation Learning

Marc T. Law

Jos Stam
NVIDIA

Abstract
In machine learning, data is usually represented in a (flat) Euclidean space where
distances between points are along straight lines. Researchers have recently considered more exotic (non-Euclidean) Riemannian manifolds such as hyperbolic space
which is well suited for tree-like data. In this paper, we propose a representation
living on a pseudo-Riemannian manifold of constant nonzero curvature. It is a
generalization of hyperbolic and spherical geometries where the nondegenerate
metric tensor need not be positive definite. We provide the necessary learning tools
in this geometry and extend gradient-based optimization techniques. More specifically, we provide closed-form expressions for distances via geodesics and define a
descent direction to minimize some objective function. Our novel framework is
applied to graph representations.

1

Introduction

In most machine learning applications, data representations lie on a smooth manifold [16] and
the training procedure is optimized with an iterative algorithm such as line search or trust region
methods [20]. In most cases, the smooth manifold is Riemannian, which means that it is equipped
with a positive definite metric. Due to the positive definiteness of the metric, the negative of the
(Riemannian) gradient is a descent direction that can be exploited to iteratively minimize some
objective function [1].
The choice of metric on the Riemannian manifold determines how relations between points are
quantified. The most common Riemannian manifold is the flat Euclidean space, which has constant
zero curvature and the distances between points are measured by straight lines. An intuitive example
of non-Euclidean Riemannian manifold is the spherical model (i.e. representations lie on a sphere)
that has constant positive curvature and is used for instance in face recognition [25, 26]. On the
sphere, geodesic distances are a function of angles. Similarly, Riemannian spaces of constant negative
curvature are called hyperbolic [23]. Such spaces were shown by Gromov to be well suited to
represent tree-like structures [10]. The machine learning community has adopted these spaces to
learn tree-like graphs [5] and hierarchical data structures [11, 18, 19], and also to compute means in
tree-like shapes [6, 7].
In this paper, we consider a class of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds of constant nonzero curvature [28]
not previously considered in machine learning. These manifolds not only generalize the hyperbolic
and spherical geometries mentioned above, but also contain hyperbolic and spherical submanifolds
and can therefore describe relationships specific to those geometries. The difference is that we
consider the larger class of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds where the considered nondegenerate metric
tensor need not be positive definite. Optimizing a cost function on our non-flat ultrahyperbolic space
requires a descent direction method that follows a path along the curved manifold. We achieve this by
employing tools from differential geometry such as geodesics and exponential maps. The theoretical
contributions in this paper are two-fold: (1) explicit methods to calculate dissimilarities and (2)
general optimization tools on pseudo-Riemannian manifolds of constant nonzero curvature.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

