Graph Stochastic Neural Networks for
Semi-supervised Learning

Haibo Wang1, 2,∗, Chuan Zhou3, 4 , Xin Chen2,∗, Jia Wu5 , Shirui Pan6 , Jilong Wang2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
6
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
{wang-hb15, cx18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zhouchuan@amss.ac.cn,
jia.wu@mq.edu.au, shirui.pan@monash.edu, wjl@cernet.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable performance in the
task of the semi-supervised node classification. However, most existing models
learn a deterministic classification function, which lack sufficient flexibility to
explore better choices in the presence of kinds of imperfect observed data such
as the scarce labeled nodes and noisy graph structure. To improve the rigidness
and inflexibility of deterministic classification functions, this paper proposes a
novel framework named Graph Stochastic Neural Networks (GSNN), which aims
to model the uncertainty of the classification function by simultaneously learning
a family of functions, i.e., a stochastic function. Specifically, we introduce a
learnable graph neural network coupled with a high-dimensional latent variable to
model the distribution of the classification function, and further adopt the amortised
variational inference to approximate the intractable joint posterior for missing
labels and the latent variable. By maximizing the lower-bound of the likelihood
for observed node labels, the instantiated models can be trained in an end-to-end
manner effectively. Extensive experiments on three real-world datasets show that
GSNN achieves substantial performance gain in different scenarios compared with
state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Graphs are essential tools to represent complex relationships among entities in various domains,
such as social networks, citation networks, biological networks and physical networks. Analyzing
graph data has become one of the most important topics in the machine learning community. As an
abstraction of many graph mining tasks, semi-supervised node classification, which aims to predict
the labels of unlabeled nodes given the graph structure, node features and labels of partial nodes, has
received significant attention in recent years. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), in particular, have
achieved impressive performance in the graph-based semi-supervised learning task [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
Most existing GNN models are designed to learn a deterministic classification function. This kind of
design makes them look simple and artistic, but the other side of the coin is that the deterministic
classification function makes these GNN models lack sufficient flexibility to cater for kinds of
imperfect observed data. For example, in many real situations, the ground-truth labels of nodes
∗

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

