Inductive Quantum Embedding

Santosh K. Srivastava∗ , Dinesh Khandelwal∗ , Dhiraj Madan∗ , Dinesh Garg∗,
Hima Karanam, L Venkata Subramaniam
IBM Research AI, India
sasriva5, dhikhand1, dmadan07, garg.dinesh, hkaranam, lvsubram@in.ibm.com

Abstract
Quantum logic inspired embedding (aka Quantum Embedding (QE)) of a
Knowledge-Base (KB) was proposed recently by Garg et al. [1]. It is claimed that
the QE preserves the logical structure of the input KB given in the form of unary
and binary predicates hierarchy. Such structure preservation allows one to perform
Boolean logic style deductive reasoning directly over these embedding vectors.
The original QE idea, however, is limited to the transductive (not inductive) setting.
Moreover, the original QE scheme runs quite slow on real applications involving
millions of entities. This paper alleviates both of these key limitations. We start by
reformulating the original QE problem to allow for the induction. On the way, we
also underscore some interesting analytic and geometric properties of the solution
and leverage them to design a faster training scheme. As an application, we show
that one can achieve state-of-the-art performance on the well-known NLP task of
fine-grained entity type classification by using the inductive QE approach. Our
training runs 9-times faster than the original QE scheme on this task.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Representation (KR) is a field of AI aiming at representing the worldly information inside
a computer so as to solve complex tasks in an automated manner. Automated Reasoning is another
important field of AI and goes hand in hand with KR because one of the main purposes of explicitly
representing knowledge is to be able to reason about that knowledge, make inferences, assert new
knowledge, etc. Virtually all knowledge representation techniques have an automated reasoning
engine as part of the overall system, for example, automated question answering, document search,
automated dialogue systems, etc.
Predominantly, there are two approaches to KR - (i) Discrete symbolic representation, (ii) Continuous
vector representation [2]. In symbolic representation, knowledge facts are represented by symbols,
and some form of logical reasoning (for example, first-order logic) is used to infer new facts and
make deductions. Symbolic reasoning is exact but slow, brittle, and noise-sensitive. Popular examples
of symbolic form of knowledge representation include semantic nets, frames, and ontologies [3].
Vector form representation is a complementary approach to the symbolic form representation. Vector
form representation stems from the field of Statistical Relational Learning [4, 5], where knowledge is
embedded into a vector space using a distributional representation capturing (dis)similarities among
entities and predicates. Vector representations are fast, noise-robust, but approximate. Despite being
fast, most of the vector representation techniques do not offer any explicit means of preserving the
input KB’s logical structure inside the vector space. Thus, the logical reasoning tasks typically experience a lower accuracy when working with vector representation than the symbolic representation
of the knowledge. Making these observations, Dominic [6, 7] suggested using Quantum Logic [8]
style framework for word meaning disambiguation problem in keyword-based search engines. This
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

