CaSPR: Learning Canonical Spatiotemporal
Point Cloud Representations

Davis Rempe1 Tolga Birdal1 Yongheng Zhao2 Zan Gojcic3
Srinath Sridhar1 Leonidas J. Guibas1
1
Stanford University 2 University of Padova 3 ETH Zürich
geometry.stanford.edu/projects/caspr

Abstract
We propose CaSPR, a method to learn object-centric Canonical Spatiotemporal
Point Cloud Representations of dynamically moving or evolving objects. Our
goal is to enable information aggregation over time and the interrogation of object
state at any spatiotemporal neighborhood in the past, observed or not. Different
from previous work, CaSPR learns representations that support spacetime continuity, are robust to variable and irregularly spacetime-sampled point clouds, and
generalize to unseen object instances. Our approach divides the problem into
two subtasks. First, we explicitly encode time by mapping an input point cloud
sequence to a spatiotemporally-canonicalized object space. We then leverage
this canonicalization to learn a spatiotemporal latent representation using neural
ordinary differential equations and a generative model of dynamically evolving
shapes using continuous normalizing flows. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on several applications including shape reconstruction, camera pose estimation, continuous spatiotemporal sequence reconstruction, and correspondence
estimation from irregularly or intermittently sampled observations.
Flow in space (CNF)

Introduction

The visible geometric properties of objects around us
are constantly evolving over time due to object motion,
articulation, deformation, or observer movement. Examples include the rigid motion of cars on the road, the
deformation of clothes in the wind, and the articulation
of moving humans. The ability to capture and reconstruct these spatiotemporally changing geometric object
properties is critical in applications like autonomous driving, robotics, and mixed reality. Recent work has made
progress on learning object shape representations from
static 3D observations [49, 52, 53, 62, 73] and dynamic
point clouds [9, 11, 40, 41, 45, 50, 80]. Yet, important
limitations remain in terms of the lack of temporal continuity, robustness, and category-level generalization.

Flow in time (Latent ODE)

1

Figure 1: CaSPR builds a point cloud representation of (partially observed) objects continuously in both space (x-axis) and time (yaxis), while canonicalizing for extrinsic object
properties like pose.

In this paper, we address the problem of learning object-centric representations that can aggregate and
encode spatiotemporal (ST) changes in object shape as seen from a 3D sensor. This is challenging
since dynamic point clouds captured by depth sensors or LIDAR are often incomplete and sparsely
sampled over space and time. Furthermore, even point clouds corresponding to adjacent frames
in a sequence will experience large sampling variation. Ideally, we would like spatiotemporal
representations to satisfy several desirable properties. First, representations should allow us to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

