A Flexible Framework for Designing Trainable Priors
with Adaptive Smoothing and Game Encoding

Bruno Lecouat
Inria∗
bruno.lecouat@inria.fr

Jean Ponce
Inria∗
jean.ponce@inria.fr

Julien Mairal
Inria†
julien.mairal@inria.fr

Abstract
We introduce a general framework for designing and training neural network
layers whose forward passes can be interpreted as solving non-smooth convex
optimization problems, and whose architectures are derived from an optimization
algorithm. We focus on convex games, solved by local agents represented by the
nodes of a graph and interacting through regularization functions. This approach
is appealing for solving imaging problems, as it allows the use of classical image
priors within deep models that are trainable end to end. The priors used in this
presentation include variants of total variation, Laplacian regularization, bilateral
filtering, sparse coding on learned dictionaries, and non-local self similarities.
Our models are fully interpretable as well as parameter and data efficient. Our
experiments demonstrate their effectiveness on a large diversity of tasks ranging
from image denoising and compressed sensing for fMRI to dense stereo matching.

1

Introduction

Despite the undeniable successes of deep learning in domains as varied as image processing [63]
and recognition [21], natural language processing [10], speech [43] or bioinformatics [1], feedforward neural networks are often maligned as being “black boxes” that, except perhaps for their top
classification or regression layers, are difficult or even impossible to interpret. In imaging applications,
for example, the elementary operations typically consist of convolutions and pointwise nonlinearities,
with many parameters adjusted by backpropagation, and no obvious functional interpretation.
In this paper, we consider instead network architectures explicitly derived from an optimization
algorithm, and thus interpretable from a functional point of view. The first instance of this approach
we are aware of is LISTA [20], which provides a fast approximation of sparse coding. Yet, we are not
content to design an architecture that provides a fast approximation to a given optimization problem,
but we also want to learn a data representation pertinent for the corresponding task. This yields
an unusual machine learning paradigm, where one learns the parameters of a parametric objective
function used to represent data, while designing an optimization algorithm to minimize it efficiently.
Even though interpretability is not always necessary to achieve good prediction, this point of view,
sometimes called algorithm unrolling [17, 40], has proven successful for solving inverse imaging
problems, providing effective and parameter-efficient models. This approach allows the use of
domain-specific priors within trainable deep models, leading to a large number of applications such as
compressive imaging [53, 62], demosaicking [26], denoising [26, 50, 52], and super-resolution [56] .
However, existing approaches are often limited to simple image priors such as sparsity induced by the
`1 -norm [52], or differentiable regularization functions [27], and a general algorithmic framework
∗
†

Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France
Inria, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

