Generalization bound of globally optimal non-convex
neural network training: Transportation map
estimation by infinite dimensional Langevin dynamics

Taiji Suzuki
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We introduce a new theoretical framework to analyze deep learning optimization
with connection to its generalization error. Existing frameworks such as mean
field theory and neural tangent kernel theory for neural network optimization analysis typically require taking limit of infinite width of the network to show its global
convergence. This potentially makes it difficult to directly deal with finite width
network; especially in the neural tangent kernel regime, we cannot reveal favorable properties of neural networks beyond kernel methods. To realize more natural
analysis, we consider a completely different approach in which we formulate the
parameter training as a transportation map estimation and show its global convergence via the theory of the infinite dimensional Langevin dynamics. This enables
us to analyze narrow and wide networks in a unifying manner. Moreover, we give
generalization gap and excess risk bounds for the solution obtained by the dynamics. The excess risk bound achieves the so-called fast learning rate. In particular,
we show an exponential convergence for a classification problem and a minimax
optimal rate for a regression problem.

1

Introduction

Despite the extensive empirical success of deep learning, there are several missing issues in theoretical understanding of its optimization and generalizations. Even though there are several theoretical
analyses on its generalization error and representation ability [46, 8, 2, 67, 56], they are not necessarily well connected with an optimization procedure. The biggest difficulty in neural network
optimization lies in its non-convexity. Recently, this difficulty of non-convexity is partly resolved by
considering infinite width limit of networks as performed in mean field theory [58, 40] and Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) [32, 22]. These analyses deal with different scaling of parameters for taking
the limit of the width, but they share a similar spirit that an appropriate gradient descent direction
can be found in an over-parameterized setting until convergence.
The mean field analysis formulates the neural network training as a gradient flow in the space of
probability measures over the weights. The gradient flow corresponding to a deterministic dynamics
of the weights can be analyzed as an interacting particle system [47, 18, 53, 54]. On the other
hand, a stochastic dynamics of an interacting particle system can be formulated as McKean–Vlasov
dynamics, and convergence to the global optimal is ensured by the ergodicity of this dynamics
[40, 41]. Intuitively, inducing stochastic noise makes the solution easier to get out of local optimal
and facilitates convergence to the global optimal.
The second regime, NTK, deals with larger scaling than the mean field regime, and the gradient
descent dynamics is approximated by that in the tangent space at the initial solution [32, 23, 1, 22, 3].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

