Regularized linear autoencoders recover the principal
components, eventually

Xuchan Bao, James Lucas, Sushant Sachdeva, Roger Grosse
University of Toronto; Vector Institute
{jennybao,jlucas,sachdeva,rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Our understanding of learning input-output relationships with neural nets has
improved rapidly in recent years, but little is known about the convergence of
the underlying representations, even in the simple case of linear autoencoders
(LAEs). We show that when trained with proper regularization, LAEs can directly
learn the optimal representation – ordered, axis-aligned principal components. We
analyze two such regularization schemes: non-uniform `2 regularization and a
deterministic variant of nested dropout [24]. Though both regularization schemes
converge to the optimal representation, we show that this convergence is slow
due to ill-conditioning that worsens with increasing latent dimension. We show
that the inefficiency of learning the optimal representation is not inevitable – we
present a simple modification to the gradient descent update that greatly speeds up
convergence empirically.1

1

Introduction

While there has been rapid progress in understanding the learning dynamics of neural networks,
most such work focuses on the networks’ ability to fit input-output relationships. However, many
machine learning problems require learning representations with general utility. For example, the
representations of a pre-trained neural network that successfully classifies the ImageNet dataset [6]
may be reused for other tasks. It is difficult in general to analyze the dynamics of learning representations, as metrics such as training and validation accuracy reveal little about them. Furthermore,
analysis through the Neural Tangent Kernel shows that in some settings, neural networks can learn
input-output mappings without finding meaningful representations [11].
In some special cases, the optimal representations are known, allowing us to analyze representation
learning exactly. In this paper, we focus on linear autoencoders (LAE). With specially chosen
regularizers or update rules, their optimal weight representations consist of ordered, axis-aligned
principal directions of the input data.
It is well known that the unregularized LAE finds solutions in the principal component spanning
subspace [3], but in general, the individual components and corresponding eigenvalues cannot be
recovered. This is because any invertible linear transformation and its inverse can be inserted between
the encoder and the decoder without changing the loss. Kunin et al. [17] showed that applying `2
regularization on the encoder and decoder reduces the symmetry of the stationary point solutions to
the group of orthogonal transformations. The individual principal directions can then be recovered by
applying the singular value decomposition (SVD) to the learned decoder weights.
We investigate how, with appropriate regularization, gradient-based optimization can further break the
symmetry, and directly learn the individual principal directions. We analyze two such regularization
schemes: non-uniform `2 regularization and a deterministic variant of nested dropout [24].
1

The code is available at https://github.com/XuchanBao/linear-ae

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

