Multilabel Classification by Hierarchical Partitioning
and Data-dependent Grouping

Shashanka Ubaru∗
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

Sanjeeb Dash
IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

Arya Mazumdar
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA

Oktay Gunluk
Operations Research and Information Engg
Cornell Universty, Ithaca, NY

Abstract
In modern multilabel classification problems, each data instance belongs to a small
number of classes from a large set of classes. In other words, these problems involve
learning very sparse binary label vectors. Moreover, in large-scale problems, the
labels typically have certain (unknown) hierarchy. In this paper we exploit the
sparsity of label vectors and the hierarchical structure to embed them in lowdimensional space using label groupings. Consequently, we solve the classification
problem in a much lower dimensional space and then obtain labels in the original
space using an appropriately defined lifting. Our method builds on the work of [35],
where the idea of group testing was also explored for multilabel classification. We
first present a novel data-dependent grouping approach, where we use a group
construction based on a low-rank Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) of the
label matrix of training instances. The construction also allows us, using recent
results, to develop a fast prediction algorithm that has a logarithmic runtime in
the number of labels. We then present a hierarchical partitioning approach that
exploits the label hierarchy in large-scale problems to divide up the large label space
and create smaller sub-problems, which can then be solved independently via the
grouping approach. Numerical results on many benchmark datasets illustrate that,
compared to other popular methods, our proposed methods achieve competitive
accuracy with significantly lower computational costs.

1

Introduction

Multilabel classification (MLC) problems involve learning how to predict a (small) subset of classes
a given data instance belongs to from a large set of classes. Given a set of labeled training data
{xi , yi }ni=1 instances with input feature vectors xi ∈ Rp and label vectors yi ∈ {0, 1}d , we wish
to learn the relationship between xi s and yi s in order to predict the label vector of a new data
instance. MLC problems are encountered in many domains such as recommendation systems [16],
bioinformatics [32], computer vision [9], natural language processing [26], and music [33]. In the
large-scale MLC problems that we are interested in, the number of labels d can be as large as O(n) but
the `0 -norm of the label vectors is quite small (constant). In some modern applications, the number
of classes can be in the thousands, or even millions [40, 15]. However, the label vectors are typically
sparse as individual instances belong to just a few classes. Examples of such large-scale MLC
problems include image and video annotation for searches [39, 9], ads recommendation and web
∗

Corresponding Author. Email : Shashanka.Ubaru@ibm.com

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

