Adaptive Gradient Quantization
for Data-Parallel SGD
Fartash Faghri1,2⇤

Iman Tabrizian1,2⇤

Daniel M. Roy1,2
1

University of Toronto

faghri@cs.toronto.edu

Ilia Markov3

Dan Alistarh3,4

Ali Ramezani-Kebrya2
2

Vector Institute

3

IST Austria

iman.tabrizian@mail.utoronto.ca

4

NeuralMagic

alir@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Many communication-efficient variants of SGD use gradient quantization schemes.
These schemes are often heuristic and fixed over the course of training. We
empirically observe that the statistics of gradients of deep models change during
the training. Motivated by this observation, we introduce two adaptive quantization
schemes, ALQ and AMQ. In both schemes, processors update their compression
schemes in parallel by efficiently computing sufficient statistics of a parametric
distribution. We improve the validation accuracy by almost 2% on CIFAR-10 and
1% on ImageNet in challenging low-cost communication setups. Our adaptive
methods are also significantly more robust to the choice of hyperparameters.

1

Introduction
1e−3

Average 9ariance

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants are cur1.1
rently the method of choice for training deep models. Yet,
large datasets cannot always be trained on a single com1.0
putational node due to memory and scalability limitations.
0.9
Data-parallel SGD is a remarkably scalable variant, in particular on multi-GPU systems [1–10]. However, despite its
0.8
many advantages, distribution introduces new challenges
for optimization algorithms. In particular, data-parallel
0
2
4
6
8
SGD has large communication cost due to the need to
1e4
IterationV
transmit potentially huge gradient vectors. Ideally, we
want distributed optimization methods that match the per- Figure 1: Changes in the average variance of
formance of SGD on a single hypothetical super machine, normalized gradient coordinates in a ResNetwhile paying a negligible communication cost.
32 model trained on CIFAR-10. Colors dis-

tinguish different runs with different seeds.

A common approach to reducing the communication cost Learning rate is decayed by a factor of 10
in data-parallel SGD is gradient compression and quan- twice at 40K and 60K iterations. The varitization [4, 11–16]. In full-precision data-parallel SGD, ance changes rapidly during the first epoch.
each processor broadcasts its locally computed stochastic The next noticeable change happens after the
gradient vector at every iteration, whereas in quantized first learning rate drop and another one apdata-parallel SGD, each processor compresses its stochas- pears after the second drop.
tic gradient before broadcasting. Current quantization
methods are either designed heuristically or fixed prior to training. Convergence rates in a stochastic
optimization problem are controlled by the trace of the gradient covariance matrix, which is referred
⇤

Equal contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

