Proximity Operator of the Matrix Perspective
Function and its Applications

Joong-Ho Won
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
wonj@stats.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We show that the matrix perspective function, which is jointly convex in the
Cartesian product of a standard Euclidean vector space and a conformal space
of symmetric matrices, has a proximity operator in an almost closed form. The
only implicit part is to solve a semismooth, univariate root finding problem. We
uncover the connection between our problem of study and the matrix nearness
problem. Through this connection, we propose a quadratically convergent Newton
algorithm for the root finding problem. Experiments verify that the evaluation of
the proximity operator requires at most 8 Newton steps, taking less than 5s for
2000 by 2000 matrices on a standard laptop. Using this routine as a building block,
we demonstrate the usefulness of the studied proximity operator in constrained
maximum likelihood estimation of Gaussian mean and covariance, peudolikelihoodbased graphical model selection, and a matrix variant of the scaled lasso problem.

1

Introduction

The main theme of this paper is the proximity operator of the matrix perspective function, defined as
1 T †
η Ω η, Ω  0, η ∈ R(Ω),
φ(Ω, η) = 2
∞,
otherwise,
for η ∈ Rp , the p-dimensional Euclidean space, and Ω ∈ Sp , the vector space of p × p symmetric
matrices. Matrix Ω† is the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of Ω. The range of Ω is denoted by R(Ω).
Relation  refers to the Löwner partial order of matrices, i.e., A  B means that A − B is positive
semidefinite. Function φ is jointly convex in Ω and η. An easy way to see this is to note that


1
(1)
φ(Ω, η) = sup η T w − wT Ωw
2
w∈Rp
[22, p. 70]. The supremand is linear in (Ω, η); a supremum of linear functions is convex. We will
shortly see that φ is also closed (lower semicontinuous). The name “matrix perspective” comes from
the perspective of a function frequently encountered in convex analysis. The (closed) perspective
g : Rd × R → R ∪ {∞} of a closed convex function f : Rd → R ∪ {∞} is defined as the closure of
function g̃(t, x) = tf (t−1 x) if t > 0, and ∞ otherwise [9, 18].
The proximity operator of a convex function f : Rd → R ∪ {+∞} is uniquely defined and denoted


1
2
proxγf (x) = arg min f (u) +
ku − xk2 , γ > 0.
2γ
u∈Rd
If we restrict Ω to be Ω = tI p where I p is the identity matrix of order p, then φ̄(t, η) := φ(tI p , η)
becomes the conventional perspective of the squared Euclidean norm function 12 k · k22 . In this special
case, a closed-form representation of the proximity operator of φ̄ has recently been found [10].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

