Precise expressions for random projections:
Low-rank approximation and randomized Newton
Michał Dereziński
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mderezin@berkeley.edu

Feynman Liang
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
feynman@berkeley.edu

Zhenyu Liao
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
zhenyu.liao@berkeley.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
It is often desirable to reduce the dimensionality of a large dataset by projecting
it onto a low-dimensional subspace. Matrix sketching has emerged as a powerful
technique for performing such dimensionality reduction very efficiently. Even
though there is an extensive literature on the worst-case performance of sketching,
existing guarantees are typically very different from what is observed in practice.
We exploit recent developments in the spectral analysis of random matrices to develop novel techniques that provide provably accurate expressions for the expected
value of random projection matrices obtained via sketching. These expressions can
be used to characterize the performance of dimensionality reduction in a variety of
common machine learning tasks, ranging from low-rank approximation to iterative
stochastic optimization. Our results apply to several popular sketching methods,
including Gaussian and Rademacher sketches, and they enable precise analysis of
these methods in terms of spectral properties of the data. Empirical results show
that the expressions we derive reflect the practical performance of these sketching
methods, down to lower-order effects and even constant factors.

1

Introduction

Many settings in modern machine learning, optimization and scientific computing require us to
work with data matrices that are so large that some form of dimensionality reduction is a necessary
component of the process. One of the most popular families of methods for dimensionality reduction,
coming from the literature on Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra (RandNLA), consists of dataoblivious sketches [Mah11, HMT11, Woo14]. Consider a large m ⇥ n matrix A. A data-oblivious
sketch of size k is the matrix SA, where S is a k ⇥ m random matrix such that E[ k1 S> S] = I, whose
distribution does not depend on A. This sketch reduces the first dimension of A from m to a much
smaller k (we assume without loss of generality that k ⌧ n  m), and an analogous procedure can
be defined for reducing the second dimension as well. This approximate representation of A is central
to many algorithms in areas such as linear regression, low-rank approximation, kernel methods, and
iterative second-order optimization. While there is a long line of research aimed at bounding the
worst-case approximation error of such representations, these bounds are often too loose to reflect
accurately the practical performance of these methods. In this paper, we develop new theory which
enables more precise analysis of the accuracy of sketched data representations.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

