The Adaptive Complexity of Maximizing a Gross
Substitutes Valuation
Ron Kupfer
The Hebrew University of Jerudalem
ron.kupfer@mail.huji.ac.il
Sharon Qian
Harvard University
sharonqian@g.harvard.edu

Eric Balkanski
Harvard University
ericbalkanski@g.harvard.edu
Yaron Singer
Harvard University
yaron@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the adaptive complexity of maximizing a monotone gross
substitutes function under a cardinality constraint. Our main result is an algorithm that achieves a 1 −  approximation in O(log n) adaptive rounds for any
constant  > 0, which is an exponential speedup in parallel running time compared to previously studied algorithms for gross substitutes functions. We show
that the algorithmic results are tight in the sense that there is no algorithm that
obtains a constant factor approximation in õ(log n) rounds. Both the upper and
lower bounds are under the assumption that queries are only on feasible sets (i.e.,
of size at most k). We also show that under a stronger model, where non-feasible
queries are allowed, there is no non-adaptive algorithm that obtains an approximation better than 1/2 + . Both lower bounds extend to the class of OXS functions.
Additionally, we conduct experiments on synthetic and real data sets to demonstrate the near-optimal performance and efficiency of the algorithm in practice.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the problem of maximizing gross substitutes functions in the adaptive complexity model. Gross substitutes are an extremely well-studied class of functions in microeconomics.
The concept of gross substitutes was first introduced in the seminal work by Arrow and Debreu as
a sufficient condition on the valuation functions of buyers to guarantee the existence of equilibria in
markets with indivisible items [1]. It was later shown to also be a necessary condition [20]. Gross
substitutes functions are also studied in the contexts of stable matchings in two-sided markets [2, 33],
combinatorial auctions [3], and trading networks [23, 25], and have been rediscovered in multiple
fields under different names. We refer the reader to [31] for a survey of the different definitions.
In theoretical computer science and optimization, gross substitutes are considered as a subclass of
submodular functions, as they satisfy the diminishing returns property. For monotone submodular functions, it is well known that a greedy algorithm that iteratively selects the element with the
maximal marginal contribution to its current solution obtains a 1 − 1/e approximation for maximization under a cardinality constraint [30] and that this bound is optimal for polynomial-time
algorithms [29, 19]. For gross substitutes functions, the greedy algorithm returns an optimal solution [13]. Thus, from a purely algorithmic perspective, gross substitutes represent an important
subclass of submodular functions: it is the most expressive class of submodular functions that can be
optimized exactly under cardinality constraints in polynomial time. Not only is gross substitutability
a sufficient condition for the optimality of greedy, but it is also a necessary condition [31].1
1
In the context of Walrasian equilibrium, gross substitutes correspond exactly to the class of functions for
which the greedy algorithm is optimal for all price vectors [31].

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

