Weakly-Supervised Reinforcement Learning for
Controllable Behavior
Lisa Lee1,2

Benjamin Eysenbach1,2
1

Ruslan Salakhutdinov1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Google Brain

3

Shane Gu2

Chelsea Finn2,3

Stanford University

lslee@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful framework for learning to take actions
to solve tasks. However, in many settings, an agent must winnow down the
inconceivably large space of all possible tasks to the single task that it is currently
being asked to solve. Can we instead constrain the space of tasks to those that are
semantically meaningful? In this work, we introduce a framework for using weak
supervision to automatically disentangle this semantically meaningful subspace
of tasks from the enormous space of nonsensical “chaff” tasks. We show that
this learned subspace enables efficient exploration and provides a representation
that captures distance between states. On a variety of challenging, vision-based
continuous control problems, our approach leads to substantial performance gains,
particularly as the complexity of the environment grows.

1

Introduction

A general purpose agent must be able to efficiently learn a diverse array of tasks through interacting
with the real world. The typical approach is to manually define a set of reward functions and only
learn the tasks induced by these reward functions [18, 37]. However, defining and tuning the reward
functions is labor intensive and places a significant burden on the user to specify reward functions
for all tasks that they care about. Designing reward functions that provide enough learning signal
yet still induce the correct behavior at convergence is challenging [34]. An alternative approach
is to parametrize a family of tasks, such as goal-reaching tasks, and learn a policy for each task
in this family [28, 38, 49, 61, 62, 71]. However, learning a single goal-conditioned policy for
reaching all goals is a challenging optimization problem and is prone to underfitting, especially in
high-dimensional tasks with limited data [12]. In this work, we aim to accelerate the acquisition of
goal-conditioned policies by narrowing the goal space through weak supervision. Answering this
question would allow an RL agent to prioritize exploring and learning meaningful tasks, resulting in
faster acquisition of behaviors for solving human-specified tasks.
How might we constrain the space of tasks to those that are semantically meaningful? Reward
functions and demonstrations are the predominant approaches to training RL agents, but they are
expensive to acquire [34]. Generally, demonstrations require expert humans to be present [15, 20, 47],
and it remains a challenge to acquire high-quality demonstration data from crowdsourcing [53]. In
contrast, human preferences and ranking schemes provide an interface for sources of supervision that
are easy and intuitive for humans to specify [11], and can scale with the collection of offline data
via crowd-sourcing. However, if we are interested in learning many tasks rather than just one, these
approaches do not effectively facilitate scalable learning of many different tasks or goals.
In this work, we demonstrate how weak supervision provides useful information to agents with
minimal burden, and how agents can leverage that supervision when learning in an environment. We
study one approach to using weak supervision in the goal-conditioned RL setting [2, 43, 57, 60, 66].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

