On Convergence of Nearest Neighbor Classifiers over
Feature Transformations
Luka Rimanic⇤
ETH Zurich
luka.rimanic@inf.ethz.ch

Cedric Renggli⇤
ETH Zurich
cedric.renggli@inf.ethz.ch

Bo Li
UIUC
lbo@illinois.edu

Ce Zhang
ETH Zurich
ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
The k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) classifier is a fundamental non-parametric machine
learning algorithm. However, it is well known that it suffers from the curse of
dimensionality, which is why in practice one often applies a kNN classifier on top
of a (pre-trained) feature transformation. From a theoretical perspective, most, if
not all theoretical results aimed at understanding the kNN classifier are derived
for the raw feature space. This leads to an emerging gap between our theoretical
understanding of kNN and its practical applications.
In this paper, we take a first step towards bridging this gap. We provide a novel
analysis on the convergence rates of a kNN classifier over transformed features.
This analysis requires in-depth understanding of the properties that connect both
the transformed space and the raw feature space. More precisely, we build our
convergence bound upon two key properties of the transformed space: (1) safety
– how well can one recover the raw posterior from the transformed space, and
(2) smoothness – how complex this recovery function is. Based on our result, we
are able to explain why some (pre-trained) feature transformations are better suited
for a kNN classifier than others. We empirically validate that both properties have
an impact on the kNN convergence on 30 feature transformations with 6 benchmark
datasets spanning from the vision to the text domain.

1

Introduction

The k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) algorithms form a simple and intuitive class of non-parametric
methods in pattern recognition. A kNN classifier assigns a label to an unseen point based on its k
closest neighbors from the training set using the maximal vote [1]. Even its simplest form, the 1NN
classifier, converges to an error rate that is at most twice the Bayes error – the minimal error of any
classifier [10]. Furthermore, when k = kn is a sequence satisfying kn /n ! 0, as n ! 1, the kNN
classifier is consistent, meaning that its error converges to the Bayes error almost surely [34]. In recent
times, kNN algorithms are popular, most often due to their simplicity and valuable properties that go
beyond accuracy: (a) evaluation of Shapley value in polynomial time, used to outperform a range of
other data valuation algorithms, whilst being orders of magnitude faster [19, 20, 21]; (b) estimation
of the Bayes error [10, 12, 33]; (c) robustness analysis [28, 39]; (d) efficiency in enabling tools such
as provable robust defenses [41]; (e) polynomial-time evaluation of the exact expectation of kNN
over a tuple-independent database [24], which is generally hard for other classifiers; (f) applications
to conformal inference tasks benefit from the fact that no training is required for running kNN [30].
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

