Continual Learning of a Mixed Sequence of
Similar and Dissimilar Tasks

1

Zixuan Ke1 , Bing Liu1,∗ and Xingchang Huang2
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago
2
ETH Zurich
{zke4, liub}@uic.edu, huangxch3@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing research on continual learning of a sequence of tasks focused on dealing
with catastrophic forgetting, where the tasks are assumed to be dissimilar and have
little shared knowledge. Some work has also been done to transfer previously
learned knowledge to the new task when the tasks are similar and have shared
knowledge. To the best of our knowledge, no technique has been proposed to learn a
sequence of mixed similar and dissimilar tasks that can deal with forgetting and also
transfer knowledge forward and backward. This paper proposes such a technique
to learn both types of tasks in the same network. For dissimilar tasks, the algorithm
focuses on dealing with forgetting, and for similar tasks, the algorithm focuses on
selectively transferring the knowledge learned from some similar previous tasks to
improve the new task learning. Additionally, the algorithm automatically detects
whether a new task is similar to any previous tasks. Empirical evaluation using
sequences of mixed tasks demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed model.2

1

Introduction

In many applications, the system needs to incrementally or continually learn a sequence of tasks.
This learning paradigm is called continual learning (CL) or lifelong learning (Chen and Liu, 2018).
Ideally, in learning each new task t, the learner should (1) not forget what it has learned from previous
tasks in order to achieve knowledge accumulation, (2) transfer the knowledge learned in the past
forward to help learn the new task t if t is similar to some previous tasks and has shared knowledge
with those previous tasks, (3) transfer knowledge backward to improve the models of similar previous
tasks, and (4) learn a mixed sequence of dissimilar and similar tasks and achieve (1), (2) and (3) at
the same time. To our knowledge, no existing CL technique has all these four capabilities. This paper
makes an attempt to achieve all these objectives in the task continual learning (TCL) setting (also
known as task incremental learning), where each task is a separate or distinct classification problem.
This work generalizes the existing works on TCL. Note, there is also the class continual learning
(CCL) setting (or class incremental learning), which learns a sequence of classes to build one overall
multi-class classifier for all the classes seen so far.
As AI agents such as chatbots, intelligent personal assistants and physical robots are increasingly
made to learn many skills or tasks, this work is becoming more and more important. In practice,
when an agent faces a new task t, naturally some previous tasks are similar and some are dissimilar
to t. The agent should learn the new task without forgetting knowledge learned from previous tasks
while also improving its learning by transferring the shared knowledge from those similar tasks.
∗
Corresponding author. The work was done when B. Liu was at Peking University on leave of absence from
University of Illinois at Chicago.
2
https://github.com/ZixuanKe/CAT

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

