Rankmax: An Adaptive Projection Alternative to the
Softmax Function
Weiwei Kong∗
Georgia Institute of Technology
wwkong@gatech.edu
Nicolas Mayoraz
Google Research
nmayoraz@google.com

Steffen Rendle
Google Research
srendle@google.com

Walid Krichene
Google Research
walidk@google.com
Li Zhang
Google Research
liqzhang@google.com

Abstract
Many machine learning models involve mapping a score vector to a probability
vector. Usually, this is done by projecting the score vector onto a probability
simplex, and such projections are often characterized as Lipschitz continuous
approximations of the argmax function, whose Lipschitz constant is controlled
by a parameter that is similar to a softmax temperature. The aforementioned
parameter has been observed to affect the quality of these models and is typically
either treated as a constant or decayed over time. In this work, we propose a
method that adapts this parameter to individual training examples. The resulting
method exhibits desirable properties, such as sparsity of its support and numerically
efficient implementation, and we find that it can significantly outperform competing
non-adaptive projection methods.

1

Introduction

The goal of many machine learning models, such as multi-class classification or retrieval, is to learn a
conditional probability distribution. Such models often involve projecting a vector on the probability
simplex, and a general form of such a projection is given by


1
pα (z) = argmin −hz, xi + g(x)
(1)
α
x∈∆n−1
where z ∈ Rn is the vector that is being projected, ∆n−1 is the standard probability simplex, and g is
a strongly convex function. For example, in the neural network setting, z can be the output of the last
hidden layer, an unconstrained vector, and pα (z) can be the final output of the network, a probability
distribution. Problem (1) has been studied extensively. It reduces to the Euclidean projection [27, 12]
when g is the squared Euclidean norm, and the entropy projection [10, 5, 3] when g is the negative
entropy. In the latter case, pα is the widely used softmax function.
The function pα can be viewed as a continuous approximation of the argmax function, and the
parameter α directly controls its Lipschitz constant. It corresponds, for example, to the inverse
temperature in the softmax (or Gibbs) distribution. It is often treated as a constant [33, 30] or a
calibration parameter [13], but it can also be varied over time, according to a fixed schedule. One of
the earliest examples is in simulated annealing for discrete optimization [19, 28, 14, 6], where the
temperature of a Gibbs distribution is decreased over time. This has also been studied in the context
∗

Work done during an internship at Google Research.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

