Regret Bounds without Lipschitz Continuity:
Online Learning with Relative-Lipschitz Losses

Yihan Zhou∗
University of British Columbia

Victor S. Portella∗
University of British Columbia

Mark Schmidt
University of British Columbia
CCAI Affiliate Chair (Amii)

Nicholas J. A. Harvey
University of British Columbia

Abstract
In online convex optimization (OCO), Lipschitz continuity of the functions is
commonly assumed in order to obtain sublinear regret. Moreover, many algorithms
have only logarithmic regret when these functions are also strongly convex. Recently, researchers from convex optimization proposed the notions of “relative
Lipschitz continuity” and “relative strong convexity”. Both of the notions are
generalizations of their classical counterparts. It has been shown that subgradient
methods in the relative setting have performance analogous to their performance in
the classical setting.
In this work, we consider OCO for relative Lipschitz and relative strongly convex
functions. We extend the known regret bounds for classical OCO algorithms to the
relative setting. Specifically, we show regret bounds for the follow the regularized
leader algorithms and a variant of online mirror descent. Due to the generality
of these methods, these results yield regret bounds for a wide variety of OCO
algorithms. Furthermore, we further extend the results to algorithms with extra
regularization such as regularized dual averaging.

1

Introduction

In online convex optimization (OCO), at each of many rounds a player has to pick a point from a
convex set while an adversary chooses a convex function that penalizes the player’s choice. More
precisely, in each round t ∈ N, the player picks a point xt from a fixed convex set X ⊆ Rn and an
adversary picks a convex function ft depending on xt . At the end of the round, the player suffers a
loss of ft (xt ). Besides modeling a wide range of online learning problems [Shalev-Shwartz, 2011],
algorithms for OCO are often used in batch optimization problems due to their low computational
cost per iteration. For example, the widely used stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm can be
viewed as a special case of online gradient descent [Hazan, 2016, Chapter 3] and AdaGrad [Duchi
et al., 2011] is a foundational adaptive gradient descent method originally proposed in the OCO
setting. The performance measure usually used for OCO algorithms is the regret. It is the difference
between the cost incurred to the player and a comparison point z ∈ X ⊆ Rn (usually with minimum
cumulative loss), that is to say,
RegretT (z) :=

T
X
t=1

∗

ft (xt ) −

T
X

ft (z).

t=1

Equal contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

