NVAE: A Deep Hierarchical Variational Autoencoder

Arash Vahdat, Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
{avahdat, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Normalizing flows, autoregressive models, variational autoencoders (VAEs), and
deep energy-based models are among competing likelihood-based frameworks
for deep generative learning. Among them, VAEs have the advantage of fast and
tractable sampling and easy-to-access encoding networks. However, they are currently outperformed by other models such as normalizing flows and autoregressive
models. While the majority of the research in VAEs is focused on the statistical
challenges, we explore the orthogonal direction of carefully designing neural architectures for hierarchical VAEs. We propose Nouveau VAE (NVAE), a deep hierarchical VAE built for image generation using depth-wise separable convolutions and
batch normalization. NVAE is equipped with a residual parameterization of Normal
distributions and its training is stabilized by spectral regularization. We show that
NVAE achieves state-of-the-art results among non-autoregressive likelihood-based
models on the MNIST, CIFAR-10, CelebA 64, and CelebA HQ datasets and it
provides a strong baseline on FFHQ. For example, on CIFAR-10, NVAE pushes the
state-of-the-art from 2.98 to 2.91 bits per dimension, and it produces high-quality
images on CelebA HQ as shown in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, NVAE is
the first successful VAE applied to natural images as large as 256×256 pixels. The
source code is available at https://github.com/NVlabs/NVAE.

1

Introduction

The majority of the research efforts on improving VAEs [1, 2] is dedicated to the statistical challenges,
such as reducing the gap between approximate and true posterior distributions [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10],
formulating tighter bounds [11, 12, 13, 14], reducing the gradient noise [15, 16], extending VAEs to
discrete variables [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23], or tackling posterior collapse [24, 25, 26, 27]. The role
of neural network architectures for VAEs is somewhat overlooked, as most previous work borrows
the architectures from classification tasks.

Figure 1: 256×256-pixel samples generated by NVAE, trained on CelebA HQ [28].
However, VAEs can benefit from designing special network architectures as they have fundamentally
different requirements. First, VAEs maximize the mutual information between the input and latent
variables [29, 30], requiring the networks to retain the information content of the input data as much
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

