Towards Better Generalization of Adaptive Gradient
Methods
Yingxue Zhou, Belhal Karimi, Jinxing Yu, Zhiqiang Xu, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
No.10 Xibeiwang East Road, Beijing 100193, China
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, Washington 98004, USA
{hustzhouyx, belhal.karimi, jinxingyu18, zhiqiangxu2001, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
Adaptive gradient methods such as AdaGrad, RMSprop and Adam have been optimizers of choice for deep learning due to their fast training speed. However, it was
recently observed that their generalization performance is often worse than that of
SGD for over-parameterized neural networks. While new algorithms (such as AdaBound) have been proposed to improve the situation, the provided analyses are
only committed to optimization bounds for the training objective, leaving critical
generalization capacity unexplored. To close this gap, we propose Stable Adaptive
Gradient Descent (SAGD) for non-convex optimization which leverages differential privacy to boost the generalization performance of adaptive gradient methods.
Theoretical analyses show that SAGD has high-probability convergence to a population stationary point. We further conduct experiments on various popular deep
learning tasks and models. Experimental results illustrate that SAGD is empirically competitive and often better than baselines.

1

Introduction

In this work, we consider the stochastic non-convex optimization [40] problem which approximately
minimizes the population loss given n i.i.d. samples z1 , . . . , zn . Mathematically speaking, we
consider the following optimization problem:
min f (w) , Ez∼P [`(w, z)] ,

w∈W

(1)

where z ∈ Z is a data sample in domain Z following an unknown sample distribution P, w represents the parameter of the underlying learning model, ` : W × Z 7→ R is a certain loss function
associated with the learning problem, and the loss function f defined by the population risk is
non-convex as with most deep learning tasks. Since finding the global minimum for non-convex
functions is NP-hard, the utility of a parameter is usually measured by the `2 -norm of the gradient.
Due to the unavailability of distribution P, the challenge of a learning algorithm is to search for an
approximate minimizer of f (w) based on only n samples z1 , . . . , zn . A natural approach toward
solving the problem stated in (1) is empirical risk minimization (ERM) [33], which minimizes the
Pn
empirical risk: minw∈W fˆ(w) , n1 j=1 `(w, zj ) , where fˆ(w) is referred to as empirical risk.
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [32] which iteratively updates the parameter of a model by descending in the direction of the negative gradient, computed on a single sample or a mini-batch of
samples, has been the most dominant algorithm for solving the ERM problem, e.g., training deep
neural networks. Since the learning rate has a crucial impact on the convergence and performance
of SGD algorithms, there have been studies (e.g., [5]) which automatically tune the learning rate by
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

