Ensemble Distillation for Robust Model Fusion in
Federated Learning

Tao Lin∗, Lingjing Kong∗ , Sebastian U. Stich, Martin Jaggi.
MLO, EPFL, Switzerland
{tao.lin, lingjing.kong, sebastian.stich, martin.jaggi}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a machine learning setting where many devices collaboratively train a machine learning model while keeping the training data decentralized. In most of the current training schemes the central model is refined by
averaging the parameters of the server model and the updated parameters from the
client side. However, directly averaging model parameters is only possible if all
models have the same structure and size, which could be a restrictive constraint in
many scenarios.
In this work we investigate more powerful and more flexible aggregation schemes
for FL. Specifically, we propose ensemble distillation for model fusion, i.e. training
the central classifier through unlabeled data on the outputs of the models from
the clients. This knowledge distillation technique mitigates privacy risk and cost
to the same extent as the baseline FL algorithms, but allows flexible aggregation
over heterogeneous client models that can differ e.g. in size, numerical precision
or structure. We show in extensive empirical experiments on various CV/NLP
datasets (CIFAR-10/100, ImageNet, AG News, SST2) and settings (heterogeneous
models/data) that the server model can be trained much faster, requiring fewer
communication rounds than any existing FL technique so far.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as an important machine learning paradigm in which a
federation of clients participate in collaborative training of a centralized model [62, 51, 65, 8, 5,
42, 34]. The clients send their model parameters to the server but never their private training
datasets, thereby ensuring a basic level of privacy. Among the key challenges in federated training
are communication overheads and delays (one would like to train the central model with as few
communication rounds as possible), and client heterogeneity: the training data (non-i.i.d.-ness), as
well as hardware and computing resources, can change drastically among clients, for instance when
training on commodity mobile devices.
Classic training algorithms in FL, such as federated averaging (F EDAVG) [51] and its recent adaptations [53, 44, 25, 35, 26, 58], are all based on directly averaging of the participating client’s
parameters and can hence only be applied if all client’s models have the same size and structure. In
contrast, ensemble learning methods [77, 15, 2, 14, 56, 47, 75] allow to combine multiple heterogeneous weak classifiers by averaging the predictions of the individual models instead. However,
applying ensemble learning techniques directly in FL is infeasible in practice due to the large number
of participating clients, as it requires keeping weights of all received models on the server and
performing naive ensembling (logits averaging) for inference.
To enable federated learning in more realistic settings, we propose to use ensemble distillation [7, 22]
for robust model fusion (FedDF). Our scheme leverages unlabeled data or artificially generated
examples (e.g. by a GAN’s generator [17]) to aggregate knowledge from all received (heterogeneous)
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

