Breaking the Sample Size Barrier in Model-Based
Reinforcement Learning with a Generative Model

Gen Li
Tsinghua

Yuting Wei
CMU

Yuejie Chi
CMU

Yuantao Gu
Tsinghua

Yuxin Chen
Princeton

Abstract
We investigate the sample efficiency of reinforcement learning in a γ-discounted
infinite-horizon Markov decision process (MDP) with state space S and action
space A, assuming access to a generative model. Despite a number of prior
work tackling this problem, a complete picture of the trade-offs between sample
complexity and statistical accuracy is yet to be determined. In particular, prior
results suffer from a sample size barrier, in the sense that their claimed statistical
|S||A|
guarantees hold only when the sample size exceeds at least (1−γ)
2 (up to some
log factor). The current paper overcomes this barrier by certifying the minimax
optimality of model-based reinforcement learning as soon as the sample size
exceeds the order of |S||A|
1−γ (modulo some log factor). More specifically, a perturbed
model-based planning algorithm provably finds an ε-optimal policy with an order
|S||A|
|S||A|
1
of (1−γ)
3 ε2 log (1−γ)ε samples for any ε ∈ (0, 1−γ ]. Along the way, we derive
improved (instance-dependent) guarantees for model-based policy evaluation. To
the best of our knowledge, this work provides the first minimax-optimal guarantee
in a generative model that accommodates the entire range of sample sizes (beyond
which finding a meaningful policy is information theoretically impossible).

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [33, 35], which is frequently modeled as learning and decision making in
a Markov decision process (MDP), is garnering growing interest in recent years due to its remarkable
success in practice. A core objective of RL is to search for a policy — based on a collection of noisy
data samples — that approximately maximizes expected rewards in an MDP, without direct access to
a precise description of the underlying model.1 To enable reliable RL in the sample-starved regime
(i.e. the regime where the model complexity overwhelms the sample size), it is crucial to obtain
a quantitative picture of the trade-off between sample complexity and statistical accuracy, and to
design efficient algorithms that provably achieve the optimal trade-off. Characterizing the sample
complexities of RL algorithms (including both model-based and model-free approaches) has been the
focal point of a large body of recent work, e.g. [1, 2, 15, 19, 29, 30, 38, 39, 40, 41].
This paper pursues a comprehensive understanding about the sample efficiency of model-based RL,
assuming access to a generative model — that is, a simulator that produces samples based on the
transition kernel of the MDP for each state-action pair [16, 19]. We focus on an infinite-horizon
discounted MDP with state space S, action space A, and discount factor 0 < γ < 1. We obtain N
samples per state-action pair by querying the generative model. For an arbitrary target accuracy level
ε > 0, the goal is to compute an ε-optimal policy with a minimal number of calls to the generative
model. Particular emphasis is placed on the sub-linear sampling scenario, in which the total sample
size is smaller than the total number |S|2 |A| of model parameters (so that it might be infeasible to
estimate the model accurately).
1

Here, the “model” refers to the probability transition kernel and the rewards of the MDP taken collectively.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

