A Finite-Time Analysis of Two Time-Scale
Actor-Critic Methods
Yue Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
ywu@cs.ucla.edu

Weitong Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
weightzero@cs.ucla.edu

Pan Xu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
panxu@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Actor-critic (AC) methods have exhibited great empirical success compared with
other reinforcement learning algorithms, where the actor uses the policy gradient
to improve the learning policy and the critic uses temporal difference learning to
estimate the policy gradient. Under the two time-scale learning rate schedule, the
asymptotic convergence of AC has been well studied in the literature. However, the
non-asymptotic convergence and finite sample complexity of actor-critic methods
are largely open. In this work, we provide a non-asymptotic analysis for two timescale actor-critic methods under non-i.i.d. setting. We prove that the actor-critic
method is guaranteed to find a first-order stationary point (i.e., k∇J(θ)k22 ≤ ) of
the non-concave performance function J(θ), with e
O(−2.5 ) sample complexity.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work providing finite-time analysis
and sample complexity bound for two time-scale actor-critic methods.

1

Introduction

Actor-Critic (AC) methods [2, 16] aim at combining the advantages of actor-only methods and
critic-only methods, and have achieved great empirical success in reinforcement learning [31, 1].
Specifically, actor-only methods, such as policy gradient [28] and trust region policy optimization [24],
utilize a parameterized policy function class and improve the policy by optimizing the parameters of
some performance function using gradient ascent, whose exact form is characterized by the Policy
Gradient Theorem [28]. Actor-only methods can be naturally applied to continuous setting but suffer
from high variance when estimating the policy gradient. On the other hand, critic-only methods, such
as temporal difference learning [26] and Q-learning [32], focus on learning a value function (expected
cumulative rewards), and determine the policy based on the value function, which is recursively
approximated based on the Bellman equation. Although the critic-only methods can efficiently learn
a satisfying policy under tabular setting [14], they can diverge with function approximation under
continuous setting [33]. Therefore, it is natural to combine actor and critic based methods to achieve
the best of both worlds. The principal idea behind actor-critic methods is simple: the critic tries
to learn the value function, given the policy from the actor, while the actor can estimate the policy
gradient based on the approximate value function provided by the critic.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

