Trading Personalization for Accuracy:
Data Debugging in Collaborative Filtering

Long Chen1 , Yuan Yao1 , Feng Xu1 , Miao Xu2,3 , Hanghang Tong4
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
The University of Queensland, Australia 3 RIKEN AIP, Japan
4
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
ronchen@smail.nju.edu.cn, {y.yao, xf}@nju.edu.cn, miao.xu@riken.jp, htong@illinois.edu
1

Abstract
Collaborative filtering has been widely used in recommender systems. Existing
work has primarily focused on improving the prediction accuracy mainly via either
building refined models or incorporating additional side information, yet has largely
ignored the inherent distribution of the input rating data. In this paper, we propose a
data debugging framework to identify overly personalized ratings whose existence
degrades the performance of a given collaborative filtering model. The key idea
of the proposed approach is to search for a small set of ratings whose editing
(e.g., modification or deletion) would near-optimally improve the recommendation
accuracy of a validation set. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
approach can significantly improve the recommendation accuracy. Furthermore, we
observe that the identified ratings significantly deviate from the average ratings of
the corresponding items, and the proposed approach tends to modify them towards
the average. This result sheds light on the design of future recommender systems
in terms of balancing between the overall accuracy and personalization.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been widely used in many real-world applications to suggest items
to users. As a key building block of recommender systems, collaborative filtering aims to model
users’ preferences to items based on the existing feedback/ratings. Classic collaborative filtering
methods include nearest-neighbor methods [14], factorization-based methods [4], deep learning based
methods [19, 3], etc.
In literature, many efforts have been spent on improving the prediction accuracy of collaborative
filtering [16]. The main focus of the existing work can be divided into two categories. The first
category aims to refine the objective function so as to better model the input ratings (e.g., [13, 28,
3, 15]), and the second aims to incorporate additional inputs such as social relationships or item
attributes (e.g., [20, 25, 12, 9, 24]). However, little attention is paid to the inherent data distribution
of the input ratings. That is, although collaborative filtering benefits from similar interests among
similar users, overfitting to overly personalized ratings from certain users may deteriorate, instead
of help, the overall recommendation. For example, suppose a set of users share most of their movie
interests (e.g. comedy, romance), and one user favors extreme-horror films. Although such ratings
might be important to reflect this specific user’s personal preference, they could downgrade the
recommendation quality to the vast majority of users (i.e., recommending unwanted extreme-horror
films to these users). This motivates us to ask: are all ratings helpful in collaborative filtering,
and if not, how can we mitigate harmful (i.e., overly personalized) ones to improve the overall
recommendation accuracy?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

