Gradient Estimation with Stochastic Softmax Tricks
Max B. Paulus∗
ETH Zürich
max.paulus@inf.ethz.ch
Daniel Tarlow
Google Research, Brain Team
dtarlow@google.com

Dami Choi∗
University of Toronto
choidami@cs.toronto.edu

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Chris J. Maddison†
University of Toronto & DeepMind
cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
The Gumbel-Max trick is the basis of many relaxed gradient estimators. These
estimators are easy to implement and low variance, but the goal of scaling them
comprehensively to large combinatorial distributions is still outstanding. Working within the perturbation model framework, we introduce stochastic softmax
tricks, which generalize the Gumbel-Softmax trick to combinatorial spaces. Our
framework is a unified perspective on existing relaxed estimators for perturbation
models, and it contains many novel relaxations. We design structured relaxations
for subset selection, spanning trees, arborescences, and others. When compared to
less structured baselines, we find that stochastic softmax tricks can be used to train
latent variable models that perform better and discover more latent structure.

1

Introduction

Gradient computation is the methodological backbone of deep learning, but computing gradients
is not always easy. Gradients with respect to parameters of the density of an integral are generally
intractable, and one must resort to gradient estimators [8, 61]. Typical examples of objectives over
densities are returns in reinforcement learning [76] or variational objectives for latent variable models
[e.g., 37, 68]. In this paper, we address gradient estimation for discrete distributions with an emphasis
on latent variable models. We introduce a relaxed gradient estimation framework for combinatorial
discrete distributions that generalizes the Gumbel-Softmax and related estimators [53, 35].
Relaxed gradient estimators incorporate bias in order to reduce variance. Most relaxed estimators are
based on the Gumbel-Max trick [52, 54], which reparameterizes distributions over one-hot binary
vectors. The Gumbel-Softmax estimator is the simplest; it continuously approximates the GumbelMax trick to admit a reparameterization gradient [37, 68, 72]. This is used to optimize the “soft”
approximation of the loss as a surrogate for the “hard” discrete objective.
Adding structured latent variables to deep learning models is a promising direction for addressing a
number of challenges: improving interpretability (e.g., via latent variables for subset selection [17] or
parse trees [19]), incorporating problem-specific constraints (e.g., via enforcing alignments [58]), and
improving generalization (e.g., by modeling known algorithmic structure [30]). Unfortunately, the
vanilla Gumbel-Softmax cannot scale to distributions over large state spaces, and the development of
structured relaxations has been piecemeal.
We introduce stochastic softmax tricks (SSTs), which are a unified framework for designing structured
relaxations of combinatorial distributions. They include relaxations for the above applications, as well
∗
†

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to max.paulus@inf.ethz.ch, choidami@cs.toronto.edu.
Work done partly at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

