Policy Improvement via Imitation of Multiple Oracles

Ching-An Cheng
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052
chinganc@microsoft.com

Andrey Kolobov
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052
akolobov@microsoft.com

Alekh Agarwal
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA 98052
alekha@microsoft.com

Abstract
Despite its promise, reinforcement learning’s real-world adoption has been hampered by the need for costly exploration to learn a good policy. Imitation learning
(IL) mitigates this shortcoming by using an oracle policy during training as a bootstrap to accelerate the learning process. However, in many practical situations, the
learner has access to multiple suboptimal oracles, which may provide conflicting
advice in a state. The existing IL literature provides a limited treatment of such scenarios. Whereas in the single-oracle case, the return of the oracle’s policy provides
an obvious benchmark for the learner to compete against, neither such a benchmark
nor principled ways of outperforming it are known for the multi-oracle setting. In
this paper, we propose the state-wise maximum of the oracle policies’ values as a
natural baseline to resolve conflicting advice from multiple oracles. Using a reduction of policy optimization to online learning, we introduce a novel IL algorithm
MAMBA, which can provably learn a policy competitive with this benchmark. In
particular, MAMBA optimizes policies by using a gradient estimator in the style
of generalized advantage estimation (GAE). Our theoretical analysis shows that
this design makes MAMBA robust and enables it to outperform the oracle policies
by a larger margin than the IL state of the art, even in the single-oracle case. In
an evaluation against standard policy gradient with GAE and AggreVaTe(D), we
showcase MAMBA’s ability to leverage demonstrations both from a single and
from multiple weak oracles, and significantly speed up policy optimization.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) promises to bring self-improving decision-making capability to many
applications, including robotics [1], computer systems [2], recommender systems [3] and user
interfaces [4]. However, deploying RL in any of these domains is fraught with numerous difficulties,
as vanilla RL agents need to do a large amount of trial-and-error exploration before discovering good
decision policies [5]. This inefficiency has motivated investigations into training RL agents with
domain knowledge, an example of which is having access to oracle policies in the training phase.
The broad class of approaches that attempt to mimic or improve upon an available oracle policy
is known as imitation learning (IL) [6]. Generally, IL algorithms work by invoking oracle policy
demonstrations to guide an RL agent towards promising states and actions. As a result, oracle-level
performance can be achieved without global exploration, thus avoiding RL’s main source of high
sample complexity. For IL with a single oracle policy, the oracle policy’s return provides a natural
benchmark for the agent to match or outperform. Most existing IL techniques assume this singleoracle setting, with a good but possibly suboptimal oracle policy. Behavior cloning [7] learns a policy
from a fixed batch of trajectories in a supervised way by treating oracle actions as labels. Inverse
reinforcement learning uses recorded oracle trajectories to infer the oracle’s reward function [8–11].
Interactive IL [12, 13] assumes the learner can actively ask an oracle policy for a demonstration
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

