Scalable Graph Neural Networks via Bidirectional
Propagation

Ming Chen
Renmin University of China
chennnming@ruc.edu.cn

Zhewei Wei∗
Renmin University of China
zhewei@ruc.edu.cn

Bolin Ding
Alibaba Group
bolin.ding@alibaba-inc.com

Yaliang Li
Alibaba Group
yaliang.li@alibaba-inc.com

Ye Yuan
Beijing Institute of Technology
yuan-ye@bit.edu.cn

Xiaoyong Du
Renmin University of China
duyong@ruc.edu.cn

Ji-Rong Wen
Renmin University of China
jrwen@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) is an emerging field for learning on non-Euclidean
data. Recently, there has been increased interest in designing GNN that scales
to large graphs. Most existing methods use "graph sampling" or "layer-wise
sampling" techniques to reduce training time. However, these methods still suffer
from degrading performance and scalability problems when applying to graphs
with billions of edges. This paper presents GBP, a scalable GNN that utilizes a
localized bidirectional propagation process from both the feature vectors and the
training/testing nodes. Theoretical analysis shows that GBP is the first method that
achieves sub-linear time complexity for both the precomputation and the training
phases. An extensive empirical study demonstrates that GBP achieves state-of-theart performance with significantly less training/testing time. Most notably, GBP
can deliver superior performance on a graph with over 60 million nodes and 1.8
billion edges in less than half an hour on a single machine.

1

Introduction

Recently, the field of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) has drawn increasing attention due to its
wide range of applications such as social analysis [23, 20, 28], biology [10, 26], recommendation
systems [36], and computer vision [39, 7, 13]. Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [15] adopts
a message-passing approach and gathers information from the neighbors of each node from the
previous layer to form the new representation. The vanilla GCN uses a full-batch training process and
stores each node’s representation in the GPU memory, which leads to limited scalability. On the other
hand, training GCN with mini-batches is difficult, as the neighborhood size could grow exponentially
with the number of layers.
These techniques can be broadly divided into three categories: 1) Layer-wise sampling methods:
GraphSAGE [11] proposes a neighbor-sampling method to sample a fixed number of neighbors for
each node. VRGCN [6] leverages historical activations to restrict the number of sampled nodes
∗
Zhewei Wei is the corresponding author. Work partially done at Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, MOE Key Lab DEKE, Renmin
University of China, and Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, 510330, China.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

