Understanding and Improving
Fast Adversarial Training

Maksym Andriushchenko
EPFL, Theory of Machine Learning Lab
maksym.andriushchenko@epfl.ch

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL, Theory of Machine Learning Lab
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
A recent line of work focused on making adversarial training computationally
efficient for deep learning models. In particular, Wong et al. [47] showed that
`∞ -adversarial training with fast gradient sign method (FGSM) can fail due to
a phenomenon called catastrophic overfitting, when the model quickly loses its
robustness over a single epoch of training. We show that adding a random step
to FGSM, as proposed in [47], does not prevent catastrophic overfitting, and that
randomness is not important per se — its main role being simply to reduce the
magnitude of the perturbation. Moreover, we show that catastrophic overfitting is
not inherent to deep and overparametrized networks, but can occur in a single-layer
convolutional network with a few filters. In an extreme case, even a single filter can
make the network highly non-linear locally, which is the main reason why FGSM
training fails. Based on this observation, we propose a new regularization method,
GradAlign, that prevents catastrophic overfitting by explicitly maximizing the
gradient alignment inside the perturbation set and improves the quality of the FGSM
solution. As a result, GradAlign allows to successfully apply FGSM training also
for larger `∞ -perturbations and reduce the gap to multi-step adversarial training.
The code of our experiments is available at https://github.com/tml-epfl/
understanding-fast-adv-training.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models based on empirical risk minimization are known to be often non-robust to
small worst-case perturbations. For decades, this has been the topic of active research by the statistics,
optimization and machine learning communities [19, 2, 10, 3]. However, the recent success of deep
learning [22, 33] has raised the interest in this topic. The lack of robustness in deep learning is clearly
illustrated by the existence of adversarial examples, i.e. tiny input perturbations that can easily fool
state-of-the-art deep neural networks into making wrong predictions [38, 12].
Improving the robustness of machine learning models is motivated not only from the security perspective [3]. Adversarially robust models have better interpretability properties [42, 32] and can generalize
better [51, 4] including also improved performance under some distribution shifts [48] (although
on some performing worse, see [39]). In order to improve the robustness, two families of solutions
have been developed: adversarial training (AT) that amounts to training the model on adversarial
examples [12, 23] and provable defenses that derive and optimize robustness certificates [46, 29, 7].
Currently, adversarial-training based methods appear to be preferred by practitioners since they (a)
achieve higher empirical robustness (although without providing a robustness certificate), (b) can be
scaled to state-of-the-art deep networks without affecting the inference time (unlike smoothing-based
approaches [7]), and (c) work equally well for different threat models. Adversarial training can
be formulated as a robust optimization problem [35, 23] which takes the form of a non-convex
non-concave min-max problem. However, computing the optimal adversarial examples is an NP-hard
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

