Generalized Boosting

Arun Sai Suggala, Bingbin Liu, Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{asuggala,bingbinl,pradeepr}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Boosting is a widely used learning technique in machine learning for solving
classification problems. In boosting, one predicts the label of an example using an
ensemble of weak classifiers. While boosting has shown tremendous success on
many classification problems involving tabular data, it performs poorly on complex
classification tasks involving low-level features such as image classification tasks.
This drawback stems from the fact that boosting builds an additive model of weak
classifiers, each of which has very little predictive power. Often, the resulting
additive models are not powerful enough to approximate the complex decision
boundaries of real-world classification problems. In this work, we present a general
framework for boosting where, similar to traditional boosting, we aim to boost the
performance of a weak learner and transform it into a strong learner. However,
unlike traditional boosting, our framework allows for more complex forms of
aggregation of weak learners. In this work, we specifically focus on one form of
aggregation - function composition. We show that many popular greedy algorithms
for learning deep neural networks (DNNs) can be derived from our framework
using function compositions for aggregation. Moreover, we identify the drawbacks
of these greedy algorithms and propose new algorithms that fix these issues. Using
thorough empirical evaluation, we show that our learning algorithms have superior
performance over traditional additive boosting algorithms, as well as existing
greedy learning techniques for DNNs. An important feature of our algorithms is
that they come with strong theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

Boosting is a widely used learning technique in machine learning for solving classification problems.
Boosting aims to improve the performance of a weak learner by combining multiple weak classifiers
to produce a strong classifier with good predictive performance. Since the seminal works of Freund
[13], Schapire [32], a number of practical algorithms such as AdaBoost [16], gradient boosting [26],
XGBoost [9], have been proposed for boosting. Over the years, boosting based methods such as
XGBoost in particular, have shown tremendous success in many real-world classification problems,
as well as competitive settings such as Kaggle competitions. However, this success is mostly
limited to classification tasks involving structured or tabular data with hand-engineered features.
On classification problems involving low-level features and complex decision boundaries, boosting
tends to perform poorly [3, 30] (also see Section 5). One example where this is evident is the image
classification task, where the decision boundaries are often complex and the features are low-level
pixel intensities. This drawback stems from the fact that boosting builds an additive model of weak
classifiers, each of which has very little predictive power. Since such additive models with any
reasonable number of weak classifiers are usually not powerful enough to approximate complex
decision boundaries, the models’ output by boosting tend to have poor performance.
In this work, we aim to overcome this drawback of traditional boosting by considering a generalization
of boosting which allows for more complex forms of aggregation than linear combinations of
weak classifiers. To achieve this goal, we work in the feature representation space and boost the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

