Faster Randomized Infeasible Interior Point Methods
for Tall/Wide Linear Programs

Agniva Chowdhury
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
chowdhu5@purdue.edu

Palma London
ORIE Department
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
plondon@cornell.edu

Haim Avron
School of Mathematical Sciences
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel
haimav@tauex.tau.ac.il

Petros Drineas
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
pdrineas@purdue.edu

Abstract
Linear programming (LP) is used in many machine learning applications, such as
`1 -regularized SVMs, basis pursuit, nonnegative matrix factorization, etc. Interior
Point Methods (IPMs) are one of the most popular methods to solve LPs both in
theory and in practice. Their underlying complexity is dominated by the cost of
solving a system of linear equations at each iteration. In this paper, we consider
infeasible IPMs for the special case where the number of variables is much larger
than the number of constraints (i.e., wide), or vice-versa (i.e., tall) by taking the
dual. Using tools from Randomized Linear Algebra, we present a preconditioning
technique that, when combined with the Conjugate Gradient iterative solver, provably guarantees that infeasible IPM algorithms (suitably modified to account for
the error incurred by the approximate solver), converge to a feasible, approximately
optimal solution, without increasing their iteration complexity. Our empirical
evaluations verify our theoretical results on both real and synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Linear programming (LP) is one of the most useful tools available to theoreticians and practitioners
throughout science and engineering. In Machine Learning, LP appears in numerous settings, including
`1 -regularized SVMs [57], basis pursuit (BP) [54], sparse inverse covariance matrix estimation
(SICE) [55], the nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) [45], MAP inference [37], etc. Not
surprisingly, designing and analyzing LP algorithms is a topic of paramount importance in computer
science and applied mathematics.
One of the most successful paradigms for solving LPs is the family of Interior Point Methods (IPMs),
pioneered by Karmarkar in the mid 1980s [25]. Path-following IPMs and, in particular, long-step
path following IPMs, are among the most practical approaches for solving linear programs. Consider
the standard form of the primal LP problem:
min cT x , subject to Ax = b , x ≥ 0 ,
m×n

m

n

(1)
n

where A ∈ R
, b ∈ R , and c ∈ R are the inputs, and x ∈ R is the vector of the primal
variables. The associated dual problem is
max bT y , subject to AT y + s = c , s ≥ 0 ,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(2)

