A polynomial-time algorithm for learning
nonparametric causal graphs

Ming Gao
University of Chicago
minggao@uchicago.edu

Yi Ding
University of Chicago
dingy@uchicago.edu

Bryon Aragam
University of Chicago
bryon@chicagobooth.edu

Abstract
We establish finite-sample guarantees for a polynomial-time algorithm for learning
a nonlinear, nonparametric directed acyclic graphical (DAG) model from data.
The analysis is model-free and does not assume linearity, additivity, independent
noise, or faithfulness. Instead, we impose a condition on the residual variances
that is closely related to previous work on linear models with equal variances.
Compared to an optimal algorithm with oracle knowledge of the variable ordering,
the additional cost of the algorithm is linear in the dimension d and the number of
samples n. Finally, we compare the proposed algorithm to existing approaches in a
simulation study.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning (ML) methods are driven by complex, high-dimensional, and nonparametric
models that can capture highly nonlinear phenomena. These models have proven useful in wideranging applications including vision, robotics, medicine, and natural language. At the same time,
the complexity of these methods often obscure their decisions and in many cases can lead to wrong
decisions by failing to properly account for—among other things—spurious correlations, adversarial
vulnerability, and invariances [5, 7, 50]. This has led to a growing literature on correcting these
problems in ML systems. A particular example of this that has received widespread attention in recent
years is the problem of causal inference, which is closely related to these issues. While substantial
methodological progress has been made towards embedding complex methods such as deep neural
networks and RKHS embeddings into learning causal graphical models [21, 26, 31, 34, 61, 64, 65],
theoretical progress has been slower and typically reserved for particular parametric models such as
linear [1–3, 9, 15, 16, 29, 58, 59], generalized linear models [37, 40], and discrete models [6, 66].
In this paper, we study the problem of learning directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) from data in a
nonparametric setting. Unlike existing work on this problem, we do not require linearity, additivity,
independent noise, or faithfulness. Our approach is model-free and nonparametric, and uses nonparametric estimators (kernel smoothers, neural networks, splines, etc.) as “plug-in” estimators. As
such, it is agnostic to the choice of nonparametric estimator chosen. Unlike existing consistency
theory in the nonparametric setting [8, 20, 21, 35, 45, 49, 56], we provide explicit (nonasymptotic)
finite sample complexity bounds and show that the resulting method has polynomial time complexity.
The method we study is closely related to existing algorithms that first construct a variable ordering
[9, 15, 16, 39]. Despite this being a well-studied problem, to the best of our knowledge our analysis
is the first to provide explicit, simultaneous statistical and computational guarantees for learning
nonparametric DAGs.
Contributions Figure 1a illustrates a key motivation for our work: While there exist methods that
obtain various statistical guarantees, they lack provably efficient algorithms, or vice versa. As a result,
these methods can fail in simple settings. Our focus is on simultaneous computational and statistical
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

