Learning from Mixtures of Private and Public
Populations

Raef Bassily
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
bassily.1@osu.edu

Shay Moran
Department of Mathematics
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
smoran@technion.ac.il

Anupama Nandi
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
nandi.10@osu.edu

Abstract
We initiate the study of a new model of supervised learning under privacy constraints. Imagine a medical study where a dataset is sampled from a population
of both healthy and unhealthy individuals. Suppose healthy individuals have no
privacy concerns (in such case, we call their data “public”) while the unhealthy
individuals desire stringent privacy protection for their data. In this example,
the population (data distribution) is a mixture of private (unhealthy) and public
(healthy) sub-populations that could be very different.
Inspired by the above example, we consider a model in which the population D
is a mixture of two sub-populations: a private sub-population Dpriv of private and
sensitive data, and a public sub-population Dpub of data with no privacy concerns.
Each example drawn from D is assumed to contain a privacy-status bit that indicates
whether the example is private or public. The goal is to design a learning algorithm
that satisfies differential privacy only with respect to the private examples.
Prior works in this context assumed a homogeneous population where private and
public data arise from the same distribution, and in particular designed solutions
which exploit this assumption. We demonstrate how to circumvent this assumption
by considering, as a case study, the problem of learning linear classifiers in Rd . We
show that in the case where the privacy status is correlated with the target label (as
in the above example), linear classifiers in Rd can be learned, in the agnostic as
well as the realizable setting, with sample complexity which is comparable to that
of the classical (non-private) PAC-learning. It is known that this task is impossible
if all the data is considered private.

1

Introduction

Despite the remarkable progress in privacy-preserving machine learning powered by the rigorous
framework of differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06], the current state of the art has several limitations.
Most of the existing works on differentially private learning follow a conventional model, where the
entirety of the input dataset to the learning algorithm is assumed to be sensitive and private, and hence,
requires protection via the stringent constraint of DP. Unfortunately, this conservative approach has
fundamental limitations that manifest in many problems. For example, learning even simple classes of
functions (e.g., one-dimensional thresholds over R) is provably impossible under that stringent model
[BNSV15, ALMM18] even though such classes are trivially learnable without privacy constraints.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

