DeepI2I: Enabling Deep Hierarchical Image-to-Image
Translation by Transferring from GANs

Yaxing Wang, Lu Yu, Joost van de Weijer
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
{yaxing, lu, joost}@cvc.uab.es

Abstract
Image-to-image translation has recently achieved remarkable results. But despite
current success, it suffers from inferior performance when translations between
classes require large shape changes. We attribute this to the high-resolution bottlenecks which are used by current state-of-the-art image-to-image methods. Therefore, in this work, we propose a novel deep hierarchical Image-to-Image Translation
method, called DeepI2I. We learn a model by leveraging hierarchical features: (a)
structural information contained in the shallow layers and (b) semantic information
extracted from the deep layers. To enable the training of deep I2I models on small
datasets, we propose a novel transfer learning method, that transfers knowledge
from pre-trained GANs. Specifically, we leverage the discriminator of a pre-trained
GANs (i.e. BigGAN or StyleGAN) to initialize both the encoder and the discriminator and the pre-trained generator to initialize the generator of our model.
Applying knowledge transfer leads to an alignment problem between the encoder
and generator. We introduce an adaptor network to address this. On many-class
image-to-image translation on three datasets (Animal faces, Birds, and Foods) we
decrease mFID by at least 35% when compared to the state-of-the-art. Furthermore,
we qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate that transfer learning significantly
improves the performance of I2I systems, especially for small datasets. Finally, we
are the first to perform I2I translations for domains with over 100 classes. Our code
and models are made public at: https://github.com/yaxingwang/DeepI2I.

1

Introduction

Most image-to-image (I2I) networks have a high-resolution bottleneck [9, 21, 33, 34, 69, 36, 37,
67, 73, 74, 76]. These methods only apply two down-sampling blocks. Whereas such models are
known to be successful for style transfer, it might be difficult to extract abstract semantic information.
Therefore, we argue (and experimentally verify) that current I2I architectures have a limited capacity
to translate between classes with significant shape changes (e.g. from dog face to meerkat face). To
successfully translate between those domains a semantic understanding of the image is required. This
information is typically extracted in the deep low-resolution layers of a network.
The loss of spatial resolution, which occurs when adding multiple down-sampling layers, is one of the
factors which complicates the usage of deep networks for I2I. For high-quality I2I both low-level style
information, as well as high-level semantic information needs to be transferred from the encoder to the
generator of the I2I system. Therefore, we propose a deep hierarchical I2I translation framework (see
Figure 1 right) that fuses feature representations at various levels of abstraction (depth). Leveraging
the hierarchical framework, allows us to perform I2I translation between classes with significant
shape changes. The proposed method, DeepI2I, builds upon the state-of-the-art BigGAN model [7],
extending it to I2I translation by adding an encoder with the same architecture as the discriminator.
An additional advantage of this architecture is that because it applies a latent class embedding, it
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

