Pontryagin Differentiable Programming:
An End-to-End Learning and Control Framework

Wanxin Jin
Zhaoran Wang
Zhuoran Yang
Shaoshuai Mou
Purdue University
Northwestern University Princeton University
Purdue University
{wanxinjin,zhaoranwang}@gmail.com
zy6@princeton.edu mous@purdue.edu

Abstract
This paper develops a Pontryagin Differentiable Programming (PDP) methodology,
which establishes a unified framework to solve a broad class of learning and control
tasks. The PDP distinguishes from existing methods by two novel techniques: first,
we differentiate through Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle, and this allows to obtain
the analytical derivative of a trajectory with respect to tunable parameters within an
optimal control system, enabling end-to-end learning of dynamics, policies, or/and
control objective functions; and second, we propose an auxiliary control system in
the backward pass of the PDP framework, and the output of this auxiliary control
system is the analytical derivative of the original system’s trajectory with respect
to the parameters, which can be iteratively solved using standard control tools. We
investigate three learning modes of the PDP: inverse reinforcement learning, system
identification, and control/planning. We demonstrate the capability of the PDP in
each learning mode on different high-dimensional systems, including multi-link
robot arm, 6-DoF maneuvering quadrotor, and 6-DoF rocket powered landing.

1

Introduction

Many learning tasks can find their counterpart problems in control fields. These tasks both seek to
obtain unknown aspects of a decision-making system with different terminologies compared below.
Table 1: Topic connections between control and learning (details presented in Section 2)
UNKNOWNS IN A SYSTEM

LEARNING METHODS

CONTROL METHODS

Dynamics xt+1 =f θ (xt , ut )
Policy ut = π θ (t, xt )P
Control objective J= t cθ (xt , ut )

Markov decision processes
Reinforcement learning (RL)
Inverse RL

System identification
Optimal control (OC)
Inverse OC

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

Z (m)

Upward (m)

With the above connections, learning and control fields
Learning to control
Imitation learning for
have begun to explore the complementary benefits of rocket powered landing quadrotor maneuvering
each other: control theory may provide abundant models
12
12
and structures that allow for efficient or certificated algolearner 9
9
6
6
expert
rithms for high-dimensional tasks, while learning enables
3
3
0
0
to obtain these models from data, which are otherwise
6
8 4
8 4
36
0 3
0 4
not readily attainable via classic control tools. Examples
3 m)
East 0 4 8 6 3 0 th (m)
X
8
6
(m)
(m)
Y(
that enjoy both benefits include model-based RL [1, 2],
Nor
where dynamics models are used for sample efficiency;
and Koopman-operator control [3, 4], where via learning, Figure 1: left: PDP learns rocket landing
nonlinear systems are lifted to a linear observable space control, right: PDP learns quadrotor dyto facilitate control design. Inspired by those, this paper namics and control objective for imitation.
aims to exploit the advantage of integrating learning and control and develop a unified framework that
enables to solve a wide range of learning and control tasks, e.g., the challenging problems in Fig. 1.

