Asymmetric Shapley values: incorporating causal
knowledge into model-agnostic explainability

Christopher Frye
chris.f@faculty.ai
Faculty

Colin Rowat
c.rowat@bham.ac.uk
University of Birmingham

Ilya Feige
ilya@faculty.ai
Faculty

Abstract
Explaining AI systems is fundamental both to the development of high performing
models and to the trust placed in them by their users. The Shapley framework
for explainability has strength in its general applicability combined with its precise, rigorous foundation: it provides a common, model-agnostic language for
AI explainability and uniquely satisfies a set of intuitive mathematical axioms.
However, Shapley values are too restrictive in one significant regard: they ignore all causal structure in the data. We introduce a less restrictive framework,
Asymmetric Shapley values (ASVs), which are rigorously founded on a set of axioms, applicable to any AI system, and flexible enough to incorporate any causal
structure known to be respected by the data. We demonstrate that ASVs can
(i) improve model explanations by incorporating causal information, (ii) provide
an unambiguous test for unfair discrimination in model predictions, (iii) enable sequentially incremental explanations in time-series models, and (iv) support featureselection studies without the need for model retraining.

1

Introduction

AI has the capacity to significantly improve economic productivity along with the potential to cause
widespread harm to humanity, and the goals of developing AI capabilities while ensuring AI safety
are not generally aligned. Helpfully, in the domain of AI explainability, this is not the case. Not only
does explainability lie at the heart of AI safety, but it is also critical to the iterative development of
new AI systems by exposing how they work, why they fail, and how they can be improved.
Explainability is a nebulous epistemic concept [29] and has been practically approached in many
ways. One safe starting point is to restrict one’s use to interpretable models that require no additional
explanation (e.g. linear and rules-based models). This approach is argued for by [34] in particularly
sensitive settings. To explain complex models, model-specific techniques leverage attributes unique to
the model type, e.g. split count for trees [7] or DeepLIFT for networks [36]. However, model-specific
approaches are bespoke in nature and do not solve the problem of explainability in general.
Model-agnostic methods provide a general approach to explainability that is helpful, not only for
its widespread applicability, but also for the common language it provides across model types.
E.g. permutation feature importance [6, 39] is a measure that can be meaningfully compared across
model types. It serves as a global explanation of the model’s reliance on each feature in the data.
Other methods provide local explanations of a prediction on a specific data point [3, 33].
A local model-agnostic approach to explainability based on Shapley values is highly compelling due
to its principled mathematical foundation [35] and its ability to capture all the interactions between
features that lead to a model’s prediction. Shapley values have been used in AI explainability for
decades [11, 23, 25, 40], with the general framework articulated more recently in [27].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

