PGM-Explainer: Probabilistic Graphical Model
Explanations for Graph Neural Networks

Minh N. Vu
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611
minhvu@ufl.edu

My T. Thai
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611
mythai@cise.ufl.edu

Abstract
In Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), the graph structure is incorporated into the
learning of node representations. This complex structure makes explaining GNNs’
predictions become much more challenging. In this paper, we propose PGMExplainer, a Probabilistic Graphical Model (PGM) model-agnostic explainer for
GNNs. Given a prediction to be explained, PGM-Explainer identifies crucial graph
components and generates an explanation in form of a PGM approximating that
prediction. Different from existing explainers for GNNs where the explanations
are drawn from a set of linear functions of explained features, PGM-Explainer is
able to demonstrate the dependencies of explained features in form of conditional
probabilities. Our theoretical analysis shows that the PGM generated by PGMExplainer includes the Markov-blanket of the target prediction, i.e. including all
its statistical information. We also show that the explanation returned by PGMExplainer contains the same set of independence statements in the perfect map. Our
experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets show that PGM-Explainer
achieves better performance than existing explainers in many benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been emerging as powerful solutions to many real-world
applications in various domains where the datasets are in form of graphs such as social networks,
citation networks, knowledge graphs, and biological networks [1, 2, 3]. Many GNN’s architectures
with high predictive performance should be mentioned are ChebNets [4], Graph Convolutional
Networks [5], GraphSage [6], Graph Attention Networks [7], among others [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].
As the field grows, understanding why GNNs made such decisions becomes more vital. (a) It
improves the model’s transparency and consequently increases trust in the model. (b) Knowledge
on model’s behaviors helps us identify scenarios in which the systems may fail. This is essential
for safety reason in complex real-world tasks in which not all possible scenarios are testable. (c)
Due to fairness and privacy reasons, knowing if a model has bias in its decision is crucial. Although
there are protection for specific classes of discrimination, there might be other unwanted biases [14].
Understanding the model’s decisions helps us discover these biases before its deployment.
Although generating explanations for Conventional Neural Networks (CNNs) has been addressed by
many methods and standardized tool-kits, called explainers [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23], the
counterparts for GNNs are lacking. Until very recently, GNNExplainer [24], has been introduced to
explain GNNs using a mutual-information approach. As this is a pioneer in explaining GNNs, there
is little knowledge on the quality of GNNExplainer and it is unclear whether mutual-information is
apt for the task. Furthermore, GNNExplainer requires an explained model to evaluate its prediction
on fractional adjacency matrix. However, most available libraries for GNNs, such as Pytorch [25]
and DGL [26], do not meet this requirement as the matrix is used to compute the discrete sum in the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

