Critic Regularized Regression
Ziyu Wang⇤†
ziyu@google.com

Alexander Novikov⇤
anovikov@google.com

Jost Tobias Springenberg⇤
springenberg@google.com
Noah Siegel⇤
siegeln@google.com

Scott Reed⇤
reedscot@google.com
Josh Merel⇤
jsmerel@google.com

Nicolas Heess⇤
heess@google.com

Konrad Żołna⇤
kondiz@google.com
Bobak Shahriari⇤
bshahr@google.com
Caglar Gulcehre⇤
caglarg@google.com

Nando de Freitas⇤
nando@google.com

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL), also known as batch RL, offers the prospect
of policy optimization from large pre-recorded datasets without online environment
interaction. It addresses challenges with regard to the cost of data collection and
safety, both of which are particularly pertinent to real-world applications of RL.
Unfortunately, most off-policy algorithms perform poorly when learning from
a fixed dataset. In this paper, we propose a novel offline RL algorithm to learn
policies from data using a form of critic-regularized regression (CRR). We find that
CRR performs surprisingly well and scales to tasks with high-dimensional state
and action spaces – outperforming several state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms by
a significant margin on a wide range of benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have succeeded in a number of challenging domains.
However, few of these domains have involved real-world decision making. One important reason is
that online execution of policies during learning, which we refer to as online RL, is often not feasible
or desirable because of cost, safety and ethics [8]. This is clearly the case in healthcare, industrial
control and robotics. Nevertheless, for many of these domains, large amounts of historical data are
available. This has led to a resurgence of interest in offline RL methods, also known as batch RL [19],
which aim to learn policies from logged data without further interaction with the real system.
This interest in offline RL is further amplified by the evaluation crisis in RL: RL involves a close
interplay between exploration and learning from experiences, which makes it difficult to compare
algorithms. By decoupling these two problems and focusing on learning from fixed experiences, it
becomes possible to share datasets with benchmarks to improve collaboration and evaluation in the
field.
The naive application of off-policy RL algorithms with function approximation to the offline setting
has often failed, and has prompted several alternative solutions [e.g. 9, 17, 30]. A shared conclusion
is that failure stems from overly optimistic Q-estimates, as well as inappropriate extrapolation beyond
⇤
†

DeepMind, London, United Kingdom.
Google Brain, Toronto, Canada.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

