Partial Optimal Transport
with Applications on Positive-Unlabeled Learning

Laetitia Chapel
Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA
F-56000 Vannes
laetitia.chapel@irisa.fr

Mokhtar Z. Alaya
LITIS EA4108
University of Rouen Normandy
mokhtarzahdi.alaya@gmail.com

Gilles Gasso
LITIS EA4108
INSA, University of Rouen Normandy
gilles.gasso@insa-rouen.fr

Abstract
Classical optimal transport problem seeks a transportation map that preserves the
total mass between two probability distributions, requiring their masses to be equal.
This may be too restrictive in some applications such as color or shape matching,
since the distributions may have arbitrary masses and/or only a fraction of the total
mass has to be transported. In this paper, we address the partial Wasserstein and
Gromov-Wasserstein problems and propose exact algorithms to solve them. We
showcase the new formulation in a positive-unlabeled (PU) learning application.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of optimal transport in
this context and we first highlight that partial Wasserstein-based metrics prove
effective in usual PU learning settings. We then demonstrate that partial GromovWasserstein metrics are efficient in scenarii in which the samples from the positive
and the unlabeled datasets come from different domains or have different features.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) has been gaining in recent years an increasing attention in the machine
learning community, mainly due to its capacity to exploit the geometric property of the samples.
Generally speaking, OT is a mathematical tool to compare distributions by computing a transportation
mass plan from a source to a target distribution. Distances based on OT are referred to as the
Monge-Kantorovich or Wasserstein distances (Villani, 2009) and have been successfully employed
in a wide variety of machine learning applications including clustering (Ho et al., 2017), computer
vision (Bonneel et al., 2011; Solomon et al., 2015), generative adversarial networks (Arjovsky et al.,
2017) or domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2017).
A key limitation of the Wasserstein distance is that it relies on the assumption of aligned distributions,
namely they must belong to the same ground space or at least a meaningful distance across domains
can be computed. Nevertheless, source and target distributions can be collected under distinct
environments, representing different times of collection, contexts or measurements (see Fig. 1, left
and right). To get benefit from OT on such heterogeneous distribution settings, one can compute the
Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance (Sturm, 2006; Mémoli, 2011) to overcome the lack of intrinsic
correspondence between the distribution spaces. GW extends Wasserstein by computing a distance
between metrics defined within each of the source and target spaces. From a computational point
view, it involves a non convex quadratic problem (Peyré and Cuturi, 2019), hard to lift to large scale
settings. A remedy to such a heavy computation burden lies in a prevalent approach referred to as
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

