Conditioning and Processing: Techniques to Improve
Information-Theoretic Generalization Bounds
Hassan Hafez-Kolahi
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
hafez@ce.sharif.edu

Zeinab Golgooni
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
golgooni@ce.sharif.edu

Shohreh Kasaei
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
kasaei@sharif.edu

Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
soleymani@sharif.edu

Abstract
Obtaining generalization bounds for learning algorithms is one of the main subjects
studied in theoretical machine learning. In recent years, information-theoretic
bounds on generalization have gained the attention of researchers. This approach
provides an insight into learning algorithms by considering the mutual information
between the model and the training set. In this paper, a probabilistic graphical
representation of this approach is adopted and two general techniques to improve
the bounds are introduced, namely conditioning and processing. In conditioning, a
random variable in the graph is considered as given, while in processing a random
variable is substituted with one of its children. These techniques can be used to
improve the bounds by either sharpening them or increasing their applicability. It
is demonstrated that the proposed framework provides a simple and unified way
to explain a variety of recent tightening results. New improved bounds derived by
utilizing these techniques are also proposed.

1

Introduction

Bounding the generalization gap is one of the most studied problems in theoretical machine learning.
Classically, uniform bounds on the hypothesis set were one of the most popular techniques in
understanding the generalization gap, but they are not always sufficient. In particular that’s the case
for deep neural networks [22]. Recently there has been a line of research trying to reason about the
generalization gap by bounding the mutual information between the dataset and the learned model
[17, 16, 18, 6, 3, 19]. Such bounds consider the details of the algorithm used to generate the model
according to the dataset, providing new opportunities to take into account the specific dynamics
involved in each learning algorithm. In particular, this idea can be used in studying deep neural
networks [14, 2, 20]. There is ongoing research to expand this information-theoretic machinery
and to tighten the generalization bounds. Bu et al. [7] provided bounds which are based on the
mutual information between the model and each individual sample. In another line of work, Asadi
et al. [3] used subgaussian assumption to apply chaining techniques in the information-theoretic
framework. An idea which was later used to analyze the layered structure of deep neural networks
[2]. Recently Steinke and Zakynthinou [19] proposed using a super sample where the training set is
selected randomly from it, and computing the mutual information conditioned on this super sample.
It was demonstrated how some of the classical tools based on VC-dimension, compression schemes,
and differential privacy, can be explained in this new information-theoretic framework. Though in
the case of VC theory, the obtained bounds were not tight and have an extra log n factor, a problem
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

