Minimax Classification with 0-1 Loss
and Performance Guarantees
Santiago Mazuelas
BCAM-Basque Center for Applied Mathematics
and IKERBASQUE-Basque Foundation for Science
Bilbao, Spain
smazuelas@bcamath.org
Andrea Zanoni
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
andrea.zanoni@epfl.ch

Aritz Pérez
BCAM-Basque Center for Applied Mathematics
Bilbao, Spain
aperez@bcamath.org

Abstract
Supervised classification techniques use training samples to find classification
rules with small expected 0-1 loss. Conventional methods achieve efficient learning and out-of-sample generalization by minimizing surrogate losses over specific
families of rules. This paper presents minimax risk classifiers (MRCs) that do not
rely on a choice of surrogate loss and family of rules. MRCs achieve efficient
learning and out-of-sample generalization by minimizing worst-case expected 0-1
loss w.r.t. uncertainty sets that are defined by linear constraints and include the
true underlying distribution. In addition, MRCs’ learning stage provides performance guarantees as lower and upper tight bounds for expected 0-1 loss. We also
present MRCs’ finite-sample generalization bounds in terms of training size and
smallest minimax risk, and show their competitive classification performance w.r.t.
state-of-the-art techniques using benchmark datasets.

1 Introduction
Supervised classification techniques use training samples to find classification rules that assign labels
to instances with small expected 0-1 loss, also referred to as risk or probability of error. Most learning methods utilize empirical risk minimization (ERM) approach that minimizes the expectation
w.r.t. the empirical distribution of training samples, see e.g., [1, 2]. Other methods utilize robust risk
minimization (RRM) approach that minimizes the worst-case expectation w.r.t. an uncertainty set of
distributions obtained using metrics such as moments’ fits, divergences, and Wasserstein distances,
see e.g., [3, 4]. Common uncertainty sets are formed by distributions with instances’ marginal supported on the training samples [5–9]. However, more general uncertainty sets, such as those used
in [3, 4, 10–12], can include the true underlying distribution with a tuneable confidence. Out-ofsample generalization is conventionally achieved by considering families of rules with favorable
properties (reduced VC dimension or Rademacher complexity [1, 13]). However, RRM techniques
can directly achieve out-of-sample generalization by using uncertainty sets that include the true
underlying distribution. In addition, such uncertainty sets can enable to obtain tight performance
bounds at learning.
Conventional methods achieve efficient learning and out-of-sample generalization by minimizing
surrogate losses over families of rules with favorable properties. ERM-based techniques such as
support vector machines (SVMs), multilayer perceptrons (MLPs), and Adaboost classifiers consider
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

