Interior Point Solving for LP-based
prediction+optimisation

Jayanta Mandi
Data Analytics Laboratory
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
jayanta.mandi@vub.be

Tias Guns
Data Analytics Laboratory
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
tias.guns@vub.be

Abstract
Solving optimization problems is the key to decision making in many real-life
analytics applications. However, the coefficients of the optimization problems
are often uncertain and dependent on external factors, such as future demand
or energy or stock prices. Machine learning (ML) models, especially neural
networks, are increasingly being used to estimate these coefficients in a datadriven way. Hence, end-to-end predict-and-optimize approaches, which consider
how effective the predicted values are to solve the optimization problem, have
received increasing attention. In case of integer linear programming problems,
a popular approach to overcome their non-differentiabilty is to add a quadratic
penalty term to the continuous relaxation, such that results from differentiating
over quadratic programs can be used. Instead we investigate the use of the more
principled logarithmic barrier term, as widely used in interior point solvers for
linear programming. Specifically, instead of differentiating the KKT conditions, we
consider the homogeneous self-dual formulation of the LP and we show the relation
between the interior point step direction and corresponding gradients needed for
learning. Finally our empirical experiments demonstrate our approach performs
as good as if not better than the state-of-the-art QPTL (Quadratic Programming
task loss) formulation of Wilder et al. [29] and SPO approach of Elmachtoub and
Grigas [12].

1

Introduction

There is recently a growing interest in data-driven decision making. In many analytics applications,
a combinatorial optimization is used for decision making with the aim of maximizing a predefined
objective. However, in many real-world problems, there are uncertainties over the coefficients of the
objective function and they must be predicted from historical data by using a Machine Learning (ML)
model, such as stock price prediction for portfolio optimization [5]. In this work, we propose a novel
approach to integrate ML and optimization in a deep learning architecture for such applications.
We consider combinatorial optimization problems that can be formulated as a mixed integer linear
program (MILP). MILP has been used, to tackle a number of combinatorial optimization problems,
for instance, efficient micro-grid scheduling [20], sales promotion planning [8] and more. Specifically,
we want to train a neural network model to predict the coefficients of the MILP in a way such that the
parameters of the neural network are determined by minimizing a task loss, which takes the effect of
the predicted coefficients on the MILP output into consideration. The central challenge is how to
compute the gradients from the MILP-based task loss, given that MILP is discrete and the Linear
Programming (LP) relaxation is not twice differentiable.
To do so, Wilder et al. [29] proposed to compute the gradients by differentiating the KKT conditions
of the continuous relaxation of the MILP. However, to execute this, they have to add a quadratic
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

