COPT: Coordinated Optimal Transport on Graphs

Yihe Dong
Microsoft

Will Sawin
Department of Mathematics
Columbia University

Abstract
We introduce COPT, a novel distance metric between graphs defined via an optimization routine, computing a coordinated pair of optimal transport maps simultaneously. This gives an unsupervised way to learn general-purpose graph
representation, applicable to both graph sketching and graph comparison. COPT
involves simultaneously optimizing dual transport plans, one between the vertices
of two graphs, and another between graph signal probability distributions. We show
theoretically that our method preserves important global structural information on
graphs, in particular spectral information, and analyze connections to existing studies. Empirically, COPT outperforms state of the art methods in graph classification
on both synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

We introduce a new unsupervised method to measure the distance between a pair of graphs, and apply
it to graph sketching. This distance is based on the general notion of optimal transport distance, which
involves minimizing a loss function over transport plans between two distributions [21]. However,
our distance is defined by minimizing a loss function over pairs of simultaneous transport plans, one
between the vertices of the two graph and one between distributions defined by the Laplacian spectra
of the graphs. This allows us to compare, in a flexible way, large-scale spectral information between
the two graphs. Thus, we call it Coordinated OPtimal Transport, or COPT. We show that COPT has
desirable properties in theory, as well as empirically demonstrate its usefulness in graph sketching,
retrieval, and summarization, on both synthetic and real world datasets.
Constructing a distance metric between graphs and studying its applications come from a long, rich
line of work, due to the ubiquity of graph-structured data and the importance of graph sketching and
retrieval. We briefly highlight some recent developments in this field, while drawing more detailed
connections throughout the text.
Sketching is often defined as choosing a sequence of combinatorial operations (e.g. edge contractions)
that minimizes a measure of distance between the sketch and the original graph. For instance, [33]
contracts edges in such a way as to preserve the Laplacian spectrum. [7] removes edges and merges
vertices in a way that minimizes the Frobenius norm of changes in the psuedoinverse of the Laplacian.
Sketching has been applied to a number of different graph problems. [43] used iterated graph
sketching to find optimal orderings of the vertices of a graph. Building on this, [9] defined an
efficiently computable notion of distance on graphs. [31] used sketching to efficiently solve linear
systems involving the graph Laplacian. Generalizing ideas from electrical engineering, [16] defined
a sketch as the Schur complement of the Laplacian with respect to a subset of the nodes. [46]
generalized multiscale methods to graphs with extra structure on the nodes. We discuss further
connections to related works in §4, as well as provide empirical comparisons to competitive baselines.
Our main contributions are 1) devising a coordinated optimal transport algorithm for computing
graph distance; 2) applying COPT to graph sketching, obtaining small sketches that allow for
improved graph classfication, insightful visualization, and high quality retrieval.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

