Delving into the Cyclic Mechanism in
Semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation

Yuxi Li∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
lyxok1@sjtu.edu.cn
John See
Multimedia University
Selangor, Malaysia
johnsee@mmu.edu.my

Ning Xu∗
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA
nxu@adobe.com

Jinlong Peng∗
Tencent Youtu Lab
Shanghai, China
jeromepeng@tencent.com

Weiyao Lin†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
wylin@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we address several inadequacies of current video object segmentation pipelines. Firstly, a cyclic mechanism is incorporated to the standard semisupervised process to produce more robust representations. By relying on the
accurate reference mask in the starting frame, we show that the error propagation
problem can be mitigated. Next, we introduce a simple gradient correction module, which extends the offline pipeline to an online method while maintaining the
efficiency of the former. Finally we develop cycle effective receptive field (cycleERF) based on gradient correction to provide a new perspective into analyzing
object-specific regions of interests. We conduct comprehensive experiments on
challenging benchmarks of DAVIS17 and Youtube-VOS, demonstrating that the
cyclic mechanism is beneficial to segmentation quality.

1

Introduction

Video object segmentation (VOS) is garnering more attention in recent years due to its widespread
application in the area of video editing and analysis. Among all the VOS scenarios, semi-supervised
video object segmentation is the most practical and widely researched. Specifically, a mask is
provided in the first frame indicating the location and boundary of the objects, and the algorithm
should accurately segment the same objects from the background in subsequent frames.
A natural solution toward the problem is to process videos in sequential order; this exploits the
information from previous frames and guides the segmentation process in the current frame. In most
practical scenarios, the video is processed in an online manner where only previous knowledge is
available. Due to this reason, most state-of-the-art pipelines [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] follow a sequential
order for segmentation in both training and inference stages. Ideally, if the masks predicted for
intermediate frames are sufficiently accurate, they can provide more helpful object-specific features
and position prior to segmentation. Besides, the existence of prediction errors at intermediate frames
can be problematic — these masks can mislead the segmentation procedure in future frames. Figure 1
illustrates an example of such error propagation risk in sequential video object segmentation pipelines.
As the algorithm is misled by another camel of similar appearance in the background, the segmented
∗
†

equal contribution
Correspondance author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

