Adversarial Weight Perturbation Helps
Robust Generalization
Dongxian Wu1,3

Shu-Tao Xia1,3
Yisen Wang2†
Tsinghua University
2
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of EECS, Peking University
3
PCL Research Center of Networks and Communications, Peng Cheng Laboratory
1

wu-dx16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The study on improving the robustness of deep neural networks against adversarial examples grows rapidly in recent years. Among them, adversarial training
is the most promising one, which flattens the input loss landscape (loss change
with respect to input) via training on adversarially perturbed examples. However,
how the widely used weight loss landscape (loss change with respect to weight)
performs in adversarial training is rarely explored. In this paper, we investigate
the weight loss landscape from a new perspective, and identify a clear correlation
between the flatness of weight loss landscape and robust generalization gap. Several well-recognized adversarial training improvements, such as early stopping,
designing new objective functions, or leveraging unlabeled data, all implicitly
flatten the weight loss landscape. Based on these observations, we propose a simple
yet effective Adversarial Weight Perturbation (AWP) to explicitly regularize the
flatness of weight loss landscape, forming a double-perturbation mechanism in the
adversarial training framework that adversarially perturbs both inputs and weights.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that AWP indeed brings flatter weight loss
landscape and can be easily incorporated into various existing adversarial training
methods to further boost their adversarial robustness.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely deployed in a number of fields such as
computer vision [14], speech recognition [51], and natural language processing [10], they could be
easily fooled to confidently make incorrect predictions by adversarial examples that are crafted by
adding intentionally small and human-imperceptible perturbations to normal examples [45, 13, 56, 4,
50]. As DNNs penetrate almost every corner in our daily life, ensuring their security, e.g., improving
their robustness against adversarial examples, becomes more and more important.
There have emerged a number of defense techniques to improve adversarial robustness of DNNs
[36, 27, 52]. Across these defenses, Adversarial Training (AT) [13, 27] is the most effective and
promising approach, which not only demonstrates moderate robustness, but also has thus far not been
comprehensively attacked [2]. AT directly incorporates adversarial examples into the training process
to solve the following optimization problem:
n
1X
max `(fw (x0i ), yi ),
(1)
min ρ(w), where ρ(w) =
w
n i=1 kx0i −xi kp ≤
where n is the number of training examples, x0i is the adversarial example within the -ball (bounded
by an Lp -norm) centered at natural example xi , fw is the DNN with weight w, `(·) is the standard
†

Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn)

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

