Memory Based Trajectory-conditioned Policies
for Learning from Sparse Rewards

Yijie Guo1
Jongwook Choi1
Marcin Moczulski2
Shengyu Feng1
2
2
Samy Bengio
Mohammad Norouzi
Honglak Lee2,1
1
2
University of Michigan
Google Brain
{guoyijie,jwook,shengyuf}@umich.edu moczulski@google.com
{bengio,mnorouzi,honglak}@google.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning with sparse rewards is challenging because an agent can
rarely obtain non-zero rewards and hence, gradient-based optimization of parameterized policies can be incremental and slow. Recent work demonstrated that
using a memory buffer of previous successful trajectories can result in more effective policies. However, existing methods may overly exploit past successful
experiences, which can encourage the agent to adopt sub-optimal and myopic
behaviors. In this work, instead of focusing on good experiences with limited
diversity, we propose to learn a trajectory-conditioned policy to follow and expand
diverse past trajectories from a memory buffer. Our method allows the agent to
reach diverse regions in the state space and improve upon the past trajectories to
reach new states. We empirically show that our approach significantly outperforms
count-based exploration methods (parametric approach) and self-imitation learning
(parametric approach with non-parametric memory) on various complex tasks with
local optima. In particular, without using expert demonstrations or resetting to
arbitrary states, we achieve the state-of-the-art scores under five billion number of
frames, on challenging Atari games such as Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms with parameterized policy and value function have
achieved remarkable success in various complex domains [32, 49, 48]. However, tasks that require
reasoning over long horizons with sparse rewards remain exceedingly challenging for the parametric
approaches. In these tasks, a positive reward could only be received after a long sequence of appropriate actions. The gradient-based updates of parameters are incremental and slow and have a global
impact on all parameters, which may cause catastrophic forgetting and performance degradation.
Many parametric approaches rely on recent samples and do not explore the state space systematically.
They might forget the positive-reward trajectories unless the good trajectories are frequently collected.
Recently, non-parametric memory from past experiences is employed in DRL algorithms to improve
policy learning and sample efficiency. Prioritized experience replay [45] proposes to learn from past
experiences by prioritizing them based on temporal-difference error. Episodic reinforcement learning
[43, 22, 28], self-imitation learning [36, 19], and memory-augmented policy optimization [27] build
a memory to store past good experience and thus can rapidly latch onto past successful policies when
encountering with states similar to past experiences. However, the exploitation of good experiences
within limited directions might hurt performance in some cases. For example on Montezuma’s
Revenge (Fig. 1), if the agent exploits the past good trajectories around the yellow path, it would
receive the small positive rewards quickly but it loses the chance to achieve a higher score in the long
term. Therefore, in order to find the optimal path (red), it is better to consider past experiences in
diverse directions, instead of focusing only on the good trajectories which lead to myopic behaviors.
Inspired by recent work on memory-augmented generative models [21, 9], we note that generating a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

