Mix and Match: An Optimistic Tree-Search
Approach for Learning Models from Mixture
Distributions
Matthew Faw
The University of Texas at Austin
matthewfaw@utexas.edu

Rajat Sen
Amazon
rajat.sen@utexas.edu

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
IBM Research NY
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Constantine Caramanis
The University of Texas at Austin
constantine@utexas.edu

Sanjay Shakkottai
The University of Texas at Austin
sanjay.shakkottai@utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider a covariate shift problem where one has access to several different
training datasets for the same learning problem and a small validation set which
possibly differs from all the individual training distributions. The distribution shift
is due, in part, to unobserved features in the datasets. The objective, then, is to find
the best mixture distribution over the training datasets (with only observed features)
such that training a learning algorithm using this mixture has the best validation
performance. Our proposed algorithm, Mix&Match, combines stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) with optimistic tree search and model re-use (evolving partially
trained models with samples from different mixture distributions) over the space of
mixtures, for this task. We prove a novel high probability bound on the final SGD
iterate without relying on a global gradient norm bound, and use it to show the
advantages of model re-use. Additionally, we provide simple regret guarantees for
our algorithm with respect to recovering the optimal mixture, given a total budget
of SGD evaluations. Finally, we validate our algorithm on two real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Suppose a predictive healthcare company has collected data from several regions of the world for a
prediction task, and would like to deploy their model in a new region where only preliminary data has
been collected. Obtaining more data before product deployment is prohibitively expensive, so they
hope to leverage the data they have to deploy their product in this new region. The differences between
the distributions from these different regions might arise due to shifts in the observed variables such
as weight and height, but might also be caused by shifts in unobserved variables not considered or
available during data collection, such as prevalence and expression of different conditions, genes, etc.
A natural idea, which allows exploiting the large amount of data from various regions, is to train
models on several different mixture distributions over these datasets, and deploy the model that
performs best when validated on the small validation data from the new region.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

