Coresets for Regressions with Panel Data

Lingxiao Huang
Huawei

K. Sudhir
Yale University

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
This paper introduces the problem of coresets for regression problems to panel
data settings. We first define coresets for several variants of regression problems
with panel data and then present efficient algorithms to construct coresets of size
that depend polynomially on 1/ε (where ε is the error parameter) and the number
of regression parameters – independent of the number of individuals in the panel
data or the time units each individual is observed for. Our approach is based on
the Feldman-Langberg framework in which a key step is to upper bound the “total
sensitivity” that is roughly the sum of maximum influences of all individual-time
pairs taken over all possible choices of regression parameters. Empirically, we
assess our approach with a synthetic and a real-world datasets; the coreset sizes
constructed using our approach are much smaller than the full dataset and coresets
indeed accelerate the running time of computing the regression objective.

1

Introduction

Panel data, represented as X ∈ RN ×T ×d and Y ∈ RN ×T where N is the number of entities/individuals, T is the number of time periods and d is the number of features is widely used in
statistics and applied machine learning. Such data track features of a cross-section of entities (e.g.,
customers) longitudinally over time. Such data are widely preferred in supervised machine learning
for more accurate prediction and unbiased inference of relationships between variables relative to
cross-sectional data (where each entity is observed only once) [28, 6].
The most common method for inferring relationships between variables using observational data
involves solving regression problems on panel data. The main difference between regression on panel
data when compared to cross-sectional data is that there may exist correlations within observations
associated with entities over time periods. Consequently, the regression problem for panel data is the
d
following optimization problem over regression variables β ∈ RP
and the covariance matrix Ω that is
induced by the abovementioned correlations: minβ∈Rd ,Ω∈RT ×T i∈[N ] (yi − Xi β)> Ω−1 (yi − Xi β).
Here Xi ∈ RT ×d denotes the observation matrix of entity i whose t-th row is xit and Ω is constrained
to have largest eigenvalue at most 1 where Ωtt0 represents the correlation between time periods t
and t0 . This regression model is motivated by the random effects model (Eq. (1) and Appendix A),
common in the panel data literature [27, 24, 23]. A common way to define the correlation between
observations is an autocorrelation structure AR(q) [25, 35] whose covariance matrix Ω is induced
by a vector ρ ∈ Rq (integer q ≥ 1). This type of correlation results in the generalized least-squares
estimator (GLSE), where the parameter space is P = Rd+q .
As the ability to track entities on various features in real-time has grown, panel datasets have grown
massively in size. However, the size of these datasets limits the ability to apply standard learning
algorithms due to space and time constraints. Further, organizations owning data may want to share
only a subset of data with others seeking to gain insights to mitigate privacy or intellectual property
related risks. Hence, a question arises: can we construct a smaller subset of the panel data on which
we can solve the regression problems with performance guarantees that are close enough to those
obtained when working with the complete dataset?
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

