Continual Learning of Control Primitives:
Skill Discovery via Reset-Games
Kelvin Xu⇤ 1 , Siddharth Verma⇤1 , Chelsea Finn2 , Sergey Levine1
1
UC Berkeley, 2 Stanford University

Abstract
Reinforcement learning has the potential to automate the acquisition of behavior
in complex settings, but in order for it to be successfully deployed, a number of
practical challenges must be addressed. First, in real world settings, when an
agent attempts a tasks and fails, the environment must somehow “reset" so that
the agent can attempt the task again. While easy in simulation, this could require
considerable human effort in the real world, especially if the number of trials is
very large. Second, real world learning is often limited by challenges in exploration,
as complex, temporally extended behavior is often times difficult to acquire with
random exploration. In this work, we show how a single method can allow an agent
to acquire skills with minimal supervision while removing the need for resets. We
do this by exploiting the insight that the need to “reset" an agent to a broad set of
initial states for a learning task provides a natural setting to learn a diverse set of
“reset-skills." We propose a general-sum game formulation that naturally balances
the objective of resetting and learning skills, and demonstrate that this approach
improves performance on reset-free tasks, and additionally show that the skills we
obtain can be used to significantly accelerate downstream learning. 2

1

Introduction

For reinforcement learning (RL) methods to be successfully deployed in the real world, they must
solve a number of distinct challenges. First, agents that learn in real world settings, such as robotics,
must contend with non-episodic learning processes: when the agent attempts the task and fails, it must
start from that resulting failure state for the next attempt. Otherwise, it would require a manuallyprovided “reset,” which is easy in simulated environments, but takes considerable human effort in the
real world, thereby reducing autonomy – the very thing that makes RL appealing. Second, complex
and temporally extended behaviors can be exceedingly hard to learn with naïve exploration [25, 24].
Agents that are equipped with a repertoire of skills or primitives (e.g., options [43]) could master
such temporally extended tasks much more efficiently. These two problems may on the surface seem
unrelated. However, the non-episodic learning problem may be addressed by learning additional skills
for resetting the system. Could these same skills also provide a natural way to accelerate learning of
downstream tasks? This is the question we study in this paper. Our goal is to understand how diverse
“reset skills” can simultaneously enable non-episodic reset-free learning and, in the process, acquire
useful primitives for accelerating downstream reinforcement learning.
Prior works have explored automated skill learning using intrinsic, unsupervised reward objectives [20,
13, 40], acquiring behaviors that can then be used to solve downstream tasks with user-specified
objectives efficiently, often by employing hierarchical methods [11, 43, 12]. These skill discovery
methods assume the ability to reset to initial states during this “pre-training” phase, and even then face
a challenging optimization problem: without any additional manual guidance, the space of potential
⇤

2

equal contribution
code is available at https://github.com/siddharthverma314/adversarial.git

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

