On Correctness of Automatic Differentiation
for Non-Differentiable Functions
Wonyeol Lee†
Hangyeol Yu†
Xavier Rival‡
Hongseok Yang†
†
School of Computer Science, KAIST, South Korea
‡
INRIA Paris, Département d’Informatique of ENS, and CNRS/PSL University, France
{wonyeol.lee.cs, yhk1344}@gmail.com rival@di.ens.fr hongseok.yang@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Differentiation lies at the core of many machine-learning algorithms, and is wellsupported by popular autodiff systems, such as TensorFlow and PyTorch. Originally, these systems have been developed to compute derivatives of differentiable functions, but in practice, they are commonly applied to functions with
non-differentiabilities. For instance, neural networks using ReLU define nondifferentiable functions in general, but the gradients of losses involving those
functions are computed using autodiff systems in practice. This status quo raises a
natural question: are autodiff systems correct in any formal sense when they are
applied to such non-differentiable functions? In this paper, we provide a positive
answer to this question. Using counterexamples, we first point out flaws in oftenused informal arguments, such as: non-differentiabilities arising in deep learning
do not cause any issues because they form a measure-zero set. We then investigate
a class of functions, called PAP functions, that includes nearly all (possibly nondifferentiable) functions in deep learning nowadays. For these PAP functions, we
propose a new type of derivatives, called intensional derivatives, and prove that
these derivatives always exist and coincide with standard derivatives for almost
all inputs. We also show that these intensional derivatives are what most autodiff
systems compute or try to compute essentially. In this way, we formally establish
the correctness of autodiff systems applied to non-differentiable functions.

1

Introduction

Automatic differentiation or autodiff is one of the key technologies behind the dramatic progress of
deep learning in recent years [4, 26, 38, 39]. It refers to the idea of developing and using a generic tool
that can differentiate any function expressed as a program in a general-purpose programming language
[20, 34]. Effective autodiff systems have been developed for popular programming languages
[2, 3, 5, 9, 22, 28, 33, 35, 42, 44, 45]. They have enabled the development of sophisticated models
and algorithms in machine learning that, in particular, involve deep neural networks [19].
This paper is concerned with one seeming contradiction of these autodiff systems: the systems have
originally been developed to compute derivatives of differentiable functions, but in practice, they
are commonly applied to functions with non-differentiabilities. For instance, neural networks using
ReLU define non-differentiable functions in general, but the derivatives of losses involving those
functions are computed using autodiff systems in practice. This status quo raises a natural question:
are autodiff systems correct in any formal sense when applied to such non-differentiable functions?
A common reaction to the question is: non-differentiabilities arising in deep learning (e.g., from
ReLU) do not cause any issues because they occur rarely (i.e., they form a Lebesgue-measure-zero
set). In the paper, we first show that this reaction needs to be carefully re-examined at least. Using
counterexamples, we point out flaws in three often-used arguments derived from this reaction. We
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

