Knowledge Distillation in Wide Neural Networks:
Risk Bound, Data Efficiency and Imperfect Teacher

Guangda Ji
Peking University
jiguangda@pku.edu.cn

Zhanxing Zhu
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University
zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a strategy of training a student network with guide of
the soft output from a teacher network. It has been a successful method of model
compression and knowledge transfer. However, currently knowledge distillation
lacks a convincing theoretical understanding. On the other hand, recent finding
on neural tangent kernel enables us to approximate a wide neural network with
a linear model of the network’s random features. In this paper, we theoretically
analyze the knowledge distillation of a wide neural network. First we provide
a transfer risk bound for the linearized model of the network. Then we propose
a metric of the task’s training difficulty, called data inefficiency. Based on this
metric, we show that for a perfect teacher, a high ratio of teacher’s soft labels can
be beneficial. Finally, for the case of imperfect teacher, we find that hard labels can
correct teacher’s wrong prediction, which explains the practice of mixing hard and
soft labels.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network has been a successful tool in many fields of artificial intelligence. However,
we typically require deep and complex networks and much effort of training to achieve good
generalization. Knowledge distillation(KD) is a method introduced in [9], which can transfer
knowledge from a large trained model (i.e. teacher) to another smaller network (i.e. student).
Through distillation, the student network can achieve better performance than direct training from
scratch [9]. The vanilla form of KD in classification problem has a combined loss of soft and hard
labels,
L = ρL(ys , yt ) + (1 − ρ)L(ys , yg )
where yt and ys are teacher and student’s soft labels , yg are ground truth labels and ρ is called soft
ratio.
Apart from this original form of KD, many variants that share the teacher-student paradigm are
proposed. [10] uses intermediate layers of neural network to perform distillation. [23] and [25] adopt
adversarial training to reduce the difference of label distribution between teacher and student. In
[12] and [14], the authors consider graph-based distillation. Self distillation, proposed in [8], distills
the student from an earlier generation of student of same architecture. The latest generation can
outperform the first generation significantly.
A common conjecture on why KD works is that it provides extra information on the output distribution,
and student model can use this “dark knowledge” to achieve higher accuracy. However, KD still lacks
a convincing theoretical explanation. [21] argues that KD not only transfers super-class correlations
to students, but also gives higher credits to correct samples in gradient flow. [2] finds that KD enables
student to learn more task-related pixels and discard the background in image classification tasks.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

