Latent World Models For Intrinsically Motivated
Exploration

Aleksandr Ermolov, Nicu Sebe
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science (DISI)
University of Trento, Italy
{aleksandr.ermolov,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it

Abstract
In this work we consider partially observable environments with sparse rewards.
We present a self-supervised representation learning method for image-based observations, which arranges embeddings respecting temporal distance of observations.
This representation is empirically robust to stochasticity and suitable for novelty
detection from the error of a predictive forward model. We consider episodic and
life-long uncertainties to guide the exploration. We propose to estimate the missing
information about the environment with the world model, which operates in the
learned latent space. As a motivation of the method, we analyse the exploration
problem in a tabular Partially Observable Labyrinth. We demonstrate the method
on image-based hard exploration environments from the Atari benchmark and
report significant improvement with respect to prior work. The source code of the
method and all the experiments is available at https://github.com/htdt/lwm.

1

Introduction

A sparse reward signal is one of the challenging problems in reinforcement learning (RL). In this
case, random exploration is inefficient, the number of randomly performed steps grows exponentially
with the number of distinct visited states, the agent is unlikely to stumble on the rewarding state. The
intrinsic motivation, or curiosity, approach aims at this problem [4]. This method provides an intrinsic
reward signal to encourage an agent to seek novel or rare states. There are several approaches to detect
such states and calculate the reward: one class of methods estimates the novelty proportionally to an
error of future state prediction (predictive forward models) [31, 25, 6], another class approximately
counts visited states and estimates the novelty in an inverse ratio [32, 4, 10, 24, 26, 33]. Most of the
methods estimate novelty in a life-long time frame, states are considered novel only if the agent did
not observe them during the whole training. Some methods use an episodic time frame comparing
only the states inside a specific episode [26, 2].
Often RL environments are only partially observable and the agent must maintain a belief state, i.e.,
a sufficient statistic of the past, required for action selection. For instance, in the Atari Pong game,
the state should include at least two consecutive frames of the environment, making it possible to
determine the direction of the ball movement. This is a common situation, when the environment
is partially observable and the reward is sparse at the same time. For instance, consider a labyrinth
composed of rooms similar to each other. The agent observes only the room in which it is currently
located, the reward is given only when the agent reaches the goal. Our experiments (Tab. 1) show that
even the 16 room labyrinth is a challenging task for a common RL algorithm. Novelty estimation,
based on current observation, is also inefficient: each room looks similar even during one episode.
Visiting states with high uncertainty can be beneficial for exploration. We distinguish three types of
uncertainty by sources: from partial observability, from novelty (epistemic) and from stochasticity
(aleatoric). The latter type is irrelevant to the exploration strategy, whereas the first and the second
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

