Variational Bayesian Unlearning

Quoc Phong Nguyen, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick Jaillet†
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA†
{qphong,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu†

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of approximately unlearning a Bayesian model
from a small subset of the training data to be erased. We frame this problem as one
of minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the approximate posterior
belief of model parameters after directly unlearning from erased data vs. the exact
posterior belief from retraining with remaining data. Using the variational inference
(VI) framework, we show that it is equivalent to minimizing an evidence upper
bound which trades off between fully unlearning from erased data vs. not entirely
forgetting the posterior belief given the full data (i.e., including the remaining data);
the latter prevents catastrophic unlearning that can render the model useless. In
model training with VI, only an approximate (instead of exact) posterior belief
given the full data can be obtained, which makes unlearning even more challenging.
We propose two novel tricks to tackle this challenge. We empirically demonstrate
our unlearning methods on Bayesian models such as sparse Gaussian process and
logistic regression using synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Our interactions with machine learning (ML) applications have surged in recent years such that
large quantities of users’ data are now deeply ingrained into the ML models being trained for these
applications. This greatly complicates the regulation of access to each user’s data or implementation
of personal data ownership, which are enforced by the General Data Protection Regulation in the
European Union [24]. In particular, if a user would like to exercise her right to be forgotten [24] (e.g.,
when quitting an ML application), then it would be desirable to have the trained ML model “unlearn”
from her data. Such a problem of machine unlearning [4] extends to the practical scenario where a
small subset of data previously used for training is later identified as malicious (e.g., anomalies) [4, 9]
and the trained ML model can perform well once again if it can unlearn from the malicious data.
A naive alternative to machine unlearning is to simply retrain an ML model from scratch with the data
remaining after erasing that to be unlearned from. In practice, this is prohibitively expensive in terms
of time and space costs since the remaining data is often large such as in the above scenarios. How
then can a trained ML model directly and efficiently unlearn from a small subset of data to be erased to
become (a) exactly and if not, (b) approximately close to that from retraining with the large remaining
data? Unfortunately, (a) exact unlearning is only possible for selected ML models (e.g., naive Bayes
classifier, linear regression, k-means clustering, and item-item collaborative filtering [4, 12, 30]).
This motivates the need to consider (b) approximate unlearning as it is applicable to a broader family
of ML models like neural networks [9, 13] but, depending on its choice of loss function, may suffer
from catastrophic unlearning1 that can render the model useless. For example, to mitigate this issue,
the works of [9, 13] have to “patch up” their loss functions by additionally bounding the loss incurred
1
A trained ML model is said to experience catastrophic unlearning from the erased data when its resulting
performance is considerably worse than that from retraining with the remaining data.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

