Unsupervised Text Generation by
Learning from Search
Jingjing Li1 , Zichao Li2 , Lili Mou3 , Xin Jiang2 , Michael R. Lyu1 , Irwin King1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
University of Alberta; Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
{lijj,lyu,king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
{li.zichao,jiang.xin}@huawei.com
doublepower.mou@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we propose TGLS, a novel framework for unsupervised Text
Generation by Learning from Search. We start by applying a strong search algorithm
(in particular, simulated annealing) towards a heuristically defined objective that
(roughly) estimates the quality of sentences. Then, a conditional generative model
learns from the search results, and meanwhile smooth out the noise of search. The
alternation between search and learning can be repeated for performance bootstrapping. We demonstrate the effectiveness of TGLS on two real-world natural language
generation tasks, unsupervised paraphrasing and text formalization. Our model
significantly outperforms unsupervised baseline methods in both tasks. Especially,
it achieves comparable performance to strong supervised methods for paraphrase
generation.1

1

Introduction

Text generation refers to a wide range of tasks involving generating natural language, including
machine translation [19, 20, 18], sentence simplification [29, 41], and text summarization [5, 1].
Recent success of neural text generation relies heavily on large parallel data for training, which
may not be available in real-world natural language processing (NLP) applications. In this work,
we consider unsupervised text generation, where no parallel data is available. This setting is more
challenging, and has significant potential in both scientific research (e.g., low-resource language
processing) and industrial applications (e.g., cold start for a new NLP application).
Early work tackles unsupervised text generation by rules or templates [47, 27]. While such approaches
do not require parallel corpora, the generated sentences are highly subject to the rules, and hence lack
the flexibility of natural language. Other work constructs pseudo-parallel data, which is only feasible
for certain tasks like unsupervised machine translation [19].
Recently, researchers have developed search-based techniques for unsupervised text generation [28,
17, 37, 23], where a heuristically defined scoring function evaluates the quality of a sentence, involving
language fluency, semantic compliance, and other task-specific aspects. Then, the algorithm performs
word-level edits (such as word deletion, insertion, and replacement) to search towards a (possibly
local) optimum of the scoring function. With a reasonably designed scoring function, such approaches
are shown to be effective in a variety of applications like paraphrase generation [28, 23], sentence
summarization [37], and text simplification [17].
However, the above search-based approach has two major drawbacks: 1) The inference efficiency is
low. To obtain an output sentence, the search algorithm would perform a few hundred steps of local
1

Code is available at https://github.com/jingjingli01/TGLS

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

