On the Role of Sparsity and DAG Constraints for
Learning Linear DAGs
Ignavier Ng
University of Toronto

AmirEmad Ghassami
Johns Hopkins University

Kun Zhang
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Learning graphical structures based on Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) is a challenging problem, partly owing to the large search space of possible graphs. A recent
line of work formulates the structure learning problem as a continuous constrained
optimization task using the least squares objective and an algebraic characterization
of DAGs. However, the formulation requires a hard DAG constraint and may lead
to optimization difficulties. In this paper, we study the asymptotic role of the
sparsity and DAG constraints for learning DAG models in the linear Gaussian and
non-Gaussian cases, and investigate their usefulness in the finite sample regime.
Based on the theoretical results, we formulate a likelihood-based score function,
and show that one only has to apply soft sparsity and DAG constraints to learn
a DAG equivalent to the ground truth DAG. This leads to an unconstrained optimization problem that is much easier to solve. Using gradient-based optimization
and GPU acceleration, our procedure can easily handle thousands of nodes while
retaining a high accuracy. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our
proposed method and show that the DAG-penalized likelihood objective is indeed
favorable over the least squares one with the hard DAG constraint.

1

Introduction

Learning graphical structures from data based on Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) is a fundamental
problem in machine learning, with applications in many areas such as biology [40] and healthcare [26].
It is clear that the learned graphical models may not be interpreted causally [33, 48]. However, they
provide a compact, yet flexible, way to decompose the joint distribution. Under further conditions,
these graphical models may have causal interpretations or be converted to representations (e.g.,
Markov equivalence classes) that have causal interpretations.
Two major classes of structure learning methods are constraint- and score-based methods. Constraintbased methods, including PC [46] and FCI [47, 11], utilize conditional independence tests to recover
the Markov equivalence class under faithfulness assumption. On the other hand, score-based methods
formulate the problem as optimizing a certain score function [19, 10, 49, 45]. Due to the large search
space of possible graphs [9], most score-based methods rely on local heuristics, such as GES [10].
Recently, Zheng et al. [54] have introduced the NOTEARS method which formulates the structure
learning problem as a continuous constrained optimization task, leveraging an algebraic characterization of DAGs. NOTEARS is specifically developed for linear DAGs, and has been extended to
handle nonlinear cases via neural networks [21, 53, 28, 29, 25, 55]. Other related works include
DYNOTEARS [32] that focuses on time-series data, and [56] that uses reinforcement learning to find
the optimal DAGs. NOTEARS and most of its extensions adopt the least squares objective, which is
related to but does not directly maximize the data likelihood. Furthermore, their formulations require
a hard DAG constraint which may lead to optimization difficulties (see Section 2.2).
In this work, we investigate whether such a hard DAG constraint and another widely used sparsity
constraint are necessary for learning DAGs. Inspired by that, we develop a likelihood-based structure
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

