Succinct and Robust Multi-Agent Communication
With Temporal Message Control

Sai Qian Zhang
Harvard University

Jieyu Lin∗
University of Toronto

Qi Zhang∗
Microsoft

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that introducing communication between agents can significantly improve overall performance in cooperative Multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL). However, existing communication schemes often require agents
to exchange an excessive number of messages at run-time under a reliable communication channel, which hinders its practicality in many real-world situations. In
this paper, we present Temporal Message Control (TMC), a simple yet effective
approach for achieving succinct and robust communication in MARL. TMC applies
a temporal smoothing technique to drastically reduce the amount of information
exchanged between agents. Experiments show that TMC can significantly reduce
inter-agent communication overhead without impacting accuracy. Furthermore,
TMC demonstrates much better robustness against transmission loss than existing
approaches in lossy networking environments.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved remarkable success in a variety of challenging problems, including intelligent traffic signal control [36], swarm robotics [15], autonomous
driving [28]. At run time, a group of agents interact with each other in a shared environment. Each
agent takes an action based on its local observation as well as both direct and indirect interactions
with the other agents. This complex interaction model often introduces instability in the training
process, which can seriously undermine the overall effectiveness of the model.
In recent years, numerous methods have been proposed to enhance the stability of cooperative MARL.
Among these methods, the centralized training and decentralized execution paradigm [21] has gained
much attention due to its superior performance. A promising approach to exploit this paradigm is the
value function decomposition method [33, 23, 31]. In this method, each agent is given an individual
Q-function. A joint Q-function, which is the aggregation of individual Q-functions, is learned during
the training phase to capture the cooperative behavior of the agents. During the execution phase, each
agent acts independently by selecting its action based on its own Q-function. However, even though
value function decomposition has demonstrated outstanding performance in solving simple tasks [33],
it does not allow explicit information exchange between agents during execution phrase, which
hinders its performance in more complex scenarios. In certain cases, some agents may overfit their
strategies to the behaviours of the other agents, causing serious performance degradation [17, 18].
Motivated by the drawbacks due to lack of communication, recent studies [13, 5, 11] have introduced
inter-agent communication during the execution phase, which enables agents to better coordinate
and react to the environment with their joint experience. However, while an extensive amount of
work has concentrated on leveraging communication for better overall performance, little attention
has been paid to the reliability of transmission channel and efficiency during the message exchange.
Moreover, recent work has shown that the message exchange between agents tends to be excessive
and redundant [39]. Furthermore, for many real applications such as autonomous driving and drone
∗

Equal contribution, names are ranked alphabetically

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

