The Pitfalls of Simplicity Bias in Neural Networks

Harshay Shah
Microsoft Research
harshay.rshah@gmail.com

Kaustav Tamuly
Microsoft Research
ktamuly2@gmail.com

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research
prajain@microsoft.com

Aditi Raghunathan
Stanford University
aditir@stanford.edu

Praneeth Netrapalli
Microsoft Research
praneeth@microsoft.com

Abstract
Several works have proposed Simplicity Bias (SB)—the tendency of standard
training procedures such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) to find simple
models—to justify why neural networks generalize well [1, 49, 74]. However, the
precise notion of simplicity remains vague. Furthermore, previous settings [67, 24]
that use SB to justify why neural networks generalize well do not simultaneously
capture the non-robustness of neural networks—a widely observed phenomenon in
practice [71, 36]. We attempt to reconcile SB and the superior standard generalization of neural networks with the non-robustness observed in practice by introducing
piecewise-linear and image-based datasets, which (a) incorporate a precise notion
of simplicity, (b) comprise multiple predictive features with varying levels of simplicity, and (c) capture the non-robustness of neural networks trained on real data.
Through theoretical analysis and targeted experiments on these datasets, we make
four observations:
(i) SB of SGD and variants can be extreme: neural networks can exclusively rely
on the simplest feature and remain invariant to all predictive complex features.
(ii) The extreme aspect of SB could explain why seemingly benign distribution
shifts and small adversarial perturbations significantly degrade model performance.
(iii) Contrary to conventional wisdom, SB can also hurt generalization on the same
data distribution, as SB persists even when the simplest feature has less predictive
power than the more complex features.
(iv) Common approaches to improve generalization and robustness—ensembles
and adversarial training—can fail in mitigating SB and its pitfalls.
Given the role of SB in training neural networks, we hope that the proposed datasets
and methods serve as an effective testbed to evaluate novel algorithmic approaches
aimed at avoiding the pitfalls of SB.

1

Introduction

Understanding the superior generalization ability of neural networks, despite their high capacity to fit
randomly labeled data [84], has been a subject of intense study. One line of recent work [67, 24] proves
that linear neural networks trained with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) on linearly separable
data converge to the maximum-margin linear classifier, thereby explaining the superior generalization
performance. However, maximum-margin classifiers are inherently robust to perturbations of data
at prediction time, and this implication is at odds with concrete evidence that neural networks, in
practice, are brittle to adversarial examples [71] and distribution shifts [52, 58, 44, 65]. Hence, the
linear setting, while convenient to analyze, is insufficient to capture the non-robustness of neural
networks trained on real datasets. Going beyond the linear setting, several works [1, 49, 74] argue that
neural networks generalize well because standard training procedures have a bias towards learning
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

