Learning differential equations that are easy to solve

Jacob Kelly∗
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
jkelly@cs.toronto.edu

Jesse Bettencourt∗
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
jessebett@cs.toronto.edu

Matthew James Johnson
Google Brain
mattjj@google.com

David Duvenaud
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
duvenaud@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Differential equations parameterized by neural networks become expensive to solve
numerically as training progresses. We propose a remedy that encourages learned
dynamics to be easier to solve. Specifically, we introduce a differentiable surrogate
for the time cost of standard numerical solvers, using higher-order derivatives
of solution trajectories. These derivatives are efficient to compute with Taylormode automatic differentiation. Optimizing this additional objective trades model
performance against the time cost of solving the learned dynamics. We demonstrate
our approach by training substantially faster, while nearly as accurate, models in
supervised classification, density estimation, and time-series modelling tasks.

1

Introduction

Differential equations describe a system’s behavior
by specifying its instantaneous dynamics. Historically, differential equations have been derived from
theory, such as Newtonian mechanics, Maxwell’s
equations, or epidemiological models of infectious
disease, with parameters inferred from observations.
Solutions to these equations usually cannot be expressed in closed-form, requiring numerical approximation.
Recently, ordinary differential equations parameterized by millions of learned parameters, called neural
ODEs, have been fit for latent time series models,
density models, or as a replacement for very deep
neural networks (Rubanova et al., 2019; Grathwohl
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2018). These learned models
are not constrained to match a theoretical model, only
to optimize an objective on observed data. Learned
models with nearly indistinguishable predictions can
have substantially different dynamics. This raises the
possibility that we can find equivalent models that
are easier and faster to solve. Yet standard training
methods have no way to penalize the complexity of
the dynamics being learned.
∗

Figure 1: Top: Trajectories of an ODE fit to
map z(t1 ) = z(t0 ) + z(t0 )3 . The learned dynamics are unnecessarily complex and require
many evaluations (black dots) to solve.
Bottom: Regularizing the third total deriva3
tive d dtz(t)
(shown by colour) gives dynamics
3
that fit the same map, but require fewer evaluations to solve.

Equal Contribution. Code available at:
github.com/jacobjinkelly/easy-neural-ode
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

