Adversarially Robust Streaming Algorithms via
Differential Privacy

Avinatan Hassidim∗

Haim Kaplan†

Yishay Mansour†

Yossi Matias‡

Uri Stemmer§

Abstract
A streaming algorithm is said to be adversarially robust if its accuracy guarantees
are maintained even when the data stream is chosen maliciously, by an adaptive
adversary. We establish a connection between adversarial robustness of streaming
algorithms and the notion of differential privacy. This connection allows us to
design new adversarially robust streaming algorithms that outperform the current
state-of-the-art constructions for many interesting regimes of parameters.

1

Introduction

The field of streaming algorithms was formalized by Alon, Matias, and Szegedy [3], and has
generated a large body of work that intersects many other fields in computer science such as theory,
databases, networking, and natural language processing. Consider a scenario in which data items
are being generated one by one, e.g., IP traffic monitoring or web searches. Generally speaking,
streaming algorithms aim to process such data streams while using only a limited amount of memory,
significantly smaller than what is needed to store the entire data stream.5 Typical streaming problems
include estimating frequency moments, counting the number of distinct elements in the stream,
identifying heavy-hitters in the stream, estimating the median of the stream, and much more [22, 13,
4, 34, 16, 14, 15, 28, 37, 21, 31, 38].
Usually, streaming algorithms can be queried a lot of times throughout the execution. The reason is
that (usually) the space requirement of streaming algorithms scales as log(1/δ), where δ is the failure
probability of the algorithm. By a union bound, this means that in order to guarantee accuracy for m
queries (with probability 1 − δ) the space only scales proportionally to log(m/δ), so we can tolerate
quite a few queries without blowing up space. However, for this argument to go through, we need to
assume that the entire stream is fixed in advanced (and is just given to us one item at a time), or at
least that the choice of the items in the stream is independent of the internal state (and coin tosses) of
our algorithm. This setting is sometimes referred to as the oblivious setting. The vast majority of the
work on streaming algorithms is focused on the oblivious setting.
Now suppose that the items in the stream, as well as the queries issued to the algorithm, are chosen
by an adaptive (stateful) adversary. Specifically, every item in the stream (and each of the queries)
is chosen by the adversary as a function of the previous items in the stream, the previous queries,
and the previous answers given by our streaming algorithm. As a result, the items in the stream are
no longer independent of the internal state of our algorithm. Oblivious streaming algorithms fail to
provide meaningful utility guarantees in such a situation. In this work we aim to design adversarially
robust streaming algorithms that maintain (provable) accuracy against such adaptive adversaries,
∗

Bar-Ilan University and Google.
Tel Aviv University and Google.
‡
Google.
§
Ben-Gurion University and Google.
5
We remark, however, that streaming algorithms are also useful in the offline world, for example in order to
process a large unstructured database that is located on an external storage.
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

