Model-based Reinforcement Learning for
Semi-Markov Decision Processes with Neural ODEs
Jianzhun Du,

Joseph Futoma, Finale Doshi-Velez
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
jzdu@g.harvard.edu, {jfutoma, finale}@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We present two elegant solutions for modeling continuous-time dynamics, in
a novel model-based reinforcement learning (RL) framework for semi-Markov
decision processes (SMDPs) using neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs).
Our models accurately characterize continuous-time dynamics and enable us to
develop high-performing policies using a small amount of data. We also develop a
model-based approach for optimizing time schedules to reduce interaction rates
with the environment while maintaining the near-optimal performance, which is
not possible for model-free methods. We experimentally demonstrate the efficacy
of our methods across various continuous-time domains.

1

Introduction

Algorithms for deep reinforcement learning (RL) have led to major advances in many applications
ranging from robots [Gu et al., 2017] to Atari games [Mnih et al., 2015]. Most of these algorithms
formulate the problem in discrete time and assume observations are available at every step. However,
many real-world sequential decision-making problems operate in continuous time. For instance,
control problems such as robotic manipulation are generally governed by systems of differential
equations. In healthcare, patient observations often consist of irregularly sampled time series: more
measurements are taken when patients are sicker or more concerns are suspected, and clinical
variables are usually observed on different time-scales.
Unfortunately, the problem of learning and acting in continuous-time environments has largely been
passed over by the recent advances of deep RL. Previous methods using semi-Markov decision
processes (SMDPs) [Howard, 1964]—including Q-learning [Bradtke and Duff, 1995], advantage
updating [Baird, 1994], policy gradient [Munos, 2006], actor-critic [Doya, 2000]—extend the standard
RL framework to continuous time, but all use relatively simple linear function approximators.
Furthermore, as model-free methods, they often require large amounts of training data. Thus, rather
than attempt to handle continuous time directly, practitioners often resort to discretizing time into
evenly spaced intervals and apply standard RL algorithms. However, this heuristic approach loses
information about the dynamics if the discretization is too coarse, and results in overly-long time
horizons if the discretization is too fine.
In this paper, we take a model-based approach to continuous-time RL, modeling the dynamics via
neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [Chen et al., 2018]. Not only is this more sampleefficient than model-free approaches, but it allows us to efficiently adapt policies learned using one
schedule of interactions with the environment for another. Our approach also allows for optimizing
the measurement schedules to minimize interaction with the environment while maintaining the
near-optimal performance that would be achieved by constant intervention.
Specifically, to build flexible models for continuous-time, model-based RL, we first introduce ways
to incorporate action and time into the neural ODE work of [Chen et al., 2018, Rubanova et al.,
2019]. We present two solutions, ODE-RNN (based on a recurrent architecture) and Latent-ODE
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

