Flows for simultaneous manifold learning
and density estimation

Johann Brehmer and Kyle Cranmer
New York University
johann.brehmer@nyu.edu, kyle.cranmer@nyu.edu

Abstract
We introduce manifold-learning flows (M-flows), a new class of generative models
that simultaneously learn the data manifold as well as a tractable probability density
on that manifold. Combining aspects of normalizing flows, GANs, autoencoders,
and energy-based models, they have the potential to represent datasets with a
manifold structure more faithfully and provide handles on dimensionality reduction,
denoising, and out-of-distribution detection. We argue why such models should not
be trained by maximum likelihood alone and present a new training algorithm that
separates manifold and density updates. In a range of experiments we demonstrate
how M-flows learn the data manifold and allow for better inference than standard
flows in the ambient data space.

1

Introduction

p(x)

p(x)

Inferring a probability distribution from example data is a common problem that is increasingly tackled with deep generative models. Both
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1] and
variational autoencoders (VAEs) [2] are based
on a lower-dimensional latent space and a learnable mapping to the data space, in essence describing a lower-dimensional data manifold emx1
bedded in the ambient data space. While they
x0
x0
allow for efficient sampling, their probability Figure 1: Sketch of how a standard flow in the ambient
density is intractable, limiting their usefulness data space (left) and an M-flow (right) model data on a
for inference tasks. On the other hand, normaliz- manifold.
ing flows [3–6] are based on a latent space with
the same dimensionality as the data space and a diffeomorphism; their tractable density permeates
the full data space and is not restricted to a lower-dimensional surface.
x1

The flow approach may be unsuited to data that do not populate the full ambient data space they
natively reside in, but are restricted to a lower-dimensional manifold [7]. Normalizing flows are
by construction not able to represent such a structure exactly, instead they learn a smeared-out
version with support off the data manifold. We illustrate this in the left panel of Fig. 1. In addition,
the requirement of latent spaces with the same dimension as the data space increases the memory
footprint and computational cost of the model. While flows have been generalized from Euclidean
spaces to Riemannian manifolds [8], this approach has so far been limited to the case where the chart
for the manifold is prescribed.
We introduce manifold-learning flows (M-flows): normalizing flows based on an injective, invertible
map from a lower-dimensional latent space to the data space. M-flows simultaneously learn the
shape of the data manifold, provide a tractable bijective chart, and learn a probability density over the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

