BoxE: A Box Embedding Model for
Knowledge Base Completion

Ralph Abboud, İsmail İlkan Ceylan, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Tommaso Salvatori
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
{firstame.lastname}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Knowledge base completion (KBC) aims to automatically infer missing facts by
exploiting information already present in a knowledge base (KB). A promising
approach for KBC is to embed knowledge into latent spaces and make predictions
from learned embeddings. However, existing embedding models are subject to
at least one of the following limitations: (1) theoretical inexpressivity, (2) lack of
support for prominent inference patterns (e.g., hierarchies), (3) lack of support for
KBC over higher-arity relations, and (4) lack of support for incorporating logical
rules. Here, we propose a spatio-translational embedding model, called BoxE, that
simultaneously addresses all these limitations. BoxE embeds entities as points,
and relations as a set of hyper-rectangles (or boxes), which spatially characterize
basic logical properties. This seemingly simple abstraction yields a fully expressive
model offering a natural encoding for many desired logical properties. BoxE can
both capture and inject rules from rich classes of rule languages, going well beyond
individual inference patterns. By design, BoxE naturally applies to higher-arity
KBs. We conduct a detailed experimental analysis, and show that BoxE achieves
state-of-the-art performance, both on benchmark knowledge graphs and on more
general KBs, and we empirically show the power of integrating logical rules.

1

Introduction

Knowledge bases (KBs) are fundamental means for representing, storing, and processing information,
and are widely used to enhance the reasoning and learning capabilities of modern information
systems. KBs can be viewed as a collection of facts of the form r(e1 , . . . , en ), which represent a
relation r between the entities e1 , . . . , en , and knowledge graphs (KGs) as a special case, where
all the relations are binary (i.e., composed of two entities). KBs such as YAGO [24], NELL [26],
Knowledge Vault [9], and Freebase [2] contain millions of facts, and are increasingly important in
academia and industry, for applications such as question answering [3], recommender systems [39],
information retrieval [44], and natural language processing [45].
KBs are, however, highly incomplete, which makes their downstream use more challenging. For
instance, 71% of individuals in Freebase lack a connection to a place of birth [42]. Knowledge base
completion (KBC), aiming at automatically inferring missing facts in a KB by exploiting the already
present information, has thus become a focal point of research. One prominent approach for KBC
is to learn embeddings for entities and relations in a latent space such that these embeddings, once
learned from known facts, can be used to score the plausibility of unknown facts.
Currently, the main embedding approaches for KBC are translational models [4, 34], which score
facts based on distances in the embedding space, bilinear models [36, 46, 1], which learn embeddings
that factorize the truth tensor of a knowledge base, and neural models [7, 31, 27], which score
facts using dedicated neural architectures. Each of these models suffer from limitations, most of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

