Off-policy Policy Evaluation For Sequential Decisions
Under Unobserved Confounding
Hongseok Namkoong⇤
Decision, Risk, and Operations Division
Columbia Business School
namkoong@gsb.columbia.edu

Ramtin Keramati⇤
Computational and Mathematical Engineering
Stanford University
keramati@cs.stanford.edu

Steve Yadlowsky⇤
Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
syadlows@stanford.edu

Emma Brunskill
Computer Science
Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
When observed decisions depend only on observed features, off-policy policy evaluation (OPE) methods for sequential decision problems can estimate the performance
of evaluation policies before deploying them. However, this assumption is frequently violated due to unobserved confounders, unrecorded variables that impact
both the decisions and their outcomes. We assess robustness of OPE methods under
unobserved confounding by developing worst-case bounds on the performance of
an evaluation policy. When unobserved confounders can affect every decision in an
episode, we demonstrate that even small amounts of per-decision confounding can
heavily bias OPE methods. Fortunately, in a number of important settings found in
healthcare, policy-making, and technology, unobserved confounders may directly
affect only one of the many decisions made, and influence future decisions/rewards
only through the directly affected decision. Under this less pessimistic model of
one-decision confounding, we propose an efficient loss-minimization-based procedure for computing worst-case bounds, and prove its statistical consistency. On
simulated healthcare examples—management of sepsis and interventions for autistic children—where this is a reasonable model, we demonstrate that our method
invalidates non-robust results and provides meaningful certificates of robustness,
allowing reliable selection of policies under unobserved confounding.

1

Introduction

New technology and regulatory shifts have allowed the collection of vast amounts of data on sequential
trajectories of past decisions and associated rewards, ranging from healthcare decisions and outcomes
to product recommendations and purchase histories. This presents unique opportunities for using
off-policy methods to inform better sequential decision-making. Leveraging prior data to evaluate the
performance of a sequential decision policy (which we call the evaluation policy) before deploying it
can reduce the need for online experimentation when doing so is expensive or risky.
A central challenge in off-policy policy evaluation (OPE) is that the estimand is inherently counterfactual: what would the rewards be if an alternate policy had been used (the counterfactual) instead
of the behavior policy that generated the observed data (the factual). As a result, OPE requires causal
reasoning about whether observed rewards were caused by observed decisions, or by a common
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

