Evolving Graphical Planner: Contextual Global
Planning for Vision-and-Language Navigation

Zhiwei Deng Karthik Narasimhan Olga Russakovsky
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
{zhiweid, karthikn, olgarus}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
The ability to perform effective planning is crucial for building an instructionfollowing agent. When navigating through a new environment, an agent is challenged with (1) connecting the natural language instructions with its progressively
growing knowledge of the world; and (2) performing long-range planning and
decision making in the form of effective exploration and error correction. Current
methods are still limited on both fronts despite extensive efforts. In this paper, we
introduce the Evolving Graphical Planner (EGP), a model that performs global
planning for navigation based on raw sensory input. The model dynamically
constructs a graphical representation, generalizes the action space to allow for
more flexible decision making, and performs efficient planning on a proxy graph
representation. We evaluate our model on a challenging Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) task with photorealistic images, and achieve superior performance
compared to previous navigation architectures. For instance, we achieve a 53%
success rate on the test split of the Room-to-Room navigation task [1] through pure
imitation learning, outperforming previous navigation architectures by up to 5%.

1

Introduction

Recent work has made remarkable progress towards building autonomous agents that navigate
by following instructions [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] and constructing memory structures for maps
[11, 12, 13]. An important problem setting within this space is the paradigm of online navigation,
where an agent needs to perform navigation based on goal descriptions in an unseen environment
using a limited number of steps [14, 1].
In order to successfully navigate through an unseen environment, an agent needs to overcome two
key challenges. First, the instructions given to the agent are natural language descriptions of the
goal and the landmarks along the way; these descriptions need to be grounded onto the evolving
visual world that the agent is observing. Second, the agent needs to perform non-trivial planning
over a large action space, including: 1) deciding which step to take next to resolve ambiguities in the
instructions through novel observations and 2) gaining a better understanding of the environment
layout in order to progress towards the goal or recover from its prior mistakes. Notably this planning
requires not only selecting from an increasingly large set of possible actions but also performing
complex long-term reasoning.
Existing work tackles only one or two components of the above and may require additional preprocessing steps. Some are constrained to use local control policies [14, 2] or use rule-based
algorithms such as beam or A∗ search [2, 15, 14] to perform localized path corrections. Others focus
on processing long-range observations instead of actions [16] or employ offline pre-training schemes
to learn topological structures [12, 13, 17]. This is challenging since accurate construction of graphs
is non-trivial and requires special adaptation to work during real-time navigation [13, 17].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

