Robust Optimal Transport with Applications in
Generative Modeling and Domain Adaptation

Yogesh Balaji
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
yogesh@umd.edu

Rama Chellappa
Electrical and Computer Engineering
and Biomedical Engineering Departments
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD
rchella4@jhu.edu

Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Optimal Transport (OT) distances such as Wasserstein have been used in several
areas such as GANs and domain adaptation. OT, however, is very sensitive to
outliers (samples with large noise) in the data since in its objective function, every
sample, including outliers, is weighed similarly due to the marginal constraints. To
remedy this issue, robust formulations of OT with unbalanced marginal constraints
have previously been proposed. However, employing these methods in deep
learning problems such as GANs and domain adaptation is challenging due to the
instability of their dual optimization solvers. In this paper, we resolve these issues
by deriving a computationally-efficient dual form of the robust OT optimization that
is amenable to modern deep learning applications. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our formulation in two applications of GANs and domain adaptation. Our
approach can train state-of-the-art GAN models on noisy datasets corrupted with
outlier distributions. In particular, the proposed optimization method computes
weights for training samples reflecting how difficult it is for those samples to be
generated in the model. In domain adaptation, our robust OT formulation leads to
improved accuracy compared to the standard adversarial adaptation methods. Our
code is available at https://github.com/yogeshbalaji/robustOT.

1

Introduction

Estimating distances between probability distributions lies at the heart of several problems in machine
learning and statistics. A class of distance measures that has gained immense popularity in several
machine learning applications is Optimal Transport (OT) [27]. In OT, the distance between two
probability distributions is computed as the minimum cost of transporting a source distribution to
the target distribution under some transportation cost function. Optimal transport enjoys several nice
properties including structure preservation, existence in smooth and non-smooth settings, being well
defined for discrete and continuous distributions [27], etc.
Two recent applications of OT in machine learning include generative modeling and domain adaptation. In Wasserstein GAN [1], a generative model is trained by minimizing the (approximate)
Wasserstein distance between real and generative distributions. In the dual form, this objective
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

