Stein Self-Repulsive Dynamics: Benefits from Past
Samples
Mao Ye ∗

Tongzheng Ren *

Qiang Liu

UT Austin
my21@cs.utexas.edu

UT Austin
tongzheng@utexas.edu

UT Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a new Stein self-repulsive dynamics for obtaining diversified samples from intractable un-normalized distributions. Our idea is to introduce Stein
variational gradient as a repulsive force to push the samples of Langevin dynamics away from the past trajectories. This simple idea allows us to significantly
decrease the auto-correlation in Langevin dynamics and hence increase the effective sample size. Importantly, as we establish in our theoretical analysis, the
asymptotic stationary distribution remains correct even with the addition of the
repulsive force, thanks to the special properties of the Stein variational gradient.
We perform extensive empirical studies of our new algorithm, showing that our
method yields much higher sample efficiency and better uncertainty estimation
than vanilla Langevin dynamics.

1

Introduction

Drawing samples from complex un-normalized distributions is one of the most basic problems in
statistics and machine learning, with broad applications to enormous research fields that rely on
probabilistic modeling. Over the past decades, large amounts of methods have been proposed for
approximate sampling, including both Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [e.g., Brooks et al.,
2011] and variational inference [e.g., Wainwright et al., 2008, Blei et al., 2017].
MCMC works by simulating Markov chains whose stationary distributions match the distributions
of interest. Despite nice asymptotic theoretical properties, MCMC is widely criticized for its slow
convergence rate in practice. In difficult problems, the samples drawn from MCMC are often found
to have high auto-correlation across time, meaning that the Markov chains explore very slowly in
the configuration space. When this happens, the samples returned by MCMC only approximate a
small local region, and under-estimate the probability of the regions un-explored by the chain.
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) [Liu and Wang, 2016] is a different type of approximate
sampling methods designed to overcome the limitation of MCMC. Instead of drawing random samples sequentially, SVGD evolves a pre-defined number of particles (or sample points) in parallel
with a special interacting particle system to match the distribution of interest by minimizing the KL
divergence. In SVGD, the particles interact with each other to simultaneously move towards the
high probability regions following the gradient direction, and also move away from each other due
to a special repulsive force. As a result, SVGD allows us to obtain diversified samples that correctly
represent the variation of the distribution of interest. SVGD has found applications in various challenging problems [e.g., Feng et al., 2017, Haarnoja et al., 2017, Pu et al., 2017, Liu et al., 2017a,
Gong et al., 2019]. See Han and Liu [e.g., 2018], Chen et al. [e.g., 2018], Liu et al. [e.g., 2019],
Wang et al. [e.g., 2019a] for examples of extensions.
However, one problem of SVGD is that it theoretically requires to run an infinite number of chains
in parallel in order to approximate the target distribution asymptotically [Liu, 2017]. With a finite
∗

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

