On Completeness-aware Concept-Based
Explanations in Deep Neural Networks
Chih-Kuan Yeh1 , Been Kim2 , Sercan Ö. Arık3 , Chun-Liang Li3 ,
Tomas Pfister3 , and Pradeep Ravikumar1
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Google Brain
3
Google Cloud AI

Abstract
Human explanations of high-level decisions are often expressed in terms of key
concepts the decisions are based on. In this paper, we study such concept-based
explainability for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). First, we define the notion of
completeness, which quantifies how sufficient a particular set of concepts is in
explaining a model’s prediction behavior based on the assumption that complete
concept scores are sufficient statistics of the model prediction. Next, we propose
a concept discovery method that aims to infer a complete set of concepts that
are additionally encouraged to be interpretable, which addresses the limitations
of existing methods on concept explanations. To define an importance score for
each discovered concept, we adapt game-theoretic notions to aggregate over sets
and propose ConceptSHAP. Via proposed metrics and user studies, on a synthetic
dataset with apriori-known concept explanations, as well as on real-world image
and language datasets, we validate the effectiveness of our method in finding
concepts that are both complete in explaining the decisions and interpretable.1

1

Introduction

The lack of explainability of deep neural networks (DNNs) arguably hampers their full potential for
real-world impact. Explanations can help domain experts better understand rationales behind the
model decisions, identify systematic failure cases, and potentially provide feedback to model builders
for improvements. Most commonly-used methods for DNNs explain each prediction by quantifying
the importance of each input feature [Ribeiro et al., 2016, Lundberg and Lee, 2017]. One caveat with
such explanations is that they typically focus on the local behavior for each data point, rather than
globally explaining how the model reasons. Besides, the weighted input features are not necessarily
the most intuitive explanations for human understanding, particularly when using low-level features
such as raw pixel values. In contrast, human reasoning often comprise “concept-based thinking,”
extracting similarities from numerous examples and grouping them systematically based on their
resemblance [Armstrong et al., 1983, Tenenbaum, 1999]. It is thus of interest to develop such
“concept-based explanations” to characterize the global behavior of a DNN in a way understandable
to humans, explaining how DNNs use concepts in arriving at particular decisions.
A few recent studies have focused on bringing such concept-based explainability to DNNs, largely
based on the common implicit assumption that the concepts lie in low-dimensional subspaces of
some intermediate DNN activations. Via supervised training based on labeled concepts, TCAV
[Kim et al., 2018] trains linear concept classifiers to derive concept vectors, and uses how sensitive
predictions are to these vectors (via directional derivatives) to measure the importance of a concept
with respect to a specific class. Zhou et al. [2018] considers the decomposition of model predictions
in terms of projections onto concept vectors. Instead of human-labeled concept data, Ghorbani et al.
1

The code is released at https://github.com/chihkuanyeh/concept_exp.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

