Optimizing Neural Networks via Koopman Operator
Theory

Akshunna S. Dogra∗
John A. Paulson School of
Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138,
asdpsn@gmail.com

William T. Redman∗
Interdeparmental Graduate Program in
Dynamical Neuroscience
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
wredman@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Koopman operator theory, a powerful framework for discovering the underlying
dynamics of nonlinear dynamical systems, was recently shown to be intimately
connected with neural network training. In this work, we take the first steps in
making use of this connection. As Koopman operator theory is a linear theory,
a successful implementation of it in evolving network weights and biases offers
the promise of accelerated training, especially in the context of deep networks,
where optimization is inherently a non-convex problem. We show that Koopman
operator theoretic methods allow for accurate predictions of weights and biases of
feedforward, fully connected deep networks over a non-trivial range of training
time. During this window, we find that our approach is >10x faster than various
gradient descent based methods (e.g. Adam, Adadelta, Adagrad), in line with
our complexity analysis. We end by highlighting open questions in this exciting
intersection between dynamical systems and neural network theory, and additional
methods by which our results may be generalized.

1

Introduction

Despite their black box nature, the training of artificial neural networks (NNs) is a discrete dynamical
system. During training, weights/biases evolve along a trajectory in an abstract weight/bias space, the
path determined by the implemented optimization algorithm, the training data, and the architecture.
This dynamical systems picture is familiar: many introductions to optimization algorithms, such as
gradient descent (GD), visualize training as a process where weights/biases change iteratively under
the influence of the loss landscape. Yet, while dynamical systems theory has provided insight into the
behavior of many complex systems, its application to NNs has been limited.
Recent advances in Koopman operator theory (KOT) have made it a powerful tool in studying the
underlying dynamics of nonlinear systems in a data-driven manner [1–8]. This begs the question, can
KOT be used to learn and predict the dynamics present in NN training? If so, can such an approach,
which we call Koopman training, afford us benefits that traditional NN training approaches, like
backpropagation, cannot? This viewpoint was recently proposed in work by one of the authors, which
demonstrated that KOT and NN training are intimately connected [9]. While significant effort has
been dedicated to using NNs to discover important features of KOT [10–12], this work was, to our
knowledge, the first application of KOT for the training of NNs (see Sec. 1.1).
An appealing aspect of KOT is that it is a linear theory for nonlinear dynamical systems. In our
case, this means that evolving NN weights/biases using Koopman operators involves only matrix
∗

Authors contributed equally

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

