Soft Contrastive Learning for Visual Localization

Janine Thoma1

Danda Pani Paudel1

1
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Luc Van Gool1,2
2
VISICS, ESAT/PSI
KU Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
Localization by image retrieval is inexpensive and scalable due to its simple mapping and matching techniques. The localization accuracy, however, depends on the
quality of the underlying image features, often obtained using contrastive learning.
Most contrastive learning strategies learn features that distinguish between different
classes. In the context of localization, however, there is no natural definition of
classes. Therefore, images are artificially separated into positive/negative classes
with respect to the chosen anchor images, based on some geometric proximity
measure. In this paper, we show why such divisions are problematic for learning
localization features. We argue that any artificial division based on a proximity
measure is undesirable due to the inherently ambiguous supervision for images
near the proximity threshold. To avoid this problem, we propose a novel technique
that uses soft positive/negative assignments of images for contrastive learning. Our
soft assignment makes a gradual distinction between close and far images in both
geometric and feature space. Experiments on four large-scale benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our soft contrastive learning over the state-of-the-art
method for retrieval-based visual localization.

1

Introduction

A high quality, view aware1 image often captures sufficient information to uniquely represent a
location. Therefore, it is not surprising that we use vision as the primary source of information for
localization, navigation, and exploration in our environments. Vision-based localization has become
an effective solution for several important applications ranging from robotics to augmented reality.
However, the application of such solutions in large scale environments is limited primarily because of
the high computational demand. This limitation is usually alleviated using additional sensory systems
such as GPS and beacons. In the absence of such sensors—either the device is not equipped with
them or the environment denies the usage (e.g. indoors)—image retrieval-based localization is an
appealing alternative. The problem of retrieval-based localization equates to matching one or more
query images, taken at some unknown location, to a set of geo-tagged reference images.
Traditionally, vision-based localization [1] is tackled either with structure-based methods, such
as Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) [8, 9, 10, 11, 12], or with retrieval-based approaches [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20].
Structure-based methods usually focus on accurate relative pose estimation, while retrieval-based
approaches prioritize absolute re-localization. Localization by image retrieval (or simply retrievalbased localization) is inexpensive due to its simple mapping and matching possibilities, which scale
well to large spaces [16, 4, 21]. Many structure-based approaches use retrieval for initialization [4].
Recent developments in learning image features for object and place recognition [13, 14, 15, 16]
have made image retrieval a viable method for localization.
1

Images captured with an intention to localize with a wide view of the surrounding.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

