A mean-field analysis of two-player zero-sum games

Carles Domingo-Enrich
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY
cd2754@nyu.edu
Arthur Mensch
École Normale Supérieure
Paris, France
arthur.mensch@m4x.org

Samy Jelassi
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
sjelassi@princeton.edu

Grant Rotskoff
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY
rotskoff@cims.nyu.edu

Joan Bruna
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
& Center for Data Science
New York University
New York, NY
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Finding Nash equilibria in two-player zero-sum continuous games is a central
problem in machine learning, e.g. for training both GANs and robust models. The
existence of pure Nash equilibria requires strong conditions which are not typically
met in practice. Mixed Nash equilibria exist in greater generality and may be found
using mirror descent. Yet this approach does not scale to high dimensions. To
address this limitation, we parametrize mixed strategies as mixtures of particles,
whose positions and weights are updated using gradient descent-ascent. We study
this dynamics as an interacting gradient flow over measure spaces endowed with the
Wasserstein-Fisher-Rao metric. We establish global convergence to an approximate
equilibrium for the related Langevin gradient-ascent dynamic. We prove a law of
large numbers that relates particle dynamics to mean-field dynamics. Our method
identifies mixed equilibria in high dimensions and is demonstrably effective for
training mixtures of GANs.

1

Introduction

Multi-objective optimization problems arise in many fields, from economics to civil engineering.
Tasks that require optimizing multiple objectives have also become a routine part of many agent-based
machine learning algorithms including generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al., 2014),
imaginative agents (Racanière et al., 2017), hierarchical reinforcement learning (Wayne and Abbott,
2014) and multi-agent reinforcement learning (Bu et al., 2008). It not only remains difficult to carry
out the necessary optimization, but also to assess the optimality of a given solution.
Multi-agent optimization is generally cast as finding equilibria in the space of strategies. The classic
notion of equilibrium is due to Nash (Nash, 1951): a Nash equilibrium is a set of agent strategies for
which no agent can unilaterally improve its loss value. Pure Nash equilibria, in which each agent
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

