Assisted Learning: A Framework for
Multi-Organization Learning

Xun Xian
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota
xian0044@umn.edu
Jie Ding
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota
dingj@umn.edu

Xinran Wang
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota
wang8740@umn.edu
Reza Ghanadan
Google Research
rezaghanadan@google.com

Abstract
In an increasing number of AI scenarios, collaborations among different organizations or agents (e.g., human and robots, mobile units) are often essential to
accomplish an organization-specific mission. However, to avoid leaking useful and
possibly proprietary information, organizations typically enforce stringent security
constraints on sharing modeling algorithms and data, which significantly limits
collaborations. In this work, we introduce the Assisted Learning framework for
organizations to assist each other in supervised learning tasks without revealing
any organization’s algorithm, data, or even task. An organization seeks assistance
by broadcasting task-specific but nonsensitive statistics and incorporating others’
feedback in one or more iterations to eventually improve its predictive performance.
Theoretical and experimental studies, including real-world medical benchmarks,
show that Assisted Learning can often achieve near-oracle learning performance as
if data and training processes were centralized.

1

Introduction

One of the significant characteristics of big data is variety, featuring in a large number of statistical
learners, each with personalized data and domain-specific learning tasks. While building an entire
database by integrating all the accessible data sources could provide an ideal dataset for learning,
sharing heterogeneous data among multiple organizations typically leads to tradeoffs between learning
efficiency and data privacy. As the awareness of privacy arises with a decentralized set of organizations
(learners), a realistic challenge is to protect learners’ privacy concerning sophisticated modeling
algorithms and data.
There exists a large market of collaborative learning in, e.g., the internet-of-things [1], autonomous
mobility [2], industrial control [3], unmanned aerial vehicles [4], and biological monitoring [5]. We
will take the medical industry as an example to illustrate such learning scenarios and their pros and
cons. It is common for medical organizations to acquire others’ assistance in order to improve clinical
care [6], reduce capital costs [7], and accelerate scientific progress [8]. Consider two organizations
Alice (a hospital) and Bob (a related clinical laboratory), who collect various features from the
same group of people. Now Alice wants to predict Length of Stay (LOS), which is one of the most
important driving forces of hospital costs [9].
The corresponding website of this project: http://www.assisted-learning.org.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

