Cascaded Text Generation
with Markov Transformers
Yuntian Deng
Harvard University
dengyuntian@seas.harvard.edu

Alexander M. Rush
Cornell University
arush@cornell.edu

Abstract
The two dominant approaches to neural text generation are fully autoregressive
models, using serial beam search decoding, and non-autoregressive models, using
parallel decoding with no output dependencies. This work proposes an autoregressive model with sub-linear parallel time generation. Noting that conditional
random fields with bounded context can be decoded in parallel, we propose an
efficient cascaded decoding approach for generating high-quality output. To parameterize this cascade, we introduce a Markov transformer, a variant of the popular
fully autoregressive model that allows us to simultaneously decode with specific
autoregressive context cutoffs. This approach requires only a small modification
from standard autoregressive training, while showing competitive accuracy/speed
tradeoff compared to existing methods on five machine translation datasets.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic text generation is a ubiquitous tool in natural language processing. Originally primarily
studied with respect to machine translation [1, 27], its progress has led to applications in document
summarization [40, 45], data-to-text [60], image captioning [61], etc. State-of-the-art text generation
approaches rely on fully autoregressive models such as RNNs and transformers [53], in which the
probability of an output word depends on all previous words. At inference time, beam search is
used for decoding, a left-to-right serial procedure. To speed up decoding, researchers have proposed
alternative parallel generation models. One class of non-autoregressive probabilistic models assumes
that each word’s output probability is independent of other words [13, 67, 28]. While it is impressive
that these models perform well, this independence assumption is very strong and often results in
noticeable artifacts such as repetitions [13, 51].
We note that non-autoregressive models, while sufficient, are not necessary for fast probabilistic
parallel generation. On parallel hardware, inference in models with bounded Markov dependencies is
trivial to parallelize and requires sub-linear time w.r.t. sequence length [43, 39]. In practice, given
the right parameterization, we can explore any level of autoregressive dependencies to achieve a
speed/accuracy tradeoff.
In this work, we exploit this property by proposing cascaded decoding with a Markov transformer
architecture. Our approach centers around a graphical model representation of the output space of
text generation. Given this model, we can employ cascaded decoding [7, 8, 58, 41] for parallel text
generation, using an iterative procedure that starts from a non-autoregressive model and introduces
increasingly higher-order dependencies. We combine this approach with a Markov transformer, an
extension to the fully autoregressive transformer architecture. This network uses barriers during
training to ensure it learns fixed high-order dependencies. At test time, a single network can be
used to parameterize a cascade of different graphical models. The Markov transformer only changes
self-attention masks and inputs at training, and is applicable to all transformer variants.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

