On Testing of Samplers ∗†

r
r
Kuldeep S. Meel1
Yash Pote 1
Sourav Chakraborty2
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata

Abstract
Given a set of items F and a weight function wt : F 7→ (0, 1), the problem of sampling seeks to sample an item proportional to its weight. Sampling is a fundamental
problem in machine learning. The daunting computational complexity of sampling
with formal guarantees leads designers to propose heuristics-based techniques for
which no rigorous theoretical analysis exists to quantify the quality of generated
distributions. This poses a challenge in designing a testing methodology to test
whether a sampler under test generates samples according to a given distribution.
Only recently, Chakraborty and Meel (2019) designed the first scalable verifier,
called Barbarik, for samplers in the special case when the weight function wt is
constant, that is, when the sampler is supposed to sample uniformly from F . The
techniques in Barbarik, however, fail to handle general weight functions.
The primary contribution of this paper is an affirmative answer to the above challenge: motivated by Barbarik, but using different techniques and analysis, we
design Barbarik2, an algorithm to test whether the distribution generated by a
sampler is ε-close or η-far from any target distribution. In contrast to blackbox sampling techniques that require a number of samples proportional to |F| ,
Barbarik2 requires only Õ(tilt(wt, ϕ)2 /η(η − 6ε)3 ) samples, where the tilt is the
maximum ratio of weights of two satisfying assignments. Barbarik2 can handle
any arbitrary weight function. We present a prototype implementation of Barbarik2
and use it to test three state-of-the-art samplers.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the success of statistical techniques, automated decision-making systems are increasingly employed in critical domains such as medical [19], aeronautics [33], criminal sentencing [20],
and military [2]. The potential long-term impact of the ensuing decisions has led to research in the
correct-by-construction design of AI-based decision systems. There has been a call for the design of
randomized and quantitative formal methods [35] to verify the basic building blocks of the modern
AI systems. In this work, we focus on one such core building block: constrained sampling.
Given a set of constraints ϕ over a set of variables X and a weight function wt over assignments to
X, the problem of constrained sampling is to sample a satisfying assignment σ of ϕ with probability
proportional to wt(σ). Constrained sampling is a fundamental problem that encapsulates a wide
range of sampling formulations [24, 23, 12, 30, 14]. For example, wt can be used to capture a given
∗
The accompanying tool, available open source, can be found at https://github.com/meelgroup/barbarik. The
Appendix is available in the accompanying supplementary material.
†
The authors decided to forgo the old convention of alphabetical ordering of authors in favor of a
randomized ordering, denoted by r . The publicly verifiable record of the randomization is available
at https://www.aeaweb.org/journals/policies/random-author-order/search with confirmation
code: GH8VZdz4mQIh. For citation of the work, authors request that the citation guidelines by AEA for random
author ordering be followed.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

