Self-Imitation Learning via Generalized Lower
Bound Q-learning

Yunhao Tang
Columbia University
yt2541@columbia.edu

Abstract
Self-imitation learning motivated by lower-bound Q-learning is a novel and effective approach for off-policy learning. In this work, we propose a n-step lower bound
which generalizes the original return-based lower-bound Q-learning, and introduce
a new family of self-imitation learning algorithms. To provide a formal motivation
for the potential performance gains provided by self-imitation learning, we show
that n-step lower bound Q-learning achieves a trade-off between fixed point bias
and contraction rate, drawing close connections to the popular uncorrected n-step
Q-learning. We finally show that n-step lower bound Q-learning is a more robust
alternative to return-based self-imitation learning and uncorrected n-step, over a
wide range of continuous control benchmark tasks. The implementation is available
at https://github.com/robintyh1/nstep-sil.

1

Introduction

Learning with off-policy data is of central importance to scalable reinforcement learning (RL). The
traditional framework of off-policy learning is based on importance sampling (IS): for example, in
policy evaluation, given trajectories (xt , at , rt )∞
t=0 generated under behavior policy µ, the objective
is to evaluate Q-function Qπ (x0 , a0 ) of a target policy π. Naive IS estimator involves products of
the form π(at | xt )/µ(at | xt ) and is infeasible in practice due to high variance. To control the
variance, a line of prior work has focused on operator-based estimation to avoid full IS products,
which reduces the estimation procedure into repeated iterations of off-policy evaluation operators
[1–3]. Each iteration of the operator requires only local IS ratios, which greatly stabilizes the update.
More formally, such operators T are designed such that their fixed points are the target Q-function
T Qπ = Qπ . As such, these operators are unbiased and conducive to theoretical analysis. However,
a large number of prior work has observed that certain biased operators tend to have significant
empirical advantages [4–6]. One notable example is the uncorrected n-step operator, which directly
bootstraps from n-step target trajectories without IS corrections [4]. The removal of all IS ratios
biases the estimate, but allows the learning signal to be propagated over a longer horizon (in Section 2,
we will characterize such effects as contraction rates). Indeed, when behavior trajectories are unlikely
under the current policy, small IS ratios π(at | xt )/µ(at | xt ) quickly cut off the learning signal. In
general, there is a trade-off between the fixed point bias and contraction rates. Empirical findings
suggest that it might be desirable to introduce bias in exchange for faster contractions in practice [7].
Recently, self-imitation learning (SIL) has been developed as a family of novel off-policy algorithms
which facilitate efficient learning from highly off-policy data [8–10]. In its original form, SIL is
∗
motivated as lower bound Q-learning [11]. In particular, let QL (x, a) ≤ Qπ (x, a) denote a lower
∗
bound of the optimal Q-function Qπ . Optimizing auxiliary losses which encourage Qθ (x, a) ≥
QL (x, a) could significantly speed up learning with the trained Q-function Qθ (x, a). Such auxiliary
losses could be extended to actor-critic algorithms with stochastic policies [8]: SIL suggests optimizing
a policy πθ (a | x) by maximizing an objective similar to [Qµ (a | x) − V πθ (x)]+ log πθ (a | x),
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

