Finite Continuum-Armed Bandits
Solenne Gaucher
Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay
Université Paris-Saclay,
91405, Orsay, France
solenne.gaucher@math.u-psud.fr

Abstract
We consider a situation where an agent has T ressources to be allocated to a larger
number N of actions. Each action can be completed at most once and results in
a stochastic reward with unknown mean. The goal of the agent is to maximize
her cumulative reward. Non trivial strategies are possible when side information
on the actions is available, for example in the form of covariates. Focusing on a
nonparametric setting, where the mean reward is an unknown function of a onedimensional covariate, we propose an optimal strategy for this problem. Under
natural assumptions on the reward function, we prove that the optimal regret scales
as O(T 1/3 ) up to poly-logarithmic factors when the budget T is proportional to the
number of actions N . When T becomes small compared to N , a smooth transition
occurs. When the ratio T /N decreases from a constant to N 1/3 , the regret
increases progressively up to the O(T 1/2 ) rate encountered in continuum-armed
bandits.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivations

Stochastic multi-armed bandits have been extensively used to model online decision problems under
uncertainty : at each time step, an agent must choose an action from a finite set, and receives a reward
drawn i.i.d. from a distribution depending on the action she has selected. By choosing the same
action over and over again, she can learn the distribution of the rewards for performing this action.
The agent then faces a trade-off between collecting information on the mechanism generating the
rewards, and taking the best action with regards to the information collected, so as to maximise her
immediate reward.
In some real-life situations, the agent can complete each action at most once, and does not have
enough resource to complete all of them. Her decisions can be rephrased in terms of allocating limited
resources between many candidates. The agent cannot estimate the reward of an action by performing
it several times, and must rely on additional information to construct her strategy. In many situations,
covariates providing information on the actions are available to the agent. Then, the expected reward
for taking an action can be modelled as a (regular) function of the corresponding covariate. Thus,
similar actions give rise to similar rewards. This problem is motivated by the following examples.
• Allocation of scarce resources. The response of an individual to medical treatment can be inferred
from contextual information describing this patient. When this treatment is expensive or short
in supply, decision-makers aim at efficiently selecting recipients who will be treated, so as to
maximise the number of beneficial interventions [Kleinberg et al., 2015]. During epidemic crises,
lack of medical resources may force hospital staff to progressively identify patients that are more
likely to recover based on indicators of their general health status, and prioritize them in the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

