On the Theory of Transfer Learning: The Importance
of Task Diversity
Nilesh Tripuraneni
University of California, Berkeley
nilesh tripuraneni@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Abstract
We provide new statistical guarantees for transfer learning via representation
learning–when transfer is achieved by learning a feature representation shared
across different tasks. This enables learning on new tasks using far less data than is
required to learn them in isolation. Formally, we consider t + 1 tasks parameterized
by functions of the form fj h in a general function class F H, where each fj
is a task-specific function in F and h is the shared representation in H. Letting
C(·) denote the complexity measure of the function class, we show that for diverse
training tasks (1) the sample complexity needed to learn the shared representation
across the first t training tasks scales as C(H) + tC(F), despite no explicit access
to a signal from the feature representation and (2) with an accurate estimate of the
representation, the sample complexity needed to learn a new task scales only with
C(F). Our results depend upon a new general notion of task diversity–applicable
to models with general tasks, features, and losses–as well as a novel chain rule for
Gaussian complexities. Finally, we exhibit the utility of our general framework in
several models of importance in the literature.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning is quickly becoming an essential tool to address learning problems in settings with
small data. One of the most promising methods for multitask and transfer learning is founded on the
belief that multiple, differing tasks are distinguished by a small number of task-specific parameters,
but often share a common low-dimensional representation. Undoubtedly, one of the most striking
successes of this idea has been to only re-train the final layers of a neural network on new task
data, after initializing its earlier layers with hierarchical representations/features from ImageNet (i.e.,
ImageNet pretraining) [Donahue et al., 2014, Gulshan et al., 2016]. However, the practical purview of
transfer learning has extended far beyond the scope of computer vision and classical ML application
domains such as deep reinforcement learning [Baevski et al., 2019], to problems such as protein
engineering and design [Elnaggar et al., 2020].
In this paper, we formally study the composite learning model in which there are t + 1 tasks whose
responses are generated noisily from the function fj? h? , where fj? are task-specific parameters in a
function class F and h? an underlying shared representation in a function class H. A large empirical
literature has documented the performance gains that can be obtained by transferring a jointly learned
representation h to new tasks in this model [Yosinski et al., 2014, Raghu et al., 2019, Lee et al., 2019].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

