Storage Efficient and Dynamic Flexible Runtime
Channel Pruning via Deep Reinforcement Learning

Jianda Chen
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
jianda001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Shangyu Chen
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
schen025@e.ntu.edu.sg

Sinno Jialin Pan
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) based framework
to efficiently perform runtime channel pruning on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Our DRL-based framework aims to learn a pruning strategy to determine how many and which channels to be pruned in each convolutional layer,
depending on each individual input instance at runtime. Unlike existing runtime
pruning methods which require to store all channels parameters for inference, our
framework can reduce parameters storage consumption by introducing a static
pruning component. Comparison experimental results with existing runtime and
static pruning methods on state-of-the-art CNNs demonstrate that our proposed
framework is able to provide a tradeoff between dynamic flexibility and storage
efficiency in runtime channel pruning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance
in various computer vision tasks [17, 30, 8, 7, 36, 18, 7, 37, 4]. However, since most state-of-the-art
CNNs require expensive computation power for inference and huge storage space to store large
amount of parameters, the limitation of energy, computation and storage on mobile or edge devices
has become the major bottleneck on real-world deployments of CNNs. Existing studies have been
focused on speeding up the execution of CNNs for inference on edge devices by model compression
using matrix decomposition [3, 25], network quantization [2], network pruning [5], etc. Among these
approaches, channel pruning, which discards an entire input or output channel and keeps the rest of
the model with structures, has shown promising performance [11, 24, 38, 26].
Most channel pruning approaches can be categorized into two types: runtime and static. Static
approaches aim to evaluate the importance of each channel over the whole training dataset and remove
the least important channels to minimize the loss of performance after pruning. By permanently
pruning a number of channels, the computation and storage cost of a CNN can be dramatically reduced
when being deployed, and the inference execution can be accelerated consequently. On the other
hand, runtime approaches have been recently proposed to achieve dynamic channel pruning on each
individual instance [6]. To be specific, the goal of runtime approaches aims to evaluate the channel
importance at runtime, which is assumed to be different on different input instances. By pruning
channels dynamically, different pruned structures can be considered as different routing of data stream
inside CNNs. This kind of approaches is able to significantly improve the representation capability of
a CNN, and thus achieve better performance in terms of prediction accuracy compared with static
approaches. However, previous runtime approaches trade storage cost off dynamic flexibility. To
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

