Unsupervised Joint k-node Graph Representations
with Compositional Energy-Based Models

Leonardo Cotta
Purdue University
cotta@purdue.edu

Carlos H. C. Teixeira
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Brazil
carlos@dcc.ufmg.br

Ananthram Swami
United States Army Research Laboratory
ananthram.swami.civ@mail.mil

Bruno Ribeiro
Purdue University
ribeiro@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Existing Graph Neural Network (GNN) methods that learn inductive unsupervised
graph representations focus on learning node and edge representations by predicting
observed edges in the graph. Although such approaches have shown advances in
downstream node classification tasks, they are ineffective in jointly representing
larger k-node sets, k>2. We propose MHM-GNN, an inductive unsupervised
graph representation approach that combines joint k-node representations with
energy-based models (hypergraph Markov networks) and GNNs. To address
the intractability of the loss that arises from this combination, we endow our
optimization with a loss upper bound using a finite-sample unbiased Markov Chain
Monte Carlo estimator. Our experiments show that the unsupervised joint k-node
representations of MHM-GNN produce better unsupervised representations than
existing approaches from the literature.

1

Introduction

Inductive unsupervised learning using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) in (dyadic) graphs is currently
restricted to node and edge representations due to their reliance on edge-based losses [7, 15, 21, 46]. If
we want to tackle downstream tasks that require jointly reasoning about k > 2 nodes, but whose input
data are dyadic relations (i.e., standard graphs) rather than hyperedges, we must develop techniques
that can go beyond edge-based losses.
Joint k-node representation tasks with dyadic relational inputs include drone swarms that communicate amongst themselves to jointly act on a task [41, 43], but also include more traditional
product-recommendation tasks. For instance, an e-commerce website might want to predict which
k products could be jointly purchased in the same shopping cart, while the database only records
(product, product) dyads to safeguard user information.
Srinivasan and Ribeiro [42] have recently shown that GNN node representations are insufficient to
capture joint characteristics of k nodes that are unique to this group of nodes. Indeed, our experiments
show that using existing unsupervised GNN —with their node representations and edge losses— one
cannot accurately detect these k-product carts on an e-commerce website. Unfortunately, existing
GNN extensions that give joint k-node representations require supervised graph-wide losses [27, 25],
leaving a significant gap between edge and supervised whole-graph losses (i.e., we need multiple
labeled graphs for these to work). The main reason for this gap is scalability: to obtain true
unsupervised joint k-node representations, one must optimize a model defined over all k-node
induced subgraphs of a graph.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

