Locally private non-asymptotic testing of discrete
distributions is faster using interactive mechanisms

Berrett Thomas
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
5, avenue Henry le Chatelier
91120 Palaiseau Cedex, FRANCE
thomas.berrett@ensae.fr

Butucea Cristina
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
5, avenue Henry le Chatelier
91120 Palaiseau Cedex, FRANCE
cristina.butucea@ensae.fr

Abstract
We find separation rates for testing multinomial or more general discrete distributions under the constraint of α-local differential privacy. We construct efficient
randomized algorithms and test procedures, in both the case where only noninteractive privacy mechanisms are allowed and also in the case where all sequentially interactive privacy mechanisms are allowed. The separation rates are faster
in the latter case. We prove general information theoretical bounds that allow us to
establish the optimality of our algorithms among all pairs of privacy mechanisms
and test procedures, in most usual cases. Considered examples include testing
uniform, polynomially and exponentially decreasing distributions.

1

Introduction

Hypothesis testing of discrete distributions is intensively used as a first step in data based decision
making and it is now also a component of many machine learning algorithms. Given samples from
an unknown probability distribution p and a known reference distribution p0 , the goal of a goodnessof-fit test is to decide whether p fits p0 , or is signficantly different to it in some suitable sense. Here
we will measure distance between distributions using either the L1 norm or the L2 norm, with our
alternative hypotheses consisting of all distributions p whose distance from p0 is above a certain
threshold. Our goal is to make accurate decisions, i.e. with low error probabilities, for distributions
p as close to p0 as possible. The smallest separation between p0 and the alternative hypothesis
for which it remains possible to reliably distinguish between the two hypotheses is known as the
uniform separation rate, δ. Its optimality is proven by showing that, whenever p is closer to p0 than
δ, no test procedure will be able to distinguish them with small error probabilities. As shown by
Valiant and Valiant [2014, 2017], the dependence of δ on p0 in the standard problem without privacy
constraints is pronounced and intricate.
In this work, we quantify how the constraint of local differential privacy affects the optimal separation rate. Differential privacy Dwork et al. [2006] is the most popular formalism under which the
analyst statistically randomizes data to be published in order to protect the privacy of the individuals
in the study. The way in which the data is randomized, known as the privacy mechanism, must be
carefully chosen to preserve the information in the data that is most pertinent for the task at hand,
though it is well-established that the cost of protecting privacy is necessarily a deterioration in statistical performance. Local differential privacy, in which there is no trusted curator who has access to
all the original data, is more stringent than the original differential privacy constraint, and it is often
observed in the literature that in this context we experience a further deterioration of the achievable
performance of estimation and test procedures, which are allowed to use private data only.
Local differential privacy can be attained through several kinds of privacy mechanisms. They can
be non-interactive (also known as private-coin) when the users independently randomize the sample
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

