Why Normalizing Flows Fail to Detect
Out-of-Distribution Data
Polina Kirichenko⇤
pk1822@nyu.edu
New York University

Pavel Izmailov⇤
pi390@nyu.edu
New York University

Andrew Gordon Wilson
andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu
New York University

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) data is crucial for robust machine learning
systems. Normalizing flows are flexible deep generative models that often surprisingly fail to distinguish between in- and out-of-distribution data: a flow trained on
pictures of clothing assigns higher likelihood to handwritten digits. We investigate
why normalizing flows perform poorly for OOD detection. We demonstrate that
flows learn local pixel correlations and generic image-to-latent-space transformations which are not specific to the target image datasets, focusing on flows based
on coupling layers. We show that by modifying the architecture of flow coupling
layers we can bias the flow towards learning the semantic structure of the target
data, improving OOD detection. Our investigation reveals that properties that
enable flows to generate high-fidelity images can have a detrimental effect on OOD
detection.

1

Introduction

Normalizing flows [42, 9, 10] seem to be ideal candidates for out-of-distribution detection, since they
are simple generative models that provide an exact likelihood. However, Nalisnick et al. [29] revealed
the puzzling result that flows often assign higher likelihood to out-of-distribution data than the data
used for maximum likelihood training. In Figure 1(a), we show the log-likelihood histogram for a
RealNVP flow model [10] trained on the ImageNet dataset [37] subsampled to 64 ⇥ 64 resolution.
The flow assigns higher likelihood to both the CelebA dataset of celebrity photos, and the SVHN
dataset of images of house numbers, compared to the target ImageNet dataset.
While there has been empirical progress in improving OOD detection with flows [29, 7, 30, 39, 40, 48],
the fundamental reasons for why flows fail at OOD detection in the first place are not fully understood.
In this paper, we show how the inductive biases [28, 47] of flow models — implicit assumptions in
the architectures and training procedures — can hinder OOD detection.
In particular, our contributions are the following:
• We show that flows learn latent representations for images largely based on local pixel
correlations, rather than semantic content, making it difficult to detect data with anomalous
semantics.
• We identify mechanisms through which normalizing flows can simultaneously increase
likelihood for all structured images. For example, in Figure 1(b, c), we show that the
coupling layers of RealNVP transform the in-distribution ImageNet in the same way as the
OOD CelebA.
• We show that by changing the architectural details of the coupling layers, we can encourage
flows to learn transformations specific to the target data, improving OOD detection.
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

