Learning Differentiable Programs with Admissible
Neural Heuristics
Ameesh Shah⇤

Eric Zhan⇤

Jennifer J. Sun

UC Berkeley

Caltech

Caltech

ameesh@berkeley.edu

ezhan@caltech.edu

jjsun@caltech.edu

Abhinav Verma

Yisong Yue

Swarat Chaudhuri

UT Austin

Caltech

UT Austin

verma@utexas.edu

yyue@caltech.edu

swarat@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning differentiable functions expressed as programs
in a domain-specific language. Such programmatic models can offer benefits such
as composability and interpretability; however, learning them requires optimizing
over a combinatorial space of program “architectures”. We frame this optimization
problem as a search in a weighted graph whose paths encode top-down derivations
of program syntax. Our key innovation is to view various classes of neural networks
as continuous relaxations over the space of programs, which can then be used
to complete any partial program. This relaxed program is differentiable and
can be trained end-to-end, and the resulting training loss is an approximately
admissible heuristic that can guide the combinatorial search. We instantiate our
approach on top of the A⇤ algorithm and an iteratively deepened branch-and-bound
search, and use these algorithms to learn programmatic classifiers in three sequence
classification tasks. Our experiments show that the algorithms outperform stateof-the-art methods for program learning, and that they discover programmatic
classifiers that yield natural interpretations and achieve competitive accuracy.

1

Introduction

An emerging body of work advocates program synthesis as an approach to machine learning. The
methods here learn functions represented as programs in symbolic, domain-specific languages (DSLs)
[12, 11, 49, 44, 46, 45]. Such symbolic models have a number of appeals: they can be more
interpretable than neural models, they use the inductive bias embodied in the DSL to learn reliably,
and they use compositional language primitives to transfer knowledge across tasks.
In this paper, we study how to learn differentiable programs, which use structured, symbolic primitives
to compose a set of parameterized, differentiable modules. Differentiable programs have recently
attracted much interest due to their ability to leverage the complementary advantages of programming
language abstractions and differentiable learning. For example, recent work has used such programs
to compactly describe modular neural networks that operate over rich, recursive data types [44].
To learn a differentiable program, one needs to induce the program’s “architecture” while simultaneously optimizing the parameters of the program’s modules. This co-design task is difficult because
the space of architectures is combinatorial and explodes rapidly. Prior work has approached this
challenge using methods such as greedy enumeration, Monte Carlo sampling, Monte Carlo tree
⇤

Equal Contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

