Variational Bayesian Monte Carlo
with Noisy Likelihoods

Luigi Acerbi∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
luigi.acerbi@helsinki.fi

Abstract
Variational Bayesian Monte Carlo (VBMC) is a recently introduced framework that
uses Gaussian process surrogates to perform approximate Bayesian inference in
models with black-box, non-cheap likelihoods. In this work, we extend VBMC to
deal with noisy log-likelihood evaluations, such as those arising from simulationbased models. We introduce new ‘global’ acquisition functions, such as expected
information gain (EIG) and variational interquantile range (VIQR), which are
robust to noise and can be efficiently evaluated within the VBMC setting. In a novel,
challenging, noisy-inference benchmark comprising of a variety of models with real
datasets from computational and cognitive neuroscience, VBMC +VIQR achieves
state-of-the-art performance in recovering the ground-truth posteriors and model
evidence. In particular, our method vastly outperforms ‘local’ acquisition functions
and other surrogate-based inference methods while keeping a small algorithmic
cost. Our benchmark corroborates VBMC as a general-purpose technique for
sample-efficient black-box Bayesian inference also with noisy models.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference provides a principled framework for uncertainty quantification and model selection
via computation of the posterior distribution over model parameters and of the model evidence
[1, 2]. However, for many black-box models of interest in fields such as computational biology and
neuroscience, (log-)likelihood evaluations are computationally expensive (thus limited in number) and
noisy due to, e.g., simulation-based approximations [3, 4]. These features make standard techniques
for approximate Bayesian inference such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) ineffective.
Variational Bayesian Monte Carlo (VBMC) is a recently proposed framework for Bayesian inference
with non-cheap models [5,6]. VBMC performs variational inference using a Gaussian process (GP [7])
as a statistical surrogate model for the expensive log posterior distribution. The GP model is refined
via active sampling, guided by a ‘smart’ acquisition function that exploits uncertainty and other
features of the surrogate. VBMC is particularly efficient thanks to a representation that affords fast
integration via Bayesian quadrature [8, 9], and unlike other surrogate-based techniques it performs
both posterior and model inference [5]. However, the original formulation of VBMC does not support
noisy model evaluations, and recent work has shown that surrogate-based approaches that work well
in the noiseless case may fail in the presence of even small amounts of noise [10].
In this work, we extend VBMC to deal robustly and effectively with noisy log-likelihood evaluations,
broadening the class of models that can be estimated via the method. With our novel contributions,
VBMC outperforms other state-of-the-art surrogate-based techniques for black-box Bayesian inference
in the presence of noisy evaluations – in terms of speed, robustness and quality of solutions.
∗

Previous affiliation: Department of Basic Neuroscience, University of Geneva.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

