Multi-task Additive Models for Robust Estimation
and Automatic Structure Discovery

Yingjie Wang1 , Hong Chen2∗, Feng Zheng3 , Chen Xu4 , Tieliang Gong4,5 , Yanhong Chen6
1
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
2
College of Science, Huazhong Agricultural University, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, China
4
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Ottawa, Canada
5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
6
National Space Science Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Additive models have attracted much attention for high-dimensional regression
estimation and variable selection. However, the existing models are usually limited to the single-task learning framework under the mean squared error (MSE)
criterion, where the utilization of variable structure depends heavily on a priori
knowledge among variables. For high-dimensional observations in real environment, e.g., Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) data, the learning performance of
previous methods may be degraded seriously due to the complex non-Gaussian
noise and the insufficiency of a prior knowledge on variable structure. To tackle
this problem, we propose a new class of additive models, called Multi-task Additive Models (MAM), by integrating the mode-induced metric, the structure-based
regularizer, and additive hypothesis spaces into a bilevel optimization framework.
Our approach does not require any priori knowledge of variable structure and suits
for high-dimensional data with complex noise, e.g., skewed noise, heavy-tailed
noise, and outliers. A smooth iterative optimization algorithm with convergence
guarantees is provided to implement MAM efficiently. Experiments on simulations
and the CMEs analysis demonstrate the competitive performance of our approach
for robust estimation and automatic structure discovery.

1

Introduction

Additive models [14], as nonparametric extension of linear models, have been extensively investigated
in machine learning literatures [1, 5, 34, 44]. The attractive properties of additive models include
the flexibility on function representation, the interpretability on prediction result, and the ability
to circumvent the curse of dimensionality. Typical additive models are usually formulated under
Tikhonov regularization schemes and fall into two categories: one focuses on recognizing dominant
variables without considering the interaction among the variables [21, 28, 29, 46] and the other aims
to screen informative variables at the group level, e.g., groupwise additive models [4, 42].
Although these existing models have shown promising performance, most of them are limited to
the single-task learning framework under the mean squared error (MSE) criterion. Particularly,
the groupwise additive models depend heavily on a priori knowledge of variable structure. In this
paper, we consider a problem commonly encountered in multi-task learning, in which all tasks share
an underlying variable structure and involve data with complex non-Gaussian noises, e.g., skewed
∗

Corresponding author. email: chenh@mail.hzau.edu.cn

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

