The All-or-Nothing Phenomenon
in Sparse Tensor PCA
Jonathan Niles-Weed
Courant Insititute of Mathematical Scienes and Center for Data Science
New York University
jnw@cims.nyu.edu
Ilias Zadik
Center for Data Science
New York University
zadik@nyu.edu

Abstract
We study the statistical problem of estimating a rank-one sparse tensor corrupted
by additive gaussian noise, a Gaussian additive model also known as sparse tensor
PCA. We show that for Bernoulli and Bernoulli-Rademacher distributed signals
and for all sparsity levels which are sublinear in the dimension of the signal, the
sparse tensor PCA model exhibits a phase transition called the all-or-nothing phenomenon. This is the property that for some signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) SNRc
and any fixed ✏ > 0, if the SNR of the model is below (1 ✏) SNRc , then it is
impossible to achieve any arbitrarily small constant correlation with the hidden
signal, while if the SNR is above (1 + ✏) SNRc , then it is possible to achieve almost perfect correlation with the hidden signal. The all-or-nothing phenomenon
was initially established in the context of sparse linear regression, and over the
last year also in the context of sparse 2-tensor (matrix) PCA, Bernoulli group testing and generalized linear models. Our results follow from a more general result
showing that for any Gaussian additive model with a discrete uniform prior, the
all-or-nothing phenomenon follows as a direct outcome of an appropriately defined “near-orthogonality” property of the support of the prior distribution.

1

Introduction

A central question in information theory and statistics is to establish the fundamental limits for
recovering a planted structure in high-dimensional models. A common theme in these works is
the presence of phase transitions, where the behavior of optimal estimators changes dramatically at
critical values. An infamous example is the PCA transition, where one observes a matrix Y 2 Rp⇥p ,
where
p
Y=
p xx> + W ,

where x is drawn uniformly from the unit sphere in Rp and W is an independent Gaussian Wigner
matrix. When < 1, then as p ! 1 the leading eigenvector of Y is asymptotically uncorrelated
with x; on the other hand, when > 1, the correlation between the hidden signal x and the leading
eigenvector of Y remains positive as p ! 1 [BBP05, FP07, BGN11].
A number of recent works establish that several sparse estimation tasks in high dimensions
evince the following even more striking phase transition, called the “all-or-nothing” phenomenon
[GZ17, RXZ19b, Zad19]: below a critical signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), it is impossible to achieve
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

