Probabilistic Active Meta-Learning

Jean Kaddour∗
Department of Computer Science
University College London

Steindór Sæmundsson∗
Department of Computing
Imperial College London

Marc Peter Deisenroth
Department of Computer Science
University College London

Abstract
Data-efficient learning algorithms are essential in many practical applications
where data collection is expensive, e.g., in robotics due to the wear and tear. To
address this problem, meta-learning algorithms use prior experience about tasks
to learn new, related tasks efficiently. Typically, a set of training tasks is assumed
given or randomly chosen. However, this setting does not take into account the
sequential nature that naturally arises when training a model from scratch in reallife: how do we collect a set of training tasks in a data-efficient manner? In this
work, we introduce task selection based on prior experience into a meta-learning
algorithm by conceptualizing the learner and the active meta-learning setting
using a probabilistic latent variable model. We provide empirical evidence that our
approach improves data-efficiency when compared to strong baselines on simulated
robotic experiments.

1

Introduction

Learning models of complicated phenomena from scratch, using models with generic inductive biases,
typically requires large datasets. Meta-learning addresses this problem by taking advantage of prior
experience in a domain to learn new tasks efficiently. Meta-models capture global properties of the
domain and use them as learned inductive biases for subsequent tasks. Standard in such algorithms is
to randomly choose training tasks, e.g. by uniformly sampling parameterizations on the fly [1, 2].
However, exhaustively exploring the task domain is impractical in many real-world applications
and uniform sampling is often sub-optimal [3]. For example, consider learning a meta-model of the
dynamics of a robotic arm for a range of parameterizations, e.g., varying lengths and link weights.
Due to costs, such as its wear and tear, there is a limited budget for experiments. Uniform sampling
of the parameters/configurations, or even space-filling designs, may lead to uninformative tasks being
explored due to the non-linear relationship between the parameters and the dynamics. In general, the
relevant task parameters might not even be observed, rendering a direct search infeasible.
In this work, we adopt the view that the aim of a meta-learning algorithm is not only to learn a
meta-model that generalizes quickly to new tasks, but to use its experience to inform which task is
learned next. A similar view is found in Automatic curriculum learning (ACL) where, in general,
a task selector is learned based on past data by optimizing it with respect to some performance
and/or exploration metric [4]. For instance, the work in [5] uses automatic domain randomization
to algorithmically generate task distributions of increasing difficulty, enabling generalization from
simulation to real-life robots. Similarly motivated work is found in [6], referred to as unsupervised
∗

Equal contribution, correspondence to jean.kaddour.20@ucl.ac.uk

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

