Adversarial Style Mining for One-Shot Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation

Yawei Luo1,2,3 , Ping Liu4,5 , Tao Guan1 ∗, Junqing Yu1 , Yi Yang2,4
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
CCAI, Zhejiang University 3 Baidu Research
4
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
5
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore

Abstract
We aim at the problem named One-Shot Unsupervised Domain Adaptation. Unlike
traditional Unsupervised Domain Adaptation, it assumes that only one unlabeled
target sample can be available when learning to adapt. This setting is realistic
but more challenging, in which conventional adaptation approaches are prone to
failure due to the scarce of unlabeled target data. To this end, we propose a novel
Adversarial Style Mining approach, which combines the style transfer module and
task-specific module into an adversarial manner. Specifically, the style transfer
module iteratively searches for harder stylized images around the one-shot target
sample according to the current learning state, leading the task model to explore
the potential styles that are difficult to solve in the almost unseen target domain,
thus boosting the adaptation performance in a data-scarce scenario. The adversarial
learning framework makes the style transfer module and task-specific module
benefit each other during the competition. Extensive experiments on both crossdomain classification and segmentation benchmarks verify that ASM achieves
state-of-the-art adaptation performance under the challenging one-shot setting.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have significantly improved the performance for a wide variety of machine-learning
problems and applications [32, 29]. Nevertheless, these impressive gains usually come with a price
of massive amounts of manual labeled data. A popular trend in the current research community is to
resort to simulated data, such as computer-generated scenes [36, 37], so that unlimited amount of
automatic annotation is made available. However, this learning paradigm suffers from the shift in data
distributions between the real and simulated domains, which poses a significant obstacle in adapting
predictive models to the target task. The introduction of Domain Adaptation (DA) techniques aims
to mitigate such performance drop when a trained agent encounters a different environment. By
bridging the distribution gap between source and target domains, DA methods have shown their
effect in many cross-domain tasks such as classification [27, 18], segmentation [19, 22, 23] and
detection [3]. Although much progress has been made for domain adaptation, most of the previous
efforts assume the availability of enough amounts of unlabeled target-domain samples. However,
such an assumption can not always hold since not only data labeling but also data collection itself
might be challenging, if not impossible, for the target task. In this data-scarce scenario with a limited
amount of unlabeled data from target domains, most previous DA strategies, such as distribution
∗

Corresponding author (qd_gt@hust.edu.cn).
Part of the work is conducted when Ping is in UTS. The code is publicly available at https://github.
com/RoyalVane/ASM.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

