Mixed Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for Mixed Discrete
and Continuous Variables
Guangyao Zhou
Vicarious AI
Union City, CA 94587, USA
stannis@vicarious.com

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) has emerged as a powerful Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) method to sample from complex continuous distributions. However,
a fundamental limitation of HMC is that it can not be applied to distributions with
mixed discrete and continuous variables. In this paper, we propose mixed HMC (MHMC) as a general framework to address this limitation. M-HMC is a novel family
of MCMC algorithms that evolves the discrete and continuous variables in tandem,
allowing more frequent updates of discrete variables while maintaining HMC’s
ability to suppress random-walk behavior. We establish M-HMC’s theoretical
properties, and present an efficient implementation with Laplace momentum that
introduces minimal overhead compared to existing HMC methods. The superior
performances of M-HMC over existing methods are demonstrated with numerical
experiments on Gaussian mixture models (GMMs), variable selection in Bayesian
logistic regression (BLR), and correlated topic models (CTMs).

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is one of the most powerful methods for sampling from
probability distributions. The Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm is a commonly used generalpurpose MCMC method, yet is inefficient for complex, high-dimensional distributions because of the
random walk nature of its movements. Recently, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [13, 22, 2] has
emerged as a powerful alternative to MH for complex continuous distributions due to its ability to
follow the curvature of target distributions using gradients information and make distant proposals
with high acceptance probabilities. It enjoyed remarkable empirical success, and (along with its
popular variant No-U-Turn Sampler (NUTS) [16]) is adopted as the dominant inference strategy in
many probabilistic programming systems [8, 27, 3, 25, 14, 10]. However, a fundamental limitation of
HMC is that it can not be applied to distributions with mixed discrete and continuous variables.
One existing approach for addressing this limitation involves integrating out the discrete variables(e.g.
in Stan[8], Pyro[3]), yet it’s only applicable on a small-scale, and can not always be carried out
automatically. Another approach involves alternating between updating continuous variables using
HMC/NUTS and discrete variables using generic MCMC methods (e.g. in PyMC3[27], Turing.jl[14]).
However, to suppress random walk behavior in HMC, long trajectories are needed. As a result, the
discrete variables can only be updated infrequently, limiting the efficiency of this approach. The most
promising approach involves updating the discrete and continuous variables in tandem. Since naively
making MH updates of discrete variables within HMC results in incorrect samples [22], novel variants
of HMC (e.g. discontinuous HMC (DHMC)[23, 29], probabilistic path HMC (PPHMC) [12]) are
developed. However, these methods can not be easily generalized to complicated discrete state spaces
(DHMC works best for ordinal discrete parameters, PPHMC is only applicable to phylogenetic trees),
and as we show in Sections 2.5 and 3, DHMC’s embedding and algorithmic structure are inefficient.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

