Does Unsupervised Architecture Representation
Learning Help Neural Architecture Search?

Shen Yan, Yu Zheng, Wei Ao, Xiao Zeng, Mi Zhang
Michigan State University
{yanshen6,zhengy30,aowei,zengxia6,mizhang}@msu.edu

Abstract
Existing Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods either encode neural architectures using discrete encodings that do not scale well, or adopt supervised
learning-based methods to jointly learn architecture representations and optimize
architecture search on such representations which incurs search bias. Despite the
widespread use, architecture representations learned in NAS are still poorly understood. We observe that the structural properties of neural architectures are hard
to preserve in the latent space if architecture representation learning and search
are coupled, resulting in less effective search performance. In this work, we find
empirically that pre-training architecture representations using only neural architectures without their accuracies as labels improves the downstream architecture
search efficiency. To explain this finding, we visualize how unsupervised architecture representation learning better encourages neural architectures with similar
connections and operators to cluster together. This helps map neural architectures
with similar performance to the same regions in the latent space and makes the
transition of architectures in the latent space relatively smooth, which considerably
benefits diverse downstream search strategies.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised representation learning has been successfully used in a wide range of domains including
natural language processing [1, 2, 3], computer vision [4, 5], robotic learning [6, 7], and network
analysis [8, 9]. Although differing in specific data type, the root cause of such success shared across
domains is learning good data representations that are independent of the specific downstream task.
In this work, we investigate unsupervised representation learning in the domain of neural architecture
search (NAS), and demonstrate how NAS search spaces encoded through unsupervised representation
learning could benefit the downstream search strategies.
Standard NAS methods encode the search space with the adjacency matrix and focus on designing
different downstream search strategies based on reinforcement learning [10], evolutionary algorithm
[11], and Bayesian optimization [12] to perform architecture search in discrete search spaces. Such
discrete encoding scheme is a natural choice since neural architectures are discrete. However, the
size of the adjacency matrix grows quadratically as search space scales up, making downstream
architecture search less efficient in large search spaces [13]. To reduce the search cost, recent NAS
methods employ dedicated networks to learn continuous representations of neural architectures
and perform architecture search in continuous search spaces [14, 15, 16, 17]. In these methods,
architecture representations and downstream search strategies are jointly optimized in a supervised
manner, guided by the accuracies of architectures selected by the search strategies. However,
these supervised architecture representation learning-based methods are biased towards weight-free
operations (e.g., skip connections, max-pooling) which are often preferred in the early stage of the
search process, resulting in lower final accuracies [18, 19, 20, 21].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

