Learning Bounds for Risk-sensitive Learning

Jaeho Lee†∗
Sejun Park‡
Jinwoo Shin‡†
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
†
School of Electrical Engineering, ‡ Graduate School of AI

Abstract
In risk-sensitive learning, one aims to find a hypothesis that minimizes a risk-averse
(or risk-seeking) measure of loss, instead of the standard expected loss. In this
paper, we propose to study the generalization properties of risk-sensitive learning
schemes whose optimand is described via optimized certainty equivalents (OCE):
our general scheme can handle various known risks, e.g., the entropic risk, meanvariance, and conditional value-at-risk, as special cases. We provide two learning
bounds on the performance of empirical OCE minimizer. The first result gives an
OCE guarantee based on the Rademacher average of the hypothesis space, which
generalizes and improves existing results on the expected loss and the conditional
value-at-risk. The second result, based on a novel variance-based characterization
of OCE, gives an expected loss guarantee with a suppressed dependence on the
smoothness of the selected OCE. Finally, we demonstrate the practical implications
of the proposed bounds via exploratory experiments on neural networks.

1

Introduction

The systematic minimization of the quantifiable uncertainty, or risk [28], is one of the core objectives
in all disciplines involving decision-making, e.g., economics and finance. Within machine learning
contexts, strategies for risk-aversion have been most actively studied under sequential decisionmaking and reinforcement learning frameworks [25, 9], giving birth to a number of algorithms based
on Markov decision processes (MDPs) and multi-armed bandits. In those works, various risk-averse
measures of loss have been used as a minimization objective, instead of the risk-neutral expected
loss; popular risk measures include entropic risk [25, 7, 8], mean-variance [47, 17, 35], and a slightly
more modern alternative known as conditional value-at-risk (CVaR [19, 11, 50]). Yet, with growing
interest to the societal impacts of machine intelligence, the importance of risk-aversion under nonsequential scenarios has also been spotlighted recently. For instance, Williamson and Menon [53]
give an axiomatic characterization of the fairness risk measures, and propose a convex fairness-aware
objective based on CVaR. Also, Curi et al. [14] empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of their
CVaR minimization algorithm to account for the covariate shift in the data-generating distribution.
The advantage of risk-sensitive (either risk-seeking or risk-averse) objectives in machine learning,
however, is not limited to tasks involving social considerations. Indeed, there exists a rich body
of works which implicitly propose to minimize risk-sensitive measures of loss, as a technique to
better optimize the standard expected loss. For example, the idea of prioritizing low-loss samples
for learning is prevalent in noisy label handling [22] or curriculum learning [30]. In those contexts,
high-loss samples are viewed as either mislabeled, or correctly labeled but detrimental to training
dynamics due to their “difficulty.” Such algorithms can be viewed as implicitly optimizing a riskseeking counterpart of CVaR (see Section 2.2). Contrarily (and ironically), it is also common to
focus on high-loss samples to improve the model accuracy or accelerate the optimization [10]. Such
algorithms can be viewed as minimizing risk-averse measures of loss; for instance, learning with
average top-k loss [16] is equivalent to the CVaR minimization when the number of samples is fixed.
∗

To be corresponded with: jaeho-lee@kaist.ac.kr

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

