Influence-Augmented Online Planning for Complex
Environments
Miguel Suau
Department of Intelligent Systems
Delft University of Technology
M.SuaudeCastro@tudelft.nl

Jinke He
Department of Intelligent Systems
Delft University of Technology
J.He-4@tudelft.nl

Frans A. Oliehoek
Department of Intelligent Systems
Delft University of Technology
F.A.Oliehoek@tudelft.nl

Abstract
How can we plan efficiently in real time to control an agent in a complex environment that may involve many other agents? While existing sample-based planners
have enjoyed empirical success in large POMDPs, their performance heavily relies
on a fast simulator. However, real-world scenarios are complex in nature and
their simulators are often computationally demanding, which severely limits the
performance of online planners. In this work, we propose influence-augmented
online planning, a principled method to transform a factored simulator of the entire
environment into a local simulator that samples only the state variables that are
most relevant to the observation and reward of the planning agent and captures
the incoming influence from the rest of the environment using machine learning
methods. Our main experimental results show that planning on this less accurate
but much faster local simulator with POMCP leads to higher real-time planning
performance than planning on the simulator that models the entire environment.

1

Introduction

We consider the online planning setting where we control an agent in a complex environment that
is partially observable and may involve many other agents. When the policies of other agents are
known, the entire environment can be modeled as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP) (Kaelbling et al., 1998), and traditional online planning approaches can be applied. While
sample-based planners like POMCP (Silver and Veness, 2010) have been shown effective for large
POMDPs, their performance relies heavily on a fast simulator to perform a vast number of Monte
Carlo simulations in a step. However, many real-world scenarios are complex in nature, making
simulators that capture the dynamics of the entire environment extremely computationally demanding
and hence preventing existing planners from being useful in practice. Towards effective planning in
realistic scenarios, this work is motivated by the question: can we significantly speed up a simulator
by replacing the part of the environment that is less important with an approximate learned model?
We build on the multi-agent decision making literature that tries to identify compact representations
of complex environments for an agent to make optimal decisions (Becker et al., 2003, 2004; Petrik
and Zilberstein, 2009; Witwicki and Durfee, 2010). These methods exploit the fact that in many
structured domains, only a small set of (state) variables, which we call local (state) factors, of the
environment directly affects the observation and reward of the agent. The rest of the environment can
only impact the agent indirectly through their influence on the local factors. For example, Figure 1a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

