On Numerosity of Deep Neural Networks

Xi Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
zhangxi_19930818@sjtu.edu.cn

Xiaolin Wu∗
McMaster University
xwu@ece.mcmaster.ca

Abstract
Recently, a provocative claim was published that number sense spontaneously
emerges in a deep neural network trained merely for visual object recognition.
This has, if true, far reaching significance to the fields of machine learning and
cognitive science alike. In this paper, we prove the above claim to be unfortunately
incorrect. The statistical analysis to support the claim is flawed in that the sample
set used to identify number-aware neurons is too small, compared to the huge
number of neurons in the object recognition network. By this flawed analysis one
could mistakenly identify number-sensing neurons in any randomly initialized
deep neural networks that are not trained at all. With the above critique we ask
the question what if a deep convolutional neural network is carefully trained for
numerosity? Our findings are mixed. Even after being trained with numberdepicting images, the deep learning approach still has difficulties to acquire the
abstract concept of numbers, a cognitive task that preschoolers perform with ease.
But on the other hand, we do find some encouraging evidences suggesting that
deep neural networks are more robust to distribution shift for small numbers than
for large numbers.

1

Introduction

In the past decade deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) have rapidly developed into a
powerful problem-solving paradigm that has found a wide gamut of applications, spanning almost all
academic disciplines. DCNNs trained by large data, or deep learning (DL) as known colloquially,
are noted for their apparent intelligent behaviours, being able to solve difficult problems of pattern
analysis, recognition and classification [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Although artificial neural networks were
originally inspired by the knowledge of animal cortex [8], our understanding of the inner working
mechanism of DL is outstepped or arguably even mystified by their functional prowess in many
applications.
It is therefore interesting to differentiate and contrast DL machines and humans in their capabilities
to perform primitive cognitive tasks. In this context, numerosity is an ideal Turing-type test on
the cognitive power or deficit of DL. Numerosity or the awareness of numbers is a neurocognitive
function possessed by human infants prior to speech and any symbolic learning and even by animals
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. Furthermore, numerosity is an innate perception, very much like taste,
sight, touch, smell and sound, although it is conceptually a higher order cognitive construct than
the common five senses. In the absence of learning newborn human infants can respond to abstract
numerical quantities across different modalities and formats [16, 17, 18]; even chicks can discriminate
quantities in visual stimuli without training [19, 20].
Indeed, the tantalizing question whether neutral networks can acquire the number sense, a benchmark
mental construct in neuroscience and cognitive psychology, has attracted attentions of a number of
researchers. Stoianov and Zorzi were the first to study the neural network as a possible model for
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

