SoftFlow: Probabilistic Framework for
Normalizing Flow on Manifolds

Hyeongju Kim, Hyeonseung Lee, Woo Hyun Kang, Joun Yeop Lee, Nam Soo Kim
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and INMC,
Seoul National University,
Seoul, South Korea
{hjkim, hslee, whkang, jylee}@hi.snu.ac.kr, nkim@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Flow-based generative models are composed of invertible transformations between
two random variables of the same dimension. Therefore, flow-based models cannot
be adequately trained if the dimension of the data distribution does not match
that of the underlying target distribution. In this paper, we propose SoftFlow, a
probabilistic framework for training normalizing flows on manifolds. To sidestep
the dimension mismatch problem, SoftFlow estimates a conditional distribution
of the perturbed input data instead of learning the data distribution directly. We
experimentally show that SoftFlow can capture the innate structure of the manifold
data and generate high-quality samples unlike the conventional flow-based models.
Furthermore, we apply the proposed framework to 3D point clouds to alleviate the
difficulty of forming thin structures for flow-based models. The proposed model
for 3D point clouds, namely SoftPointFlow, can estimate the distribution of various
shapes more accurately and achieves state-of-the-art performance in point cloud
generation.

1

Introduction

Ever since Dinh et al. (2014) first introduced Non-linear Independent Component Estimation (NICE)
that exploits a change of variables for density estimation, flow-based generative models have been
widely studied and have shown competitive performance in many applications such as image generation (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), speech synthesis (Prenger et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2018), video
prediction (Kumar et al., 2019) and machine translation (Ma et al., 2019). With this success, flowbased models are considered a potent technique for unsupervised learning due to their attractive
merits: (i) exact log-likelihood evaluation, (ii) efficient synthetic data generation, and (iii) wellstructured latent variable space. These properties enable the flow-based model to learn complex
dependencies within high-dimensional data, generate a number of synthetic samples in real-time, and
learn a semantically meaningful latent space which can be used for downstream tasks or interpolation
between data points.
There also have been some theoretical developments as well as various application of flow-based
models in recent years. For example, unlike the conventional flow-based models which typically
perform dequantization by adding uniform noise to discrete data points (e.g., image) as a pre-process
for the change of variable formula (Dinh et al., 2016; Papamakarios et al., 2017), Flow++ (Ho
et al., 2019) proposed to leverage a variational dequantization technique to provide more natural
and smoother density approximator of discrete data. Another example is a continuous normalizing
flow (CNF) (Chen et al., 2018; Grathwohl et al., 2018). While discrete flow-based models adopt
a restricted architecture for ease of computing the determinant of the Jacobian, CNFs impose no
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

