Leap-Of-Thought: Teaching Pre-Trained Models to
Systematically Reason Over Implicit Knowledge

Alon Talmor1,2

Oyvind Tafjord1

Peter Clark1

Yoav Goldberg1,3

Jonathan Berant1,2

1

2

The Allen Institute for AI
Tel-Aviv University, 3 Bar-Ilan University

{alont,oyvindt,peterc,yoavg,jonathan}@allenai.org

Abstract
To what extent can a neural network systematically reason over symbolic facts?
Evidence suggests that large pre-trained language models (LMs) acquire some
reasoning capacity, but this ability is difficult to control. Recently, it has been
shown that Transformer-based models succeed in consistent reasoning over explicit
symbolic facts, under a “closed-world" assumption. However, in an open-domain
setup, it is desirable to tap into the vast reservoir of implicit knowledge already
encoded in the parameters of pre-trained LMs. In this work, we provide a first
demonstration that LMs can be trained to reliably perform systematic reasoning
combining both implicit, pre-trained knowledge and explicit natural language
statements. To do this, we describe a procedure for automatically generating
datasets that teach a model new reasoning skills, and demonstrate that models
learn to effectively perform inference which involves implicit taxonomic and world
knowledge, chaining and counting. Finally, we show that “teaching” the models
to reason generalizes beyond the training distribution: they successfully compose
the usage of multiple reasoning skills in single examples. Our work paves a path
towards open-domain systems that constantly improve by interacting with users
who can instantly correct a model by adding simple natural language statements.

1

Introduction

A longstanding goal of artificial intelligence is to develop systems that continuously accumulate
knowledge by consuming facts and rules about the world and reasoning over them [1, 2, 3]. Recently
[4], it has been shown that Transformers [5] are an effective architecture for this goal, as they can be
trained to reason over knowledge expressed as natural language statements.
However, modern neural networks for language do not store knowledge symbolically. Instead,
substantial amounts of knowledge are encoded in their parameters by pre-training on large corpora
with a language modeling (LM) objective [6, 7, 8, 9]. Moreover, although LM-based models do
exhibit certain reasoning abilities [10, 11], these abilities are not systematic and are difficult to control.
Thus, for real-world open-domain applications, it is imperative that models reason consistently over
both explicit input statements and implicit knowledge that is already encoded by the network.
In this work, we develop models that reason over implicit knowledge and explicit natural language
statements in a systematic manner. Consider the example in Figure 1. The model needs to determine
whether “A whale has a belly button”, but answers incorrectly since this particular knowledge nugget
is unknown to the model. However, if a user tells the model explicitly that “A mammal has a belly
button”, the model can combine this statement with the its implicit knowledge that “A whale is a
mammal”, and make the right inference on the spot. Thus, we want the model to systematically
handle such cases that combine implicit knowledge with input natural language statements.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

