Learning Affordance Landscapes for
Interaction Exploration in 3D Environments

Tushar Nagarajan
UT Austin and Facebook AI Research
tushar@cs.utexas.edu

Kristen Grauman
UT Austin and Facebook AI Research
grauman@fb.com

Abstract
Embodied agents operating in human spaces must be able to master how their
environment works: what objects can the agent use, and how can it use them?
We introduce a reinforcement learning approach for exploration for interaction,
whereby an embodied agent autonomously discovers the affordance landscape
of a new unmapped 3D environment (such as an unfamiliar kitchen). Given an
egocentric RGB-D camera and a high-level action space, the agent is rewarded for
maximizing successful interactions while simultaneously training an image-based
affordance segmentation model. The former yields a policy for acting efficiently
in new environments to prepare for downstream interaction tasks, while the latter
yields a convolutional neural network that maps image regions to the likelihood they
permit each action, densifying the rewards for exploration. We demonstrate our idea
with AI2-iTHOR. The results show agents can learn how to use new home environments intelligently and that it prepares them to rapidly address various downstream
tasks like “find a knife and put it in the drawer.” Project page: http://vision.
cs.utexas.edu/projects/interaction-exploration/

1

Introduction

The ability to interact with the environment is an essential skill for embodied agents operating in
human spaces. Interaction gives agents the capacity to modify their environment, allowing them to
move from semantic navigation tasks (e.g., “go to the kitchen; find the coffee cup”) towards complex
tasks involving interactions with their surroundings (e.g., “heat some coffee and bring it to me”).
Today’s embodied agents are typically trained to perform specific interactions in a supervised manner.
For example, an agent learns to navigate to specified objects [18], a dexterous hand learns to solve
a Rubik’s cube [4], a robot learns to manipulate a rope [40]. In these cases and many others, it is
known a priori what objects are relevant for the interactions and what the goal of the interaction is,
whether expressed through expert demonstrations or a reward crafted to elicit the desired behavior.
Despite exciting results, the resulting agents remain specialized to the target interactions and objects
for which they were taught.
In contrast, we envision embodied agents that can enter a novel 3D environment, move around to
encounter new objects, and autonomously discern the affordance landscape—what are the interactable
objects, what actions are relevant to use them, and under what conditions will these interactions
succeed? Such an agent could then enter a new kitchen (say), and be primed to address tasks like
“wash my coffee cup in the sink.” These capabilities would mimic humans’ ability to efficiently
discover the functionality of even unfamiliar objects though a mixture of learned visual priors and
exploratory manipulation.
To this end, we introduce the exploration for interaction problem: a mobile agent in a 3D environment
must autonomously discover the objects with which it can physically interact, and what actions are
valid as interactions with them.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

