A Decentralized Parallel Algorithm for Training
Generative Adversarial Nets
Mingrui Liu† , Wei Zhang‡ , Youssef Mroueh‡ , Xiaodong Cui‡ , Jerret Ross‡ , Tianbao Yang† , Payel Das‡
†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242
‡
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, 10598, USA
mingruiliu.ml@gmail.com

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are a powerful class of generative models in the deep learning community. Current practice on large-scale GAN training
utilizes large models and distributed large-batch training strategies, and is implemented on deep learning frameworks (e.g., TensorFlow, PyTorch, etc.) designed
in a centralized manner. In the centralized network topology, every worker needs
to either directly communicate with the central node or indirectly communicate
with all other workers in every iteration. However, when the network bandwidth is
low or network latency is high, the performance would be significantly degraded.
Despite recent progress on decentralized algorithms for training deep neural networks, it remains unclear whether it is possible to train GANs in a decentralized
manner. The main difficulty lies at handling the nonconvex-nonconcave min-max
optimization and the decentralized communication simultaneously. In this paper,
we address this difficulty by designing the first gradient-based decentralized
parallel algorithm which allows workers to have multiple rounds of communications in one iteration and to update the discriminator and generator simultaneously,
and this design makes it amenable for the convergence analysis of the proposed
decentralized algorithm. Theoretically, our proposed decentralized algorithm is
able to solve a class of non-convex non-concave min-max problems with provable
non-asymptotic convergence to first-order stationary point. Experimental results
on GANs demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1] are very effective at modeling high dimensional data,
such as images, but are known to be notoriously difficult to train. Recent research on large-scale GAN
training by [2] suggests that distributed large-batch training techniques can be beneficial on large
models. Their algorithm is based on a centralized network topology [3, 4], in which each worker
computes a local stochastic gradient based on its local data and then sends its gradient to a central node.
The central node aggregates the local stochastic gradients together, updates its model parameters
by first-order methods and then sends the parameters back to each worker. The central node is the
busiest node since it needs to communicate with each worker concurrently. This communication
is the main bottleneck of centralized algorithms since it could lead to a communication traffic jam
when the network bandwidth is low or network latency is high. To address this issue, decentralized
algorithms are usually considered as a surrogate when the cost of centralized communication is
prohibitively expensive. In decentralized algorithms, instead, each worker only communicates with
its neighbors and a central node is not needed. To this end, recently a decentralized algorithm was also
designed for training a deep neural network [5]. In addition, decentralized algorithms only require
workers to communicate with their trusted neighbors and are usually a good way for maintaining
privacy [6, 7, 8].
While decentralized algorithms are beneficial, they are limited from an optimization perspective. All
previous decentralized works are designed either for solving convex and non-convex minimization
problems [6, 7, 8, 5] or convex-concave min-max problems [9, 10, 11]. However, none of them are
directly applicable for non-convex non-concave min-max problems such as GANs. In this paper, we
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

