Video Frame Interpolation without Temporal Priors

Youjian Zhang∗
The University of Sydney, Australia

Chaoyue Wang∗
The University of Sydney, Australia

yzha0535@uni.sydney.edu.au

chaoyue.wang@sydney.edu.au

Dacheng Tao
The University of Sydney, Australia
dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Video frame interpolation, which aims to synthesize non-exist intermediate frames
in a video sequence, is an important research topic in computer vision. Existing
video frame interpolation methods have achieved remarkable results under specific
assumptions, such as instant or known exposure time. However, in complicated realworld situations, the temporal priors of videos, i.e., frames per second (FPS) and
frame exposure time, may vary from different camera sensors. When test videos
are taken under different exposure settings from training ones, the interpolated
frames will suffer significant misalignment problems. In this work, we solve
the video frame interpolation problem in a general situation, where input frames
can be acquired under uncertain exposure (and interval) time. Unlike previous
methods that can only be applied to a specific temporal prior, we derive a general
curvilinear motion trajectory formula from four consecutive sharp frames or two
consecutive blurry frames without temporal priors. Moreover, utilizing constraints
within adjacent motion trajectories, we devise a novel optical flow refinement
strategy for better interpolation results. Finally, experiments demonstrate that one
well-trained model is enough for synthesizing high-quality slow-motion videos
under complicated real-world situations. Codes are available on https://github.
com/yjzhang96/UTI-VFI.

1

Introduction

Video frame interpolation aims to synthesize non-exist intermediate frames and thereby provides a
visually fluid video sequence. It has broad application prospects, such as slow motion production [13],
up-converting frame rate [3] and novel-view rendering [6].
Many state-of-the-art video interpolation methods [1, 12, 17, 34] aim to estimate the object motion
and occlusion with the assistance of optical flow. Through refining forward and backward motion
flows among several frames, these methods can directly warp pixels to synthesize desired intermediate
frames. To achieve this goal, some popular datasets, of which either triplet images or 240fps highframe-rate videos, are collected as the ground-truth of real-world motions. Meanwhile, to evaluate the
performance of proposed methods, the well-trained model is tested using frames collected in a similar
way. Although significant improvement has demonstrated by experiments of recent works, people
may ask if the same (or similar) performance can be achieved in complicated real-world situations.
* indicates equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

