Learning with Optimized Random Features:
Exponential Speedup by Quantum Machine Learning
without Sparsity and Low-Rank Assumptions

Hayata Yamasaki
The University of Tokyo, Austrian Academy of Sciences
hayata.yamasaki@gmail.com
Sho Sonoda
RIKEN AIP

Sathyawageeswar Subramanian
University of Cambridge,
University of Warwick

Masato Koashi
The University of Tokyo

Abstract
Kernel methods augmented with random features give scalable algorithms for
learning from big data. But it has been computationally hard to sample random
features according to a probability distribution that is optimized for the data, so as
to minimize the required number of features for achieving the learning to a desired
accuracy. Here, we develop a quantum algorithm for sampling from this optimized
distribution over features, in runtime O(D) that is linear in the dimension D of
the input data. Our algorithm achieves an exponential speedup in D compared
to any known classical algorithm for this sampling task. In contrast to existing
quantum machine learning algorithms, our algorithm circumvents sparsity and
low-rank assumptions and thus has wide applicability. We also show that the
sampled features can be combined with regression by stochastic gradient descent to
achieve the learning without canceling out our exponential speedup. Our algorithm
based on sampling optimized random features leads to an accelerated framework
for machine learning that takes advantage of quantum computers.

1

Introduction

Random features [1, 2] provide a powerful technique for scaling up kernel methods [3] applicable
to various machine learning tasks, such as ridge regression [4], kernel learning [5], and principle
component analysis [6]. Recently, Bach [7] has shown an optimized probability distribution of
random features, and sampling features from this optimized distribution would drastically improve
runtime of learning algorithms based on the random features. However, this sampling task has been
computationally “hard in practice” [7] due to inversion of a high-dimensional operator. In contrast,
the power of quantum computers to process data in quantum superposition attracts growing attention
towards accelerating learning tasks, opening a new field: quantum machine learning (QML) [8–
10]. In this work, we develop a framework of QML that accelerates a supervised learning task, by
constructing an efficient quantum algorithm for sampling from this optimized distribution.
Learning with random features: Supervised learning deals with the problem of estimating an
unknown function y = f (x). We will consider D-dimensional input x ∈ RD and real-valued output
y ∈ R. Given N input-output pairs of examples, we want to learn f to a desired accuracy  > 0. To
model f , kernel methods use reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) associated with a symmetric,
positive semidefinite function k(x0 , x), the kernel [3]. Typical kernel methods that compute an
N × N Gram matrix may not be scalable as N gets large, but random features [1, 2], along with other
techniques via low-rank matrix approximation [11–13], enable scalable kernel-based algorithms.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

