Modern Hopfield Networks and Attention for
Immune Repertoire Classification

Michael Widrich∗
Lukas Gruber∗

Bernhard Schäfl∗

Markus Holzleitner∗

Milena Pavlović† ,‡

Hubert Ramsauer∗

Johannes Brandstetter∗

Geir Kjetil Sandve‡

Victor Greiff†

Sepp Hochreiter∗ ,§

Günter Klambauer∗
ELLIS Unit Linz and LIT AI Lab,
Institute for Machine Learning,
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
†
Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Norway
‡
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway
§
Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI)
∗

Abstract
A central mechanism in machine learning is to identify, store, and recognize
patterns. How to learn, access, and retrieve such patterns is crucial in Hopfield
networks and the more recent transformer architectures. We show that the attention mechanism of transformer architectures is actually the update rule of modern
Hopfield networks that can store exponentially many patterns. We exploit this
high storage capacity of modern Hopfield networks to solve a challenging multiple
instance learning (MIL) problem in computational biology: immune repertoire
classification. In immune repertoire classification, a vast number of immune receptors are used to predict the immune status of an individual. This constitutes a
MIL problem with an unprecedentedly massive number of instances, two orders
of magnitude larger than currently considered problems, and with an extremely
low witness rate. Accurate and interpretable machine learning methods solving
this problem could pave the way towards new vaccines and therapies, which is
currently a very relevant research topic intensified by the COVID-19 crisis. In this
work, we present our novel method DeepRC that integrates transformer-like attention, or equivalently modern Hopfield networks, into deep learning architectures
for massive MIL such as immune repertoire classification. We demonstrate that
DeepRC outperforms all other methods with respect to predictive performance on
large-scale experiments including simulated and real-world virus infection data
and enables the extraction of sequence motifs that are connected to a given disease
class. Source code and datasets: https://github.com/ml-jku/DeepRC

1

Introduction

Transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017) and their attention mechanisms are currently used in
many applications, such as natural language processing (NLP), imaging, and also in multiple instance
learning (MIL) problems (Lee et al., 2019). In MIL, a set or bag of objects is labelled rather than
objects themselves as in standard supervised learning tasks (Dietterich et al., 1997). Examples for MIL
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

