Self-Supervised MultiModal Versatile Networks

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac1∗ Adrià Recasens1∗ Rosalia Schneider1∗ Relja Arandjelović1∗
Jason Ramapuram2,3† Jeffrey De Fauw1

Lucas Smaira1

Sander Dieleman1

Andrew Zisserman1,4
3

1
DeepMind 2 Faculty of Science, Computer Science Dept., University of Geneva, HES-SO
Geneva School of Business Admin. (DMML Group) 4 VGG, Dept. of Eng. Science, University of Oxford
{jalayrac, arecasens, rgschneider, relja}@google.com
‡
https://github.com/deepmind/deepmind-research/tree/master/mmv

Abstract
Videos are a rich source of multi-modal supervision. In this work, we learn representations using self-supervision by leveraging three modalities naturally present
in videos: visual, audio and language streams. To this end, we introduce the notion
of a multimodal versatile network – a network that can ingest multiple modalities
and whose representations enable downstream tasks in multiple modalities. In
particular, we explore how best to combine the modalities, such that fine-grained
representations of the visual and audio modalities can be maintained, whilst also
integrating text into a common embedding. Driven by versatility, we also introduce
a novel process of deflation, so that the networks can be effortlessly applied to
the visual data in the form of video or a static image. We demonstrate how such
networks trained on large collections of unlabelled video data can be applied on
video, video-text, image and audio tasks. Equipped with these representations, we
obtain state-of-the-art performance on multiple challenging benchmarks including UCF101, HMDB51, Kinetics600, AudioSet and ESC-50 when compared to
previous self-supervised work. Our models are publicly available‡ .

1

Introduction

Our experience of the world is multimodal. From as far back as the crib, we perceive through
multi-sensory systems, for instance we watch the flames dancing in the fireplace, we hear the sound
of the crackling wood, as well as feel the heat coming off. Through this multimodal synchronous
perception, we learn to draw useful connections between modalities [73] which, in turn, enables us to
form good representations of the world. Later, comes language that allows us to communicate this
fine-grained multimodal experience using higher-level abstract concepts.
Our objective is to learn representations from such multimodal experience in a self-supervised manner
without resorting to any specific manual annotation. The modalities considered are the three that are
easily available from large collections of unlabelled videos: visual, audio and language (obtained
from narrations) streams. In this, we seek to learn a multimodal versatile network, defined as a
network that has the following four properties: (i) it should be able to take as input any of the three
modalities; (ii) it should respect the specificity of modalities, in particular the fact that the audio
and visual modalities are much more fine-grained than language; (iii) it should enable the different
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done during an internship at DeepMind.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

