Just Pick a Sign: Optimizing Deep Multitask Models
with Gradient Sign Dropout
Zhao Chen
Waymo LLC
Mountain View, CA 94043
zhaoch@waymo.com

Jiquan Ngiam
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
jngiam@google.com

Yanping Huang
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
huangyp@google.com

Thang Luong
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
thangluong@google.com

Henrik Kretzschmar
Waymo LLC
Mountain View, CA 94043
kretzschmar@waymo.com

Yuning Chai
Waymo LLC
Mountain View, CA 94043
chaiy@waymo.com

Dragomir Anguelov
Waymo LLC
Mountain View, CA 94043
dragomir@waymo.com

Abstract
The vast majority of deep models use multiple gradient signals, typically corresponding to a sum of multiple loss terms, to update a shared set of trainable weights.
However, these multiple updates can impede optimal training by pulling the model
in conflicting directions. We present Gradient Sign Dropout (GradDrop), a probabilistic masking procedure which samples gradients at an activation layer based on
their level of consistency. GradDrop is implemented as a simple deep layer that can
be used in any deep net and synergizes with other gradient balancing approaches.
We show that GradDrop outperforms the state-of-the-art multiloss methods within
traditional multitask and transfer learning settings, and we discuss how GradDrop
reveals links between optimal multiloss training and gradient stochasticity.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have fueled many recent advances in the state-of-the-art for high-dimensional
nonlinear problems. However, when distilled down to its most basic elements, deep learning relies
on the humble gradient as the optimization signal which drives its complex algorithmic machinery.
Indeed, the desire to properly leverage gradients has spurred a wealth of research into optimization
strategies which has led to faster, more stable model training [36].
However, the literature has habitually glossed over an increasingly crucial detail: most gradient
signals are sums of many smaller gradient signals, often corresponding to multiple losses. A broad
array of models fall under this category, including ones not traditionally considered multitask; for
example, multiclass classifiers can be split into a loss per class, and object detectors conventionally
break down their predictions along various bounding box dimensions. It is uncertain, and in fact
unlikely, that a naïve sum of these individual signals would produce the best solution.
Deep learning theory tells us that the local minima found in single-task models through simple
gradient updates are generally of high quality [4]. However, such a claim should be reevaluated in
the context of multitask loss surfaces, where minima of each constituent loss may exist at different
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

