The Statistical Cost of Robust Kernel
Hyperparameter Tuning

Raphael A. Meyer
Tandon School of Engineering
New York University
Brooklyn, NY 11201
ram900@nyu.edu

Christopher Musco
Tandon School of Engineering
New York University
Brooklyn, NY 11201
cmusco@nyu.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the statistical complexity of kernel hyperparameter tuning in the
setting of active regression under adversarial noise. We consider the problem of
finding the best interpolant from a class of kernels with unknown hyperparameters,
assuming only that the noise is square-integrable. We provide finite-sample guarantees for the problem, characterizing how increasing the complexity of the kernel
class increases the complexity of learning kernel hyperparameters. For common
kernel classes (e.g. squared-exponential kernels with unknown lengthscale), our
results show that hyperparameter optimization increases sample complexity by
just a logarithmic factor, in comparison to the setting where optimal parameters
are known in advance. Our result is based on a subsampling guarantee for linear
regression under multiple design matrices which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) is central to modern time series analysis
and nonparametric regression. For time series, Gaussian Processes model the covariance of a
stochastic process using a kernel matrix, and interpolate the underlying signal with KRR [RW06].
In nonparametric regression, kernels define a local-averaging scheme, and KRR provides a smooth
interpolation for the function [Fot07, Tsy09]. Experimentally, it is known that the Kernel Ridge
Regression estimator generalizes and interpolates well over continuous domains [WA13, AKM+ 19].
However, it is also known that kernel regression only performs well when kernel hyperparameters
are chosen well [WN15, BMS+ 19]. This observation has lead to significant interest in algorithms
that try to find the best kernel parameters in a large search space [WPG+ 19, LCB+ 04]. Additionally,
the existing research generally assumes that observation noise is independent, unbiased, and random
[RW06, MRT12, AKM+ 17, Fot07]. The goal of this paper is to understand the statistical cost of this
sort of hyperparameter optimization when we can have worst-case observation noise. How many
data samples are needed to avoid over-fitting when searching over such a large class of models?
We formalize this problem in an adversarial noise setting that originated in the function approximation
community [CP19a, CM17].RBy Bochner’s theorem, every stationary (shift invariant) kernel function
kµ can be written kµ (∆) = R e−2πiξ∆ µ(ξ)dξ for some probability density function µ. [AKM+ 19]
introduced the following active regression problem for interpolating with a fixed kernel kµ :
Problem 1. Let y(t) be a signal we wish to interpolate. Let z(t) be an adversarial noise signal. Fix
regularization parameter ε > 0 and observe y(t) + z(t) at any chosen times t1 , . . . , tn . How large
does n need to be so that an interpolant ỹ constructed from our observations satisfies:

kỹ − yk2T ≤ C0 · kzk2T + ε · Energyµ (y)
for some universal constant C0 > 1.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

