Learning Mutational Semantics

Brian Hie
MIT
brianhie@mit.edu

Ellen D. Zhong
MIT
zhonge@mit.edu

Bryan D. Bryson
MIT
bryand@mit.edu

Bonnie Berger
MIT
bab@mit.edu

Abstract
In many natural domains, changing a small part of an entity can transform its
semantics; for example, a single word change can alter the meaning of a sentence,
or a single amino acid change can mutate a viral protein to escape antiviral treatment
or immunity. Although identifying such mutations can be desirable (for example,
therapeutic design that anticipates avenues of viral escape), the rules governing
semantic change are often hard to quantify. Here, we introduce the problem of
identifying mutations with a large effect on semantics, but where valid mutations are
under complex constraints (for example, English grammar or biological viability),
which we refer to as constrained semantic change search (CSCS). We propose
an unsupervised solution based on language models that simultaneously learn
continuous latent representations. We report good empirical performance on CSCS
of single-word mutations to news headlines, map a continuous semantic space of
viral variation, and, notably, show unprecedented zero-shot prediction of singleresidue escape mutations to key influenza and HIV proteins, suggesting a productive
link between modeling natural language and pathogenic evolution.1

1

Introduction

Much of the effort devoted to learning machine-intelligible representations of natural language
semantics has been built on the “distributional hypothesis,” in which the context and co-occurrence
of words is assumed to provide insight into the meaning of words [25, 22, 35, 38, 41, 43]. While
distributional semantics was developed to model human intuitive notions of “meaning,” similar
reasoning may be useful for domains beyond human intuition.
For example, like linguistic semantics, biological function is encoded by a sequence of tokens (the
bases of nucleic acids or the amino acid residues of proteins) that is determined by a complex
distributional structure. Promisingly, recent analyses of biological sequence inspired by tools for
modeling natural language have been shown to improve prediction of biological function [9, 45, 5].
A pressing and still poorly understood biological problem is understanding how rapidly mutating
viral proteins can evade recognition by “escaping” the immune system’s antibodies. Viral escape,
which can be caused by even a single-residue change, has prevented the development of a universal
antibody-based vaccine for influenza [30, 33] or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [6]. However,
the rules governing viral fitness are complex and a biological experiment that empirically tests the
escape potential of all mutations to all viral strains would be prohibitively expensive. A key concept
underlying this study is that, in order to escape the immune system, a mutation must not only preserve
1

Code at https://github.com/brianhie/mutational-semantics-neurips2020.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

