Human Parsing Based Texture Transfer from Single
Image to 3D Human via Cross-View Consistency

Fang Zhao1 Shengcai Liao1∗ Kaihao Zhang2,3 Ling Shao1,4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence 2 Australian National University
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{fang.zhao,shengcai.liao}@inceptioniai.org
super.khzhang@gmail.com, ling.shao@inceptioniai.org

1

Abstract
This paper proposes a human parsing based texture transfer model via cross-view
consistency learning to generate the texture of 3D human body from a single image.
We use the semantic parsing of human body as input for providing both the shape
and pose information to reduce the appearance variation of human image and
preserve the spatial distribution of semantic parts. Meanwhile, in order to improve
the prediction for textures of invisible parts, we explicitly enforce the consistency
across different views of the same subject by exchanging the textures predicted by
two views to render images during training. The perceptual loss and total variation
regularization are optimized to maximize the similarity between rendered and input
images, which does not necessitate extra 3D texture supervision. Experimental
results on pedestrian images and fashion photos demonstrate that our method can
produce higher quality textures with convincing details than other texture generation
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/zhaofang0627/HPBTT.

1

Introduction

Rebuilding 3D model of human body from 2D images is of great value for many applications, such
as virtual reality, movie making, clothes try-on, generation of synthetic data for learning. Particularly,
generating the 3D human model from a single image has been extensively studied in recent years due
to its potential practical value. However, most research works mainly focus on estimating the pose
and shape of the human body [17, 31, 34, 4, 14] and very few works aim at addressing the texture
generation problem.
In existing methods, [18] introduces texture inference as prediction of an image in a canonical
appearance space and optimizes the perceptual metric between the rendered image and the input
image. [36] proposes to generate textures of human bodies under the supervision of person reidentification (re-ID), which utilizes the distance metric learned by the re-ID task. [23] infers textures
in a UV-space using an image-to-image translation method, which registers the SMPL model [26] to
3D scans of people to generate ground-truth 3D textures for training. [27] builds a paired dataset of
3D garments and 2D clothing images as training data and then learns a dense mapping from garment
silhouettes to a UV map of a 3D garment model.
There still exist some issues that have not been handled well for generating textures of human
body from a single image. Firstly, obtaining ground-truth 3D textures is time-consuming and laborintensive. Secondly, textures of invisible human body parts are difficult to predict due to only one
image available and lack of information from other views at inference. Thirdly, the diversity of
∗

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

