Lipschitz Bounds and Provably Robust Training by
Laplacian Smoothing

Vishaal Krishnan
Mechanical Engineering Department
University of California Riverside
vishaalk@ucr.edu

Abed AlRahman Al Makdah
Electrical & Computer Engineering Department
University of California Riverside
aalmakdah@engr.ucr.edu

Fabio Pasqualetti
Mechanical Engineering Department
University of California Riverside
fabiopas@engr.ucr.edu

Abstract
In this work we propose a graph-based learning framework to train models with
provable robustness to adversarial perturbations. In contrast to regularizationbased approaches, we formulate the adversarially robust learning problem as
one of loss minimization with a Lipschitz constraint, and show that the saddle
point of the associated Lagrangian is characterized by a Poisson equation with
weighted Laplace operator. Further, the weighting for the Laplace operator is
given by the Lagrange multiplier for the Lipschitz constraint, which modulates
the sensitivity of the minimizer to perturbations. We then design a provably
robust training scheme using graph-based discretization of the input space and a
primal-dual algorithm to converge to the Lagrangian’s saddle point. Our analysis
establishes a novel connection between elliptic operators with constraint-enforced
weighting and adversarial learning. We also study the complementary problem of
improving the robustness of minimizers with a margin on their loss, formulated as
a loss-constrained minimization problem of the Lipschitz constant. We propose
a technique to obtain robustified minimizers, and evaluate fundamental Lipschitz
lower bounds by approaching Lipschitz constant minimization via a sequence of
gradient p-norm minimization problems. Ultimately, our results show that, for
a desired nominal performance, there exists a fundamental lower bound on the
sensitivity to adversarial perturbations that depends only on the loss function and the
data distribution, and that improvements in robustness beyond this bound can only
be made at the expense of nominal performance. Our training schemes provably
achieve these bounds both under constraints on performance and robustness.

1

Introduction

Sensitivity to adversarial perturbations is one of the main limitations of data-driven models, and a
hurdle to their deployment in safety-critical applications. Improving adversarial robustness requires
adjusting the worst-case sensitivity of the data-driven input-output map, which is characterized by
its Lipschitz constant. Training under a Lipschitz regularization or constraint is therefore a natural
way of improving adversarial robustness, which has led to many works on the subject [1, 2]. Yet, a
fundamental understanding of the limitations of this approach, as well as a general framework for
training models that are provably robust to adversarial perturbations, remain critically lacking.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

