Deeply Learned Spectral Total Variation
Decomposition

Tamara G. Grossmann
DAMTP
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
tg410@cam.ac.uk

Yury Korolev
DAMTP
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
yk362@cam.ac.uk

Guy Gilboa
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
guy.gilboa@ee.technion.ac.il

Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb
DAMTP
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
cbs31@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Non-linear spectral decompositions of images based on one-homogeneous functionals such as total variation have gained considerable attention in the last few
years. Due to their ability to extract spectral components corresponding to objects of different size and contrast, such decompositions enable filtering, feature
transfer, image fusion and other applications. However, obtaining this decomposition involves solving multiple non-smooth optimisation problems and is therefore
computationally highly intensive. In this paper, we present a neural network approximation of a non-linear spectral decomposition. We report up to four orders of
magnitude (×10, 000) speedup in processing of mega-pixel size images, compared
to classical GPU implementations. Our proposed network, TVSpecNET, is able to
implicitly learn the underlying PDE and, despite being entirely data driven, inherits
invariances of the model based transform. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first approach towards learning a non-linear spectral decomposition of images. Not
only do we gain a staggering computational advantage, but this approach can also
be seen as a step towards studying neural networks that can decompose an image
into spectral components defined by a user rather than a handcrafted functional.

1

Introduction

Transforming and processing information such as images in a frequency domain to facilitate analysis
and manipulation is a classical and very successful approach. A prominent example of a linear
spectral decomposition is the Fourier transform that uses the trigonometric basis to represent a signal
or an image. However, this linear transform is not optimal for images that contain discontinuities
(edges), which can only be represented using high frequencies. To overcome this, a non-linear
spectral decomposition based on the edge-preserving total variation (TV) functional was proposed
in [17, 18]. The TV transform enables a scale representation based on the size and contrast of the
structures contained in an image. The spectral components are related to eigenfunctions induced by
the TV functional such as indicator functions of disks and other smooth convex shapes. Similarly
to the linear case, the spectral components of an image defined by the non-linear TV transform
can be filtered, extracted and attenuated at different scales. Manipulation and analysis of images
using the spectral TV decomposition has found various successful applications ranging from image
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

