Exactly Computing the Local Lipschitz Constant of
ReLU networks
Matt Jordan
UT Austin
mjordan@cs.utexas.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
UT Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
The local Lipschitz constant of a neural network is a useful metric with applications
in robustness, generalization, and fairness evaluation. We provide novel analytic
results relating the local Lipschitz constant of nonsmooth vector-valued functions
to a maximization over the norm of the generalized Jacobian. We present a
sufficient condition for which backpropagation always returns an element of the
generalized Jacobian, and reframe the problem over this broad class of functions.
We show strong inapproximability results for estimating Lipschitz constants of
ReLU networks, and then formulate an algorithm to compute these quantities
exactly. We leverage this algorithm to evaluate the tightness of competing Lipschitz
estimators and the effects of regularized training on the Lipschitz constant.

1

Introduction

We are interested in computing the Lipschitz constant of neural networks with ReLU activations.
Formally, for a network f with multiple inputs and outputs, we are interested in the quantity
sup
x6=y

||f (x) − f (y)||β
.
||x − y||α

(1)

We allow the norm of the numerator and denominator to be arbitrary and further consider the case
where x, y are constrained in an open subset of Rn leading to the more general problem of computing
the local Lipschitz constant.
Estimating or bounding the Lipschitz constant of a neural network is an important and well-studied
problem. For the Wasserstein GAN formulation [1] the discriminator is required to have a bounded
Lipschitz constant, and there are several techniques to enforce this [1–3]. For supervised learning
Bartlett et al. [4] have shown that classifiers with lower Lipschitz constants have better generalization
properties. It has also been observed that networks with smaller gradient norms are more robust
to adversarial attacks. Bounding the (local) Lipschitz constant has been used widely for certifiable
robustness against targeted adversarial attacks [5–7]. Lipschitz bounds under fair metrics may also be
used as a means to certify the individual fairness of a model [8, 9].
The Lipschitz constant of a function is fundamentally related to the supremal norm of its Jacobian
matrix. Previous work has demonstrated the relationship between these two quantities for functions
that are scalar-valued and smooth [10, 11]. However, neural networks used for multi-class classification with ReLU activations do not meet either of these assumptions. We establish an analytical result
that allows us to formulate the local Lipschitz constant of a vector-valued nonsmooth function as
an optimization over the generalized Jacobian. We access the generalized Jacobian by means of the
chain rule. As we discuss, the chain rule may produce incorrect results [12] for nonsmooth functions,
even ReLU networks. To address this problem, we present a sufficient condition over the parameters
of a ReLU network such that the chain rule always returns an element of the generalized Jacobian,
allowing us to solve the proposed optimization problem.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

