The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Greedy
Algorithms in Multi-Armed Bandit with Many Arms

Mohsen Bayati
Stanford University
bayati@stanford.edu

Nima Hamidi
Stanford University
hamidi@stanford.edu

Ramesh Johari
Stanford University
rjohari@stanford.edu

Khashayar Khosravi∗
Google Research, NYC
khosravi@google.com

Abstract
We study the structure of regret-minimizing policies in the many-armed Bayesian
multi-armed bandit problem: in particular, with
√ k the number of arms and T the
time horizon, we consider the case where k ≥ T . We first show that subsampling
is a critical step for designing optimal policies. In particular, the standard UCB
algorithm leads to sub-optimal regret bounds in the many-armed
regime. However,
√
a subsampled UCB (SS-UCB), which samples Θ( T ) arms and executes UCB
only on that subset, is rate-optimal. Despite theoretically optimal regret, even
SS-UCB performs poorly due to excessive exploration of suboptimal arms. In
particular, in numerical experiments SS-UCB performs worse than a simple greedy
algorithm (and its subsampled version) that pulls the current empirical best arm
at every time period. We show that these insights hold even in a contextual
setting, using real-world data. These empirical results suggest a novel form of
free exploration in the many-armed regime that benefits greedy algorithms. We
theoretically study this new source of free exploration and find that it is deeply
connected to the distribution of a certain tail event for the prior distribution of
arm rewards. This is a fundamentally distinct phenomenon from free exploration
as discussed in the recent literature on contextual bandits, where free exploration
arises due to variation in contexts. We use this insight to prove that
√ the subsampled
greedy algorithm is rate-optimal for Bernoulli bandits when k > T , and achieves
sublinear regret with more general distributions. This is a case where theoretical
rate optimality does not tell the whole story: when complemented by the empirical
observations of our paper, the power of greedy algorithms becomes quite evident.
Taken together, from a practical standpoint, our results suggest that in applications
it may be preferable to use a variant of the greedy algorithm in the many-armed
regime.

1

Introduction

We consider the standard stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem, in which a decision-maker
takes actions sequentially over T time periods (the horizon). At each time period, the decision-maker
chooses one of k arms, and receives an uncertain reward. The goal is to maximize cumulative rewards
attained over the horizon. Crucially, in the typical formulation of this problem, the set of arms k is
assumed to be “small” relative to the time horizon T ; in particular, in standard asymptotic analysis
∗

The majority of this work was completed while Khashayar Khosravi was affiliated with Stanford University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

