Provably Efficient Exploration for Reinforcement
Learning Using Unsupervised Learning ∗

Fei Feng
University of California, Los Angeles
fei.feng@math.ucla.edu

Ruosong Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu

Wotao Yin
University of California, Los Angeles
wotaoyin@math.ucla.edu

Simon S. Du
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Lin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the prevailing paradigm of using unsupervised learning for efficient
exploration in reinforcement learning (RL) problems (Tang et al., 2017; Bellemare
et al., 2016), we investigate when this paradigm is provably efficient. We study
episodic Markov decision processes with rich observations generated from a small
number of latent states. We present a general algorithmic framework that is built
upon two components: an unsupervised learning algorithm and a no-regret tabular
RL algorithm. Theoretically, we prove that as long as the unsupervised learning
algorithm enjoys a polynomial sample complexity guarantee, we can find a nearoptimal policy with sample complexity polynomial in the number of latent states,
which is significantly smaller than the number of observations. Empirically, we
instantiate our framework on a class of hard exploration problems to demonstrate
the practicality of our theory.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is the framework of learning to control an unknown system through trial
and error. It takes as inputs the observations of the environment and outputs a policy, i.e., a mapping
from observations to actions, to maximize the cumulative rewards. To learn a near-optimal policy, it
is critical to sufficiently explore the environment and identify all the opportunities for high rewards.
However, modern RL applications often need to deal with huge observation spaces such as those
consist of images or texts, which makes it challenging or impossible (if there are infinitely many
observations) to fully explore the environment in a direct way. In some work, function approximation
scheme is adopted such that essential quantities for policy improvement, e.g. state-action values,
can be generalized from limited observed data to the whole observation space. However, the use of
function approximation alone does not resolve the exploration problem (Du et al., 2020a).
To tackle this issue, multiple empirically successful strategies are developed (Tang et al., 2017;
Bellemare et al., 2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Azizzadenesheli et al., 2018; Lipton et al., 2018; Fortunato
et al., 2018; Osband et al., 2016). Particularly, in Tang et al. (2017) and Bellemare et al. (2016), the
∗

Correspondence to: Simon S. Du <ssdu@cs.washington.edu>, Lin F. Yang <linyang@ee.ucla.edu>

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

