Learning Physical Constraints with
Neural Projections

1

Shuqi Yang1∗ , Xingzhe He1 , Bo Zhu1
Dartmouth College, Computer Science Department
∗
shuqi.yang.gr@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
We propose a new family of neural networks to predict the behaviors of physical systems by learning their underpinning constraints. A neural projection operator lies
at the heart of our approach, composed of a lightweight network with an embedded
recursive architecture that interactively enforces learned underpinning constraints
and predicts the various governed behaviors of different physical systems. Our
neural projection operator is motivated by the position-based dynamics model that
has been used widely in game and visual effects industries to unify the various
fast physics simulators. Our method can automatically and effectively uncover
a broad range of constraints from observation point data, such as length, angle,
bending, collision, boundary effects, and their arbitrary combinations, without any
connectivity priors. We provide a multi-group point representation in conjunction
with a configurable network connection mechanism to incorporate prior inputs
for processing complex physical systems. We demonstrated the efficacy of our
approach by learning a set of challenging physical systems all in a unified and
simple fashion including: rigid bodies with complex geometries, ropes with varying
length and bending, articulated soft and rigid bodies, and multi-object collisions
with complex boundaries.

1

Introduction

How does a human being distinguish the motions of a piece of paper and a piece of cloth? A
high-school physics teacher might answer that they are both tangentially inextensible but cloth
cannot resist any bending force from the normal direction. This raises a further general question
for machine perception – what is the most effective representation to characterize a physical system
computationally? The answer to this question is fundamental for the design of better neural physics
engines [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] to predict the dynamics of various real-world Newtonian systems based on
limited observations. In general, a capable neural physics simulator needs to capture the essential
features of a dynamic system with a unified computational model, simple network architectures,
small training data, and the minimum human inputs for priors. To this end, a vast literature has been
devoted into building neural-network models to reason and predict physics. Two of the main areas
include to reason the underlying physics by learning local interactions (e.g., the gravitational force
between two planets [1]) or by enforcing global energy conservation (e.g., the sum of potential and
kinematic energies of a pendulum [6]).
This paper proposes to investigate a third category of approaches to characterize classical physical
systems, by establishing neural predictors to learn and enforce underlying physical constraints.
The term “physical constraints” broadly defines the various intuitive criteria that the motion of a
physical system must satisfy, e.g., a constant length between particles, a fixed angle between two
segment pieces, the overlap of joint positions, the non-penetrating geometries for collisions, etc. Such
constraints can be either hard or soft, with forms of both equality and inequality. Mathematically, a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

