DISK: Learning local features with policy gradient

1

Michał J. Tyszkiewicz1
Pascal Fua1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

michal.tyszkiewicz@epfl.ch

Eduard Trulls2
Google Research, Zurich

2

pascal.fua@epfl.ch

trulls@google.com

Abstract
Local feature frameworks are difficult to learn in an end-to-end fashion, due
to the discreteness inherent to the selection and matching of sparse keypoints.
We introduce DISK (DIScrete Keypoints), a novel method that overcomes these
obstacles by leveraging principles from Reinforcement Learning (RL), optimizing
end-to-end for a high number of correct feature matches. Our simple yet expressive
probabilistic model lets us keep the training and inference regimes close, while
maintaining good enough convergence properties to reliably train from scratch. Our
features can be extracted very densely while remaining discriminative, challenging
commonly held assumptions about what constitutes a good keypoint, as showcased
in Fig. 1, and deliver state-of-the-art results on three public benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Local features have been a key computer vision technology since the introduction of SIFT [20], enabling applications such as Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [1, 15, 36], SLAM [27], re-localization [23],
and many others. While not immune to the deep learning “revolution”, 3D reconstruction is one of
the last bastions where sparse, hand-crafted solutions remain competitive with or outperform their
dense, learned counterparts [37, 34, 16]. This is due to the difficulty of designing end-to-end methods
with a differentiable training objective that corresponds well enough with the downstream task.
While patch descriptors can be easily learned on predefined keypoints [38, 39, 25, 40, 13], joint
detection and matching is harder to relax in a differentiable manner, due to its computational
complexity. Given two images A and B with feature sets FA and FB , matching them is O(|FA |·|FB |).
As each image pixel may become a feature, the problem quickly becomes intractable. Moreover, the
“quality” of a given feature depends on the rest, because a feature that is very similar to others is less
distinctive, and therefore less useful. This is hard to account for during training.
We address this issue by bridging the gap between training and inference to fully leverage the
expressive power of CNNs. Our backbone is a network that takes images as input and outputs
keypoint ‘heatmaps’ and dense descriptors. Discrete keypoints are sampled from the heatmap, and
the descriptors at those locations are used to build a distribution over feature matches across images.
We then use geometric ground truth to assign positive or
Pnegative rewards to each match, and perform
gradient descent to maximize the expected reward E (i,j)∈MA↔B r(i ↔ j), where MA↔B is the
set of matches and r is per-match reward. In effect, this is a policy gradient method [44].
Probabilistic relaxation is powerful for discrete tasks, but its applicability is limited by the fact that
the expected reward and its gradients usually cannot be computed exactly. Therefore, noisy Monte
Carlo approximations have to be used instead, which harms convergence. We overcome this difficulty
by careful modeling that yields analytical expressions for the gradients. As a result, we can benefit
from the expressiveness of policy gradient, narrowing the gap between training and inference and
ultimately outperforming state-of-the-art methods, while still being able to train models from scratch.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

