Graduated Assignment for Joint Multi-Graph
Matching and Clustering with Application to
Unsupervised Graph Matching Network Learning

Runzhong Wang1,2
Junchi Yan1,2 ∗
Xiaokang Yang2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

{runzhong.wang,yanjunchi,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper considers the setting of jointly matching and clustering multiple graphs
belonging to different groups, which naturally rises in many realistic problems.
Both graph matching and clustering are challenging (NP-hard) and a joint solution
is appealing due to the natural connection of the two tasks. In this paper, we
resort to a graduated assignment procedure for soft matching and clustering over
iterations, whereby the two-way constraint and clustering confidence are modulated
by two separate annealing parameters, respectively. Our technique can be further
utilized for end-to-end learning whose loss refers to the cross-entropy between
two lines of matching pipelines, as such the keypoint feature extraction CNNs can
be learned without ground-truth supervision. Experimental results on real-world
benchmarks show our method outperforms learning-free algorithms and performs
comparatively against two-graph based supervised graph matching approaches.
Source code is publicly available as a module of ThinkMatch.

1

Introduction and Related Works

Graph matching (GM) computes the node-to-node matching relationship among multiple graphs, by
utilizing the structural information in graphs, which can be applied to align various real-world graphs.
GM is in general NP-hard [1], and can be formulated as Quadratic Assignment Problem (QAP).
Traditional GM algorithms mainly solve two-graph matching problems via continuous relaxation [2,
3, 4, 5, 6] or tree search algorithms [7, 8] with fixed affinity metric, while there exists increasing
interest on developing more robust graph matching by fusing multiple graph information, known
as multi-graph matching (MGM) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14] and adopting learnable affinity functions
(known as learning graph matching [15, 16], especially deep graph matching [17, 18, 19]). However,
learning, especially deep learning is merely considered in existing multi-graph matching algorithms.
In addition, current supervised deep graph matching requires costly annotation on large-scaled
training data, which restricts the real-world application of modern deep graph matching methods.
Motivated by the fact that MGM will usually result in better matching results compared to pairwise
matching [10], it is appealing to devise an unsupervised deep multi-graph matching learning algorithm
by utilizing multi-graph matching information as the pseudo label for pairwise matchings.
A realistic yet more challenging setting is considered namely multi-graph matching and clustering
(MGMC), where graphs may belong to different groups and clustering and matching both need to
be solved. This problem has seldom been considered apart from one loosely relevant work [20],
which is learning-free, and clustering is performed after matching. In contrast, observing the fact that
∗

Junchi Yan is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

