Causal Shapley Values: Exploiting Causal Knowledge
to Explain Individual Predictions of Complex Models

Tom Heskes
Radboud University
tom.heskes@ru.nl
Ioan Gabriel Bucur
Radboud University
g.bucur@cs.ru.nl

Evi Sijben
Machine2Learn
evisijben@gmail.com
Tom Claassen
Radboud University
t.claassen@science.ru.nl

Abstract
Shapley values underlie one of the most popular model-agnostic methods within explainable artificial intelligence. These values are designed to attribute the difference
between a model’s prediction and an average baseline to the different features used
as input to the model. Being based on solid game-theoretic principles, Shapley values uniquely satisfy several desirable properties, which is why they are increasingly
used to explain the predictions of possibly complex and highly non-linear machine
learning models. Shapley values are well calibrated to a user’s intuition when
features are independent, but may lead to undesirable, counterintuitive explanations
when the independence assumption is violated.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for computing Shapley values that
generalizes recent work that aims to circumvent the independence assumption.
By employing Pearl’s do-calculus, we show how these ‘causal’ Shapley values
can be derived for general causal graphs without sacrificing any of their desirable
properties. Moreover, causal Shapley values enable us to separate the contribution
of direct and indirect effects. We provide a practical implementation for computing
causal Shapley values based on causal chain graphs when only partial information
is available and illustrate their utility on a real-world example.

1

Introduction

Complex machine learning models like deep neural networks and ensemble methods like random
forest and gradient boosting machines may well outperform simpler approaches such as linear
regression or single decision trees, but are noticeably harder to interpret. This can raise practical,
ethical, and legal issues, most notably when applied in critical systems, e.g., for medical diagnosis
or autonomous driving. The field of explainable AI aims to address these issues by enhancing the
interpretability of complex machine learning models.
The Shapley-value approach has quickly become one of the most popular model-agnostic methods
within explainable AI. It can provide local explanations, attributing changes in predictions for individual data points to the model’s features, that can be combined to obtain better global understanding of
the model structure [17]. Shapley values are based on a principled mathematical foundation [27] and
satisfy various desiderata (see also Section 2). They have been applied for explaining statistical and
machine learning models for quite some time, see e.g., [15, 31]. Recent interests have been triggered
by Lundberg and Lee’s breakthrough paper [19] that introduces efficient computational procedures
and unifies Shapley values and other popular local model-agnostic approaches such as LIME [26].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

