Convergence and Stability of Graph Convolutional
Networks on Large Random Graphs

Nicolas Keriven∗
CNRS, GIPSA-lab, Grenoble, France
nicolas.keriven@cnrs.fr

Alberto Bietti∗
NYU Center for Data Science, New York, USA†
alberto.bietti@nyu.edu

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS, IMB, Dijon, France
samuel.vaiter@u-bourgogne.fr

Abstract
We study properties of Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) by analyzing their
behavior on standard models of random graphs, where nodes are represented by
random latent variables and edges are drawn according to a similarity kernel. This
allows us to overcome the difficulties of dealing with discrete notions such as
isomorphisms on very large graphs, by considering instead more natural geometric
aspects. We first study the convergence of GCNs to their continuous counterpart
as the number of nodes grows. Our results are fully non-asymptotic and are valid
for relatively sparse graphs with an average degree that grows logarithmically with
the number of nodes. We then analyze the stability of GCNs to small deformations
of the random graph model. In contrast to previous studies of stability in discrete
settings, our continuous setup allows us to provide more intuitive deformationbased metrics for understanding stability, which have proven useful for explaining
the success of convolutional representations on Euclidean domains.

1

Introduction

Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs [9, 15, 26]) are deep architectures defined on graphs inspired
by classical Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs [29]). In the past few years, they have been
successfully applied to, for instance, node clustering [11], semi-supervised learning [26], or graph
regression [23, 20], and remain one of the most popular variant of Graph Neural Networks (GNN).
We refer the reader to the review papers [7, 47] for more details.
Many recent results have improved the theoretical understanding of GNNs. While some architectures
have been shown to be universal [36, 24] but not implementable in practice, several studies have
characterized GNNs according to their power to distinguish (or not) graph isomorphisms [48, 12, 35]
or compute combinatorial graph parameters [13]. However, such notions usually become moot for
large graphs, which are almost never isomorphic to each other, but for which GCNs have proved
to be successful in identifying large-scale structures nonetheless, e.g., for segmentation or spectral
clustering [11]. Under this light, a relevant notion is that of stability: since GCNs are trained then
tested on different (large) graphs, how much does a change in the graph structure affect its predictions?
In the context of signals defined on Euclidean domains, including images or audio, convolutional
representations such as scattering transforms or certain CNN architectures have been shown to be
stable to spatial deformations [34, 5, 40]. However the notion of deformations is not well-defined on
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while AB was at Inria Paris.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

