Uncertainty Quantification for Inferring
Hawkes Networks
Haoyun Wang1 , Liyan Xie1 , Alex Cuozzo2 , Simon Mak2 , Yao Xie1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Duke University

Abstract
Multivariate Hawkes processes are commonly used to model streaming networked
event data in a wide variety of applications. However, it remains a challenge to
extract reliable inference from complex datasets with uncertainty quantification.
Aiming towards this, we develop a statistical inference framework to learn causal
relationships between nodes from networked data, where the underlying directed
graph implies Granger causality. We provide uncertainty quantification for the
maximum likelihood estimate of the network multivariate Hawkes process by
providing a non-asymptotic confidence set. The main technique is based on the
concentration inequalities of continuous-time martingales. We compare our method
to the previously-derived asymptotic Hawkes process confidence interval, and
demonstrate the strengths of our method in an application to neuronal connectivity
reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been a surge of interest in using Hawkes processes networks to model discrete
events data in both the statistics and the machine learning community (see a review in [20]). The
popularity of the model can be attributed to its wide range of applications, including seismology,
criminology, epidemiology [24], social networks [14], neural activity [22], and so on. The model is
capable of capturing a spatio-temporal triggering effect reflected in real-world networks – one event
may trigger subsequent events at different locations. Existing works for recovery of the Hawkes
network focus on performing point estimators: most of them rely on estimating influence coefficients
(representing the magnitude of the influence) and thresholding by a pre-specified value to recover
the Hawkes network structure. However, most existing work does not quantify the uncertainty, for
instance, in the form of a confidence interval.
One outstanding issue with point estimators is that, without accurate uncertainty quantification,
one cannot claim any statistical significance of the results. For instance, it is difficult to assign
a probability to the existence of a directed edge between two nodes. This problem is critical for
certain problems, such as causal inference. In Hawkes network models, Granger causality has a
very simple form: there is a causal relationship between two nodes in the network if and only if
there exists an edge between the two nodes, and there is no casual relationship otherwise [7]. Thus,
uncertainty quantification (UQ) is critical in scientific studies, because we wish to test whether a
causal relationship exists between one node to another node at a given statistical confidence level. The
development of easy-to-implement and robust UQ tools is crucial for a variety of scientific problems,
from medical data to social networks to neural spike train data and more.
In this paper, we study the uncertainty quantification for maximum likelihood estimates of multivariate
Hawkes processes over networks. Each node can represent a location, a region of a brain, or a user in
a social network. We are particularly interested in recovering the underlying structure (connections)
between different nodes with uncertainty quantification, meaning providing accurate upper and lower
confidence intervals for the influence coefficients (which is linked to the causal relationships between
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

