COT-GAN: Generating Sequential Data
via Causal Optimal Transport

Tianlin Xu
London School of Economics
t.xu12@lse.ac.uk

Li K. Wenliang
University College London
kevinli@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Michael Munn
Google, NY
munn@google.com

Beatrice Acciaio
London School of Economics
ETH Zurich
beatrice.acciaio@math.ethz.ch

Abstract
We introduce COT-GAN, an adversarial algorithm to train implicit generative models optimized for producing sequential data. The loss function of this algorithm is
formulated using ideas from Causal Optimal Transport (COT), which combines
classic optimal transport methods with an additional temporal causality constraint.
Remarkably, we find that this causality condition provides a natural framework
to parameterize the cost function that is learned by the discriminator as a robust
(worst-case) distance, and an ideal mechanism for learning time dependent data
distributions. Following Genevay et al. (2018), we also include an entropic penalization term which allows for the use of the Sinkhorn algorithm when computing
the optimal transport cost. Our experiments show effectiveness and stability of
COT-GAN when generating both low- and high-dimensional time series data. The
success of the algorithm also relies on a new, improved version of the Sinkhorn
divergence which demonstrates less bias in learning.

1

Introduction

Dynamical data are ubiquitous in the world, including natural scenes such as video and audio data,
and temporal recordings such as physiological and financial traces. Being able to synthesize realistic
dynamical data is a challenging unsupervised learning problem and has wide scientific and practical
applications. In recent years, training implicit generative models (IGMs) has proven to be a promising
approach to data synthesis, driven by the work on generative adversarial networks (GANs) [23].
Nonetheless, training IGMs on dynamical data poses an interesting yet difficult challenge. On one
hand, learning complex spatial structures of static images has already received significant effort
within the research community. On the other hand, temporal dependencies are no less complicated
since the dynamical features are strongly correlated with spatial features. Recent works, including
[16, 36, 39, 41, 44], often tackle this problem by separating the model or loss into static and dynamic
components.
In this paper, we examine training dynamic IGMs for sequential data. We introduce a new adversarial
objective that builds on optimal transport (OT) theory, and constrains the transport plans to respect
causality: the probability mass moved to the target sequence at time t can only depend on the source
sequence up to time t, see [2, 8]. A reformulation of the causality constraint leads to a new adversarial
training objective, in the spirit of [21] but tailored to sequential data. In addition, we demonstrate that
optimizing the original Sinkhorn divergence over mini-batches causes biased parameter estimation,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

