Multi-Task Reinforcement Learning with
Soft Modularization

1

Ruihan Yang1 Huazhe Xu2 Yi Wu3,4
2
3
UC San Diego
UC Berkeley
IIIS, Tsinghua

Xiaolong Wang1
4
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
Multi-task learning is a very challenging problem in reinforcement learning. While
training multiple tasks jointly allow the policies to share parameters across different
tasks, the optimization problem becomes non-trivial: It remains unclear what
parameters in the network should be reused across tasks, and how the gradients
from different tasks may interfere with each other. Thus, instead of naively sharing
parameters across tasks, we introduce an explicit modularization technique on
policy representation to alleviate this optimization issue. Given a base policy
network, we design a routing network which estimates different routing strategies
to reconfigure the base network for each task. Instead of directly selecting routes
for each task, our task-specific policy uses a method called soft modularization
to softly combine all the possible routes, which makes it suitable for sequential
tasks. We experiment with various robotics manipulation tasks in simulation
and show our method improves both sample efficiency and performance over
strong baselines by a large margin. Our project page with code is at https:
//rchalyang.github.io/SoftModule/.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has recently demonstrated extraordinary capabilities in multiple
domains, including playing games [21] and robotic control and manipulation [18, 16]. Despite its
successful applications, Deep RL still requires a large amount of data for training complex tasks. On
the other hand, while the current deep RL methods can learn individual policies for specific tasks such
as robot grasping and pushing, it remains very challenging to train a single network that generalizes
across all possible robotic manipulation tasks.
In this paper, we study multi-task RL as one step forward towards skill sharing across diverse tasks
and ultimately building robots that can generalize. Training deep networks with multiple tasks
jointly, agents can learn to share and re-use components across different tasks, which further leads to
improved sample efficiency. This is particularly important when we want to adopt RL algorithms in
real-world applications. Multi-task learning also provides a natural curriculum since learning easier
tasks can be beneficial for learning of more challenging tasks with shared parameters [25].
However, multi-task RL remains a hard problem. It becomes even more challenging when the
number of tasks increases. For instance, it has been shown by [43] that training with diverse robot
manipulation tasks jointly with a sharing network backbone and multiple task-specific heads for
actions hurt the final performance comparing to independent training in each task. One major reason is
that multi-task learning introduces optimization difficulties: It is unclear how the tasks will affect each
other when trained jointly, and optimizing some tasks can bring negative impacts on the others [37].
For tackling this problem, compositional models with multiple modules were introduced [1, 9]. For
example, researchers proposed to train modular sub-policies and task-specific high-level policies
jointly in a Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) framework [1]. The sub-policies can be
shared and selected by different high-level policies with a learned policy composition function.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

