DynaBERT: Dynamic BERT with Adaptive Width
and Depth

Lu Hou1 , Zhiqi Huang2 , Lifeng Shang1 , Xin Jiang1 , Xiao Chen1 , Qun Liu1
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{houlu3,shang.lifeng,Jiang.Xin,chen.xiao2,qun.liu}@huawei.com
2
Peking University, China
zhiqihuang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The pre-trained language models like BERT, though powerful in many natural
language processing tasks, are both computation and memory expensive. To
alleviate this problem, one approach is to compress them for specific tasks before deployment. However, recent works on BERT compression usually compress the large BERT model to a fixed smaller size. They can not fully satisfy
the requirements of different edge devices with various hardware performances.
In this paper, we propose a novel dynamic BERT model (abbreviated as DynaBERT), which can flexibly adjust the size and latency by selecting adaptive
width and depth. The training process of DynaBERT includes first training a
width-adaptive BERT and then allowing both adaptive width and depth, by distilling knowledge from the full-sized model to small sub-networks. Network
rewiring is also used to keep the more important attention heads and neurons shared
by more sub-networks. Comprehensive experiments under various efficiency
constraints demonstrate that our proposed dynamic BERT (or RoBERTa) at its
largest size has comparable performance as BERTBASE (or RoBERTaBASE ), while
at smaller widths and depths consistently outperforms existing BERT compression methods. Code is available at https://github.com/huawei-noah/
Pretrained-Language-Model/tree/master/DynaBERT.

1

Introduction

Recently, pre-trained language models based on the Transformer [24] structure like BERT [5] and
RoBERTa [14] have achieved remarkable results on natural language processing tasks. However,
these models have many parameters, hindering their deployment on edge devices with limited storage,
computation, and energy consumption. The difficulty of deploying BERT to these devices lies in two
aspects. Firstly, the hardware performances of various devices vary a lot, and it is infeasible to deploy
one single BERT model to all kinds of edge devices. Thus different architectural configurations
of the BERT model are desired. Secondly, the resource condition of one device under different
circumstances can be quite different. For instance, on a mobile phone, when a large number of
compute-intensive or storage-intensive programs are running, the resources that can be allocated to
the current BERT model will be correspondingly fewer. Thus once the BERT model is deployed,
dynamically selecting a part of the model (also referred to as sub-networks) for inference based on the
device’s current resource condition is also desirable. Note that unless otherwise specified, the BERT
model mentioned in this paper refers to a task-specific BERT rather than the pre-trained model.
There have been some attempts to compress and accelerate inference of the Transformer-based models
using low-rank approximation [15, 12], weight-sharing [4, 12], knowledge distillation [21, 23, 10, 28],
quantization [1, 33, 22, 8] and pruning [16, 17, 3, 25]. However, these methods usually compress the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

