PLLay: Efficient Topological Layer
based on Persistence Landscapes

Kwangho Kim
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
kwanghk@cmu.edu

Jisu Kim
Inria
Palaiseau, France
jisu.kim@inria.fr

Manzil Zaheer
Google Research
Mountain View, USA
manzilzaheer@google.com

Joon Sik Kim
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
joonsikk@cs.cmu.edu

Frederic Chazal
Inria
Palaiseau, France
frederic.chazal@inria.fr

Larry Wasserman
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, USA
larry@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose PLLay, a novel topological layer for general deep learning models
based on persistence landscapes, in which we can efficiently exploit the underlying
topological features of the input data structure. In this work, we show differentiability with respect to layer inputs, for a general persistent homology with arbitrary
filtration. Thus, our proposed layer can be placed anywhere in the network and
feed critical information on the topological features of input data into subsequent
layers to improve the learnability of the networks toward a given task. A taskoptimal structure of PLLay is learned during training via backpropagation, without
requiring any input featurization or data preprocessing. We provide a novel adaptation for the DTM function-based filtration, and show that the proposed layer is
robust against noise and outliers through a stability analysis. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach by classification experiments on various datasets.

1

Introduction

With its strong generalizability, deep learning has been pervasively applied in machine learning. To
improve the learnability of deep learning models, various techniques have been proposed. Some
of them have achieved an efficient data processing method through specialized layer structures; for
instance, inserting a convolutional layer greatly improves visual object recognition and other tasks in
computer vision [e.g., Krizhevsky et al., 2012, LeCun et al., 2016]. On the other hand, a large body
of recent work focuses on optimal architecture of deep network [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015, He
et al., 2016, Szegedy et al., 2015, Albelwi and Mahmood, 2016].
In this paper, we explore an alternative way to enhance the learnability of deep learning models by
developing a novel topological layer which feeds the significant topological features of the underlying
data structure in an arbitrary network. The power of topology lies in its capacity which differentiates
sets in topological spaces in a robust and meaningful geometric way [Carlsson, 2009, Ghrist, 2008].
It provides important insights into the global "shape" of the data structure via persistent homology
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

