Compressing Images by Encoding Their Latent
Representations with Relative Entropy Coding
Gergely Flamich⇤
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
gf332@cam.ac.uk

Marton Havasi⇤
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
mh740@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge,
Microsoft Research,
Alan Turing Institute
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) have seen widespread use in learned image
compression. They are used to learn expressive latent representations on which
downstream compression methods can operate with high efficiency. Recently
proposed ‘bits-back’ methods can indirectly encode the latent representation of
images with codelength close to the relative entropy between the latent posterior
and the prior. However, due to the underlying algorithm, these methods can only be
used for lossless compression, and they only achieve their nominal efficiency when
compressing multiple images simultaneously; they are inefficient for compressing
single images. As an alternative, we propose a novel method, Relative Entropy
Coding (REC), that can directly encode the latent representation with codelength
close to the relative entropy for single images, supported by our empirical results
obtained on the Cifar10, ImageNet32 and Kodak datasets. Moreover, unlike
previous bits-back methods, REC is immediately applicable to lossy compression,
where it is competitive with the state-of-the-art on the Kodak dataset.

1

Introduction

The recent development of powerful generative models, such as Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) has
caused a great deal of interest in their application to image compression, notably Ballé et al. (2016a,
2018); Townsend et al. (2020); Minnen & Singh (2020). The benefit of using these models as opposed
to hand-crafted methods is that they can adapt to the statistics of their inputs more effectively, and
hence allow significant gains in compression rate. A second advantage is their easier adaptability to
new media formats, such as light-field cameras, 360 images, Virtual Reality (VR), video streaming,
etc. for which classical methods are not currently applicable, or are not performant.
VAEs consist of two neural networks, the encoder and the decoder. The former maps images to
their latent representations and the latter maps them back. Compression methods can operate very
efficiently in latent space, thus realizing a non-linear transform coding method (Goyal, 2001; Ballé
et al., 2016b). The sender can use the encoder to obtain the latent posterior of an image and then use
the compression algorithm to transmit a sample latent representation from the posterior. Then, the
receiver can use the decoder to reconstruct the image from the latent representation they received.
Note that this reconstruction contains small errors. In lossless compression, the sender must correct
for this and has to transmit the residuals along with the latent code. In lossy compression, we omit
the transmission of the residuals, as the model is optimized such that the reconstruction retains high
perceptual quality.
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

