Labelling unlabelled videos
from scratch with multi-modal self-supervision

Yuki M. Asano1∗

Mandela Patrick1,2∗
Christian Rupprecht1
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
yuki@robots.ox.ac.uk
2
Facebook AI Research
mandelapatrick@fb.com

Andrea Vedaldi1,2

Abstract
A large part of the current success of deep learning lies in the effectiveness of
data – more precisely: labelled data. Yet, labelling a dataset with human annotation continues to carry high costs, especially for videos. While in the image
domain, recent methods have allowed to generate meaningful (pseudo-) labels
for unlabelled datasets without supervision, this development is missing for the
video domain where learning feature representations is the current focus. In this
work, we a) show that unsupervised labelling of a video dataset does not come
for free from strong feature encoders and b) propose a novel clustering method
that allows pseudo-labelling of a video dataset without any human annotations, by
leveraging the natural correspondence between the audio and visual modalities.
An extensive analysis shows that the resulting clusters have high semantic overlap
to ground truth human labels. We further introduce the first benchmarking results
on unsupervised labelling of common video datasets Kinetics, Kinetics-Sound,
VGG-Sound and AVE2 .

1

Introduction

One of the key tasks in machine learning is to convert continuous perceptual data such as images
and videos into a symbolic representation, assigning discrete labels to it. This task is generally formulated as clustering [31]. For images, recent contributions such as [6, 13, 37, 72] have obtained
good results by combining clustering and representation learning. However, progress has been more
limited for videos, which pose unique challenges and opportunities. Compared to images, videos
are much more expensive to annotate; at the same time, they contain more information, including
a temporal dimension and two modalities, aural and visual, which can be exploited for better clustering. In this paper, we are thus interested in developing methods to cluster video datasets without
manual supervision, potentially reducing the cost and amount of manual labelling required for video
data.
Just as for most tasks in machine learning, clustering can be greatly facilitated by extracting a suitable representation of the data. However, representations are usually learned by means of manually
supplied labels, which we wish to avoid. Inspired by [79], we note that a solution is to consider one
of the recent state-of-the-art self-supervised representation learning methods and apply an off-theshelf clustering algorithm post-hoc. With this, we show that we can obtain very strong baselines for
clustering videos.
∗
2

Joint first authors
Code will be made available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/selavi

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

