Efficient Generation of Structured Objects with
Constrained Adversarial Networks
Luca Di Liello∗
University of Trento
Paolo Morettin†
KU Leuven

Pierfrancesco Ardino∗
University of Trento
Stefano Teso
University of Trento
firstname.lastname@unitn.it

Jacopo Gobbi∗
University of Trento
Andrea Passerini
University of Trento

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) struggle to generate structured objects
like molecules and game maps. The issue is that structured objects must satisfy hard
requirements (e.g., molecules must be chemically valid) that are difficult to acquire
from examples alone. As a remedy, we propose Constrained Adversarial Networks
(CANs), an extension of GANs in which the constraints are embedded into the
model during training. This is achieved by penalizing the generator proportionally
to the mass it allocates to invalid structures. In contrast to other generative models,
CANs support efficient inference of valid structures (with high probability) and
allows to turn on and off the learned constraints at inference time. CANs handle
arbitrary logical constraints and leverage knowledge compilation techniques to
efficiently evaluate the disagreement between the model and the constraints. Our
setup is further extended to hybrid logical-neural constraints for capturing very
complex constraints, like graph reachability. An extensive empirical analysis shows
that CANs efficiently generate valid structures that are both high-quality and novel.

1

Introduction

Many key applications require to generate objects that satisfy hard structural constraints, like drug
molecules, which must be chemically valid, and game levels, which must be playable. Despite
their impressive success [1, 2, 3], Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [4] struggle in these
applications. The reason is that data alone are often insufficient to capture the structural constraints
(especially if noisy) and convey them to the model.
As a remedy, we derive Constrained Adversarial Networks (CANs), which extend GANs to generating
valid structures with high probabilty. Given a set of arbitrary discrete constraints, CANs achieve
this by penalizing the generator for allocating mass to invalid objects during training. The penalty
term is implemented using the semantic loss (SL) [5], which turns the discrete constraints into a
differentiable loss function implemented as an arithmetic circuit (i.e., a polynomial). The SL is
probabilistically sound, can be evaluated exactly, and supports end-to-end training. Importantly,
the polynomial – which can be quite large, depending on the complexity of the constraints – can
be thrown away after training. In addition, CANs handle complex constraints, like reachability on
graphs, by first embedding the candidate configurations in a space in which the constraints can be
encoded compactly, and then applying the SL to the embeddings.
∗
†

Equal contributions.
This work was partially carried out when PM was working at the University of Trento.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

