Universal Function Approximation on Graphs

Rickard Brüel-Gabrielsson
rbg@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In this work we produce a framework for constructing universal function approximators on graph isomorphism classes. We prove how this framework comes with
a collection of theoretically desirable properties and enables novel analysis. We
show how this allows us to achieve state-of-the-art performance on four different
well-known datasets in graph classification and separate classes of graphs that other
graph-learning methods cannot. Our approach is inspired by persistent homology,
dependency parsing for NLP, and multivalued functions. The complexity of the
underlying algorithm is O(#edges × #nodes) and code is publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

Graphs are natural structures for many sources of data, including molecular, social, biological, and
financial networks. Graph learning consists loosely of learning functions from the set of graph
isomorphism classes to the set of real numbers, and such functions include node classification, link
prediction, and graph classification. Learning on graphs demands effective representation, usually in
vector form, and different approaches include graph kernels [10], deep learning [24], and persistent
homology [1]. Recently there has been a growing interest in understanding the discriminative power
of certain frameworks [22, 7, 13, 12] which belongs to the inquiry into what functions on graph
isomorphism classes can be learned. We call this the problem of function approximation on graphs.
In machine learning, the problem of using neural networks (NNs) for function approximation on Rd
is well-studied and the universal function approximation abilities of NNs as well as recurrent NNs
(RNNs) are well known [11, 18]. In this work, we propose a theoretical foundation for universal
function approximation on graphs, and in Section 3 we present an algorithm with universal function
approximation abilities on graphs. This paper will focus on the case of graph classification, but
with minor modifications, our framework can be extended to other tasks of interest. We take care
to develop a framework that is applicable to real-world graph learning problems and in Section 4
we show our framework performing at state-of-the-art on graph classification on four well known
datasets and discriminating between graphs that other graph learning frameworks cannot.
Among deep learning approaches, a popular method is the graph neural network (GNN) [23] which
can be as discriminative as the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph isomorphism test [22]. In addition, Long
Short Term Memory models (LSTMs) that are prevalent in Natural Language Processing (NLP) have
been used on graphs [20]. Using persistent homology features for graph classification [9] also show
promising results. Our work borrows ideas from persistent homology [8] and tree-LSTMs [21].
To be able to discriminate between any isomorphism classes, graph representation should be an
injective function on such classes. In practice this is challenging. Even the best known runtime [4]
for such functions is too slow for most real world machine learning problems and their resulting
representation is unlikely to be conducive to learning. To our knowledge, there exists no algorithm
that produces isomorphism-injective graph representation for machine learning applications. We
overcome several challenges by considering multivalued functions, with certain injective properties,
on graph isomorphism classes instead of injective functions.
1

https://github.com/bruel-gabrielsson/universal-function-approximation-on-graphs

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

