On the Value of Out-of-Distribution Testing:
An Example of Goodhart’s Law

Damien Teney1 Kushal Kafle2 Robik Shrestha3
Ehsan Abbasnejad1 Christopher Kanan3 Anton van den Hengel1
1

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide, Australia
2
Adobe Research
3
Rochester Institute of Technology
{damien.teney,ehsan.abbasnejad,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au
kkafle@adobe.com {rss9369,kanan}@rit.edu

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) testing is increasingly popular for evaluating a machine
learning system’s ability to generalize beyond the biases of a training set. OOD
benchmarks are designed to present a different joint distribution of data and labels
between training and test time. VQA-CP has become the standard OOD benchmark
for visual question answering, but we discovered three troubling practices in its
current use. First, most published methods rely on explicit knowledge of the
construction of the OOD splits. They often rely on “inverting” the distribution of
labels, e.g. answering mostly “yes” when the common training answer is “no”.
Second, the OOD test set is used for model selection. Third, a model’s in-domain
performance is assessed after retraining it on in-domain splits (VQA v2) that exhibit
a more balanced distribution of labels. These three practices defeat the objective of
evaluating generalization, and put into question the value of methods specifically
designed for this dataset. We show that embarrassingly-simple methods, including
one that generates answers at random, surpass the state of the art on some question
types. We provide short- and long-term solutions to avoid these pitfalls and realize
the benefits of OOD evaluation.

1

Introduction
Goodhart’s law: When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.

The practical value of a machine learning (ML) system is strongly related to its capacity to generalize,
i.e. to produce relevant outputs for data beyond its training set. The common paradigm in learning
theory [42] assumes that the training and test data are drawn as independent and identically distributed
(IID) samples. Therefore, most datasets are built following this IID assumption, such that data points
are assigned randomly to training or test splits. For many tasks however, this fails to assess whether
an ML system adequately generalizes, or whether it has simply captured the idiosyncrasies of a
dataset, including spurious correlations that manifest in both the training and test sets [28].
Out-of-distribution (OOD) testing is an increasingly popular method for evaluating generalization [3,
4, 7, 23, 25, 29]. In this paper, we use “OOD” to refer to splits designed such that the joint distribution
of inputs and labels differs between the training and testing sets. The differences in this distribution
concern features of the data that are irrelevant to the task of interest, e.g. the background in an image
recognition task. Such irrelevant factors can be spuriously correlated with the correct labels. They
form “dataset biases” and other statistical patterns that a robust model should not rely on.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

