UCSG-N ET - Unsupervised Discovering of
Constructive Solid Geometry Tree

Kacper Kania1∗
1

Maciej Zi˛eba1,2

Tomasz Kajdanowicz1

Wrocław University of Science and Technology
2
Tooploox
kacp.kania@gmail.com

Abstract
Signed distance field (SDF) is a prominent implicit representation of 3D meshes.
Methods that are based on such representation achieved state-of-the-art 3D shape
reconstruction quality. However, these methods struggle to reconstruct non-convex
shapes. One remedy is to incorporate a constructive solid geometry framework
(CSG) that represents a shape as a decomposition into primitives. It allows to
embody a 3D shape of high complexity and non-convexity with a simple tree
representation of Boolean operations. Nevertheless, existing approaches are supervised and require the entire CSG parse tree that is given upfront during the
training process. On the contrary, we propose a model that extracts a CSG parse
tree without any supervision - UCSG-N ET. Our model predicts parameters of
primitives and binarizes their SDF representation through differentiable indicator
function. It is achieved jointly with discovering the structure of a Boolean operators
tree. The model selects dynamically which operator combination over primitives
leads to the reconstruction of high fidelity. We evaluate our method on 2D and
3D autoencoding tasks. We show that the predicted parse tree representation is
interpretable and can be used in CAD software.1

1

Introduction

Neural networks for 3D shape analysis gained much popularity in recent years. Among their main
advantages are fast inference for unknown shapes and high generalization power. Many approaches
rely on the different representations of the input: implicit such as voxel grids, point clouds and
signed distance fields [1–3], or explicit - meshes [4]. Meshes can be found in computer-aided design
applications, where a graphic designer often composes complex shapes out simple shapes primitives,
such as boxes and spheres.
Existing methods for representing meshes, such as BSP-N ET [5] and C VX N ET [6], achieve remarkable accuracy on a reconstruction tasks. However, the process of generating the mesh from predicted
planes requires an additional post-processing step. These methods also assume that any object can be
decomposed into a union of convex primitives. While holding, it requires many such primitives to
represent concave shapes. Consequently, the decoding process is difficult to explain and modified
with some external expert knowledge. On the other hand, there are fully interpretable approaches,
like CSG-N ET [7, 8], that utilize CSG parse tree to represent 3D shape construction process. Such
solutions require expensive supervision that assumes assigned CSG parse tree for each example given
during training.
∗
1

Now at Warsaw University of Technology
We published our code at https://github.com/kacperkan/ucsgnet

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

