A Self-Tuning Actor-Critic Algorithm

Tom Zahavy, Zhongwen Xu, Vivek Veeriah, Matteo Hessel, Junhyuk Oh,
Hado van Hasselt, David Silver and Satinder Singh
Deepmind
{tomzahavy,zhongwen,vveeriah,mtthss,junhyuk,hado,davidsilver,baveja}@google.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms are highly sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters, typically requiring significant manual effort to identify hyperparameters
that perform well on a new domain. In this paper, we take a step towards addressing
this issue by using metagradients to automatically adapt hyperparameters online by
meta-gradient descent (Xu et al., 2018). We apply our algorithm, Self-Tuning ActorCritic (STAC), to self-tune all the differentiable hyperparameters of an actor-critic
loss function, to discover auxiliary tasks, and to improve off-policy learning using
a novel leaky V-trace operator. STAC is simple to use, sample efficient and does
not require a significant increase in compute. Ablative studies show that the overall
performance of STAC improved as we adapt more hyperparameters. When applied
to the Arcade Learning Environment (Bellemare et al. 2012), STAC improved
the median human normalized score in 200M steps from 243% to 364%. When
applied to the DM Control suite (Tassa et al., 2018), STAC improved the mean
score in 30M steps from 217 to 389 when learning with features, from 108 to 202
when learning from pixels, and from 195 to 295 in the Real-World Reinforcement
Learning Challenge (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2020).

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms often have many modules and loss functions with
many hyperparameters. When applied to a new domain, these hyperparameters are searched via
cross-validation, random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012), or population-based training (Jaderberg
et al., 2017), which requires extensive computing resources. Meta-learning approaches in RL (e.g.,
MAML, Finn et al. (2017)) focus on learning good initialization via multi-task learning and transfer.
However, many of the hyperparameters must be adapted during the agent’s lifetime to achieve good
performance (learning rate scheduling, exploration annealing, etc.). This motivates a significant body
of work on specific solutions to tune specific hyperparameters, within a single agent lifetime (Schaul
et al., 2019; Mann et al., 2016; White & White, 2016; Rowland et al., 2019; Sutton, 1992).
Metagradients, on the other hand, provide a general and compute-efficient approach for self-tuning
in a single lifetime. The general concept is to represent the training loss as a function of both
the agent parameters and the hyperparameters. The agent optimizes the parameters to minimize
this loss function, w.r.t the current hyperparameters. The hyperparameters are then self-tuned via
backpropagation to minimize a fixed loss function. This approach has been used to learn the discount
factor or the λ coefficient (Xu et al., 2018), to discover intrinsic rewards (Zheng et al., 2018) and
auxiliary tasks (Veeriah et al., 2019). Finally, we note that there also exist derivative-free approaches
for self-tuning hyper parameters (Paul et al., 2019; Tang & Choromanski, 2020).
This paper makes the following contributions. First, we introduce two novel ideas that extend
IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) with additional components. (1) The first agent, referred to as a
Self-Tuning Actor-Critic (STAC), self-tunes all the differentiable hyperparameters in the IMPALA
loss function. In addition, STAC introduces a leaky V-trace operator that mixes importance sampling
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

