Stochastic Deep Gaussian Processes over Graphs

Naiqi Li1,∗ Wenjie Li2,∗ Jifeng Sun1

Yinghua Gao2

Yong Jiang1,3

Shu-Tao Xia2,3,†

1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
PCL Research Center of Networks and Communications, Peng Cheng Laboratory
2

Abstract
In this paper we propose Stochastic Deep Gaussian Processes over Graphs (DGPG),
which are deep Gaussian models that learn the mappings between input and output
signals in graph domains. The approximate posterior distributions of the latent
variables are derived with variational inference, and the evidence lower bound
is evaluated and optimized by the proposed recursive sampling scheme. The
Bayesian non-parametric natural of our model allows it to resist overfitting, while
the expressive deep structure grants it the potential to learn complex relations.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves superior performances
in both small size (< 50) and large size (> 35,000) datasets. We show that DGPG
outperforms another Gaussian-based approach, and is competitive to a state-ofthe-art method in the challenging task of traffic flow prediction. Our model is
also capable of capturing uncertainties in a mathematical principled way and
automatically discovering which vertices and features are relevant to the prediction.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) [1] are a favourable choice in the machine learning arsenal, due to their
distinguishing advantages in modeling uncertainties, the ability of introducing expert knowledge
through the flexible kernel design, and the data efficient property which accounts for their success
in small and medium datasets. GPs have been successfully applied in a variety of tasks, including
computer vision [2], Bayesian optimization [3], active learning [4], multi-task learning [5] and
reinforcement learning [6]. However standard GPs scale poorly as O(N 3 ), making it a challenge
to apply them to large-scale datasets. Their expressiveness is also limited by the specific choice of
kernel functions, which are difficult to be manually decided for complex problems.
Recently a series of works about deep GPs were presented [7–9], which overcome the aforementioned
disadvantages. All these methods can find their roots in the seminal paper [10], which proposes to
use a set of inducing points whose size is manageable to summarize all the information in the original
large dataset - the inducing points and their latent function values can be inferred by variational
inference. This sparse approximation technique enables deep GPs to handle extremely large datasets.
For instance [11] reports that their method achieves superior performance on a dataset with over one
billion data points. The deep hierarchical structure has greatly improved the expressiveness of the
models, resulting in state-of-the-art performances over various challenging tasks.
The last decade also witnesses the rapid development of machine learning algorithms over graphstructured datasets. A great amount of impacting research on graph neural networks (GNNs) has
been presented, including [12–17], to name only a few of which. Hitherto most of the emerging
literature on graph data analysis are based on neural networks. Though demonstrating satisfactory
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author: Shu-Tao Xia (xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

