Learning Certified Individually Fair Representations

Anian Ruoss, Mislav Balunović, Marc Fischer, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
anruoss@ethz.ch
{mislav.balunovic, marc.fischer, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Fair representation learning provides an effective way of enforcing fairness constraints without compromising utility for downstream users. A desirable family of
such fairness constraints, each requiring similar treatment for similar individuals,
is known as individual fairness. In this work, we introduce the first method that
enables data consumers to obtain certificates of individual fairness for existing
and new data points. The key idea is to map similar individuals to close latent
representations and leverage this latent proximity to certify individual fairness.
That is, our method enables the data producer to learn and certify a representation
where for a data point all similar individuals are at `∞ -distance at most , thus
allowing data consumers to certify individual fairness by proving -robustness of
their classifier. Our experimental evaluation on five real-world datasets and several
fairness constraints demonstrates the expressivity and scalability of our approach.

1

Introduction

The increased use of machine learning in sensitive domains (e.g., crime risk assessment [1], ad
targeting [2], and credit scoring [3]) has raised concerns that methods learning from data can reinforce
human bias, discriminate, and lack fairness [4–6]. Moreover, data owners often face the challenge
that their data will be used in (unknown) downstream applications, potentially indifferent to fairness
concerns [7]. To address this challenge, the paradigm of learning fair representations has emerged as
a promising approach to obtain data representations that preserve fairness while maintaining utility
for a variety of downstream tasks [8, 9]. The recent work of McNamara et al. [10] has formalized
this setting by partitioning the landscape into: a data regulator who defines fairness for the particular
task at hand, a data producer who processes sensitive user data and transforms it into another
representation, and a data consumer who performs predictions based on the new representation.
In this setting, a machine learning model M : Rn → Ro is composed of two parts: an encoder
fθ : Rn → Rk , provided by the data producer, and a classifier hψ : Rk → Ro , provided by the data
consumer, with Rk denoting the latent space. The data regulator selects a definition of fairness that the
model M should satisfy. Most work so far has explored two main families of fairness definitions [11]:
statistical and individual. Statistical notions define specific groups in the population and require that
particular statistics, computed based on model decisions, should be equal for all groups. Popular
notions of this kind include demographic parity [12] and equalized odds [13]. While these notions
do not require any assumptions on the data and are easy to certify, they offer no guarantees for
individuals or other subgroups in the population [14]. In contrast, individual notions of fairness [12]
are desirable as they explicitly require that similar individuals in the population are treated similarly.
Key challenge A central challenge then is to enforce individual fairness in the setting described
above. That is, to both learn an individually fair representation and to certify that individual fairness
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

