Collegial Ensembles

Etai Littwin Ben Myara Sima Sabah Joshua Susskind Shuangfei Zhai Oren Golan
Apple Inc.
{elittwin, bmyara, sima, jsusskind, szhai, ogolan}@apple.com

Abstract
Modern neural network performance typically improves as model size increases. A
recent line of research on the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) of over-parameterized
networks indicates that the improvement with size increase is a product of a
better conditioned loss landscape. In this work, we investigate a form of overparameterization achieved through ensembling, where we define collegial ensembles (CE) as the aggregation of multiple independent models with identical
architectures, trained as a single model. We show that the optimization dynamics
of CE simplify dramatically when the number of models in the ensemble is large,
resembling the dynamics of wide models, yet scale much more favorably. We use
recent theoretical results on the finite width corrections of the NTK to perform
efficient architecture search in a space of finite width CE that aims to either minimize capacity, or maximize trainability under a set of constraints. The resulting
ensembles can be efficiently implemented in practical architectures using group
convolutions and block diagonal layers. Finally, we show how our framework can
be used to analytically derive optimal group convolution modules originally found
using expensive grid searches, without having to train a single model.

1

Introduction

Neural networks exhibit generalization behavior in the overparameterized regime, a phenomenon that has been well observed
in practice [23, 2, 18, 17]. Recent theoretical advancements have
been made to try and understand the trainability and generalization
properties of over-parameterized neural networks, by observing their
nearly convex behaviour at large width [13, 15]. For a wide neural
network F(x) with parameters θ and a convex loss L, the parameter updates −µ∇θ L can be represented in the space of functions
as kernel gradient decent (GD) updates −µ∇F L, with the Neural
Tangent Kernel [10] (NTK) function K(x, xj ) = ∇θ F(x)∇>
θ F(xj )
operating on x, xj :
X
∆θ = −µ∇θ L −→ ∆F(x) ∼ −µ
K(x, xj )∇F (xj ) L
(1)

input
n1

n1

···

n1

n2

n2

···

n2

..
.

.. m paths ..
.
.

nL

nL

···

nL

Σ

j

× √1m
In the infinite width limit, the NTK remains constant during training,
output
and GD reduces to kernel GD, rendering the optimization a convex
problem. Hence, over parameterized models in the “large width”
sense both generalize, and are simpler to optimize. In this work, we Figure 1: Collegial Ensemble
consider a different type of over-parameterization achieved through
ensembling. We denote by collegial ensembles (CE) models where the output, either intermediate or
final, is constructed from the aggregation of multiple identical pathways (see illustration in Fig. 1).
We show that the training dynamics of CE simplify when the ensemble multiplicity is large, in a
similar sense as wide models, yet at a much cheaper cost in terms of parameter count. Our results
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

