A Group-Theoretic Framework for
Data Augmentation
Shuxiao Chen
Department of Statistics
University of Pennsylvania
shuxiaoc@wharton.upenn.edu

Edgar Dobriban
Department of Statistics
University of Pennsylvania
dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu

Jane H. Lee
Department of Computer Science
University of Pennsylvania
janehlee@sas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Data augmentation has become an important part of modern deep learning pipelines
and is typically needed to achieve state of the art performance for many learning
tasks. It utilizes invariant transformations of the data, such as rotation, scale, and
color shift, and the transformed images are added to the training set. However, these
transformations are often chosen heuristically and a clear theoretical framework
to explain the performance benefits of data augmentation is not available. In this
paper, we develop such a framework to explain data augmentation as averaging
over the orbits of the group that keeps the data distribution approximately invariant,
and show that it leads to variance reduction. We study finite-sample and asymptotic
empirical risk minimization and work out as examples the variance reduction in
certain two-layer neural networks. We further propose a strategy to exploit the
benefits of data augmentation for general learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Many deep learning models succeed by exploiting symmetry in data. Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) use that image identity is roughly invariant to translations: a translated cat is still a cat.
Such invariances are present in many domains, including image and language data. Standard
architectures are invariant to some, but not all transforms. CNNs induce an approximate equivariance
to translations, but not to rotations. This is an inductive bias of CNNs, and the idea dates back at least
to the neocognitron [30].
To make models invariant to arbitrary transforms beyond the ones built into the architecture, data
augmentation (DA) is commonly used. The model is trained not just with the original data, but also
with transformed data. Data augmentation is a crucial component of modern deep learning pipelines,
and it has been used e.g., in AlexNet [44], and other pioneering works [17]. State-of-the-art results
often rely on data augmentation. See Figure 1(a) for a small experiment.
Rather than designing new architectures, data augmentation is a universally applicable, generative, and
algorithmic way to exploit invariances. However, a general theoretical framework for understanding
augmentation is missing. Such a framework would enable us to reason clearly about its benefits
and tradeoffs compared to invariant features. Further, we may discover the precise conditions under
which data augmentation would lead to such benefits, which may guide its use in general learning
tasks beyond domains in which it is standardly used.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

