Deep Metric Learning with Spherical Embedding

1

Dingyi Zhang1 , Yingming Li1∗, Zhongfei Zhang2
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Binghamton University, USA
{dyzhang, yingming}@zju.edu.cn, zhongfei_mark@yahoo.com

Abstract
Deep metric learning has attracted much attention in recent years, due to seamlessly
combining the distance metric learning and deep neural network. Many endeavors
are devoted to design different pair-based angular loss functions, which decouple
the magnitude and direction information for embedding vectors and ensure the
training and testing measure consistency. However, these traditional angular losses
cannot guarantee that all the sample embeddings are on the surface of the same
hypersphere during the training stage, which would result in unstable gradient in
batch optimization and may influence the quick convergence of the embedding
learning. In this paper, we first investigate the effect of the embedding norm for
deep metric learning with angular distance, and then propose a spherical embedding
constraint (SEC) to regularize the distribution of the norms. SEC adaptively adjusts
the embeddings to fall on the same hypersphere and performs more balanced
direction update. Extensive experiments on deep metric learning, face recognition,
and contrastive self-supervised learning show that the SEC-based angular space
learning strategy significantly improves the performance of the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

The objective of distance metric learning is to learn an embedding space where semantically similar
instances are encouraged to be closer than semantically different instances [1, 2]. In recent years, with
the development of deep learning, deep metric learning (DML) demonstrates evident improvements
by employing a neural network as the embedding mapping. With an appropriate distance metric,
it is convenient to handle many visual understanding tasks, such as face recognition [3, 4] and
fine-grained image retrieval [5, 6, 7]. In regard to the research in DML, an active direction is to design
a discriminative loss function for model optimization. A family of pair-based loss functions are
proposed, which are constructed by similarities of instance pairs in a mini-batch, such as contrastive
loss [8], triplet loss [9, 4], lifted structured loss [5], N -pair loss [10], and multi-similarity loss [11].
Theoretically, either Euclidean distance or angular distance could be employed to measure the
similarity between two embeddings in an embedding space, while in the existing DML loss functions,
angular distance is usually adopted to disentangle the norm and direction of an embedding, which
ensures the training and testing measure consistency. However, this traditional setup usually ignores
the importance of the embedding norm for gradient computation. For example, considering a cosine
distance which measures the angular distance between two embeddings fi and fj , its gradient to an
embedding fi is computed as follows:
∂hfˆi , fˆj i
1
=
(fˆj − cos θij fˆi ),
∂fi
||fi ||2

where fˆ denotes the l2 -normalized embedding of f .
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

