SDF-SRN: Learning Signed Distance
3D Object Reconstruction from Static Images

Chen-Hsuan Lin
Chaoyang Wang
Simon Lucey
Carnegie Mellon University
chlin@cmu.edu
chaoyanw@andrew.cmu.edu
slucey@cs.cmu.edu
https://chenhsuanlin.bitbucket.io/signed-distance-SRN/

Abstract
Dense 3D object reconstruction from a single image has recently witnessed remarkable advances, but supervising neural networks with ground-truth 3D shapes is
impractical due to the laborious process of creating paired image-shape datasets.
Recent efforts have turned to learning 3D reconstruction without 3D supervision
from RGB images with annotated 2D silhouettes, dramatically reducing the cost
and effort of annotation. These techniques, however, remain impractical as they
still require multi-view annotations of the same object instance during training. As
a result, most experimental efforts to date have been limited to synthetic datasets.
In this paper, we address this issue and propose SDF-SRN, an approach that requires
only a single view of objects at training time, offering greater utility for real-world
scenarios. SDF-SRN learns implicit 3D shape representations to handle arbitrary
shape topologies that may exist in the datasets. To this end, we derive a novel
differentiable rendering formulation for learning signed distance functions (SDF)
from 2D silhouettes. Our method outperforms the state of the art under challenging
single-view supervision settings on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Humans have strong capabilities to reason about 3D geometry in our visual world. When we see an
object, not only can we infer its shape and appearance, but we can also speculate the underlying 3D
structure. We learn to develop the concepts of 3D geometry and semantic priors, as well as the ability
to mentally reconstruct the 3D world. Somehow through visual perception, i.e. just looking at a
collection of 2D images, we have the ability to infer the 3D geometry of the objects in those images.
Researchers have sought to emulate such ability of 3D shape recovery from a single 2D image for AI
systems, where success has been drawn specifically through neural networks. Although one could
train such networks naively from images with associated ground-truth 3D shapes, such paired data
are difficult to come by at scale. While most works have resorted to 3D object datasets, in which case
synthetic image data can be created pain-free through rendering engines, the domain gap between
synthetic and real images has prevented them from practical use. An abundant source of supervision
that can be practically obtained for real-world image data is one problem that looms large in the field.
In the quest to eliminate the need for direct 3D supervision, recent research have attempted to tackle
the problem of learning 3D shape recovery from 2D images with object silhouettes, which are easier
to annotate in practice. This line of works seeks to maximize the reprojection consistency of 3D shape
predictions to an ensemble of training images. While success has been shown on volumetric [41] and
mesh-based [18, 25] reconstruction, such discretized 3D representations have drawbacks. Voxels are
inefficient for representing shape surfaces as they are sparse by nature, while meshes are limited to
deforming from fixed templates as learning adaptive mesh topologies is a nontrivial problem. Implicit
shape representations become a more desirable choice for overcoming these limitations.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

