Measuring Robustness to Natural Distribution Shifts
in Image Classification

Rohan Taori
UC Berkeley
Nicholas Carlini
Google Brain

Achal Dave
CMU
Benjamin Recht
UC Berkeley

Vaishaal Shankar
UC Berkeley
Ludwig Schmidt
UC Berkeley

Abstract
We study how robust current ImageNet models are to distribution shifts arising from
natural variations in datasets. Most research on robustness focuses on synthetic
image perturbations (noise, simulated weather artifacts, adversarial examples,
etc.), which leaves open how robustness on synthetic distribution shift relates to
distribution shift arising in real data. Informed by an evaluation of 204 ImageNet
models in 213 different test conditions, we find that there is often little to no transfer
of robustness from current synthetic to natural distribution shift. Moreover, most
current techniques provide no robustness to the natural distribution shifts in our
testbed. The main exception is training on larger and more diverse datasets, which
in multiple cases increases robustness, but is still far from closing the performance
gaps. Our results indicate that distribution shifts arising in real data are currently
an open research problem. We provide our testbed and data as a resource for future
work at https://modestyachts.github.io/imagenet-testbed/.

1

Introduction

Reliable classification under distribution shift is still out of reach for current machine learning
[65, 68, 91]. As a result, the research community has proposed a wide range of evaluation protocols
that go beyond a single, static test set. Common examples include noise corruptions [33, 38], spatial
transformations [28, 29], and adversarial examples [5, 84]. Encouragingly, the past few years have
seen substantial progress in robustness to these distribution shifts, e.g., see [13, 28, 34, 55, 57,
66, 93, 96, 105, 114, 115] among many others. However, this progress comes with an important
limitation: all of the aforementioned distribution shifts are synthetic: the test examples are derived
from well-characterized image modifications at the pixel level.
Synthetic distribution shifts are a good starting point for experiments since they are precisely defined
and easy to apply to arbitrary images. However, classifiers ultimately must be robust to distribution
shifts arising naturally in the real world. These distribution shifts may include subtle changes in scene
compositions, object types, lighting conditions, and many others. Importantly, these variations are
not precisely defined because they have not been created artificially. The hope is that an ideal robust
classifier is still robust to such natural distribution shifts.
In this paper, we investigate how robust current machine learning techniques are to distribution shift
arising naturally from real image data without synthetic modifications. To this end, we conduct a
comprehensive experimental study in the context of ImageNet [18, 70]. ImageNet is a natural starting
point since it has been the focus of intense research efforts over the past decade and a large number
of pre-trained classification models, some with robustness interventions, are available for this task.
The core of our experimental study is a testbed of 204 pre-trained ImageNet models that we evaluate
in 213 different settings, covering both the most popular models and distribution shifts. Our testbed
consists of 109 model predictions and is 100 times larger than prior work [27, 33, 47, 68]. This allows
us to draw several new conclusions about current robustness interventions:
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

