Greedy inference with structure-exploiting lazy maps

Michael C. Brennan ∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
mcbrenn@mit.edu

Daniele Bigoni ∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
dabi@mit.edu

Olivier Zahm
Université Grenoble Alpes, INRIA, CNRS, LJK
38000 Grenoble, France
olivier.zahm@inria.fr

Alessio Spantini
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
alessio.spantini@gmail.com

Youssef Marzouk
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
ymarz@mit.edu

Abstract
We propose a framework for solving high-dimensional Bayesian inference problems using structure-exploiting low-dimensional transport maps or flows. These
maps are confined to a low-dimensional subspace (hence, lazy), and the subspace
is identified by minimizing an upper bound on the Kullback–Leibler divergence
(hence, structured). Our framework provides a principled way of identifying and
exploiting low-dimensional structure in an inference problem. It focuses the expressiveness of a transport map along the directions of most significant discrepancy
from the posterior, and can be used to build deep compositions of lazy maps,
where low-dimensional projections of the parameters are iteratively transformed
to match the posterior. We prove weak convergence of the generated sequence of
distributions to the posterior, and we demonstrate the benefits of the framework
on challenging inference problems in machine learning and differential equations,
using inverse autoregressive flows and polynomial maps as examples of the underlying density estimators.

1

Introduction

R
Inference in the Bayesian setting typically requires the computation of integrals f dπ over an
intractable posterior distribution whose density2 π is known up to a normalizing constant. One
approach to this problem is to construct a deterministic nonlinear transformation, i.e., a transport map
[57], that induces a coupling of π with a tractable distribution ρ (e.g., a standard Gaussian). Formally,
we seek a Rmap T that pushes forward ρ to π, written as T] ρ = π, such that the change of variables
R
f dπ = f ◦ T dρ makes integration tractable.
Many constructions for such maps have been developed in recent years. Normalizing flows (see
[34, 42, 46, 54] and references therein) build transport maps via a deep composition of functions
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
In this paper, we only consider distributions that are absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue
measure on Rd , and thus will use the notation π to denote both the distribution and its associated density.
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

