A Unifying View of Optimism in Episodic
Reinforcement Learning

Ciara Pike-Burke∗
Imperial College London
London, UK
c.pikeburke@gmail.com

Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
gergely.neu@gmail.com

Abstract
The principle of “optimism in the face of uncertainty” underpins many theoretically
successful reinforcement learning algorithms. In this paper we provide a general
framework for designing, analyzing and implementing such algorithms in the
episodic reinforcement learning problem. This framework is built upon Lagrangian
duality, and demonstrates that every model-optimistic algorithm that constructs an
optimistic MDP has an equivalent representation as a value-optimistic dynamic
programming algorithm. Typically, it was thought that these two classes of algorithms were distinct, with model-optimistic algorithms benefiting from a cleaner
probabilistic analysis while value-optimistic algorithms are easier to implement
and thus more practical. With the framework developed in this paper, we show that
it is possible to get the best of both worlds by providing a class of algorithms which
have a computationally efficient dynamic-programming implementation and also a
simple probabilistic analysis. Besides being able to capture many existing algorithms in the tabular setting, our framework can also address large-scale problems
under realizable function approximation, where it enables a simple model-based
analysis of some recently proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a key framework for sequential decision-making under uncertainty
[45, 46]. In an RL problem, a learning agent interacts with a reactive environment by taking a series
of actions. Each action provides the agent with some reward, but also takes them to a new state
which determines their future rewards. The aim of the agent is to pick actions to maximize their total
reward in the long run. The learning problem is typically modeled by a Markov Decision Process
(MDP, [40]) where the agent does not know the rewards or transition probabilities. Dealing with this
lack of knowledge is a crucial challenge in reinforcement learning: the agent must maximize their
rewards while simultaneously learning about the environment. One class of algorithms that have been
successful at balancing this exploration versus exploitation trade-off are optimistic reinforcement
learning algorithms. In this paper, we provide a new framework for studying this class of algorithms.
Optimistic algorithms are built upon the principle of “optimism in the face of uncertainty” (OFU).
They operate by maintaining a set of statistically plausible models of the world, and selecting actions
to maximize the returns in the best plausible world. Such algorithms were first studied in the context
of multi-armed bandit problems [29, 2, 14, 5, 30], and went on to inspire numerous algorithms for
reinforcement learning. A closer look at the literature reveals two main approaches to incorporate
optimism into RL. In the first, optimism is introduced through estimates of the MDP: these approaches
build a set of plausible MDPs by constructing confidence bounds around the empirical transition and
∗
This work was done while CPB was at Universitat Pompeu Fabra and Barcelona Graduate School of
Economics.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

