What Makes for Good Views for Contrastive
Learning?

Yonglong Tian
MIT CSAIL
Dilip Krishnan
Google Research

Chen Sun
Google, Brown University

Ben Poole
Google Research

Cordelia Schmid
Google Research

Phillip Isola
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Contrastive learning between multiple views of the data has recently achieved
state of the art performance in the field of self-supervised representation learning.
Despite its success, the influence of different view choices has been less studied. In
this paper, we use theoretical and empirical analysis to better understand the importance of view selection, and argue that we should reduce the mutual information
(MI) between views while keeping task-relevant information intact. To verify this
hypothesis, we devise unsupervised and semi-supervised frameworks that learn
effective views by aiming to reduce their MI. We also consider data augmentation as a way to reduce MI, and show that increasing data augmentation indeed
leads to decreasing MI and improves downstream classification accuracy. As a byproduct, we achieve a new state-of-the-art accuracy on unsupervised pre-training
for ImageNet classification (73% top-1 linear readout with a ResNet-50)1 .

1

Introduction

It is commonsense that how you look at an object does not change its identity. Nonetheless, Jorge
Luis Borges imagined the alternative. In his short story on Funes the Memorious, the titular character
becomes bothered that a “dog at three fourteen (seen from the side) should have the same name as
the dog at three fifteen (seen from the front)" [6]. The curse of Funes is that he has a perfect memory,
and every new way he looks at the world reveals a percept minutely distinct from anything he has
seen before. He cannot collate the disparate experiences.
Most of us, fortunately, do not suffer from this curse. We build mental representations of identity
that discard nuisances like time of day and viewing angle. The ability to build up view-invariant
representations is central to a rich body of research on multiview learning. These methods seek
representations of the world that are invariant to a family of viewing conditions. Currently, a popular
paradigm is contrastive multiview learning, where two views of the same scene are brought together
in representation space, and two views of different scenes are pushed apart.
This is a natural and powerful idea but it leaves open an important question: “which viewing
conditions should we be invariant to?" It’s possible to go too far: if our task is to classify the time
of day then we certainly should not use a representation that is invariant to time. Or, like Funes, we
could go not far enough: representing each specific viewing angle independently would cripple our
ability to track a dog as it moves about a scene.
We therefore seek representations with enough invariance to be robust to inconsequential variations
but not so much as to discard information required by downstream tasks. In contrastive learning,
1

Project page: http://hobbitlong.github.io/InfoMin

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

