Online Multitask Learning with Long-Term Memory
Mark Herbster, Stephen Pasteris, Lisa Tse
Department of Computer Science
University College London
London
United Kingdom
(m.herbster|s.pasteris|l.tse)@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a novel online multitask setting. In this setting each task is partitioned
into a sequence of segments that is unknown to the learner. Associated with each
segment is a hypothesis from some hypothesis class. We give algorithms that
are designed to exploit the scenario where there are many such segments but
significantly fewer associated hypotheses. We prove regret bounds that hold for
any segmentation of the tasks and any association of hypotheses to the segments.
In the single-task setting this is equivalent to switching with long-term memory
in the sense of [1]. We provide an algorithm that predicts on each trial in time
linear in the number of hypotheses when the hypothesis class is finite. We also
consider infinite hypothesis classes from reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces for
which we give an algorithm whose per trial time complexity is cubic in the number
of cumulative trials. In the single-task special case this is the first example of
an efficient regret-bounded switching algorithm with long-term memory for a
non-parametric hypothesis class.

1

Introduction

We consider a model of online prediction in a non-stationary environment with multiple interrelated
tasks. Associated with each task is an asynchronous data stream. As an example, consider a scenario
where a team of drones may need to decontaminate an area of toxic waste. In this example, the tasks
correspond to drones. Each drone is receiving a data stream from its sensors. The data streams are
non-stationary but interdependent as the drones are travelling within a common site. At any point
in time, a drone receives an instance x and is required to predict its label y. The aim is to minimize
mispredictions. As is standard in regret-bounded learning we have no statistical assumptions on
the data-generation process. Instead, we aim to predict well relative to some hypothesis class of
predictors. Unlike a standard regret model, where we aim to predict well in comparison to a single
hypothesis, we instead aim to predict well relative to a completely unknown sequence of hypotheses
in each task’s data stream, as illustrated by the “coloring” in Figure 1. Each mode (color) corresponds
to a distinct hypothesis from the hypothesis class. A switch is said to have occurred whenever we
move between modes temporally within the same task.
Thus in task 1, there are three modes and four switches. We are particularly motivated by the
case that a mode once present will possibly recur multiple times even within different tasks, i.e.,
“modes” ⌧ “switches.” We will give algorithms and regret bounds for finite hypothesis classes
(the “experts” model [2, 3, 4]) and for infinite non-parametric Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS) [5] hypothesis classes.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we introduce our formal model for online
switching multitask learning. In doing so we provide a brief review of some related online learning
results which enable us to provide a prospectus for attainable regret bounds. This is done by
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

