Provably Efficient Online Hyperparameter
Optimization with Population-Based Bandits
Jack Parker-Holder
University of Oxford
jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk

Vu Nguyen
University of Oxford
vu@robots.ox.ac.uk

Stephen J. Roberts
University of Oxford
sjrob@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Many of the recent triumphs in machine learning are dependent on well-tuned
hyperparameters. This is particularly prominent in reinforcement learning (RL)
where a small change in the configuration can lead to failure. Despite the
importance of tuning hyperparameters, it remains expensive and is often done
in a naive and laborious way. A recent solution to this problem is Population
Based Training (PBT) which updates both weights and hyperparameters in a
single training run of a population of agents. PBT has been shown to be
particularly effective in RL, leading to widespread use in the field. However,
PBT lacks theoretical guarantees since it relies on random heuristics to explore
the hyperparameter space. This inefficiency means it typically requires vast
computational resources, which is prohibitive for many small and medium sized
labs. In this work, we introduce the first provably efficient PBT-style algorithm,
Population-Based Bandits (PB2). PB2 uses a probabilistic model to guide the search
in an efficient way, making it possible to discover high performing hyperparameter
configurations with far fewer agents than typically required by PBT. We show in
a series of RL experiments that PB2 is able to achieve high performance with a
modest computational budget.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks [22, 26, 38] have achieved remarkable success in a variety of fields. Some
of the most notable results have come in reinforcement learning (RL), where the last decade has
seen a series of significant achievements in games [60, 48, 8] and robotics [51, 33]. However, it
is notoriously difficult to reproduce RL results, often requiring excessive trial-and-error to find the
optimal hyperparameter configurations [6, 24, 50].
This has led to a surge in popularity for Automated Machine Learning (AutoML, [29]), which seeks
to automate the training of machine learning models. A key component in AutoML is automatic
hyperparameter selection [7, 47], where popular approaches include Bayesian Optimization (BO,
[10, 25, 49]) and Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs, [12, 27]). Using automated methods for RL
(AutoRL) is crucial for accessibility and for generalization, since different environments typically
require totally different hyperparameters [24]. Furthermore, it may even be possible to improve
performance of existing methods using learned parameters. In fact, BO was revealed to play a
valuable role in AlphaGo, improving the win percentage before the final match with Lee Sedol [13].
A particularly promising approach, Population Based Training (PBT, [32, 39]), showed it is possible
to achieve impressive performance by updating both weights and hyperparameters during a single
training run of a population of agents. PBT works in a similar fashion to a human observing
experiments, periodically replacing weaker performers with superior ones. PBT has shown to be
particularly effective in reinforcement learning, and has been used in a series of recent works to
improve performance [56, 44, 17, 31].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

