Reinforced Molecular Optimization with
Neighborhood-Controlled Grammars

Chencheng Xu,1,2 Qiao Liu,1,3 Minlie Huang,1,2∗ Tao Jiang4,1,2∗
1
BNRIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UCR, CA 92521, USA
{xucc18, liu-q16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn, jiang@cs.ucr.edu

Abstract
A major challenge in the pharmaceutical industry is to design novel molecules with
specific desired properties, especially when the property evaluation is costly. Here,
we propose MNCE-RL, a graph convolutional policy network for molecular optimization with molecular neighborhood-controlled embedding grammars through
reinforcement learning. We extend the original neighborhood-controlled embedding grammars to make them applicable to molecular graph generation and design
an efficient algorithm to infer grammatical production rules from given molecules.
The use of grammars guarantees the validity of the generated molecular structures.
By transforming molecular graphs to parse trees with the inferred grammars, the
molecular structure generation task is modeled as a Markov decision process where
a policy gradient strategy is utilized. In a series of experiments, we demonstrate that
our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in a diverse range of molecular
optimization tasks and exhibits significant superiority in optimizing molecular
properties with a limited number of property evaluations.

1

Introduction

Traditional drug discovery relies on the development and exploration by expert chemists and pharmacologists, which is time-consuming due to the large chemical structure space [33]. Effective methods
for collecting chemical structures with desired properties will significantly reduce the number of
candidates for wet-lab experiments and thus accelerate the development of novel drugs.
Recently, several methods have been proposed to solve the molecular optimization problem within the
deep learning framework [16, 36, 17, 19, 30, 10]. The major challenges for molecular optimization
mainly lie in generating valid molecular structures and efficiently exploring the vast chemical structure
space. Although several methods, including [34, 19, 16, 36], have been proposed to solve the first
challenge, they either involve complex network architectures or struggle to optimize properties due to
the choices of molecular representations [16, 19]. The second challenge is addressed by Bayesian
optimization (BO) [16, 19, 25] and reinforcement learning (RL) [36]. However, few of these methods
considered the high cost to evaluate molecular properties in real-world applications [17]. In fact, for
most chemical and biological properties, such as antibacterial, anticancer and teratogenicity, there are
no known explicit functions to directly interpret a chemical structure as a corresponding numerical
property score. Hence, time-consuming wet-lab experiments or simulations are typically required
to evaluate these properties of molecules, resulting in a limited number of molecules with validated
∗

Minlie Huang and Tao Jiang are the co-corresponding authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

