The Primal-Dual method for Learning Augmented
Algorithms

Etienne Bamas∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
etienne.bamas@epfl.ch

Andreas Maggiori∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
andreas.maggiori@epfl.ch

Ola Svensson∗
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
ola.svensson@epfl.ch

Abstract
The extension of classical online algorithms when provided with predictions is
a new and active research area. In this paper, we extend the primal-dual method
for online algorithms in order to incorporate predictions that advise the online
algorithm about the next action to take. We use this framework to obtain novel
algorithms for a variety of online covering problems. We compare our algorithms
to the cost of the true and predicted offline optimal solutions and show that these
algorithms outperform any online algorithm when the prediction is accurate while
maintaining good guarantees when the prediction is misleading.

1

Introduction

In the classical field of online algorithms the input is presented in an online fashion and the
algorithm is required to make irrevocable decisions without knowing the future. The performance is
often measured in terms of worst-case guarantees with respect to an optimal offline solution. In this
paper, we will consider minimization problems and formally, we will say that an online algorithm
ALG is c-competitive if on any input I, the cost cALG (I) of the solution output by algorithm
ALG on input I satisfies cALG (I) ⩽ c · OPT(I), where OPT(I) denotes the cost of the offline
optimum. Due to the uncertainty about the future, online algorithms tend to be overly cautious
which sometimes causes their performance in real-world situations to be far from what a machine
learning (ML) algorithm would have achieved. Indeed in many practical applications future events
follow patterns which are easily predictable using ML methods. In [19] Lykouris and Vassilvitskii
formalized a general framework for incorporating (ML) predictions into online algorithms and
designed an extension of the marking algorithm to solve the online caching problem when provided
with predictions. This work was quickly followed by many other papers studying different learning
augmented online problems such as scheduling ([17]), caching ([2, 26]), ski rental ([10, 16, 25, 28]),
clustering ([7]) and other problems ([12, 23]). The main challenge is to incorporate the prediction
without knowing how the prediction was computed and in particular without making any assumption
on the quality of the prediction. This setting is natural as in real-world situations, predictions are
provided by ML algorithms that rarely come with worst-case guarantees on their accuracy. Thus, the
difficulty in designing a learning augmented algorithm is to find a good balance: on the one hand,
following blindly the prediction might lead to a very bad solution if the prediction is misleading. On
the other hand if the algorithm does not trust the prediction at all, it will simply never benefit from
an excellent prediction. The aforementioned results solve this issue by designing smart algorithms
∗

Equal Contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

