Learning Structured Distributions From Untrusted
Batches: Faster and Simpler

Sitan Chen
MIT
sitanc@mit.edu

Jerry Li
MSR
jerrl@microsoft.com

Ankur Moitra
MIT
moitra@mit.edu

Abstract
We revisit the problem of learning from untrusted batches introduced by Qiao and
Valiant [QV17]. Recently, Jain and Orlitsky [JO19] gave a simple semidefinite
programming approach based on the cut-norm that achieves essentially informationtheoretically optimal error in polynomial time. Concurrently, Chen et al. [CLM19]
considered a variant of the problem where µ is assumed to be structured, e.g.
log-concave, monotone hazard rate, t-modal, etc. In this case, it is possible to
achieve the same error with sample complexity sublinear in n, and they exhibited
a quasi-polynomial time algorithm for doing so using Haar wavelets.
In this paper, we find an appealing way to synthesize [JO19] and [CLM19] to
give the best of both worlds: an algorithm which runs in polynomial time and
can exploit structure in the underlying distribution to achieve sublinear sample
complexity. Along the way, we simplify the approach of [JO19] by avoiding the
need for SDP rounding and giving a more direct interpretation of it via soft filtering,
a powerful recent technique in high-dimensional robust estimation. We validate
the usefulness of our algorithms in preliminary experimental evaluations.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the problem of learning structured distributions from untrusted batches.
This is a variant on the problem of learning from untrusted batches, as introduced in [QV17]. Here,
there is an unknown distribution µ over {1, . . . , n}, and we are given N batches of samples, each of
size k. A (1 − )-fraction of batches are “good,” and consist of k i.i.d. samples from some distribution
µi at distance at most ω from µ in total variation distance, but an -fraction of batches are “bad,” and
can be adversarially corrupted. The goal is to estimate µ in total variation, equivalently L1 .
This problem models a situation where we get batches of data from different users, e.g. in a
crowdsourcing application. Each honest user provides a small batch of data, which is by itself
insufficient to learn a good model, and moreover, can come from slightly different distributions
depending on the user, due to heterogeneity. At the same time, a non-trivial fraction of data can come
from malicious users who wish to game our algorithm to their own ends. The high level question
is whether we can exploit the batch structure of our data to improve the robustness of our estimator.
There are three separate, but equally important, metrics under which we can evaluate our estimator:
Robustness How accurately can we estimate µ in total variation distance?
Runtime Are there algorithms that run in polynomial time in all the relevant parameters?
Sample complexity How few batches do we need in order to estimate µ?
In the original paper, Qiao and Valiant [QV17] focus primarily on robustness. They give an algorithm
for learning general
µ fromuntrusted batches that uses a polynomial number of batches, and estimates

√
µ to within O ω + / k in total variation distance, and they proved that this is the best possible
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

