Towards Maximizing the Representation Gap
between In-Domain & Out-of-Distribution Examples

Jay Nandy
Wynne Hsu
Mong Li Lee
National University of Singapore
{jaynandy,whsu,leeml}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Among existing uncertainty estimation approaches, Dirichlet Prior Network (DPN)
distinctly models different predictive uncertainty types. However, for in-domain
examples with high data uncertainties among multiple classes, even a DPN model
often produces indistinguishable representations from the out-of-distribution (OOD)
examples, compromising their OOD detection performance. We address this shortcoming by proposing a novel loss function for DPN to maximize the representation
gap between in-domain and OOD examples. Experimental results demonstrate that
our proposed approach consistently improves OOD detection performance.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network (DNN) based models have achieved impeccable success to address various
real-world tasks [1, 2, 3]. However, when these intelligent systems fail, they do not provide any
explanation or warning. Predictive uncertainty estimation has emerged as an important research
direction to inform users about possible wrong predictions and allow users to react in an informative
manner, thus improving their reliability.
Predictive uncertainties of DNNs can come from three different sources: model uncertainty, data
uncertainty, and distributional uncertainty [4, 5]. Model uncertainty or epistemic uncertainty captures
the uncertainty in estimating the model parameters, conditioning on training data [4]. Data uncertainty
(or aleatoric uncertainty) arises from the natural complexities of the underlying distribution, such as
class overlap, label noise, homoscedastic and heteroscedastic noise, etc [4]. Distributional uncertainty
or dataset shift arises due to the distributional mismatch between the training and test examples, that
is, the test data is out-of-distribution (OOD) [6, 5].
It is useful to determine the sources of predictive uncertainties. In active learning, distributional uncertainty indicates that the classifier requires additional data for training. For real-world applications,
where the cost of errors are high, such as in autonomous vehicles [7], medical diagnosis [8], financial,
and legal fields [9], the source of uncertainty can allow manual intervention in an informed way.
Notable progress has been made for predictive uncertainty estimation. Bayesian neural networkbased models conflate the distributional uncertainty through model uncertainty [10, 4, 11, 12, 13].
However, since the true posterior for their model parameters are intractable, their success depend on
the nature of approximations. In contrast, non-Bayesian approaches can explicitly train the network in
a multi-task fashion, incorporating both in-domain and OOD examples to produce sharp and uniform
categorical predictions respectively [14, 15]. However, these approaches cannot robustly determine
the source of predictive uncertainty [5]. In particular, the presence of high data uncertainty among
multiple classes leads them to produce uniform categorical predictions for in-domain examples, often
making them indistinguishable from the OOD examples.
Dirichlet Prior Network (DPN) separately models different uncertainty types by producing sharp
uni-modal Dirichlet distributions for in-domain examples, and flat Dirichlet distributions for OOD
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

