NeuMiss networks: differentiable programming for
supervised learning with missing values
Marine Le Morvan1,2 Julie Josse1,3

Thomas Moreau1 Erwan Scornet3 Gaël Varoquaux1, 4

1

Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, Palaiseau, 91120, France
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS/IN2P3, IJCLab, 91405 Orsay, France
3
CMAP, UMR7641, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris, 91128 Palaiseau, France
4
Mila, McGill University, Montréal, Canada
2

{marine.le-morvan, julie.josse, thomas.moreau, gael.varoquaux}@inria.fr
erwan.scornet@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
The presence of missing values makes supervised learning much more challenging.
Indeed, previous work has shown that even when the response is a linear function
of the complete data, the optimal predictor is a complex function of the observed
entries and the missingness indicator. As a result, the computational or sample
complexities of consistent approaches depend on the number of missing patterns,
which can be exponential in the number of dimensions. In this work, we derive the
analytical form of the optimal predictor under a linearity assumption and various
missing data mechanisms including Missing at Random (MAR) and self-masking
(Missing Not At Random). Based on a Neumann-series approximation of the
optimal predictor, we propose a new principled architecture, named NeuMiss
networks. Their originality and strength come from the use of a new type of
non-linearity: the multiplication by the missingness indicator. We provide an
upper bound on the Bayes risk of NeuMiss networks, and show that they have
good predictive accuracy with both a number of parameters and a computational
complexity independent of the number of missing data patterns. As a result they
scale well to problems with many features, and remain statistically efficient for
medium-sized samples. Moreover, we show that, contrary to procedures using EM
or imputation, they are robust to the missing data mechanism, including difficult
MNAR settings such as self-masking.

1

Introduction

Increasingly complex data-collection pipelines, often assembling multiple sources of information, lead
to datasets with incomplete observations and complex missing-values mechanisms. The pervasiveness
of missing values has triggered an abundant statistical literature on the subject [14, 31]: a recent survey
reviewed more than 150 implementations to handle missing data [10]. Nevertheless, most methods
have been developed either for inferential purposes, i.e. to estimate parameters of a probabilistic
model of the fully-observed data, or for imputation, completing missing entries as well as possible
[6]. These methods often require strong assumptions on the missing-values mechanism, i.e. either
the missing at random (MAR) assumption [27] – the probability of being missing only depends on
observed values – or the more restrictive Missing Completely At Random assumption (MCAR) – the
missingness is independent of the data. In MAR or MCAR settings, good imputation is sufficient to
fit statistical models, or even train supervised-learning models [11]. In particular, a precise knowledge
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

