How does This Interaction Affect Me?
Interpretable Attribution for Feature Interactions

Michael Tsang, Sirisha Rambhatla, Yan Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
{tsangm,sirishar,yanliu.cs}@usc.edu

Abstract
Machine learning transparency calls for interpretable explanations of how inputs relate to predictions. Feature attribution is a way to analyze the impact of features on
predictions. Feature interactions are the contextual dependence between features
that jointly impact predictions. There are a number of methods that extract feature
interactions in prediction models; however, the methods that assign attributions
to interactions are either uninterpretable, model-specific, or non-axiomatic. We
propose an interaction attribution and detection framework called Archipelago
which addresses these problems and is also scalable in real-world settings. Our experiments on standard annotation labels indicate our approach provides significantly
more interpretable explanations than comparable methods, which is important for
analyzing the impact of interactions on predictions. We also provide accompanying
visualizations of our approach that give new insights into deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

The success of state-of-the-art prediction models such as neural networks is driven by their capability
to learn complex feature interactions. When such models are used to make predictions for users, we
may want to know how they personalize to us. Such model behavior can be explained via interaction
detection and attribution, i.e. if features influence each other and how these interactions contribute
to predictions, respectively. Interaction explanations are useful for applications such as sentiment
analysis [36], image classification [48], and recommendation tasks [21, 48].
Relevant methods for attributing predictions to feature interactions are black-box explanation methods
based on axioms (or principles), but these methods lack interpretability. One of the core issues is
that an interaction’s importance is not the same as its attribution. Techniques like Shapley Taylor
Interaction Index (STI) [14] and Integrated Hessians (IH) [25] combine these concepts in order to be
axiomatic. Specifically, they base an interaction’s attribution on non-additivity, i.e. the degree that
features non-additively affect an outcome. While non-additivity can be used for interaction detection,
it is not interpretable as an attribution measure as we see in Fig. 1. In addition, neither STI nor IH
is tractable for higher-order feature interactions [14, 46]. Hence, there is a need for interpretable,
axiomatic, and scalable methods for interaction attribution and corresponding interaction detection.
To this end, we propose a novel framework called Archipelago1 , which consists of an interaction
attribution method, ArchAttribute, and a corresponding interaction detector, ArchDetect, to
address the challenges of being interpretable, axiomatic, and scalable. Archipelago is named after
its ability to provide explanations by isolating feature interactions, or feature “islands”. The inputs to
Archipelago are a black-box model f and data instance x? , and its outputs are a set of interactions
and individual features {I} as well as an attribution score φ(I) for each of the feature sets I.
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/mtsang/archipelago

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

