On the equivalence of molecular graph convolution
and molecular wave function with poor basis set

Masashi Tsubaki
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
tsubaki.masashi@aist.go.jp
Teruyasu Mizoguchi
Institute of Industrial Science, University of Tokyo
teru@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In this study, we demonstrate that the linear combination of atomic orbitals
(LCAO), an approximation introduced by Pauling and Lennard-Jones in the 1920s,
corresponds to graph convolutional networks (GCNs) for molecules. However,
GCNs involve unnecessary nonlinearity and deep architecture. We also verify
that molecular GCNs are based on a poor basis function set compared with the
standard one used in theoretical calculations or quantum chemical simulations.
From these observations, we describe the quantum deep field (QDF), a machine
learning (ML) model based on an underlying quantum physics, in particular the
density functional theory (DFT). We believe that the QDF model can be easily
understood because it can be regarded as a single linear layer GCN. Moreover, it
uses two vanilla feedforward neural networks to learn an energy functional and a
Hohenberg–Kohn map that have nonlinearities inherent in quantum physics and
the DFT. For molecular energy prediction tasks, we demonstrated the viability of
an “extrapolation,” in which we trained a QDF model with small molecules, tested
it with large molecules, and achieved high extrapolation performance. We believe
that we should move away from the competition of interpolation accuracy within
benchmark datasets and evaluate ML models based on physics using an extrapolation setting; this will lead to reliable and practical applications, such as fast,
large-scale molecular screening for discovering effective materials.

1

Introduction

Recently, graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [1, 2] have been applied to molecular graphs. Although numerous variants of the molecular GCN have been developed [3, 4, 5] (Section 2.1), they
have a basic computational procedure: the GCN model (1) considers that each node (i.e., atom)
of a molecular graph has a multidimensional variable (i.e., the atom feature vector), (2) uses the
convolutional operation to update the feature vectors according to the graph structure defined by
the adjacency or distance matrix between the atoms in the molecule, and finally (3) outputs a value
(e.g., the energy of the molecule) via a readout function (e.g., the sum/mean of the updated vectors).
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are used in the convolutional operation. Therefore, GCNs involve
strong nonlinearity when modeling the molecular graph structure and have achieved good prediction
performance on large-scale benchmark datasets, such as QM9 [6].
In this study, from the perspective of quantum physics, we demonstrate that extant molecular GCNs
involve unnecessary nonlinearity and deep architecture. We first describe an approximation of quantum physics introduced by Pauling and Lennard-Jones in the 1920s [7, 8, 9], which states that the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

