R-learning in actor-critic model offers a biologically
relevant mechanism for sequential decision-making

Sergey Shuvaev1∗, Sarah Starosta1,2∗ , Duda Kvitsiani3 , Adam Kepecs1,2 , Alexei Koulakov1
1
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 2 Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis,
3
DANDRITE, Aarhus University | sshuvaev@cshl.edu, sarah.starosta@wustl.edu,
kvitsi@dandrite.au.dk, akepecs@wustl.edu, koulakov@cshl.edu

Abstract
When should you continue with your ongoing plans and when should you instead
decide to pursue better opportunities? We show in theory and experiment that such
stay-or-leave decisions are consistent with deep R-learning both behaviorally and
neuronally. Our results suggest that real-world agents leave depleting resources
when their reward rate falls below its exponential average, which, we argue, is a
Bayes optimal rule in dynamic natural environments. Our work links reinforcement
learning, the marginal value theorem and Bayesian inference approaches to offer a
learning algorithm and a decision rule for making sequential stay-or-leave choices.

1

Introduction

In everyday life we repeatedly face sequential stay-or-leave decisions. These decisions include time
investment, employment, entertainment and other choices in settings where rewards decrease over
time. For example, should we continue watching a TV series although each new season is not as
good as the previous one? The ways how real-world agents decide whether to commit to their current
option or to search for a better one are studied in this paper.
The puzzle of real-world sequential stay-or-leave decisions has started to get attention in behavioral
research only very recently (1). A few studies have explored sequential stay-or-leave decisions in
humans, or rodents – the model organism used to access neuronal activity at high resolution. In
both cases, decision patterns were collected in foraging tasks – the experimental settings where
subjects decide when to leave depleting resources (2). In human studies, foraging environments
were usually virtual with money used as a proxy for the reward (2). In animal tasks, reward options
were represented by multiple sources of primary rewards (e.g. food, water), decreasing in size or
probability over time to model natural resource depletion (2; 3).
In the aforementioned experiments, the average-case foraging decisions were consistent with the
Marginal Value Theorem (MVT) (2; 4) – a theoretical framework suggesting that an agent should
abandon depleting resources when the next expected reward falls below the average reward in the
environment discounted by the travel-related costs (Appendix A1). This approach, however, assumes
that the agents have the full knowledge of the environments, which may not be possible in real-world
settings. Alternative frameworks for the models of real-world decision-making allow the agents to
update their estimates of environmental variables. These frameworks, so far not often applied in a
context of foraging, include model-based reinforcement learning (RL) (1) and Bayesian inference (5)
– both assuming that an agent has a model of the environment where only a small number of relevant
variables are updated with the changes in environmental states (2).
The available theoretical frameworks for sequential stay-or-leave decision-making explained some
important aspects of these decisions, such as the average-case decision rules and how they may be
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

