Sanity-Checking Pruning Methods:
Random Tickets can Win the Jackpot

Jingtong Su1,∗ Yihang Chen2,∗ Tianle Cai3,4,∗
Tianhao Wu2

Ruiqi Gao3,4

Liwei Wang5,6,† Jason D. Lee3,†

1

Yuanpei College, Peking University
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University
4
Zhongguancun Haihua Institute for Frontier Information Technology
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
6
Center for Data Science, Peking University
2

Abstract
Network pruning is a method for reducing test-time computational resource requirements with minimal performance degradation. Conventional wisdom of pruning
algorithms suggests that: (1) Pruning methods exploit information from training
data to find good subnetworks; (2) The architecture of the pruned network is crucial
for good performance. In this paper, we conduct sanity checks for the above beliefs
on several recent unstructured pruning methods and surprisingly find that: (1) A
set of methods which aims to find good subnetworks of the randomly-initialized
network (which we call “initial tickets”), hardly exploits any information from the
training data; (2) For the pruned networks obtained by these methods, randomly
changing the preserved weights in each layer, while keeping the total number of preserved weights unchanged per layer, does not affect the final performance. These
findings inspire us to choose a series of simple data-independent prune ratios for
each layer, and randomly prune each layer accordingly to get a subnetwork (which
we call “random tickets”). Experimental results show that our zero-shot random
tickets outperform or attain a similar performance compared to existing “initial
tickets”. In addition, we identify one existing pruning method that passes our sanity
checks. We hybridize the ratios in our random ticket with this method and propose
a new method called “hybrid tickets”, which achieves further improvement.3

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved great success in the overparameterized regime [44, 35, 8, 7, 2].
However, overparameterization also leads to excessive computational and memory requirements.
To mitigate this, network pruning [33, 22, 15, 14, 6] has been proposed as an effective technique to
reduce the resource requirements with minimal performance degradation.
One typical line of pruning methods, exemplified by retraining [14], can be described as follows: First,
find a subnetwork of original network using pruning methods (which we call the “pruning step”), and
then, retrain this subnetwork to obtain the final pruned network (which we call the “retraining step”).
∗

Equal Contribution, reverse alphabetical order.
Corresponding authors.
3
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/JingtongSu/sanity-checking-pruning.

†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

