Multi-agent Trajectory Prediction with Fuzzy Query
Attention
Nitin Kamra
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
nkamra@usc.edu

Hao Zhu
Department of Computer Science, School of EECS
Peking University
Beijing, China
hzhu1998@pku.edu.cn

Dweep Trivedi
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
dtrivedi@usc.edu

Ming Zhang
Department of Computer Science, School of EECS
Peking University
Beijing, China
mzhang_cs@pku.edu.cn

Yan Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
yanliu.cs@usc.edu

Abstract
Trajectory prediction for scenes with multiple agents and entities is a challenging
problem in numerous domains such as traffic prediction, pedestrian tracking and
path planning. We present a general architecture to address this challenge which
models the crucial inductive biases of motion, namely, inertia, relative motion,
intents and interactions. Specifically, we propose a relational model to flexibly
model interactions between agents in diverse environments. Since it is well-known
that human decision making is fuzzy by nature, at the core of our model lies a novel
attention mechanism which models interactions by making continuous-valued
(fuzzy) decisions and learning the corresponding responses. Our architecture
demonstrates significant performance gains over existing state-of-the-art predictive
models in diverse domains such as human crowd trajectories, US freeway traffic,
NBA sports data and physics datasets. We also present ablations and augmentations
to understand the decision-making process and the source of gains in our model.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent settings are ubiquitous and predicting trajectories of agents in motion is a key challenge
in many domains, e.g., traffic prediction [28, 15], pedestrian tracking [1, 3] and path planning [20]. In
order to model multi-agent settings with complex underlying interactions, several recent works based
on graphs and graph neural networks have achieved significant success in prediction performance [23,
14]. However, modeling interactions between two agents is challenging because it is not a binary
true/false variable but is rather fuzzy1 by nature. For instance, a person driving a car on a freeway
1
We use the word fuzzy in this work to represent continuous-valued decisions over their discrete-valued
boolean counterparts and not necessarily to fuzzy logic.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

