Walsh-Hadamard Variational Inference
for Bayesian Deep Learning

Simone Rossi∗
Data Science Department
EURECOM (FR)
simone.rossi@eurecom.fr

Sébastien Marmin*
Data Science Department
EURECOM (FR)
sebastien.marmin@eurecom.fr

Maurizio Filippone
Data Science Department
EURECOM (FR)
maurizio.filippone@eurecom.fr

Abstract
Over-parameterized models, such as DeepNets and ConvNets, form a class of
models that are routinely adopted in a wide variety of applications, and for which
Bayesian inference is desirable but extremely challenging. Variational inference
offers the tools to tackle this challenge in a scalable way and with some degree of
flexibility on the approximation, but for over-parameterized models this is challenging due to the over-regularization property of the variational objective. Inspired
by the literature on kernel methods, and in particular on structured approximations of distributions of random matrices, this paper proposes Walsh-Hadamard
Variational Inference (WHVI), which uses Walsh-Hadamard-based factorization
strategies to reduce the parameterization and accelerate computations, thus avoiding over-regularization issues with the variational objective. Extensive theoretical
and empirical analyses demonstrate that WHVI yields considerable speedups and
model reductions compared to other techniques to carry out approximate inference
for over-parameterized models, and ultimately show how advances in kernel methods can be translated into advances in approximate Bayesian inference for Deep
Learning.

1

Introduction

Since its inception, Variational Inference (VI, [25]) has continuously gained popularity as a scalable
and flexible approximate inference scheme for a variety of models for which exact Bayesian inference
is intractable. Bayesian neural networks [35, 38] represent a good example of models for which
inference is intractable, and for which VI– and approximate inference in general – is challenging
due to the nontrivial form of the posterior distribution and the large dimensionality of the parameter
space [17, 14]. Recent advances in VI allow one to effectively deal with these issues in various ways.
For instance, a flexible class of posterior approximations can be constructed using, e.g., normalizing
flows [46], whereas the need to operate with large parameter spaces has pushed the research in the
direction of Bayesian compression [34, 36].
Employing VI is notoriously challenging for over-parameterized statistical models. In this paper, we
focus in particular on Bayesian Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and Bayesian Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) as typical examples of over-parameterized models. Let’s consider a supervised
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
∗

Equal contribution

