Barking up the right tree: an approach to search over
molecule synthesis DAGs

John Bradshaw

Brooks Paige

Matt J. Kusner

University of Cambridge
MPI for Intelligent Systems
jab255@cam.ac.uk

University College London
The Alan Turing Institute
b.paige@ucl.ac.uk

University College London
The Alan Turing Institute
m.kusner@ucl.ac.uk

Marwin H. S. Segler

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato

WWU Münster
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK
marwin.segler@wwu.de

University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
When designing new molecules with particular properties, it is not only important
what to make but crucially how to make it. These instructions form a synthesis
directed acyclic graph (DAG), describing how a large vocabulary of simple building
blocks can be recursively combined through chemical reactions to create more
complicated molecules of interest. In contrast, many current deep generative models
for molecules ignore synthesizability. We therefore propose a deep generative
model that better represents the real world process, by directly outputting molecule
synthesis DAGs. We argue that this provides sensible inductive biases, ensuring that
our model searches over the same chemical space that chemists would also have
access to, as well as interpretability. We show that our approach is able to model
chemical space well, producing a wide range of diverse molecules, and allows
for unconstrained optimization of an inherently constrained problem: maximize
certain chemical properties such that discovered molecules are synthesizable.

1

Introduction

Designing and discovering new molecules is key for addressing some of world’s most pressing
problems: creating new materials to tackle climate change, developing new medicines, and providing
agrochemicals to the world’s growing population. The molecular discovery process usually proceeds
in design-make-test-analyze cycles, where new molecules are designed, made in the lab, tested in
lab-based experiments to gather data, which is then analyzed to inform the next design step [29].
There has been a lot of recent interest in accelerating this feedback loop, by using machine learning
(ML) to design new molecules [3, 14, 23, 35, 38, 39, 52, 64, 67, 70, 71, 82]. We can break up these
developments into two connected goals: G1. Learning strong generative models of molecules
that can be used to sample novel molecules, for downstream screening and scoring tasks; and G2.
Molecular optimization: Finding molecules that optimize properties of interest (e.g. binding affinity,
solubility, non-toxicity, etc.). Both these goals try to reduce the total number of design-make-testanalyze cycles needed in a complementary manner, G1 by broadening the number of molecules that
can be considered in each step, and G2 by being smarter about which molecule to pick next.
Significant progress towards these goals has been made using: (a) representations ranging from
strings and grammars [23, 44, 67], to fragments [35, 53] and molecular graphs [46, 47, 72]; and (b)
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

