EvolveGraph: Multi-Agent Trajectory Prediction
with Dynamic Relational Reasoning

Jiachen Li1,2,∗ † Fan Yang2,∗
1

Honda Research Institute, USA

Masayoshi Tomizuka2
2

Chiho Choi1

University of California, Berkeley

{jiachen_li, fanyang16, tomizuka}@berkeley.edu

cchoi@honda-ri.com

Abstract
Multi-agent interacting systems are prevalent in the world, from purely physical
systems to complicated social dynamic systems. In many applications, effective
understanding of the situation and accurate trajectory prediction of interactive
agents play a significant role in downstream tasks, such as decision making and
planning. In this paper, we propose a generic trajectory forecasting framework
(named EvolveGraph) with explicit relational structure recognition and prediction
via latent interaction graphs among multiple heterogeneous, interactive agents.
Considering the uncertainty of future behaviors, the model is designed to provide
multi-modal prediction hypotheses. Since the underlying interactions may evolve
even with abrupt changes, and different modalities of evolution may lead to different
outcomes, we address the necessity of dynamic relational reasoning and adaptively
evolving the interaction graphs. We also introduce a double-stage training pipeline
which not only improves training efficiency and accelerates convergence, but
also enhances model performance. The proposed framework is evaluated on
both synthetic physics simulations and multiple real-world benchmark datasets
in various areas. The experimental results illustrate that our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance in terms of prediction accuracy.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent trajectory prediction is critical in many real-world applications, such as autonomous
driving, mobile robot navigation and other areas where a group of entities interact with each other,
giving rise to complicated behavior patterns at the level of both individuals and the multi-agent
system as a whole. Since usually only the trajectories of individual entities are available without any
knowledge of the underlying interaction patterns, and there are usually multiple possible modalities
for each agent, it is challenging to model such dynamics and forecast their future behaviors.
There have been a number of existing works trying to provide a systematic solution to multi-agent
interaction modeling. Some related techniques include, but not limited to social pooling layers [1],
attention mechanisms [42, 19, 12, 40, 21], message passing over graphs [8, 37, 22], etc. These
techniques can be summarized as implicit interaction modeling by information aggregation. Another
line of research is to explicitly perform inference over the structure of the latent interaction graph,
which allows for relational structures with multiple interaction types [18, 2]. Our approach falls into
this category but with significant extension and performance enhancement over existing methods.
A closely related work is NRI [18], in which the interaction graph is static with homogeneous nodes
during training. This is sufficient for the systems involving homogeneous type of agents with fixed
∗
†

indicates equal contribution
Work done during Jiachen’s internship at Honda Research Institute, USA.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

