Representation Learning for Integrating
Multi-domain Outcomes to Optimize Individualized
Treatments
Yuan Chen
Department of Biostatistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10032
yc3281@cumc.columbia.edu

Donglin Zeng
Department of Biostatistics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27516
dzeng@email.unc.edu

Tianchen Xu
Department of Biostatistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10032
tx2155@cumc.columbia.edu

Yuanjia Wang
Department of Biostatistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10032
yw2016@cumc.columbia.edu

Abstract
For mental disorders, patients’ underlying mental states are non-observed latent constructs which have to be inferred from observed multi-domain measurements such
as diagnostic symptoms and patient functioning scores. Additionally, substantial
heterogeneity in the disease diagnosis between patients needs to be addressed for
optimizing individualized treatment policy in order to achieve precision medicine.
To address these challenges, we propose an integrated learning framework that can
simultaneously learn patients’ underlying mental states and recommend optimal
treatments for each individual. This learning framework is based on the measurement theory in psychiatry for modeling multiple disease diagnostic measures as
arising from the underlying causes (true mental states). It allows incorporation of
the multivariate pre- and post-treatment outcomes as well as biological measures
while preserving the invariant structure for representing patients’ latent mental
states. A multi-layer neural network is used to allow complex treatment effect
heterogeneity. Optimal treatment policy can be inferred for future patients by comparing their potential mental states under different treatments given the observed
multi-domain pre-treatment measurements. Experiments on simulated data and
a real-world clinical trial data show that the learned treatment polices compare
favorably to alternative methods on heterogeneous treatment effects, and have
broad utilities which lead to better patient outcomes on multiple domains.

1

Introduction

For mental disorders, patients’ mental states are of primary interest and are crucial for optimizing individualized treatment policy. However, a patient’s true mental state is not observed due to the complex
nature of the disease. We only have assessments from disease diagnostic symptoms in an instrument
or questionnaire that consists of multiple items (an item is a variable on an instrument/questionnaire).
For example, the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D, [6]), which consists of 17 diagnostic
symptom items, is designed to measure a patient’s depression severity. Therefore, a patient’s true
underlying mental status needs to be inferred based on the the observed multi-domain measurements
in order to prescribe optimal treatments and achieve precision medicine.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

