PAC-Bayes Learning Bounds for
Sample-Dependent Priors

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research and
Rutgers University
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Satyen Kale
Google Research
satyenkale@google.com

Stefani Karp
Google Research and
Carnegie Mellon University
stefanik@google.com

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research and
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
mohri@google.com

Abstract
We present a series of new PAC-Bayes learning guarantees for randomized algorithms with sample-dependent priors. Our most general bounds make no assumption on the priors and are given in terms of certain covering numbers under the
infinite-Rényi divergence and the `1 distance. We show how to use these general
bounds to derive learning bounds in the setting where the sample-dependent priors
obey an infinite-Rényi divergence or `1 -distance sensitivity condition. We also
provide a flexible framework for computing PAC-Bayes bounds, under certain
stability assumptions on the sample-dependent priors, and show how to use this
framework to give more refined bounds when the priors satisfy an infinite-Rényi
divergence sensitivity condition.

1

Introduction

The PAC-Bayesian framework provides generalization bounds for the performance of randomized
learning algorithms [McAllester, 1999b,a, Shawe-Taylor and Williamson, 1997]. Rather than outputting a single hypothesis, such algorithms output a probability distribution Q (the posterior) over a
hypothesis set H. In the PAC-Bayes framework, the generalization guarantees associated with Q are
typically expressed in terms of the relative entropy, D(Q ∥ P ), where P is a fixed prior distribution
over the hypothesis set. In the traditional framework, the prior P must be selected before receiving a
training sample [Langford and Caruana, 2002, Langford and Seeger, 2001, Seeger, 2002].
In recent years, there have been efforts to establish more refined PAC-Bayes bounds in which the
prior can depend on the distribution generating the data or a separate sample drawn from the same
distribution [Catoni, 2007, Ambroladze et al., 2007, Parrado-Hernández et al., 2012, Lever et al.,
2013]. However, in practice, information about the underlying data distribution is available only via
the training sample and discarding a fraction of that data to compute a generalization bound can be
wasteful, motivating the study of PAC-Bayes bounds for sample-dependent priors.1
In the context of overparameterized deep neural networks, where deriving non-vacuous generalization
bounds is notoriously hard, it has been argued that sample-dependent priors can lead to finer generalization bounds [Nagarajan and Kolter, 2019, Dziugaite and Roy, 2017, Neyshabur et al., 2018].
1
The same notion has also been called data-dependent priors in the literature [Dziugaite and Roy, 2018a,
Negrea et al., 2019, Dziugaite et al., 2020, Haghifam et al., 2020].

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

