Domain Generalization via Entropy Regularization

Shanshan Zhao
The University of Sydney
Australia
szha4333@uni.sydney.edu.au

Mingming Gong
University of Melbourne
Australia
mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au

Tongliang Liu
The University of Sydney
Australia
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Huan Fu
Alibaba Group
China
fuhuan.fh@alibaba-inc.com

Dacheng Tao
The University of Sydney
Australia
dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Domain generalization aims to learn from multiple source domains a predictive
model that can generalize to unseen target domains. One essential problem in domain generalization is to learn discriminative domain-invariant features. To arrive at
this, some methods introduce a domain discriminator through adversarial learning
to match the feature distributions in multiple source domains. However, adversarial
training can only guarantee that the learned features have invariant marginal distributions, while the invariance of conditional distributions is more important for
prediction in new domains. To ensure the conditional invariance of learned features,
we propose an entropy regularization term that measures the dependency between
the learned features and the class labels. Combined with the typical task-related
loss, e.g., cross-entropy loss for classification, and adversarial loss for domain
discrimination, our overall objective is guaranteed to learn conditional-invariant
features across all source domains and thus can learn classifiers with better generalization capabilities. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method through
comparison with state-of-the-art methods on both simulated and real-world datasets.
Code is available at: https://github.com/sshan-zhao/DG_via_ER.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the remarkable success of modern machine learning techniques in
various applications. However, a fundamental problem machine learning suffers from is that the
model learned from training data often does not generalize well on data sampled from a different
distribution, due to the existence of data bias [1, 2] between the training and test data. To tackle this
issue, a significant effort has been made in domain adaptation, which reduces the discrepancy between
source and target domains [3–8]. The main drawback of this approach is that one has to repeat training
for each new dataset, which can be time-consuming. Therefore, domain generalization [9] is proposed
to learn generalizable models by leveraging information from multiple source domains [10–13].
Since there is no prior information about the distribution of the target domain during training, it
is difficult to match the distributions between source and target domains, which makes domain
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

