An Asymptotically Optimal Primal-Dual Incremental
Algorithm for Contextual Linear Bandits

Andrea Tirinzoni∗
Politecnico di Milano
andrea.tirinzoni@polimi.it

Matteo Pirotta
Facebook AI Research
pirotta@fb.com

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research
lazaric@fb.com

Abstract
In the contextual linear bandit setting, algorithms built on the optimism principle
fail to exploit the structure of the problem and have been shown to be asymptotically
suboptimal. In this paper, we follow recent approaches of deriving asymptotically
optimal algorithms from problem-dependent regret lower bounds and we introduce
a novel algorithm improving over the state-of-the-art along multiple dimensions.
We build on a reformulation of the lower bound, where context distribution and
exploration policy are decoupled, and we obtain an algorithm robust to unbalanced
context distributions. Then, using an incremental primal-dual approach to solve the
Lagrangian relaxation of the lower bound, we obtain a scalable and computationally
efficient algorithm. Finally, we remove forced exploration and build on confidence
intervals of the optimization problem to encourage a minimum level of exploration
that is better adapted to the problem structure. We demonstrate the asymptotic
optimality of our algorithm, while providing both problem-dependent and worstcase finite-time regret guarantees. Our bounds scale with the logarithm of the
number of arms, thus avoiding the linear dependence common in all related prior
works. Notably, we establish minimax optimality for any learning horizon in the
special case of non-contextual linear bandits. Finally, we verify that our algorithm
obtains better empirical performance than state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

We study the contextual linear bandit (CLB) setting [e.g., 1], where at each time step t the learner
observes a context Xt drawn from a context distribution ρ, pulls an arm At , and receives a reward
Yt drawn from a distribution whose expected value is a linear combination between d-dimensional
features φ(Xt , At ) describing context and arm, and an unknown parameter θ? . The objective of the
learner is to maximize the reward over time, that is to minimize the cumulative regret w.r.t. an optimal
strategy that selects the best arm in each context. This setting formalizes a wide range of problems
such as online recommendation systems, clinical trials, dialogue systems, and many others [2].
Popular algorithmic principles, such as optimism-in-face-of-uncertainty and Thompson sampling
[3], have been applied to this setting leading to algorithms such as OFUL [4] and L IN TS [5, 6] with
strong finite-time worst-case regret guarantees. Nonetheless, Lattimore & Szepesvari [7] recently
showed that these algorithms are not asymptotically optimal (in a problem-dependent sense) as
they fail to adapt to the structure of the problem at hand. In fact, in the CLB setting, the values of
∗

Work done while at Facebook.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

