AI Feynman 2.0: Pareto-optimal symbolic regression
exploiting graph modularity

Silviu-Marian Udrescu1 , Andrew Tan1 , Jiahai Feng1 , Orisvaldo Neto1 , Tailin Wu2 & Max Tegmark1,3
1
MIT Dept. of Physics and Institute for AI & Fundamental Interactions, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Stanford Dept. of Computer Science, Palo Alto, CA, USA
3
Theiss Research, La Jolla, CA, USA
1
{sudrescu, aktan, fjiahai, oris,tegmark}@mit.edu, 2 tailin@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We present an improved method for symbolic regression that seeks to fit data to
formulas that are Pareto-optimal, in the sense of having the best accuracy for a given
complexity. It improves on the previous state-of-the-art by typically being orders
of magnitude more robust toward noise and bad data, and also by discovering many
formulas that stumped previous methods. We develop a method for discovering
generalized symmetries (arbitrary modularity in the computational graph of a
formula) from gradient properties of a neural network fit. We use normalizing
flows to generalize our symbolic regression method to probability distributions
from which we only have samples, and employ statistical hypothesis testing to
accelerate robust brute-force search.

1

Introduction
1

25

Relative r.m.s. error

Inacuraccy [bits/data point]

30

10- 3

20
15

10- 6

10
5
0
0

5

10

15

20

Complexity [bits]

25

30

10- 9

Figure 1: Our symbolic regression of data on how kinetic energy depends on mass, velocity and the
speed of light discovers a Pareto-frontier of four formulas that are each the most accurate given their
complexity. Convex corners reveal particularly useful formulas, in this case Einstein’s formula and
the classical approximation mv 2 /2.
A central challenge in science is symbolic regression: discovering a symbolic expression that provides
a simple yet accurate fit to a given data set. More specifically, we are given a table of numbers,
whose rows are of the form {x1 , ..., xn , y} where y = f (x1 , ..., xn ), and our task is to discover the
correct symbolic expression (composing mathematical functions from a user-provided set) for the
unknown mystery function f , optionally including the complication of noise and outliers. Science
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

