Variational Policy Gradient Method for
Reinforcement Learning with General Utilities
Junyu Zhang
Department of Electrical Engineering
Center for Statistics and Machine Learning
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544
junyuz@princeton.edu
Amrit Singh Bedi
CISD
US Army Research Laboratory
Adelphi, MD 20783
amrit0714@gmail.com

Alec Koppel
CISD
US Army Research Laboratory
Adelphi, MD 20783
alec.e.koppel.civ@mail.mil
Csaba Szepesvári
Department of Computer Science
DeepMind/University of Alberta
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Mengdi Wang
Department of Electrical Engineering
Center for Statistics and Machine Learning
Princeton University/Deepmind, Princeton, NJ 08544
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Abstract
In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) systems with general goals beyond a
cumulative sum of rewards have gained traction, such as in constrained problems,
exploration, and acting upon prior experiences. In this paper, we consider policy optimization in Markov Decision Problems, where the objective is a general concave
utility function of the state-action occupancy measure, which subsumes several
of the aforementioned examples as special cases. Such generality invalidates the
Bellman equation. As this means that dynamic programming no longer works, we
focus on direct policy search. Analogously to the Policy Gradient Theorem [44]
available for RL with cumulative rewards, we derive a new Variational Policy Gradient Theorem for RL with general utilities, which establishes that the parametrized
policy gradient may be obtained as the solution of a stochastic saddle point problem involving the Fenchel dual of the utility function. We develop a variational
Monte Carlo gradient estimation algorithm to compute the policy gradient based
on sample paths. We prove that the variational policy gradient scheme converges
globally to the optimal policy for the general objective, though the optimization
problem is nonconvex. We also establish its rate of convergence of the order O(1/t)
by exploiting the hidden convexity of the problem, and proves that it converges
exponentially when the problem admits hidden strong convexity. Our analysis
applies to the standard RL problem with cumulative rewards as a special case, in
which case our result improves the available convergence rate.

1

Introduction

The standard formulation of reinforcement learning (RL) is concerned with finding a policy that
maximizes the expected sum of rewards along the sample paths generated by the policy. The additive
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

