Explore Aggressively, Update Conservatively:
Stochastic Extragradient Methods with Variable Stepsize Scaling

Yu-Guan Hsieh
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, LJK
38000 Grenoble, France
yu-guan.hsieh@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

Franck Iutzeler
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, LJK
38000 Grenoble, France
franck.iutzeler@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

Jérôme Malick
CNRS, LJK
38000 Grenoble, France
jerome.malick@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG
38000 Grenoble, France
Criteo AI Lab, France
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
Owing to their stability and convergence speed, extragradient methods have become a staple for solving large-scale saddle-point problems in machine learning.
The basic premise of these algorithms is the use of an extrapolation step before performing an update; thanks to this exploration step, extragradient methods overcome
many of the non-convergence issues that plague gradient descent/ascent schemes.
On the other hand, as we show in this paper, running vanilla extragradient with
stochastic gradients may jeopardize its convergence, even in simple bilinear models.
To overcome this failure, we investigate a double stepsize extragradient algorithm
where the exploration step evolves at a more aggressive time-scale compared to the
update step. We show that this modification allows the method to converge even
with stochastic gradients, and we derive sharp convergence rates under an error
bound condition.

1

Introduction

A major obstacle in the training of generative adversarial networks (GANs) is the lack of an implementable, strongly convergent method based on stochastic gradients. The reason for this is that the
coupling of two (or more) neural networks gives rise to behaviors and phenomena that do not occur
when minimizing an individual loss function, irrespective of the complexity of its landscape. As a
result, there has been significant interest in the literature to codify the failures of GAN training, and
to propose methods that could potentially overcome them.
Perhaps the most prominent of these failures is the appearance of cycles [4, 6, 7, 20, 21] and,
potentially, the transition to aperiodic orbits and chaos [3, 8, 28, 29, 31]. Surprisingly, non-convergent
phenomena of this kind are observed even in very simple saddle-point problems such as twodimensional, unconstrained bilinear games [4, 7, 21]. In view of this, it is quite common to examine
the convergence (or non-convergence) of a gradient training scheme in bilinear models before
applying it to more complicated, non-convex/non-concave problems.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

