Lower Bounds and Optimal Algorithms for
Personalized Federated Learning

Filip Hanzely
KAUST
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
filip.hanzely@kaust.edu.sa

Slavomír Hanzely
KAUST
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
slavomir.hanzely@kaust.edu.sa

Samuel Horváth
KAUST
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
samuel.horvath@kaust.edu.sa

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
In this work, we consider the optimization formulation of personalized federated
learning recently introduced by [19] which was shown to give an alternative explanation to the workings of local SGD methods. Our first contribution is establishing
the first lower bounds for this formulation, for both the communication complexity
and the local oracle complexity. Our second contribution is the design of several
optimal methods matching these lower bounds in almost all regimes. These are the
first provably optimal methods for personalized federated learning. Our optimal
methods include an accelerated variant of FedProx, and an accelerated variancereduced version of FedAvg/Local SGD. We demonstrate the practical superiority of
our methods through extensive numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [32, 24] is a relatively new field attracting much attention lately. Specifically,
FL is a subfield of distributed machine learning that aims to fit the data stored locally on a very large
number of heterogeneous clients. Unlike typical distributed learning inside a data center, each FL
client only sees his/her data, which might differ from the population average significantly. Furthermore, as the clients are often physically located far away from the central server, communication
becomes a notable bottleneck, which is far more significant compared to centralized datacenter
learning.
While the key factor differentiating FL from other varieties of supervised learning lies in the practical
considerations coming from the need to train models from private and heterogeneous data stored
across a large number of heterogeneous and not always available devices, FL is supervised learning,
and as such shares the same mathematical formalism. In particular, the standard formulation of FL
aims to find the minimizer of the overall population loss
n
n
1X
1X
min
fi (z) =
min
fi (xi ),
(1)
z∈Rd n
x1 ,x2 ,...,xn ∈Rd n
i=1
i=1
subject to x1 = x2 = · · · = xn ,
where fi is the loss of the client i that only depends on his/her own local data.
However, the requirements of several FL applications [53, 25, 10] question the appropriateness of the
objective (1) as a modeling paradigm for FL. Specifically, the minimizer of the overall population
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

