CompRess: Self-Supervised Learning by
Compressing Representations

Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani∗ Ajinkya Tejankar∗ Hamed Pirsiavash
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
{soroush,at6,hpirsiav}@umbc.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised learning aims to learn good representations with unlabeled data.
Recent works have shown that larger models benefit more from self-supervised
learning than smaller models. As a result, the gap between supervised and selfsupervised learning has been greatly reduced for larger models. In this work,
instead of designing a new pseudo task for self-supervised learning, we develop a
model compression method to compress an already learned, deep self-supervised
model (teacher) to a smaller one (student). We train the student model so that
it mimics the relative similarity between the datapoints in the teacher’s embedding space. For AlexNet, our method outperforms all previous methods including
the fully supervised model on ImageNet linear evaluation (59.0% compared to
56.5%) and on nearest neighbor evaluation (50.7% compared to 41.4%). To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first time a self-supervised AlexNet has outperformed supervised one on ImageNet classification. Our code is available here:
https://github.com/UMBCvision/CompRess

1

Introduction

Supervised deep learning needs lots of annotated data, but the annotation process is particularly
expensive in some domains like medical images. Moreover, the process is prone to human bias and
may also result in ambiguous annotations. Hence, we are interested in self-supervised learning (SSL)
where we learn rich representations from unlabeled data. One may use these learned features along
with a simple linear classifier to build a recognition system with small annotated data. It is shown that
SSL models trained on ImageNet without labels outperform the supervised models when transferred
to other tasks [9, 24].
Some recent self-supervised learning algorithms have shown that increasing the capacity of the
architecture results in much better representations. For instance, for SimCLR method [9], the gap
between supervised and self-supervised is much smaller for ResNet-50x4 compared to ResNet-50
(also shown in Figure 1). Given this observation, we are interested in learning better representations
for small models by compressing a deep self-supervised model.
In edge computing applications, we prefer to run the model (e.g., an image classifier) on the device
(e.g., IoT) rather than sending the images to the cloud. During inference, this reduces the privacy
concerns, latency, power usage, and cost. Hence, there is need for rich, small models. Compressing
SSL models goes beyond that and reduces the privacy concerns at the training time as well. For
instance, one can download a rich self-supervised MobileNet model that can generalize well to other
tasks and finetune it on his/her own data without sending any data to the cloud for training.
Since we assume our teacher has not seen any labels, its output is an embedding rather than a
probability distribution over some categories. Hence, standard model distillation methods [26] cannot
∗

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

