Dynamic allocation of limited memory resources
in reinforcement learning

Nisheet Patel∗
Department of Basic Neurosciences
University of Geneva
nisheet.patel@unige.ch

Luigi Acerbi
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
luigi.acerbi@helsinki.fi

Alexandre Pouget
Department of Basic Neurosciences
University of Geneva
alexandre.pouget@unige.ch

Abstract
Biological brains are inherently limited in their capacity to process and store
information, but are nevertheless capable of solving complex tasks with apparent
ease. Intelligent behavior is related to these limitations, since resource constraints
drive the need to generalize and assign importance differentially to features in
the environment or memories of past experiences. Recently, there have been
parallel efforts in reinforcement learning and neuroscience to understand strategies
adopted by artificial and biological agents to circumvent limitations in information
storage. However, the two threads have been largely separate. In this article, we
propose a dynamical framework to maximize expected reward under constraints of
limited resources, which we implement with a cost function that penalizes precise
representations of action-values in memory, each of which may vary in its precision.
We derive from first principles an algorithm, Dynamic Resource Allocator (DRA),
which we apply to two standard tasks in reinforcement learning and a model-based
planning task, and find that it allocates more resources to items in memory that have
a higher impact on cumulative rewards. Moreover, DRA learns faster when starting
with a higher resource budget than what it eventually allocates for performing well
on tasks, which may explain why frontal cortical areas in biological brains appear
more engaged in early stages of learning before settling to lower asymptotic levels
of activity. Our work provides a normative solution to the problem of learning how
to allocate costly resources to a collection of uncertain memories in a manner that
is capable of adapting to changes in the environment.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful form of learning wherein agents interact with their
environment by taking actions available to them and observing the outcome of their choices in order
to maximize a scalar reward signal. Most RL algorithms use a value function in order to find good
policies [1, 2] because knowing the optimal value function is sufficient to find an optimal policy [3, 4].
However, RL models typically assume that agents can access and update the value function for each
state or state-action pair with nearly infinite precision. In neural circuits, however, this assumption
∗
Current address: Département des neurosciences fondamentales, Université de Genève, CMU, 1 rue
Michel-Servet, 1206 Genève, Switzerland. Alternative e-mail: nisheet.pat@gmail.com.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

