A mathematical model for automatic differentiation
in machine learning

Jérôme Bolte˚
Toulouse School of Economics
Univ. Toulouse
Toulouse, France

Edouard Pauwels
IRIT, CNRS
Univ. Toulouse
Toulouse, France

Abstract
Automatic differentiation, as implemented today, does not have a simple mathematical model adapted to the needs of modern machine learning. In this work we
articulate the relationships between differentiation of programs as implemented
in practice and differentiation of nonsmooth functions. To this end we provide
a simple class of functions, a nonsmooth calculus, and show how they apply to
stochastic approximation methods. We also evidence the issue of artificial critical
points created by algorithmic differentiation and show how usual methods avoid
these points with probability one.

1

Introduction

Optimization algorithms based on backpropagation oracles, and more generally on automatic or
algorithmic differentiation (AD) [41, 39], are one of the most widely used training tools for modern
learning architectures [14, 32, 15, 18, 20, 3, 16]. They often rely on popular numerical implementations as TensorFlow or PyTorch [1, 36]. However, for nonsmooth, nonconvex losses, AD does not
have a stable theory [23, 25, 26, 2, 30, 28, 29, 12], matching the actual practice. We wish to present a
simple mathematical framework addressing this issue. Let us progressively explain our approach.
1.1

What is backpropagation?

Algorithmic differentiation acts on programs not on functions: To convey this fact we carry
out a small experiment in TensorFlow [1] with the function relu : t ÞÑ maxt0, tu, see Appendix A.2
for implementation details. Algorithmic differentiation is displayed in Figure 1, in particular, we
have relu1 p0q “ 0. Consider the two functions
relu2 : t ÞÑ relup´tq ` t,

relu3 : t ÞÑ

1
preluptq ` relu2 ptqq.
2

As mathematical functions on R these are equal to relu. However TensorFlow returns relu12 p0q “ 1
and relu13 p0q “ 1{2 (Figure 1). Indeed, AD does not act on functions, but on their representations,
i.e., on programs. Different programs implementing the same function may provide different results,
beyond numerical precision; we refer to this as the spurious behaviour of AD for nonsmooth
functions2 . Let us explore this phenomenon further. The function zero : t ÞÑ relu2 ptq ´ reluptq,
outputs constantly 0 but AD gives zero1 p0q “ 1. More generally, one can modify the value of the
derivative of a given function at prescribed arguments (Figure 1). This may generate artificial critical
points; for instance x Ñ x ´ zero is the identity but its derivative at 0 according to AD is 0.
˚

Authors in alphabetical order.
The validity domain of AD is restricted in theory to smooth functions [23], yet it is common practice to use
it for nonsmooth functions.
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

