Minimax Estimation of Conditional Moment Models
Nishanth Dikkala
MIT
nishanthd@csail.mit.edu

Greg Lewis
Microsoft Research
glewis@microsoft.com

Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research
lmackey@microsoft.com

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
vasy@microsoft.com

Abstract
We develop an approach for estimating models described via conditional moment
restrictions, with a prototypical application being non-parametric instrumental
variable regression. We introduce a min-max criterion function under which the
estimation problem can be thought of as solving a zero-sum game between a
modeler who is optimizing over the hypothesis space of the target model and an
adversary who identifies violating moments over a test function space. We analyze
the statistical estimation rate of the resulting estimator for arbitrary hypothesis
spaces, with respect to an appropriate analogue of the mean squared error metric, for
ill-posed inverse problems. We show that when the minimax criterion is regularized
with a second moment penalty on the test function and the test function space is
sufficiently rich, the estimation rate scales with the critical radius of the hypothesis
and test function spaces, a quantity which typically gives tight fast rates. Our main
result follows from a novel localized Rademacher analysis of statistical learning
problems defined via minimax objectives. We provide applications of our main
results for several hypothesis spaces used in practice such as: reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces, high dimensional sparse linear functions, spaces defined via shape
constraints, ensemble estimators such as random forests, and neural networks.
For each of these applications we provide computationally efficient optimization
methods for solving the corresponding minimax problem (e.g., stochastic first-order
heuristics for neural networks). In several applications, we show how our modified
mean squared error rate, combined with conditions that bound the ill-posedness
of the inverse problem, lead to mean squared error rates. We conclude with an
extensive experimental analysis of the proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Understanding how policy choices affect social systems requires an understanding of the underlying
causal relationships between them. To measure these causal relationships, social scientists look to
either field experiments or quasi-experimental variation in observational data. Most observational
studies rely on assumptions that can be formalized in moment conditions. This is the basis of the
estimation approach known as generalized method of moments (GMM) [Hansen, 1982].
While GMM is an incredibly flexible estimation approach, it suffers from some drawbacks. The
underlying independence (randomization) assumptions often imply an infinite number of moment
A very preliminary version of this work appeared as Adversarial Generalized Method of Moments (see
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.07164)
Associated code can be found in https://github.com/microsoft/AdversarialGMM.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

