Geometric Dataset Distances via Optimal Transport
David Alvarez-Melis
Microsoft Research, New England
alvarez.melis@microsoft.com

Nicolò Fusi
Microsoft Research, New England
nfusi@microsoft.com

Abstract
The notion of task similarity is at the core of various machine learning paradigms,
such as domain adaptation and meta-learning. Current methods to quantify it are
often heuristic, make strong assumptions on the label sets across the tasks, and
many are architecture-dependent, relying on task-specific optimal parameters (e. g.,
require training a model on each dataset). In this work we propose an alternative
notion of distance between datasets that (i) is model-agnostic, (ii) does not involve
training, (iii) can compare datasets even if their label sets are completely disjoint
and (iv) has solid theoretical footing. This distance relies on optimal transport,
which provides it with rich geometry awareness, interpretable correspondences
and well-understood properties. Our results show that this novel distance provides
meaningful comparison of datasets, and correlates well with transfer learning
hardness across various experimental settings and datasets.

1

Introduction

A key hallmark of machine learning practice is that labeled data from the application of interest is
usually scarce. For this reason, there is vast interest in methods that can combine, adapt and transfer
knowledge across datasets and domains. Entire research areas are devoted to these goals, such as
domain adaptation, transfer-learning and meta-learning. A fundamental concept underlying all these
paradigms is the notion of distance (or more generally, similarity) between datasets. For instance,
transferring knowledge across similar domains should intuitively be easier than across distant ones.
Likewise, given a choice of various datasets to pretrain a model on, it would seem natural to choose
the one that is closest to the task of interest.
Despite its evident usefulness and apparent simpleness, the notion of distance between datasets is
an elusive one, and quantifying it efficiently and in a principled manner remains largely an open
problem. Doing so requires solving various challenges that commonly arise precisely in the settings
for which this notion would be most useful, such as the ones mentioned above. For example, in
supervised machine learning settings the datasets consist of both features and labels, and while
defining a distance between the former is often —though not always— trivial, doing so for the labels
is far from it, particularly if the label-sets across the two tasks are not identical (as is often the case
for off-the-shelf pretrained models).
Current approaches to transfer learning that seek to quantify dataset similarity circumvent these
challenges in various ingenious, albeit often heuristic, ways. A common approach is to compare the
dataset via proxies, such as the learning curves of a pre-specified model [37] or its optimal parameters
[2, 32] on a given task, or by making strong assumptions on the similarity or co-occurrence of labels
across the two datasets [50]. Most of these approaches lack guarantees, are highly dependent on
the probe model used, and require training a model to completion (e. g., to find optimal parameters)
on each dataset being compared. On the opposite side of the spectrum are principled notions of
discrepancy between domains [9, 41], which nevertheless are often not computable in practice, or do
not scale to the type of datasets used in machine learning practice.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

