Towards practical differentially private causal graph
discovery

Lun Wang
University of California, Berkeley
wanglun@berkeley.edu

Qi Pang
Zhejiang University
pangqi@zju.edu.cn

Dawn Song
University of California, Berkeley
dawnsong@gmail.com

Abstract
Causal graph discovery refers to the process of discovering causal relation graphs
from purely observational data. Like other statistical data, a causal graph might
leak sensitive information about participants in the dataset. In this paper, we
present a differentially private causal graph discovery algorithm, Priv-PC, which
improves both utility and running time compared to the state-of-the-art. The design of Priv-PC follows a novel paradigm called sieve-and-examine which
uses a small amount of privacy budget to filter out “insignificant” queries, and
leverages the remaining budget to obtain highly accurate answers for the “significant” queries. We also conducted the first sensitivity analysis for conditional independence tests including conditional Kendall’s τ and conditional Spearman’s ρ. We evaluated Priv-PC on 7 public datasets and compared with the
state-of-the-art. The results show that Priv-PC achieves 10.61 to 293.87 times
speedup and better utility. The implementation of Priv-PC, including the code
used in our evaluation, is available at https://github.com/sunblaze-ucb/
Priv-PC-Differentially-Private-Causal-Graph-Discovery.

1

Introduction

Causal graph discovery refers to the process of discovering causal relation graphs from purely observational data. Causal graph discovery has seen wide deployment in areas like genomics, ecology,
epidemiology, space physics, clinical medicine, and neuroscience. The PC algorithm [30] is one of
the most popular causal discovery algorithms. It is comprised of a series of independence tests like
Spearman’s ρ [29], Kendall’s τ [14], G-test [20] or χ2 -test [21]. The algorithm starts by connecting
all variables in the graph. If an independence test indicates that two variables are independent, the
edge between the two variables will be removed from the causal graph. The process will continue
until the edges between independent variables are totally removed.
Like other statistical data, a causal graph can leak information about participants in the dataset.
For instance, Genome-Wide Association Studies involve finding causal relations between Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) and diseases. In this case, a causal link between a specific SNP
and a disease may indicate the participation of a minority patient. However, the problem of effective
causal graph discovery with differential privacy remains largely unsolved.
State-of-the-art. The most straightforward solution is to perturb all the independence tests in the
PC algorithm with calibrated noise such as Laplace or Gaussian noise [9]. However, as pointed out
in [33], the numerous independence tests incur too much noise to output meaningful causal graphs.
Even tight composition techniques based on Rényi differential privacy [1, 22, 32] cannot address
the issue. The state-of-the-art solution to differentially private causal graph discovery is EM-PC [33],
a modification of the PC algorithm which uses the exponential mechanism to guarantee differential
privacy. Instead of perturbing each independence test with noise, EM-PC randomly selects how
many and which edges to delete using the exponential mechanism. In this way, EM-PC manages to
achieve a relative balance between utility and privacy. However, EM-PC has two severe defects. First,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

