Constraining Variational Inference with
Geometric Jensen-Shannon Divergence
Jacob Deasy⇤, Nikola Simidjievski, Pietro Liò
Department of Computer Science and Technology
University of Cambridge
{jd645,ns779,pl219}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We examine the problem of controlling divergences for latent space regularisation
in variational autoencoders. Specifically, when aiming to reconstruct example
x 2 Rm via latent space z 2 Rn (n  m), while balancing this against the need for
generalisable latent representations. We present a regularisation mechanism based
on the skew-geometric Jensen-Shannon divergence JSG↵ . We find a variation
in JSG↵ , motivated by limiting cases, which leads to an intuitive interpolation
between forward and reverse KL in the space of both distributions and divergences.
We motivate its potential benefits for VAEs through low-dimensional examples,
before presenting quantitative and qualitative results. Our experiments demonstrate
that skewing our variant of JSG↵ , in the context of JSG↵ -VAEs, leads to better
reconstruction and generation when compared to several baseline VAEs. Our
approach is entirely unsupervised and utilises only one hyperparameter which can
be easily interpreted in latent space.

1

Introduction

The problem of controlling regularisation strength for generative models is often data-dependent and
poorly understood [3, 7]. Post-hoc analysis of coefficients dictating regularisation strength is rarely
carried out and even more rarely provides an intuitive explanation (e.g. -VAE, [13]). Although
evidence suggests that stronger regularisation in variational settings leads to desirable disentangled
representations of latent factors and better generalisation [38], scaling factors remain opaque and
unrelated to the task at hand.
To learn useful latent representations for reconstruction and generation of high-dimensional distributions, the variational inference problem can be addressed through the use of Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) [17, 34]. VAE learning requires optimisation of an objective balancing the quality of samples
that are encoded and then decoded, with a regularisation term penalising latent space deviations from
a fixed prior distribution. VAEs have favourable properties when compared with other families of
generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10] and autoregressive models
[9, 20]. In particular, GANs are known to necessitate more stringent and problem-dependent training
regimes, while autoregressive models are computationally expensive and inefficient to sample.
VAEs often assume latent variables to be parameterised by a multivariate Gaussian p✓ (z) = N (µ, 2 )
with z, µ, 2 Rn , which is approximated by q (z|x) with x 2 Rm and n  m. In variational
Bayesian methods, using the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO) [4], the model can be naturally
constrained to prevent overfitting by minimising the Kullback-Leibler (KL) [19] divergence to an
isotropic unit Gaussian ball KL (p✓ (z) k N (0, I)). One line of work has sought to better understand
this divergence term to induce disentanglement, robustness, and generalisation [5, 6]. Meanwhile, the
⇤

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

