AdaShare: Learning What To Share For Efficient
Deep Multi-Task Learning

Ximeng Sun1 Rameswar Panda2 Rogerio Feris2 Kate Saenko1,2
1
Boston University, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
{sunxm, saenko}@bu.edu, {rpanda@, rsferis@us.}ibm.com

Abstract
Multi-task learning is an open and challenging problem in computer vision. The
typical way of conducting multi-task learning with deep neural networks is either
through handcrafted schemes that share all initial layers and branch out at an
adhoc point, or through separate task-specific networks with an additional feature
sharing/fusion mechanism. Unlike existing methods, we propose an adaptive
sharing approach, called AdaShare, that decides what to share across which tasks to
achieve the best recognition accuracy, while taking resource efficiency into account.
Specifically, our main idea is to learn the sharing pattern through a task-specific
policy that selectively chooses which layers to execute for a given task in the
multi-task network. We efficiently optimize the task-specific policy jointly with
the network weights, using standard back-propagation. Experiments on several
challenging and diverse benchmark datasets with a variable number of tasks well
demonstrate the efficacy of our approach over state-of-the-art methods. Project
page: https://cs-people.bu.edu/sunxm/AdaShare/project.html.

1

Introduction

Multi-task learning (MTL) focuses on simultaneously solving multiple related tasks and has attracted
much attention in recent years. Compared with single-task learning, it can significantly reduce the
training and inference time, while improving generalization performance and prediction accuracy by
learning a shared representation across related tasks [7, 56]. However, a fundamental challenge of
MTL is deciding what parameters to share across which tasks for efficient learning of multiple tasks.
Most of the prior works rely on hand-designed architectures, usually composed of shared initial layers,
after which all tasks branch out simultaneously at an adhoc point in the network (hard-parameter
sharing) [23, 29, 43, 5, 26, 12]. However, there is a large number of possible options for tweaking
such architectures, in fact, too large to tune an optimal configuration manually, especially for deep
neural networks with hundreds or thousands of layers. It is even more difficult when the number of
tasks grows and an improper sharing scheme across unrelated tasks may cause negative transfer, a
severe problem in multi-task learning [52, 27]. Furthermore, it has been empirically observed that
different sharing patterns tend to work best for different task combinations [39].
More recently, we see a shift of paradigm in deep multi-task learning, where a set of task-specific
networks are used in combination with feature sharing/fusion for more flexible multi-task learning
(soft-parameter sharing) [39, 16, 48, 33, 49]. While this line of work has obtained reasonable
accuracy on commonly used benchmark datasets, it is not computationally or memory efficient, as
the size of the model grows proportionally with respect to the number of tasks.
In this paper, we argue that an optimal MTL algorithm should not only achieve high accuracy on all
tasks, but also restrict the number of new network parameters as much as possible as the number of
tasks grows. This is extremely important for many resource-limited applications such as autonomous
vehicles and mobile platforms that would benefit from multi-task learning. Motivated by this, we
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

