The Power of Comparisons for Actively Learning
Linear Classifiers
Max Hopkins
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92092
nmhopkin@eng.ucsd.edu

Daniel Kane
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92092
dakane@eng.ucsd.edu

Shachar Lovett
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92092
slovett@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
In the world of big data, large but costly to label datasets dominate many fields.
Active learning, a semi-supervised alternative to the standard PAC-learning model,
was introduced to explore whether adaptive labeling could learn concepts with
exponentially fewer labeled samples. While previous results show that active learning performs no better than its supervised alternative for important concept classes
such as linear separators, we show that by adding weak distributional assumptions
and allowing comparison queries, active learning requires exponentially fewer
samples. Further, we show that these results hold as well for a stronger model of
learning called Reliable and Probably Useful (RPU) learning. In this model, our
learner is not allowed to make mistakes, but may instead answer “I don’t know.”
While previous negative results showed this model to have intractably large sample
complexity for label queries, we show that comparison queries make RPU-learning
at worst logarithmically more expensive in both the passive and active regimes.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the availability of big data and the high cost of labeling has lead to a surge of interest
in active learning, an adaptive, semi-supervised learning paradigm. In traditional active learning,
given an instance space X, a distribution D on X, and a class of concepts c : X → {0, 1}, the
learner receives unlabeled samples x from D with the ability to query an oracle for the labeling
c(x). Classically our goal would be to minimize the number of samples the learner draws before
approximately learning the concept class with high probability (PAC-learning). Instead, active
learning assumes unlabeled samples are inexpensive, and rather aims to minimize expensive queries
to the oracle. While active learning requires exponentially fewer labeled samples than PAC-learning
for simple classes such as thresholds in one dimension, it fails to provide asymptotic improvement
for classes essential to machine learning such as linear separators [1].
However, recent results point to the fact that with slight relaxations or additions to the paradigm,
such concept classes can be learned with exponentially fewer queries. In 2013, Balcan and Long
[2] proved that this was the case for homogeneous (through the origin) linear separators, as long as
the distribution over the instance space X = Rd was (nearly isotropic) log-concave–a wide range of
distributions generalizing common cases such as gaussians or uniform distributions over convex sets.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

