Posterior Network: Uncertainty Estimation without
OOD Samples via Density-Based Pseudo-Counts

Bertrand Charpentier, Daniel Zügner, Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{charpent, zuegnerd, guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
Accurate estimation of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty is crucial to build
safe and reliable systems. Traditional approaches, such as dropout and ensemble
methods, estimate uncertainty by sampling probability predictions from different
submodels, which leads to slow uncertainty estimation at inference time. Recent
works address this drawback by directly predicting parameters of prior distributions
over the probability predictions with a neural network. While this approach has
demonstrated accurate uncertainty estimation, it requires defining arbitrary target
parameters for in-distribution data and makes the unrealistic assumption that outof-distribution (OOD) data is known at training time.
In this work we propose the Posterior Network (PostNet), which uses Normalizing
Flows to predict an individual closed-form posterior distribution over predicted
probabilites for any input sample. The posterior distributions learned by PostNet
accurately reflect uncertainty for in- and out-of-distribution data – without requiring
access to OOD data at training time. PostNet achieves state-of-the art results in
OOD detection and in uncertainty calibration under dataset shifts.

1

Introduction

Quantifying uncertainty in neural network predictions is key to making Machine Learning reliable. In
many sensitive domains, like robotics, financial or medical areas, giving autonomy to AI systems is
highly dependent on the trust we can assign to them. In addition, AI systems being aware about their
predictions’ uncertainty, can adapt to new situations and refrain from taking decisions in unknown
or unsafe conditions. Despite of this necessity, traditional neural networks show overconfident
predictions, even for data that is signifanctly different from the training data [21] [11]. In particular,
they should distinguish between aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty, also called data and knowledge
uncertainty [24], respectively. The aleatoric uncertainty is irreducible from the data, e.g. a fair coin
has 50/50 chance for head. The epistemic uncertainty is due to the lack of knowledge about unseen
data, e.g. an image of an unknown object or an outlier in the data.
Related work. Uncertainty estimation is a growing research area unifying various approaches
[3, 23, 30, 7, 21, 8]. Bayesian Neural Networks learn a distribution over the weights [3, 23, 30].
Another class of approaches uses a collection of sub-models and aggregates their predictions, which
are in turn used to estimate statistics (e.g., mean and variance) of the class probability distribution.
Even though such methods, like ensemble and drop-out, have demonstrated remarkable performance
(see, e.g., [38]), they describe implicit distributions for predictions and require a costly sampling
phase at inference time for uncertainty estimation.
Recently, a new class of models aims to directly predict the parameters of a prior distribution on the
categorical probability predictions, accounting for the different types of uncertainty [24, 25, 35, 1].
However, these methods require (i) the definition of arbitrary target prior distributions [24, 25, 35],
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

