High-contrast “gaudy” images improve the training
of deep neural network models of visual cortex

Benjamin R. Cowley, Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University
{bcowley, jpillow}@princeton.edu

Abstract
A key challenge in understanding the sensory transformations of the visual system
is to obtain a highly predictive model that maps natural images to neural responses.
Deep neural networks (DNNs) provide a promising candidate for such a model.
However, DNNs require orders of magnitude more training data than neuroscientists
can collect because experimental recording time is severely limited. This motivates
us to find images to train highly-predictive DNNs with as little training data as
possible. We propose high-contrast, binarized versions of natural images—termed
gaudy images—to efficiently train DNNs to predict higher-order visual cortical
responses. In simulation experiments and analyses of real neural data, we find that
training DNNs with gaudy images substantially reduces the number of training
images needed to accurately predict responses to natural images. We also find that
gaudy images, chosen before training, outperform images chosen during training by
active learning algorithms. Thus, gaudy images overemphasize features of natural
images that are the most important for efficiently training DNNs. We believe gaudy
images will aid in the modeling of visual cortical neurons, potentially opening new
scientific questions about visual processing.

Introduction
A major goal in systems neuroscience is to understand the sensory transformations of the visual
system [1, 2]. A key part of this goal is to find a model that accurately maps natural images to
the responses of visual neurons. For lower-order visual areas, DNNs have been found to be highly
predictive of responses from retinal cells [3–5] and neurons in primary visual cortical area V1 [6–10].
For higher-order visual areas V4 and IT (the focus of our work), the amount of data offered by
neurophysiological experiments (where recording time is limited and costly) is often too small to
train end-to-end DNNs without overfitting. To overcome this, transfer learning is typically used:
Images are first passed into a DNN already trained for object recognition, and the activity of hidden
units from a middle layer of this pre-trained DNN are then mapped to neural responses [11–14]. This
mapping is almost always chosen to be linear, both for interpretability reasons and to avoid overfitting.
However, the true mapping between features and responses is likely nonlinear. We desire to train
a more expressive mapping: a readout network (i.e., a DNN) that can fit to nonlinear mappings.
Because DNNs tend to overfit to a small number of training responses (even with transfer learning),
our goal is to optimize images to train the readout network as accurately as possible with as
little training data as possible (i.e., minimize recording time).
Here we report a surprising finding: A simple manipulation of natural images substantially reduces the
number of training images needed. This manipulation, inspired by active learning theory, maximizes
the dynamic range of each input dimension in order to drive the activity of hidden units in the readout
network as much as possible. It achieves this by setting the pixel intensity p of each color channel
to either 0 or 255, depending on if p is less than or greater than the image’s mean pixel intensity,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

