Improving Local Identifiability in Probabilistic Box
Embeddings

Shib Sankar Dasgupta∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
ssdasgupta@cs.umass.edu

Michael Boratko∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
mboratko@cs.umass.edu

Dongxu Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
dongxu@cs.umass.edu

Luke Vilnis
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
luke@cs.umass.edu

Xiang Lorraine Li
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
xiang@cs.umass.edu

Andrew McCallum
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
mccallum@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Geometric embeddings have recently received attention for their natural ability
to represent transitive asymmetric relations via containment. Box embeddings,
where objects are represented by n-dimensional hyperrectangles, are a particularly
promising example of such an embedding as they are closed under intersection
and their volume can be calculated easily, allowing them to naturally represent
calibrated probability distributions. The benefits of geometric embeddings also
introduce a problem of local identifiability, however, where whole neighborhoods of
parameters result in equivalent loss which impedes learning. Prior work addressed
some of these issues by using an approximation to Gaussian convolution over the
box parameters, however this intersection operation also increases the sparsity
of the gradient. In this work we model the box parameters with min and max
Gumbel distributions, which were chosen such that the space is still closed under
the operation of intersection. The calculation of the expected intersection volume
involves all parameters, and we demonstrate experimentally that this drastically
improves the ability of such models to learn.

1

Introduction

Geometric embedding models have recently been explored for their ability to learn hierarchies,
transitive relations, and partial order structures. Rather than representing objects with vectors,
geometric representation models associate domain elements, such as knowledge base queries, images,
sentences, concepts, or graph nodes, with objects whose geometry is more suited to expressing
relationships in the domain.
Geometric embedding models have used Gaussian densities [25, 1], convex cones, as in order
embeddings and entailment cones [24, 10, 5], and axis-aligned hyperrectangles, as in box embeddings
∗

Equal Contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

