Learning Optimal Representations with the
Decodable Information Bottleneck
Yann Dubois
Facebook AI Research
yannd@fb.com

Douwe Kiela
Facebook AI Research
dkiela@fb.com

David J. Schwab
Facebook AI Research
CUNY Graduate Center
dschwab@fb.com

Ramakrishna Vedantam
Facebook AI Research
ramav@fb.com

Abstract
We address the question of characterizing and finding optimal representations
for supervised learning. Traditionally, this question has been tackled using the
Information Bottleneck, which compresses the inputs while retaining information
about the targets, in a decoder-agnostic fashion. In machine learning, however, our
goal is not compression but rather generalization, which is intimately linked to
the predictive family or decoder of interest (e.g. linear classifier). We propose the
Decodable Information Bottleneck (DIB) that considers information retention and
compression from the perspective of the desired predictive family. As a result, DIB
gives rise to representations that are optimal in terms of expected test performance
and can be estimated with guarantees. Empirically, we show that the framework
can be used to enforce a small generalization gap on downstream classifiers and to
predict the generalization ability of neural networks.

1

Introduction

A fundamental choice in supervised machine learning (ML) centers around the data representation
from which to perform predictions. While classical ML uses predefined encodings of the data [1–5]
recent progress [6, 7] has been driven by learning such representations. A natural question, then, is
what characterizes an “optimal” representation — in terms of generalization — and how to learn it.
The standard framework for studying generalization, statistical learning theory [8], usually assumes
a fixed dataset/representation, and aims to restrict the predictive functional family V (e.g. linear
classifiers) such that empirical risk minimizers (ERMs) generalize.1 Here, we turn the problem on its
head: we ask whether it is possible to enforce generalization by changing the representation of the
inputs such that ERMs in V perform well, irrespective of the complexity of V.
A common approach to representation learning consists of jointly training the classifier and representation by minimizing the empirical risk (which we call J-ERM). By only considering empirical
risk, J-ERM is optimal in the infinite data limit (consistent; [10]), but the resulting representations do
not favor classifiers that will generalize from finite samples. In contrast, the information bottleneck
(IB) method [11] aims for representations that have minimal information about the inputs to avoid
over-fitting, while having sufficient information about the labels [12]. While conceptually appealing
and used in a range of applications [13–16], IB is based on Shannon’s mutual information, which
1
Rather than defining learning in terms of deterministic hypotheses h ∈ H, we consider the more general [9]
case of probabilistic predictors V, in order to make a link with information theory.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

