Learning outside the Black-Box:
The pursuit of interpretable models

Jonathan Crabbe
University of Cambridge
jc2133@cam.ac.uk

Yao Zhang
University of Cambridge
yz555@cam.ac.uk

William R. Zame
University of California Los Angeles
zame@econ.ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California Los Angeles
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine Learning has proved its ability to produce accurate models – but the
deployment of these models outside the machine learning community has been
hindered by the difficulties of interpreting these models. This paper proposes an
algorithm that produces a continuous global interpretation of any given continuous
black-box function. Our algorithm employs a variation of projection pursuit in
which the ridge functions are chosen to be Meijer G-functions, rather than the
usual polynomial splines. Because Meijer G-functions are differentiable in their
parameters, we can “tune” the parameters of the representation by gradient descent;
as a consequence, our algorithm is efficient. Using five familiar data sets from the
UCI repository and two familiar machine learning algorithms, we demonstrate that
our algorithm produces global interpretations that are both highly accurate and
parsimonious (involve a small number of terms). Our interpretations permit easy
understanding of the relative importance of features and feature interactions. Our
interpretation algorithm represents a leap forward from the previous state of the
art.

1

Introduction

What do we need to trust the predictions of the black-box models crafted by our Machine Learning (ML) algorithms? Although the ML community has succeeded in generating accurate models in
a very wide variety of settings, it has not yet succeeded in convincing most practitioners to adopt
these models. One possible reason is that many practitioners will use familiar models over more
accurate models that they do not understand. For a striking example, we cite the area of medical
risk prediction, in which clinical models have remained the standard despite the fact that ML models
are demonstrably more accurate. The explicitly stated reason for this is that an acceptable model
must be both accurate and transparent [24]; state-of-the-art clinical models are transparent while
state-of-the-art ML models are not. In responding to this challenge, one possibility would be to focus
on the design of ML models that are themselves transparent; an alternative possibility is to make a
given ML model more transparent by providing an interpretation of that model.
As detailed in Section 5, a substantial literature in the ML community follows the latter approach, but not entirely successfully. To understand the challenge that we are addressing here,
it is instructive to make a simple thought experiment. Let us assume that the data follows a
Cox proportional hazards model [10]. For such a model, the hazard rate at time t is given by
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

