De-Anonymizing Text by
Fingerprinting Language Generation

Zhen Sun
Cornell University
zs352@cornell.edu

Roei Schuster
Cornell Tech, Tel Aviv University
rs864@cornell.edu

Vitaly Shmatikov
Cornell Tech
shmat@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Components of machine learning systems are not (yet) perceived as security
hotspots. Secure coding practices, such as ensuring that no execution paths depend on confidential inputs, have not yet been adopted by ML developers. We
initiate the study of code security of ML systems by investigating how nucleus
sampling—a popular approach for generating text, used for applications such as
auto-completion—unwittingly leaks texts typed by users. Our main result is that
the series of nucleus sizes for many natural English word sequences is a unique
fingerprint. We then show how an attacker can infer typed text by measuring these
fingerprints via a suitable side channel (e.g., cache access times), explain how this
attack could help de-anonymize anonymous texts, and discuss defenses.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models are composed from building blocks such as layer types, loss functions,
sampling methods, etc. Each building block typically has a few popular library implementations,
which are incorporated into many models—including models whose inputs are sensitive (e.g., private
images or typed text). Therefore, ML models are “security hotspots” and their implementations must
follow secure coding practices. This includes protecting the inputs from side channels, i.e., low-level
physical or microarchitectural side effects of the computation that are externally observable and leak
information about its internal state to concurrent, adversarial processes.
We use nucleus sampling [19], a leading approach for efficiently generating high-fidelity text, as a
case study of side-channel vulnerabilities in ML models. Given the output probabilities of a language
model such as GPT-2 [35], nucleus sampling draws candidates from a variable-sized “nucleus” of the
most probable words. It is the basis of applications such as text auto-completion [24, 44].
First, we demonstrate that the series of nucleus sizes produced when generating an Englishlanguage word sequence is a fingerprint by showing that the nucleus size series of any sequence
satisfying a simple criterion is far from any other sequence, unless their textual contents substantially
overlap. We then derive a lower bound on the Euclidean distance between fingerprints that depends
only on the sequence length but not on the size or domain of the corpus.
Second, we show that implementations of nucleus sampling, such as the popular Hugging Face
Transformers package, contain a dangerous information leak. An attacker who runs a concurrent,
sandboxed application process on the user’s device can infer the nucleus size by indirectly measure the
number of iterations of a certain loop, and thus fingerprint the input text. We use Flush+Reload [47]
for our proof of concept, but the general approach works with any suitable side channel [17, 28, 32].
We design a fingerprint matching algorithm and show that (1) it tolerates noise in side-channel
measurements, and (2) does not produce false positives. Therefore, an attacker can accurately identify
the typed sequence out of many billions of possible candidates in an “open-world” setting, without
assuming a priori that the user’s input belongs to a known small dataset. This technique can help
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

