Using noise to probe recurrent neural network
structure and prune synapses

Eli Moore
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
elimoore@ucdavis.edu

Rishidev Chaudhuri
Center for Neuroscience
Department of Mathematics
Department of Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
rchaudhuri@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Many networks in the brain are sparsely connected, and the brain eliminates
synapses during development and learning. How could the brain decide which
synapses to prune? In a recurrent network, determining the importance of a
synapse between two neurons is a difficult computational problem, depending on
the role that both neurons play and on all possible pathways of information flow
between them. Noise is ubiquitous in neural systems, and often considered an
irritant to be overcome. Here we suggest that noise could play a functional role
in synaptic pruning, allowing the brain to probe network structure and determine
which synapses are redundant. We construct a simple, local, unsupervised plasticity
rule that either strengthens or prunes synapses using only synaptic weight and the
noise-driven covariance of the neighboring neurons. For a subset of linear and
rectified-linear networks, we prove that this rule preserves the spectrum of the
original matrix and hence preserves network dynamics even when the fraction of
pruned synapses asymptotically approaches 1. The plasticity rule is biologicallyplausible and may suggest a new role for noise in neural computation.

1

Introduction

The brain eliminates synapses, dramatically during development but then across the lifespan [1–3].
The degree of synaptic pruning post-learning correlates with learning performance, suggesting an
important functional role [4, 5]. Moreover, connection density is disrupted across a spectrum of
diseases [6–9]. Determining how the brain finds and maintains sparse network structure is important
to understand the brain’s remarkable energy efficiency and replicate it in artificial neural networks as
well as to understand changes in connection density with aging [10, 11] and in disease [6–9].
In a highly-recurrent network with multiple pathways of information flow, it is difficult to determine
which synapses are redundant and can be safely pruned, and which are important and should be
retained. For example, even if a synapse between two neurons is strong, if information can travel
between the neurons by alternative pathways then the synapse is redundant and can be removed.
A biologically-plausible pruning rule must determine this higher-order structure using information
locally available at the synapse.
Neural systems seem noisy, at multiple levels: neural activity contains large background fluctuations,
responses to the same stimulus can be quite variable, and synapses often fail to propagate a signal [12–
15]. Here we show that noise could play a useful computational role in synaptic pruning. Specifically,
the pattern of activity correlations in a noise-driven network reflects higher-order network structure
in exactly the form needed for good synaptic pruning (as predicted by a theoretical argument). We
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

