Pruning Filter in Filter

Fanxu Meng1,2∗ , Hao Cheng2∗ ,
Ke Li , Huixiang Luo2 , Xiaowei Guo2 , Guangming Lu1† , Xing Sun2†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
2

18S151514@stu.hit.edu.cn, luguangm@hit.edu.cn
{louischeng, tristanli,huixiangluo,scorpioguo,winfredsun}@tencent.com

Abstract
Pruning has become a very powerful and effective technique to compress and
accelerate modern neural networks. Existing pruning methods can be grouped into
two categories: filter pruning (FP) and weight pruning (WP). FP wins at hardware
compatibility but loses at the compression ratio compared with WP. To converge
the strength of both methods, we propose to prune the filter in the filter. Specifically,
we treat a filter F ∈ RC×K×K as K × K stripes, i.e., 1 × 1 filters ∈ RC , then
by pruning the stripes instead of the whole filter, we can achieve finer granularity
than traditional FP while being hardware friendly. We term our method as SWP
(Stripe-Wise Pruning). SWP is implemented by introducing a novel learnable
matrix called Filter Skeleton, whose values reflect the shape of each filter. As
some recent work has shown that the pruned architecture is more crucial than the
inherited important weights, we argue that the architecture of a single filter, i.e.,
the shape, also matters. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that SWP
is more effective compared to the previous FP-based methods and achieves the
state-of-art pruning ratio on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets without obvious
accuracy drop. Code is available at this url.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable progress in many areas including speech
recognition [1], computer vision [2, 3], natural language processing [4], etc. However, model
deployment is sometimes costly due to the large number of parameters in DNNs. To relieve such a
problem, numerous approaches have been proposed to compress DNNs and reduce the amount of
computation. These methods can be classified into two main categories: weight pruning (WP) and
filter (channel) pruning (FP).
WP is a fine-grained pruning method that prunes the individual weights, e.g., whose value is nearly 0,
inside the network [5, 6], resulting in a sparse network without sacrificing prediction performance.
However, since the positions of non-zero weights are irregular and random, we need an extra record
of the weight position, and the sparse network pruned by WP can not be presented in a structured
fashion like FP due to the randomness inside the network, making WP unable to achieve acceleration
on general-purpose processors. By contrast, FP-based methods [7, 8, 9] prune filters or channels
within the convolution layers, thus the pruned network is still well organized in a structure fashion
and can easily achieve acceleration in general processors. A standard filter pruning pipeline is as
follows: 1) Train a larger model until convergence. 2) Prune the filters according to some criterions 3)
Fine-tune the pruned network. [10] observes that training the pruned model with random initialization
1
In the author list, ∗ denotes that authors contribute equally; † denotes corresponding authors. The work is
conducted while Fanxu Meng works as an internship at Tencent Youtu Lab.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

