Curriculum by Smoothing

Samarth Sinha 1 , Animesh Garg 1, 2 , Hugo Larochelle 3

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown impressive performance in
computer vision tasks such as image classification, detection, and segmentation.
Moreover, recent work in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has highlighted the importance of learning by progressively increasing the difficulty of a
learning task [26]. When learning a network from scratch, the information propagated within the network during the earlier stages of training can contain distortion
artifacts due to noise which can be detremental to training. In this paper, we propose an elegant curriculum-based scheme that smoothes the feature embedding of
a CNN using anti-aliasing or low-pass filters. We propose to augment the training of CNNs by controlling the amount of high frequency information propagated
within the CNNs as training progresses, by convolving the output of a CNN feature map of each layer with a Gaussian kernel. By decreasing the variance of the
Gaussian kernel, we gradually increase the amount of high-frequency information available within the network for inference. As the amount of information in
the feature maps increases during training, the network is able to progressively
learn better representations of the data. Our proposed augmented training scheme
significantly improves the performance of CNNs on various vision tasks without
either adding additional trainable parameters or an auxiliary regularization objective. The generality of our method is demonstrated through empirical performance
gains in CNN architectures across four different tasks: transfer learning, crosstask transfer learning, and generative models. The code will soon be released at
www.github.com/pairlab/CBS.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning models have revolutionized the field of computer vision, which has led to great
progress in recent years. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [33], have turned out to be a
very effective class of models, which have enabled state-of-the-art performance on a multitude of
computer vision tasks such as image recognition [31, 19], semantic segmentation [38, 46], object
detection [13, 45], pose estimation [62] to name a few.
Recent work by Karras et al. [26] showed excellent results on building a curricula to progressively
increase the learning task for a GAN. By simply increasing the resolution of the image progressively,
they are able to achieve significantly better results and stabilize GAN training. This progressive
curricula helps the CNN models learn and generate better representations during GAN training.
However a core question remains: how to design a curricula that fundamentally improves the ability
of CNNs to learn better representations from data?
In this paper, we propose an elegant and effective curriculum that augments a CNN’s training regime
by smoothing the feature maps of a CNN using low-pass or anti-aliasing filters, and progressively
adding the high-frequency information in the feature maps to the model. Specifically, we propose
to learn CNNs using a curricula, such that the high-frequency information can only be used by
feature maps towards the later stages of training. As shown by [25], early stages of training is
1
University of Toronto, Vector Institute, 2 Nvidia, 2 Mila, Google Brain, CIFAR Fellow
Corresponding author: samarth.sinha@mail.utoronto.ca

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

