Computing Valid p-value for Optimal Changepoint by
Selective Inference using Dynamic Programming

Vo Nguyen Le Duy∗
Nagoya Institute of Technology and RIKEN
duy.mllab.nit@gmail.com
Ryota Sugiyama
Nagoya Institute of Technology
sugiyama.r.mllab.nit@gmail.com

Hiroki Toda∗
Nagoya Institute of Technology
toda.h.mllab.nit@gmail.com

Ichiro Takeuchi†
Nagoya Institute of Technology and RIKEN
takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp

Abstract
Although there is a vast body of literature related to methods for detecting changepoints (CPs), less attention has been paid to assessing the statistical reliability of
the detected CPs. In this paper, we introduce a novel method to perform statistical
inference on the significance of the CPs, estimated by a Dynamic Programming
(DP)-based optimal CP detection algorithm. Our main idea is to employ a Selective
Inference (SI) approach — a new statistical inference framework that has recently
received a lot of attention — to compute exact (non-asymptotic) valid p-values
for the detected optimal CPs. Although it is well-known that SI has low statistical
power because of over-conditioning, we address this drawback by introducing a
novel method called parametric DP, which enables SI to be conducted with the
minimum amount of conditioning, leading to high statistical power. We conduct
experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets, through which we offer
evidence that our proposed method is more powerful than existing methods, has
decent performance in terms of computational efficiency, and provides good results
in many practical applications.

1

Introduction

Changepoint (CP) detection is a fundamental problem and has been studied in many areas. The
goal of CP detection is to find changes in the underlying mechanism of the observed sequential
data. Analyzing the detected CPs benefits to several applications [14, 35, 15, 22, 19]. There is a vast
body of literature related to methods for detecting CPs [2, 47, 32, 42, 29, 11, 46] — nice surveys
can be found in [1, 44]. CP detection is usually formulated as the problem of minimizing the cost
over segmentations, where Dynamic Programming (DP) is commonly used because it can solve the
minimization problem efficiently, and exactly find the optimal CPs under the given criteria.
Unfortunately, less attention has been paid to the statistical reliability of the detected CPs. Without
statistical reliability, the results may contain many false detections, i.e., the detected CPs may not be
true CPs. These falsely detected CPs are harmful when they are used for high-stake decision making
such as medical diagnosis or automatic driving. Therefore, it is highly necessary to develop a valid
statistical inference for the detected CPs that can properly control the risk of false detection.
Valid statistical inference on CPs is intrinsically difficult because the observed data is used twice
— one for detection and another for inference, which is often referred to as double dipping [23]. In
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

