Can I Trust My Fairness Metric? Assessing Fairness
with Unlabeled Data and Bayesian Inference

Disi Ji1
Padhraic Smyth1
Mark Steyvers2
2
Department of Computer Science
Department of Cognitive Sciences
University of California, Irvine
disij@uci.edu
smyth@ics.uci.edu mark.steyvers@uci.edu
1

Abstract
We investigate the problem of reliably assessing group fairness when labeled
examples are few but unlabeled examples are plentiful. We propose a general
Bayesian framework that can augment labeled data with unlabeled data to produce
more accurate and lower-variance estimates compared to methods based on labeled
data alone. Our approach estimates calibrated scores for unlabeled examples in each
group using a hierarchical latent variable model conditioned on labeled examples.
This in turn allows for inference of posterior distributions with associated notions
of uncertainty for a variety of group fairness metrics. We demonstrate that our
approach leads to significant and consistent reductions in estimation error across
multiple well-known fairness datasets, sensitive attributes, and predictive models.
The results show the benefits of using both unlabeled data and Bayesian inference
in terms of assessing whether a prediction model is fair or not.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are increasingly used to make important decisions about individuals. At
the same time it has become apparent that these models are susceptible to producing systematically
biased decisions with respect to sensitive attributes such as gender, ethnicity, and age [Angwin et al.,
2017, Berk et al., 2018, Corbett-Davies and Goel, 2018, Chen et al., 2019, Beutel et al., 2019]. This
has led to a significant amount of recent work in machine learning addressing these issues, including
research on both (i) definitions of fairness in a machine learning context (e.g., Dwork et al. [2012],
Chouldechova [2017]), and (ii) design of fairness-aware learning algorithms that can mitigate issues
such as algorithmic bias (e.g., Calders and Verwer [2010], Kamishima et al. [2012], Feldman et al.
[2015], Zafar et al. [2017], Chzhen et al. [2019]).
In this paper we focus on an important yet under-studied aspect of the fairness problem: reliably
assessing how fair a blackbox model is, given limited labeled data. In particular, we focus on
assessment of group fairness of binary classifiers. Group fairness is measured with respect to parity
in prediction performance between different demographic groups. Examples include differences in
performance for metrics such as true positive rates and false positive rates (also known as equalized
odds [Hardt et al., 2016]), accuracy [Chouldechova, 2017], false discovery/omission rates [Zafar
et al., 2017], and calibration and balance [Kleinberg et al., 2016].
Despite the simplicity of these definitions, a significant challenge in assessment of group fairness is
high variance in estimates of these metrics based on small amounts of labeled data. To illustrate this
point, Figure 1 shows frequency-based estimates of group differences in true positive rates (TPRs)
for four real-world datasets. The boxplots clearly show the high variability for the estimated TPRs
relative to the true TPRs (shown in red) as a function of the number of labeled examples nL . In
many cases the estimates are two or three or more times larger than the true difference. In addition, a
relatively large percentage of the estimates have the opposite sign of the true difference, potentially
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

