Online Bayesian Persuasion

Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

Andrea Celli∗
Facebook Core Data Science
andreacelli@fb.com

Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Abstract
In Bayesian persuasion, an informed sender has to design a signaling scheme
that discloses the right amount of information so as to influence the behavior of a
self-interested receiver. This kind of strategic interaction is ubiquitous in real-world
economic scenarios. However, the seminal model by Kamenica and Gentzkow
makes some stringent assumptions that limit its applicability in practice. One of
the most limiting assumptions is, arguably, that the sender is required to know the
receiver’s utility function to compute an optimal signaling scheme. We relax this
assumption through an online learning framework in which the sender repeatedly
faces a receiver whose type is unknown and chosen adversarially at each round from
a finite set of possible types. We are interested in no-regret algorithms prescribing a
signaling scheme at each round of the repeated interaction with performances close
to that of a best-in-hindsight signaling scheme. First, we prove a hardness result on
the per-round running time required to achieve no-α-regret for any α < 1. Then,
we provide algorithms for the full and partial feedback models with regret bounds
sublinear in the number of rounds and polynomial in the size of the instance.

1

Introduction

Bayesian persuasion was first introduced by Kamenica and Gentzkow [23] as the problem faced by an
informed sender trying to influence the behavior of a self-interested receiver via the strategic provision
of payoff-relevant information. In Bayesian persuasion, the agents’ beliefs are influenced only by
controlling ‘who gets to know what’. This ‘sweet talk’ is ubiquitous among all sorts of economic
activities, and it was famously attributed to a quarter of the GDP in the United States by McCloskey
and Klamer [28]. 2 The computational study of Bayesian persuasion has been largely driven by its
application in domains such as auctions and online advertisement [7, 19, 11], voting [1, 14, 16], traffic
routing [9, 32], recommendation systems [26], security [30, 34], and product marketing [6, 13].
In the model by Kamenica and Gentzkow [23], the sender’s and receiver’s payoffs are determined
by the receiver’s action and a set of parameters collectively termed the state of nature. Unlike the
receiver, the sender observes the realized state of nature drawn from a shared prior distribution. The
sender uses this private information to determine a signal for the receiver according to a publicly
known signaling scheme, i.e., a mapping from states of nature to probability distributions over signals.
In this paper, we focus on arguably one of the most severe limitations of the basic model: the sender
must know exactly the receiver’s utility function to compute an optimal signaling scheme.
∗
2

The work was conducted while the author was a postdoc at Politecnico di Milano.
A more recent estimate by Antioch and others [2] places this figure at 30%.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

