PEP: Parameter Ensembling by Perturbation

Alireza Mehrtash1,2 , Purang Abolmaesumi1 , Polina Golland3 ,
Tina Kapur2 , Demian Wassermann4 , William M. Wells III2,3
1

ECE Department, University of British Columbia (UBC), Vancouver, BC
Department of Radiology, BWH, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
3
CSAIL, MIT, Boston, MA 4 INRIA Saclay, Palaiseau, France
{mehrtash,sw}@bwh.harvard.edu

2

Abstract
Ensembling is now recognized as an effective approach for increasing the predictive performance and calibration of deep networks. We introduce a new approach,
Parameter Ensembling by Perturbation (PEP), that constructs an ensemble of parameter values as random perturbations of the optimal parameter set from training
by a Gaussian with a single variance parameter. The variance is chosen to maximize the log-likelihood of the ensemble average (L) on the validation data set.
Empirically, and perhaps surprisingly, L has a well-defined maximum as the variance grows from zero (which corresponds to the baseline model). Conveniently,
calibration level of predictions also tends to grow favorably until the peak of L is
reached. In most experiments, PEP provides a small improvement in performance,
and, in some cases, a substantial improvement in empirical calibration. We show
that this “PEP effect” (the gain in log-likelihood) is related to the mean curvature
of the likelihood function and the empirical Fisher information. Experiments on
ImageNet pre-trained networks including ResNet, DenseNet, and Inception showed
improved calibration and likelihood. We further observed a mild improvement in
classification accuracy on these networks. Experiments on classification benchmarks such as MNIST and CIFAR-10 showed improved calibration and likelihood,
as well as the relationship between the PEP effect and overfitting; this demonstrates
that PEP can be used to probe the level of overfitting that occurred during training.
In general, no special training procedure or network architecture is needed, and in
the case of pre-trained networks, no additional training is needed.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success on many classification and regression tasks
[28]. In the usual usage, the parameters of a conditional probability model are optimized by maximum
likelihood on large amounts of training data [10]. Subsequently the model, in combination with
the optimal parameters, is used for inference. Unfortunately, this approach ignores uncertainty in
the value of the estimated parameters; as a consequence over-fitting may occur and the results of
inference may be overly confident. In some domains, for example medical applications, or automated
driving, overconfidence can be dangerous [1].
Probabilistic predictions can be characterized by their level of calibration, an empirical measure of
consistency with outcomes, and work by Guo et al. shows that modern neural networks (NN) are
often poorly calibrated, and that a simple one-parameter temperature scaling method can improve
their calibration level [12]. Explicitly Bayesian approaches such as Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD)
[8] have been developed that can improve likelihoods or calibration. MCD approximates a Gaussian
process at inference time by running the model several times with active dropout layers. Similar to the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

