DiffGCN: Graph Convolutional Networks via
Differential Operators and Algebraic Multigrid
Pooling

Moshe Eliasof
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
eliasof@post.bgu.ac.il

Eran Treister
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
erant@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have shown to be effective in handling
unordered data like point clouds and meshes. In this work we propose novel
approaches for graph convolution, pooling and unpooling, inspired from finite
differences and algebraic multigrid frameworks. We form a parameterized convolution kernel based on discretized differential operators, leveraging the graph mass,
gradient and Laplacian. This way, the parameterization does not depend on the
graph structure, only on the meaning of the network convolutions as differential
operators. To allow hierarchical representations of the input, we propose pooling
and unpooling operations that are based on algebraic multigrid methods, which
are mainly used to solve partial differential equations on unstructured grids. To
motivate and explain our method, we compare it to standard convolutional neural
networks, and show their similarities and relations in the case of a regular grid. Our
proposed method is demonstrated in various experiments like classification and
part-segmentation, achieving on par or better than state of the art results. We also
analyze the computational cost of our method compared to other GCNs.

1

Introduction

The emergence of deep learning and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [1, 2, 3] in recent
years has had great impact on the community of computer vision and graphics [4, 5, 6, 7]. Over
the past years, multiple works used standard CNNs to perform 3D related tasks on unordered data
(e.g., point clouds and meshes), one of which is PointNet [8, 9], that operates directly on point
clouds. Along with these works, another massively growing field is Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs) [10], or Geometric Deep Learning, which suggests using graph convolutions for tasks related
to three dimensional inputs, arising from either spectral theory [11, 12, 13] or spatial convolution
[14, 15, 16, 17]. This makes the processing of unstructured data like point clouds, graphs and meshes
more natural by operating directly in the underlying structure of the data.
In this work we aim to bridge the gap between ordered and unordered deep learning architectures, and
to build on the foundation of standard CNNs in unordered data. To this end, we leverage the similarity
between standard CNNs and partial differential equations (PDEs) [18], and propose a new approach
to define convolution operators on graphs that are based on discretization of differential operators on
unstructured grids. Specifically, we define a 3D convolution kernel which is based on discretized
differential operators. We consider the mass (self-feature), gradient and Laplacian of the graph, and
discretize them using a simple version of finite differences, similarly to the way that standard graph
Laplacians are defined. Such differential operators form a subspace which spans standard convolution
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

