Smoothed Geometry for Robust Attribution
Zifan Wang
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
zifan@cmu.edu

Haofan Wang
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University

Shakul Ramkumar
Information Networking Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Piotr Mardziel
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University

Matt Fredrikson
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Anupam Datta
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Feature attributions are a popular tool for explaining the behavior of Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), but have recently been shown to be vulnerable to attacks
that produce divergent explanations for nearby inputs. This lack of robustness is
especially problematic in high-stakes applications where adversarially-manipulated
explanations could impair safety and trustworthiness. Building on a geometric
understanding of these attacks presented in recent work, we identify Lipschitz
continuity conditions on models’ gradients that lead to robust gradient-based
attributions, and observe that the smoothness of the model’s decision surface
is related to the transferability of attacks across multiple attribution methods.
To mitigate these attacks in practice, we propose an inexpensive regularization
method that promotes these conditions in DNNs, as well as a stochastic smoothing
technique that does not require re-training. Our experiments on a range of image
models demonstrate that both of these mitigations consistently improve attribution
robustness, and confirm the role that smooth geometry plays in these attacks on
real, large-scale models.

1

Introduction

Attribution methods map each input feature of a model to a numeric score that quantifies its relative
importance towards the model’s output. At inference time, an analyst can view the attribution map
alongside its corresponding input to interpret the data attributes that are most relevant to a given
prediction. In recent years, this has become a popular way of explaining the behavior of Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), particularly in domains such as medical imaging [5] and other safety-critical
tasks [23] where the opacity of DNNs might otherwise prevent their adoption.
Recent work has shown that attribution methods are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations [12, 14,
16, 19, 47], showing that it is often possible to find a small-norm set of feature changes that yield
attribution maps with adversarially-chosen qualities while leaving the model’s output behavior intact.
For example, an attacker might introduce visually-imperceptible changes that cause the mapping
generated for a medical image classifier to focus attention on an irrelevant region. Such attacks
have troubling implications for the continued adoption of attribution methods for explainability in
high-stakes settings.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

