Online Fast Adaptation and Knowledge
Accumulation (OSAKA):
a New Approach to Continual Learning

Massimo Caccia123 Pau Rodríguez2 Oleksiy Ostapenko13 Fabrice Normandin13
Min Lin13 Lucas Caccia145 Issam Laradji2 Irina Rish137
Alexandre Lacoste2 David Vazquez2 Laurent Charlin167
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 2 ElementAI, 3 Université de Montréal, 4 Facebook AI Research
5
McGill University, 6 HEC Montréal, 7 Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Continual learning agents experience a stream of (related) tasks. The main challenge is that the agent must not forget previous tasks and also adapt to novel tasks
in the stream. We are interested in the intersection of two recent continual-learning
scenarios. In meta-continual learning, the model is pre-trained using meta-learning
to minimize catastrophic forgetting of previous tasks. In continual-meta learning,
the aim is to train agents for faster remembering of previous tasks through adaptation. In their original formulations, both methods have limitations. We stand
on their shoulders to propose a more general scenario, OSAKA, where an agent
must quickly solve new (out-of-distribution) tasks, while also requiring fast remembering. We show that current continual learning, meta-learning, meta-continual
learning, and continual-meta learning techniques fail in this new scenario. We
propose Continual-MAML, an online extension of the popular MAML algorithm as
a strong baseline for this scenario. We show in an empirical study that ContinualMAML is better suited to the new scenario than the aforementioned methodologies
including standard continual learning and meta-learning approaches.

1

Introduction

A common assumption in supervised machine learning is that the data is independently and identically
distributed (i.i.d.). This assumption is violated in many practical applications handling non-stationary
data distributions, including robotics, autonomous driving, conversational agents, and other real-time
applications. Over the last few years, several methodologies study learning from non-i.i.d. data. We
focus on continual learning (CL), where the goal is to learn incrementally from a non-stationary data
sequence involving different datasets or tasks, while not forgetting previously acquired knowledge, a
problem known as catastrophic forgetting [47].
We draw inspiration from autonomous systems deployed in environments that might differ from the
ones they were (pre-)trained on. For instance, a robot pre-trained in a factory and deployed in homes
where it will need to adapt to new domains and even solve new tasks. Or a virtual assistant can
be pre-trained on historical data and then adapt to its user’s needs and preferences once deployed.
Further motivating applications exist in time-series forecasting including market prediction, game
playing, autonomous customer service, recommendation systems, and autonomous driving. These
systems must adapt online to maximize their cumulative rewards [30, 31]. As a step in that direction,
we propose a task-incremental scenario (OSAKA) where previous tasks reoccur and new tasks appear.
corresponding author: massimo.p.caccia@gmail.com
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

