Sparse Graphical Memory for Robust Planning

Scott Emmons*
Berkeley AI Research

Ajay Jain*
Berkeley AI Research

Michael Laskin*
Berkeley AI Research

Thanard Kurutach
Berkeley AI Research

Pieter Abbeel
Berkeley AI Research

Deepak Pathak
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
To operate effectively in the real world, agents should be able to act from highdimensional raw sensory input such as images and achieve diverse goals across long
time-horizons. Current deep reinforcement and imitation learning methods can
learn directly from high-dimensional inputs but do not scale well to long-horizon
tasks. In contrast, classical graphical methods like A* search are able to solve
long-horizon tasks, but assume that the state space is abstracted away from raw
sensory input. Recent works have attempted to combine the strengths of deep
learning and classical planning; however, dominant methods in this domain are
still quite brittle and scale poorly with the size of the environment. We introduce
Sparse Graphical Memory (SGM), a new data structure that stores states and
feasible transitions in a sparse memory. SGM aggregates states according to a
novel two-way consistency objective, adapting classic state aggregation criteria
to goal-conditioned RL: two states are redundant when they are interchangeable
both as goals and as starting states. Theoretically, we prove that merging nodes
according to two-way consistency leads to an increase in shortest path lengths that
scales only linearly with the merging threshold. Experimentally, we show that SGM
significantly outperforms current state of the art methods on long horizon, sparsereward visual navigation tasks. Project video and code are available at https:
//mishalaskin.github.io/sgm/.

1

Introduction

Learning-driven approaches to control, like imitation learning and reinforcement learning, have
been quite successful in both training agents to
act from raw, high-dimensional input [34] as
well as to reach multiple goals by conditioning on them [1, 35]. However, this success has
been limited to short horizon scenarios, and scaling these methods to distant goals remains extremely challenging. On the other hand, classical planning algorithms have enjoyed great
success in long-horizon tasks with distant goals
by reduction to graph search [18, 25]. For instance, A* was successfully used to control
Shakey the robot for real-world navigation over
five decades ago [7]. Unfortunately, the graph
nodes on which these search algorithms operate
*

Figure 1: Illustration of Sparse Graphical Memory
(SGM). New states are either merged with existing
graph nodes according to our two-way consistency
criterion, or a new node is generated. After graph
construction, incorrect edges representing infeasible transitions are corrected.

Equal contribution. Author order determined randomly. {emmons, ajayj, mlaskin}@berkeley.edu
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

