Learning sparse codes from compressed
representations with biologically plausible local
wiring constraints

Kion Fallah∗‡ , Adam A. Willats∗‡ , Ninghao Liu§ , Christopher J. Rozell‡
‡
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
§
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843 USA
kion@gatech.edu, awillats3@gatech.edu,
nhliu43@tamu.edu, crozell@gatech.edu

Abstract
Sparse coding is an important method for unsupervised learning of task-independent
features in theoretical neuroscience models of neural coding. While a number of
algorithms exist to learn these representations from the statistics of a dataset, they
largely ignore the information bottlenecks present in fiber pathways connecting cortical areas. For example, the visual pathway has many fewer neurons transmitting
visual information to cortex than the number of photoreceptors. Both empirical
and analytic results have recently shown that sparse representations can be learned
effectively after performing dimensionality reduction with randomized linear operators, producing latent coefficients that preserve information. Unfortunately,
current proposals for sparse coding in the compressed space require a centralized
compression process (i.e., dense random matrix) that is biologically unrealistic due
to local wiring constraints observed in neural circuits. The main contribution of
this paper is to leverage recent results on structured random matrices to propose a
theoretical neuroscience model of randomized projections for communication between cortical areas that is consistent with the local wiring constraints observed in
neuroanatomy. We show analytically and empirically that unsupervised learning of
sparse representations can be performed in the compressed space despite significant
local wiring constraints in compression matrices of varying forms (corresponding
to different local wiring patterns). Our analysis verifies that even with significant
local wiring constraints, the learned representations remain qualitatively similar,
have similar quantitative performance in both training and generalization error, and
are consistent across many measures with measured macaque V1 receptive fields.

1

Introduction

Sensory nervous systems have long been championed for their ability to learn effective representations
of natural scene statistics [66]. In fact, this ability has been one of the broad motivations behind
work in artificial neural networks underlying significant recent advances in machine learning systems.
While it is less understood than the supervised learning frameworks common in machine learning,
unsupervised learning of task-independent representations is especially important in models of
biological sensory systems where supervisory signals are less prevalent. In particular, learning
∗

equal contribution
Code available at: https://github.com/siplab-gt/localized-sparse-coding.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

