Fairness with Overlapping Groups

Forest Yang∗
UC Berkeley

Moustapha Cisse
Google Research Accra

Sanmi Koyejo
Google Research Accra & Illinois

Abstract
In algorithmically fair prediction problems, a standard goal is to ensure the equality of fairness metrics across multiple overlapping groups simultaneously. We
reconsider this standard fair classification problem using a probabilistic population
analysis, which, in turn, reveals the Bayes-optimal classifier. Our approach unifies
a variety of existing group-fair classification methods and enables extensions to
a wide range of non-decomposable multiclass performance metrics and fairness
measures. The Bayes-optimal classifier further inspires consistent procedures for
algorithmically fair classification with overlapping groups. On a variety of real
datasets, the proposed approach outperforms baselines in terms of its fairnessperformance tradeoff.

1

Introduction

Machine learning informs an increasingly large number of critical decisions in diverse settings. They
assist medical diagnosis [17], guide policing [18], and power credit scoring systems [23]. While
they have demonstrated their value in many sectors, they are prone to unwanted biases, leading to
discrimination against protected subgroups within the population. For example, recent studies have
revealed biases in predictive policing and criminal sentencing systems [18, 6]. The blossoming body
of research in algorithmic fairness aims to study and address this issue by introducing novel algorithms
guaranteeing a certain level of non-discrimination in the predictions. Each such algorithm relies on a
specific definition of fairness, which falls into one of two categories: Individual fairness [9, 26] or
group fairness [4, 14, 11]. The vast majority of the algorithmic group fairness literature has focused
on the simplest case where there are only two groups. In this paper, we consider the more nuanced
case of group fairness with respect to multiple groups.
The simplest setting is the independent case, with only one sensitive attribute which can take
multiple values, e.g., race only. The presence of multiple sensitive attributes (e.g., race and gender
simultaneously) leads to non-equivalent definitions of group fairness. On the one hand, fairness
can be considered independently per sensitive attribute, leading to overlapping subgroups. For
example, consider a model restricted to demographic parity between subgroups defined by ethnicity.
Simultaneously, the model can be constrained to fulfill demographic parity between subgroups
defined by gender. We term fairness in this situation independent group fairness. On the other hand,
one can consider all subgroups defined by intersections of sensitive attributes (e.g., ethnicity and
gender), leading to intersectional group fairness. A given algorithm can be independently group
fair, e.g., when considering race and gender in isolation, but not intersectionally group fair, e.g.,
when considering intersections of racial and gender groups. For example, Buolamwini and Gebru [3],
showed how facial recognition software had a particularly poor performance for black women. This
phenomenon, called fairness gerrymandering, has been studied by Kearns et al. [15]. Intersectional
∗

Work completed while an intern at Google Accra.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

