Black-Box Ripper: Copying black-box models using
generative evolutionary algorithms

Antonio Bărbălău1,∗ , Adrian Cosma2 , Radu Tudor Ionescu1 , Marius Popescu1
1
University of Bucharest, Romania
2
University Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania
∗
abarbalau@fmi.unibuc.ro

Abstract
We study the task of replicating the functionality of black-box neural models, for
which we only know the output class probabilities provided for a set of input images.
We assume back-propagation through the black-box model is not possible and its
training images are not available, e.g. the model could be exposed only through
an API. In this context, we present a teacher-student framework that can distill
the black-box (teacher) model into a student model with minimal accuracy loss.
To generate useful data samples for training the student, our framework (i) learns
to generate images on a proxy data set (with images and classes different from
those used to train the black-box) and (ii) applies an evolutionary strategy to make
sure that each generated data sample exhibits a high response for a specific class
when given as input to the black box. Our framework is compared with several
baseline and state-of-the-art methods on three benchmark data sets. The empirical
evidence indicates that our model is superior to the considered baselines. Although
our method does not back-propagate through the black-box network, it generally
surpasses state-of-the-art methods that regard the teacher as a glass-box model. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/antoniobarbalau/black-box-ripper.

1

Introduction

In the last couple of years, AI has gained a lot of attention in industry, due to the latest research
developments in the field, e.g. deep learning [21]. Indeed, an increasing amount of companies have
started to integrate neural models into their products [23], which are used by consumers or third-party
developers [11]. In order to protect their intellectual property, companies try to keep information
about the internals (architecture, training data, hyperparameters and so on) of their neural models
confidential, exposing the models only as black boxes: data samples in, predictions out. However,
recent research [17, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36] showed that various aspects of black-box neural models can
be stolen with some effort, including even their functionality.
Studying ways of stealing or copying the functionality of black-box models is of great interest to AI
companies, giving them the opportunity to better protect their models through various mechanisms
[12, 40]. Motivated by this direction of study, we propose a novel generative evolutionary framework
able to effectively steal the functionality of black-box models. The proposed framework is somewhat
related to knowledge distillation with teacher-student networks [2, 10, 22, 39], the main difference
being that access to the training data of the teacher is not permitted to preserve the black-box nature of
the teacher. In this context, we train the student on a proxy data set with images and classes different
from those used to train the black-box, in a setting known as zero-shot or data-free knowledge
distillation [1, 3, 4, 8, 24, 28, 38]. To our knowledge, we are among the few [17, 31] to jointly
consider no access to the training data and to the model’s architecture and hyperparameters, i.e. the
model in question is a complete black-box.
As shown in Figure 1, our framework is comprised of a black-box teacher network, a student network,
a generator and an evolutionary strategy. The teacher is trained independently of the framework,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

