Online Adaptation for Consistent Mesh
Reconstruction in the Wild
Xueting Li1 , Sifei Liu2 , Shalini De Mello2 , Kihwan Kim2 , Xiaolong Wang3 ,
Ming-Hsuan Yang1 , Jan Kautz2
1
University of California, Merced, 2 NVIDIA, 3 University of California, San Diego

Abstract
This paper presents an algorithm to reconstruct temporally consistent 3D meshes of
deformable object instances from videos in the wild. Without requiring annotations
of 3D mesh, 2D keypoints, or camera pose for each video frame, we pose videobased reconstruction as a self-supervised online adaptation problem applied to any
incoming test video. We first learn a category-specific 3D reconstruction model
from a collection of single-view images of the same category that jointly predicts
the shape, texture, and camera pose of an image. Then, at inference time, we adapt
the model to a test video over time using self-supervised regularization terms that
exploit temporal consistency of an object instance to enforce that all reconstructed
meshes share a common texture map, a base shape, as well as parts. We demonstrate
that our algorithm recovers temporally consistent and reliable 3D structures from
videos of non-rigid objects including those of animals captured in the wild – an
extremely challenging task rarely addressed before. Codes and other resources will
be released at https://sites.google.com/nvidia.com/vmr-2020.

1

Introduction

When we humans try to understand the object shown in Fig. 1(a), we instantly recognize it as a “duck”.
We also instantly perceive and imagine its shape in the 3D world, its viewpoint, and its appearance
from other views. Furthermore, when we see it in a video, its 3D structure and deformation become
even more apparent to us. Our ability to perceive the 3D structure of objects contributes vitally to our
rich understanding of them.
While 3D perception is easy for humans, 3D reconstruction of deformable objects remains a very
challenging problem in computer vision, especially for objects in the wild. For learning-based
algorithms, the key bottleneck is the lack of supervision. It is extremely challenging to collect 3D
annotations such as 3D shape and camera pose [4, 17]. Consequently, existing research mostly
focuses on limited domains (e.g., rigid objects [24], human bodies [14, 50] and faces [47]) for
which 3D annotations can be captured in constrained environments. However, these approaches
do not generalize well to non-rigid objects captured in naturalistic environments (e.g., animals). In
non-rigid structure from motion methods [2, 28], the 3D structure can be partially recovered from
correspondences between multiple viewpoints, which are also hard to label. Due to constrained
environments and limited annotations, it is nearly impossible to generalize these approaches to the
3D reconstruction of non-rigid objects (e.g., animals) from images and videos captured in the wild.
Instead of relying on 3D supervision, weakly supervised or self-supervised approaches have been
proposed for 3D mesh reconstruction. They use annotated 2D object keypoints [13], category-level
templates [21, 20] or silhouettes [22]. However, to scale up learning with 2D annotations to hundreds
of thousands of images is still non-trivial. This limits the generalization ability of current models
to new domains. For example, a 3D reconstruction model trained on single-view images, e.g., [13],
produces unstable and erratic predictions for video data. This is unsurprising, due to perturbations
over time. However, the temporal signal in videos should provide us an advantage instead of a
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

