Generalised Bayesian Filtering via Sequential Monte
Carlo
Ayman Boustati∗
University of Warwick
a.boustati@warwick.ac.uk

Ömer Deniz Akyildiz∗
The Alan Turing Institute
University of Warwick
omer.akyildiz@warwick.ac.uk

Theodoros Damoulas
The Alan Turing Institute
University of Warwick
t.damoulas@warwick.ac.uk

Adam M. Johansen
University of Warwick
The Alan Turing Institute
a.m.johansen@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a framework for inference in general state-space hidden Markov
models (HMMs) under likelihood misspecification. In particular, we leverage
the loss-theoretic perspective of Generalized Bayesian Inference (GBI) to define
generalised filtering recursions in HMMs, that can tackle the problem of inference
under model misspecification. In doing so, we arrive at principled procedures for
robust inference against observation contamination by utilising the β-divergence.
Operationalising the proposed framework is made possible via sequential Monte
Carlo methods (SMC), where most standard particle methods, and their associated
convergence results, are readily adapted to the new setting. We apply our approach
to object tracking and Gaussian process regression problems, and observe improved
performance over both standard filtering algorithms and other robust filters.

1

Introduction

Estimating the hidden states in dynamical systems is a long-standing problem in many fields of science and engineering. This can be formulated as an inference problem of a general state-space hidden
Markov model (HMM) defined via two processes, the hidden process (xt )t≥0 , and the observation process (yt )t≥1 . More precisely, we consider the general state-space hidden Markov models of the form
x0 ∼ π0 (x0 ),

(1)

xt |xt−1 ∼ ft (xt |xt−1 ), (2)

yt |xt ∼ gt (yt |xt ),

(3)

where xt ∈ X for t ≥ 0, yt ∈ Y for t ≥ 1, ft is a Markov kernel on X and gt : Y × X → R+ is the
likelihood function. We assume X ⊆ Rdx and Y ⊆ Rdy for convenience; however, the extension to
general Polish spaces follows directly. The key inference problem in this model class is estimating
is the filtering distributions, i.e. the posterior distributions of the hidden states (xt )t≥0 given the
observations y1:t denoted as (πt (xt |y1:t ))t≥1 — commonly known as Bayesian filtering [1, 2].
Under assumptions of linearity and Gaussianity, the inference problem for the hidden states of HMMs
can be solved analytically via the Kalman filter [3]. However, inference for general HMMs of the form
(1)–(3) with nonlinear, non-Gaussian transitions and likelihoods lacked a general, principled solution
until the arrival of the particle filtering schemes [4]. Particle filters (PFs) have become ubiquitous for
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

