DVERGE: Diversifying Vulnerabilities for Enhanced
Robust Generation of Ensembles
Huanrui Yang1∗, Jingyang Zhang1∗, Hongliang Dong1∗, Nathan Inkawhich1 ,
Andrew Gardner2 , Andrew Touchet2 , Wesley Wilkes2 , Heath Berry2 , Hai Li1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
Radiance Technologies
1
{huanrui.yang, jz288, hongliang.dong, nai2, hai.li}@duke.edu,
2
{andrew.gardner, atouchet, Wesley.Wilkes, Heath.Berry}@radiancetech.com

Abstract
Recent research finds CNN models for image classification demonstrate overlapped
adversarial vulnerabilities: adversarial attacks can mislead CNN models with small
perturbations, which can effectively transfer between different models trained
on the same dataset. Adversarial training, as a general robustness improvement
technique, eliminates the vulnerability in a single model by forcing it to learn
robust features. The process is hard, often requires models with large capacity,
and suffers from significant loss on clean data accuracy. Alternatively, ensemble
methods are proposed to induce sub-models with diverse outputs against a transfer
adversarial example, making the ensemble robust against transfer attacks even
if each sub-model is individually non-robust. Only small clean accuracy drop
is observed in the process. However, previous ensemble training methods are
not efficacious in inducing such diversity and thus ineffective on reaching robust
ensemble. We propose DVERGE, which isolates the adversarial vulnerability in
each sub-model by distilling non-robust features, and diversifies the adversarial
vulnerability to induce diverse outputs against a transfer attack. The novel diversity
metric and training procedure enables DVERGE to achieve higher robustness
against transfer attacks comparing to previous ensemble methods, and enables the
improved robustness when more sub-models are added to the ensemble. The code
of this work is available at https://github.com/zjysteven/DVERGE.

1

Introduction

Recent discoveries of adversarial attacks cast doubt on the inherent robustness of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [1, 2, 3]. These attacks, commonly referred to as adversarial examples,
comprise precisely crafted input perturbations that are often imperceptible to humans yet consistently
induce misclassification in CNN models. Moreover, previous research has demonstrated widespread
transferability of adversarial examples, wherein adversarial examples generated against an arbitrary
model can reliably mislead other unspecified deep learning models trained with the same dataset [4,
5, 6]. Ilyas et al. [5] conjecture the existence of robust and non-robust features within standard image
classification datasets. Whereas humans may understand an image via “human-meaningful” robust
features, which usually are insensitive to small additive noise, deep learning models are more prone
to learning non-robust features. Non-robust features are highly correlated with output labels and help
improve clean accuracy but are not visually meaningful and are sensitive to noise. Such dependency
on non-robust features leads to adversarial vulnerability that is exploited by adversarial examples
to mislead CNN models. Moreover, Ilyas et al. empirically show that CNN models independently
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

