Meta-Consolidation for Continual Learning
K J Joseph and Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India
{cs17m18p100001,vineethnb}@iith.ac.in

Abstract
The ability to continuously learn and adapt itself to new tasks, without losing
grasp of already acquired knowledge is a hallmark of biological learning systems,
which current deep learning systems fall short of. In this work, we present a
novel methodology for continual learning called MERLIN: Meta-Consolidation for
Continual Learning. We assume that weights of a neural network , for solving
task t, come from a meta-distribution p( |t). This meta-distribution is learned
and consolidated incrementally. We operate in the challenging online continual
learning setting, where a data point is seen by the model only once. Our experiments
with continual learning benchmarks of MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and MiniImageNet datasets show consistent improvement over five baselines, including a
recent state-of-the-art, corroborating the promise of MERLIN.

1

Introduction

The human brain is able to constantly, and incrementally, consolidate new information with existing
information, allowing for quick recall when needed [5, 78]. In this natural setting, it is not common
to see the same data sample multiple times, or even twice at times. Human memory capacity is also
limited which forbids memorizing all examples that are seen during its lifetime [39]. Hence, the
brain operates in an online manner, where it is able to adapt itself to continuously changing data
distributions without losing grasp of its previously acquired knowledge [33]. Unfortunately, deep
neural networks have been known to suffer from catastrophic forgetting [53, 25], where they fail to
retain performance on older tasks, while learning new tasks.
Continual learning is a machine learning setting characterized by its requirement to have a learning
model incrementally adapt to new tasks, while not losing its performance on previously learned tasks.
Note that ‘task’ here can refer to a set of new classes, new domains (e.g. thermal, RGB) or even
new tasks in general (e.g. colorization, segmentation) [63, 68, 89]. The last few years have seen
many efforts to develop methods to address this setting from various perspectives. One line of work
[88, 38, 47, 2, 16, 71, 56, 13, 79, 42] constrains the parameters of the deep network trained on Task
A to not change much while learning a new Task B, while another - replay-based methods - store
[63, 48, 14, 66, 9, 3, 4, 22] or generate [74, 81, 46, 45] examples of previous tasks to finetune the final
model at evaluation time. Another kind of methods [51, 72, 69, 19, 68, 62, 87] attempt to expand the
network to increase the capacity of the model, while learning new tasks. Broadly speaking, all these
methods manipulate the data space or the weight space in different ways to achieve their objectives.
In this work, we propose a different perspective to addressing continual learning, based on the
latent space of a weight-generating process, rather than the weights themselves. Studies of the
human brain suggest that knowledge and skills to solve tasks are represented in a meta-space of
concepts with a high-level semantic basis [28, 10, 50]. The codification from tasks to concepts,
and the periodic consolidation of memory, are considered essential for a transferable and compact
representation of knowledge that helps humans continually learn [11, 85, 5]. Current continual
learning methods consolidate (assimilate knowledge on past tasks) either in the weight space [13,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

