Continual Deep Learning by Functional
Regularisation of Memorable Past

Pingbo Pan,1,∗,† Siddharth Swaroop,2,∗,‡ Alexander Immer,3,† Runa Eschenhagen,4,†
Richard E. Turner,2 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan5,‡ .
1

University of Technology Sydney, Australia
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
3
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
4
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
5
RIKEN Center for AI Project, Tokyo, Japan
2

Abstract
Continually learning new skills is important for intelligent systems, yet standard
deep learning methods suffer from catastrophic forgetting of the past. Recent
works address this with weight regularisation. Functional regularisation, although
computationally expensive, is expected to perform better, but rarely does so in
practice. In this paper, we fix this issue by using a new functional-regularisation
approach that utilises a few memorable past examples crucial to avoid forgetting.
By using a Gaussian Process formulation of deep networks, our approach enables
training in weight-space while identifying both the memorable past and a functional
prior. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on standard benchmarks
and opens a new direction for life-long learning where regularisation and memorybased methods are naturally combined.

1

Introduction

The ability to quickly adapt to changing environments is an important quality of intelligent systems.
For such quick adaptation, it is important to be able to identify, memorise, and recall useful past
experiences when acquiring new ones. Unfortunately, standard deep-learning methods lack such
qualities, and can quickly forget previously acquired skills when learning new ones [18]. Such
catastrophic forgetting presents a big challenge for applications such as robotics, where new tasks
can appear during training, and data from previous tasks might be unavailable for retraining.
In recent years, many methods have been proposed to address catastrophic forgetting in deep neural
networks (DNNs). One popular approach is to keep network weights close to the values obtained
for the previous tasks/data [12, 18, 22, 37]. However, this may not always ensure the quality of
predictions on previous tasks. Since the network outputs depend on the weights in a complex way,
such weight-regularisation may not be effective. A better approach is to use functional-regularisation,
where we directly regularise the network outputs [5], but this is costly because it requires derivatives
of outputs at many input locations. Existing approaches reduce these costs by carefully selecting the
locations, e.g. by using a working memory [5] or Gaussian-Process (GP) inducing points [34], but
currently they do not consistently outperform existing weight-regularisation methods.
* These two authors contributed equally.
† This work is conducted during an internship at RIKEN Center for AI project, Tokyo, Japan.
‡ Corresponding authors: emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp, ss2163@cam.ac.uk

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

