Network-to-Network Translation with
Conditional Invertible Neural Networks
Robin Rombach∗
Patrick Esser∗
Björn Ommer
IWR, HCI, Heidelberg University
firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Given the ever-increasing computational costs of modern machine learning models, we need to find new ways to reuse such expert models and thus tap into the
resources that have been invested in their creation. Recent work suggests that the
power of these massive models is captured by the representations they learn. Therefore, we seek a model that can relate between different existing representations and
propose to solve this task with a conditionally invertible network. This network
demonstrates its capability by (i) providing generic transfer between diverse domains, (ii) enabling controlled content synthesis by allowing modification in other
domains, and (iii) facilitating diagnosis of existing representations by translating
them into interpretable domains such as images. Our domain transfer network
can translate between fixed representations without having to learn or finetune
them. This allows users to utilize various existing domain-specific expert models
from the literature that had been trained with extensive computational resources.
Experiments on diverse conditional image synthesis tasks, competitive image modification results and experiments on image-to-image and text-to-image generation
demonstrate the generic applicability of our approach. For example, we translate
between BERT and BigGAN, state-of-the-art text and image models to provide
text-to-image generation, which neither of both experts can perform on their own.

1

Introduction

One of the key features of intelligence is the ability to combine and transfer information between
diverse domains and modalities [12, 73, 65, 68, 61]. In contrast, artificial intelligence research has
made great progress in learning powerful representations for individual domains [28, 71, 19, 69, 15, 5]
that can even achieve superhuman performance on confined tasks such as traffic sign recognition
[10, 11], image classification [29] or question answering [15]. However, learning representations
for different domains that also allow a domain-to-domain transfer of information between them is
significantly more challenging [2]: There is a trade-off between the expressiveness of individual
domain representations and their compatibility to another to support transfer. While for limited
training data multimodal learning has successfully trained representations for different domains
together [66, 74], the overall most powerful domain-specific representations typically result from
training huge models specifically for individual challenging domains using massive amounts of
training data and computational resources, e.g. [19, 69, 5]. With the dawn of even more massive
models like the recently introduced GPT-3 [5], where training on only a single domain already
demands most of the available resources, we must find new, creative ways to make use of these
powerful models, which none but the largest institutions can afford to train and experiment with,
and thereby utilize the huge amount of resources and knowledge which are distilled into the model’s
representations—in other words, we have to find ways to cope with "The Bitter Lesson" [67].
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Code available at https://github.com/CompVis/net2net.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

