Counterfactual Contrastive Learning for
Weakly-Supervised Vision-Language Grounding

Zhu Zhang1,2 , Zhou Zhao1,2∗, Zhijie Lin1 , Jieming Zhu3 , and Xiuqiang He3
1
Zhejiang University
2
Key Laboratory Foundation of Information Perception and Systems for Public Security of MIIT,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zhangzhu, zhaozhou, linzhijie}@zju.edu.cn
{jamie.zhu, hexiuqiang1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Weakly-supervised vision-language grounding aims to localize a target moment
in a video or a specific region in an image according to the given sentence query,
where only video-level or image-level sentence annotations are provided during
training. Most existing approaches employ the MIL-based or reconstruction-based
paradigms for the WSVLG task, but the former heavily depends on the quality
of randomly-selected negative samples and the latter cannot directly optimize the
visual-textual alignment score. In this paper, we propose a novel Counterfactual
Contrastive Learning (CCL) to develop sufficient contrastive training between counterfactual positive and negative results, which are based on robust and destructive
counterfactual transformations. Concretely, we design three counterfactual transformation strategies from the feature-, interaction- and relation-level, where the
feature-level method damages the visual features of selected proposals, interactionlevel approach confuses the vision-language interaction and relation-level strategy
destroys the context clues in proposal relationships. Extensive experiments on five
vision-language grounding datasets verify the effectiveness of our CCL paradigm.

1

Introduction

Vision-language grounding is a fundamental and crucial problem in multi-modal understanding.
Video grounding [14, 17] aims to identify the temporal boundaries of the target moment according to
the given description. And image grounding [20, 28, 46] localizes a specific region described by a
referring expression. Recently, to avoid expensive manual annotations, researchers begin to explore
Weakly-Supervised Vision-Language Grounding (WSVLG), which only needs the video-sentence
or image-sentence pairs during training. Most existing approaches [33, 26, 11, 29, 15, 23, 8, 37]
employ the MIL-based or reconstruction-based paradigm to train weakly-supervised grounding
networks, but they both have some drawbacks. The MIL-based methods [11, 29, 15, 8] often define
the original vision-language pairs as positive samples, construct the unmatched vision-language pairs
as negative samples, and directly learn the latent visual-textual alignment by an inter-sample loss.
However, these approaches heavily depend on the quality of randomly-selected negative samples,
which are often easy to distinguish and cannot provide strong supervision signals. On the other hand,
reconstruction-based methods [33, 26, 23, 37] attempt to reconstruct the sentence query from visual
contents during training and utilize intermediate results, such as attention weights, to localize the
target proposal (i.e., region or moment) during inference. But these methods cannot directly optimize
the visual-textual alignment scores which are applied for inference. Considering the proposals with
∗

Zhou Zhao is the corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

