Smooth And Consistent Probabilistic Regression
Trees
Sami Alkhoury
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, Grenoble, France
sami.alkhoury@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Emilie Devijver
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, Grenoble, France
emilie.devijver@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Marianne Clausel
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, IECL, Nancy, France
marianne.clausel@univ-lorraine.fr
Myriam Tami
Univ. Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, MICS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
myriam.tami@centralesupelec.fr
Eric Gaussier
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, Grenoble, France
eric.gaussier@imag.fr
Georges Oppenheim
Univ. Paris-Est-Marne la Vallée, Département de Mathématiques, Marne-la-Vallée, France
georges.oppenheim@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose here a generalization of regression trees, referred to as Probabilistic
Regression (PR) trees, that adapt to the smoothness of the prediction function
relating input and output variables while preserving the interpretability of the
prediction and being robust to noise. In PR trees, an observation is associated
to all regions of a tree through a probability distribution that reflects how far the
observation is to a region. We show that such trees are consistent, meaning that
their error tends to 0 when the sample size tends to infinity, a property that has not
been established for similar, previous proposals as Soft trees and Smooth Transition
Regression trees. We further explain how PR trees can be used in different ensemble
methods, namely Random Forests and Gradient Boosted Trees. Lastly, we assess
their performance through extensive experiments that illustrate their benefits in
terms of performance, interpretability and robustness to noise.

1

Introduction

Classification and regression trees (CART) [3] and the ensemble methods based on them, as Random
Forests [2] and Gradient Boosted Trees [11, 8], have been successfully used for regression problems
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

