A Novel Automated Curriculum Strategy to Solve
Hard Sokoban Planning Instances

Dieqiao Feng
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
dqfeng@cs.cornell.edu

Carla P. Gomes
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Bart Selman
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
selman@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
In recent years, we have witnessed tremendous progress in deep reinforcement
learning (RL) for tasks such as Go, Chess, video games, and robot control. Nevertheless, other combinatorial domains, such as AI planning, still pose considerable
challenges for RL approaches. The key difficulty in those domains is that a positive
reward signal becomes exponentially rare as the minimal solution length increases.
So, an RL approach loses its training signal. There has been promising recent
progress by using a curriculum-driven learning approach that is designed to solve
a single hard instance. We present a novel automated curriculum approach that
dynamically selects from a pool of unlabeled training instances of varying task
complexity guided by our difficulty quantum momentum strategy. We show how
the smoothness of the task hardness impacts the final learning results. In particular,
as the size of the instance pool increases, the “hardness gap” decreases, which
facilitates a smoother automated curriculum based learning process. Our automated
curriculum approach dramatically improves upon the previous approaches. We
show our results on Sokoban, which is a traditional PSPACE-complete planning
problem and presents a great challenge even for specialized solvers. Our RL agent
can solve hard instances that are far out of reach for any previous state-of-the-art
Sokoban solver. In particular, our approach can uncover plans that require hundreds
of steps, while the best previous search methods would take many years of computing time to solve such instances. In addition, we show that we can further boost the
RL performance with an intricate coupling of our automated curriculum approach
with a curiosity-driven search strategy and a graph neural net representation.

1

Introduction

Planning is an area in core artificial intelligence (AI), which emerged in the early days of AI as part
of research on robotics. An AI planning problem consists of a specification of an initial state, a goal
state, and a set of operators that specifies how one can move from one state to the next. In robotics,
a planner can be used to synthesize a plan, i.e., a sequence of robot actions from an initial state to
a desired goal state. The generality of the planning formalism captures a surprisingly wide range
of tasks, including task scheduling, program synthesis, and general theorem proving (actions are
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

