OrganITE: Optimal transplant donor organ offering
using an individual treatment effect
Jeroen Berrevoets
University of Cambridge,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
jeroen.berrevoets@maths.cam.ac.uk
Ioana Bica
University of Oxford,
The Alan Turing Institute
ioana.bica@eng.ox.ac.uk

James Jordon
University of Oxford
james.jordon@wolfson.ox.ac.uk

Alexander Gimson
Cambridge University Hospitals
alexander.gimson@nhs.net

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge,
University of California, Los Angeles,
The Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Transplant-organs are a scarce medical resource. The uniqueness of each organ and
the patients’ heterogeneous responses to the organs present a unique and challenging machine learning problem. In this problem there are two key challenges: (i)
assigning each organ "optimally" to a patient in the queue; (ii) accurately estimating
the potential outcomes associated with each patient and each possible organ. In
this paper, we introduce OrganITE, an organ-to-patient assignment methodology
that assigns organs based not only on its own estimates of the potential outcomes
but also on organ scarcity. By modelling and accounting for organ scarcity we
significantly increase total life years across the population, compared to the existing
greedy approaches that simply optimise life years for the current organ available.
Moreover, we propose an individualised treatment effect model capable of addressing the high dimensionality of the organ space. We test our method on real and
simulated data, resulting in as much as an additional year of life expectancy as
compared to existing organ-to-patient policies.

1

Introduction

For patients with endstage diseases, organ-transplantation surgery is often a last resort. With an
increasing number of donors and patients in need of a transplant [1, 2]– organ transplantation
surgeries have doubled in the last fifteen years [3] –finding the best recipient for each available
organ is becoming an ever more important problem. Though the problem is one of treatment effect
estimation and resource allocation, unique challenges arise in each sub-problem in the setting of
organ transplantation.
The problem. There are several possible objectives we could consider optimising in the setting
of organ matching, e.g. total life years of the population, number of deaths in the waiting queue,
deaths before 5 years after transplant, etc. We focus on the objective of maximising the total life
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

