Black-Box Certiﬁcation with Randomized Smoothing:
A Functional Optimization Based Framework
Dinghuai Zhang∗
Mila
dinghuai.zhang@mila.quebec

Mao Ye∗ , Chengyue Gong∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
{my21, cygong}@cs.utexas.edu

Zhanxing Zhu
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Randomized classiﬁers have been shown to provide a promising approach for
achieving certiﬁed robustness against adversarial attacks in deep learning. However, most existing methods only leverage Gaussian smoothing noise and only
work for ℓ2 perturbation. We propose a general framework of adversarial certiﬁcation with non-Gaussian noise and for more general types of attacks, from a uniﬁed
functional optimization perspective. Our new framework allows us to identify a
key trade-off between accuracy and robustness via designing smoothing distributions and leverage it to design new families of non-Gaussian smoothing distributions that work more efﬁciently for different ℓp settings, including ℓ1 , ℓ2 and ℓ∞
attacks. Our proposed methods achieve better certiﬁcation results than previous
works and provide a new perspective on randomized smoothing certiﬁcation.

1

Introduction

Although many robust training algorithms have been developed to overcome adversarial attacks
[1, 2, 3], most heuristically developed methods can be shown to be broken by more powerful adversaries eventually (e.g., [4, 5, 6, 7]). This casts an urgent demand for developing robust classiﬁers
with provable worst-case guarantees. One promising approach for certiﬁable robustness is the recent
randomized smoothing method [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], which constructs smoothed classiﬁers
with certiﬁable robustness by introducing noise on the inputs. Compared with the other more traditional certiﬁcation approaches [16, 17, 18] that exploit special structures of the neural networks (such
as the properties of ReLU), the randomized smoothing approaches work more ﬂexibly on general
black-box classiﬁers and is shown to be more scalable and provide tighter bounds on challenging
datasets such as ImageNet [19].
Most existing methods use Gaussian noise for smoothing. Although appearing to be a natural choice,
one of our key observations is that the Gaussian distribution is, in fact a sub-optimal choice in high
dimensional spaces even for ℓ2 attack. We observe that there is a counter-intuitive phenomenon in
high dimensional spaces [20], that almost all of the probability mass of standard Gaussian distribution concentrates around the sphere surface of a certain radius. This makes tuning the variance
of Gaussian distribution an inefﬁcient way to trade off robustness and accuracy for randomized
smoothing.
∗

Equal contributions

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

