Improved Analysis of Clipping Algorithms for
Non-convex Optimization
Bohang Zhang∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE,
School of EECS, Peking University
zhangbohang@pku.edu.cn
Cong Fang
University of Pennsylvania
fangcong@pku.edu.cn

Jikai Jin∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
jkjin@pku.edu.cn

Liwei Wang†
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE,
School of EECS, Peking University
Center of Data Science, Peking University
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Gradient clipping is commonly used in training deep neural networks partly due
to its practicability in relieving the exploding gradient problem. Recently, Zhang
et al. [2020a] show that clipped (stochastic) Gradient Descent (GD) converges
faster than vanilla GD/SGD via introducing a new assumption called (L0 , L1 )smoothness, which characterizes the violent ﬂuctuation of gradients typically encountered in deep neural networks. However, their iteration complexities on the
problem-dependent parameters are rather pessimistic, and theoretical justiﬁcation
of clipping combined with other crucial techniques, e.g. momentum acceleration,
are still lacking. In this paper, we bridge the gap by presenting a general framework to study the clipping algorithms, which also takes momentum methods into
consideration. We provide convergence analysis of the framework in both deterministic and stochastic setting, and demonstrate the tightness of our results by
comparing them with existing lower bounds. Our results imply that the efﬁciency
of clipping methods will not degenerate even in highly non-smooth regions of
the landscape. Experiments conﬁrm the superiority of clipping-based methods in
deep learning tasks.

1

Introduction

The problem of the central interest in this paper is to minimize a general non-convex function presented below:
min F (x),
(1)
x∈Rd

where F (x) can be potentially stochastic, i.e.
F (x) = Eξ∼D [f (x, ξ)] .
For non-convex optimization problems in form of (1), since obtaining the global minimum is
NP-hard in general, this paper takes the concern on a reasonable relaxed criteria: ﬁnding an εapproximate ﬁrst-order stationary point such that ∥∇F (x)∥ ≤ ε.
∗
†

Equal Contributions.
Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

