Adversarial Robustness of
Supervised Sparse Coding

Jeremias Sulam
Johns Hopkins University
jsulam1@jhu.edu

Ramchandran Muthukumar
Johns Hopkins University
rmuthuk1@jhu.edu

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Several recent results provide theoretical insights into the phenomena of adversarial
examples. Existing results, however, are often limited due to a gap between the
simplicity of the models studied and the complexity of those deployed in practice.
In this work, we strike a better balance by considering a model that involves
learning a representation while at the same time giving a precise generalization
bound and a robustness certificate. We focus on the hypothesis class obtained by
combining a sparsity-promoting encoder coupled with a linear classifier, and show
an interesting interplay between the expressivity and stability of the (supervised)
representation map and a notion of margin in the feature space. We bound the robust
risk (to `2 -bounded perturbations) of hypotheses parameterized by dictionaries that
achieve a mild encoder gap on training data. Furthermore, we provide a robustness
certificate for end-to-end classification. We demonstrate the applicability of our
analysis by computing certified accuracy on real data, and compare with other
alternatives for certified robustness.

1

Introduction

With machine learning applications becoming ubiquitous in modern-day life, there exists an increasing
concern about the robustness of the deployed models. Since first reported in [Szegedy et al., 2013,
Goodfellow et al., 2014, Biggio et al., 2013], these adversarial attacks are small perturbations of
the input, imperceptible to the human eye, which can nonetheless completely fluster otherwise
well-performing systems. Because of clear security implications [DARPA, 2019], this phenomenon
has sparked an increasing amount of work dedicated to devising defense strategies [Metzen et al.,
2017, Gu and Rigazio, 2014, Madry et al., 2017] and correspondingly more sophisticated attacks
[Carlini and Wagner, 2017, Athalye et al., 2018, Tramer et al., 2020], with each group trying to
triumph over the other in an arms-race of sorts.
A different line of research attempts to understand adversarial examples from a theoretical standpoint.
Some works have focused on giving robustness certificates, thus providing a guarantee to withstand
the attack of an adversary under certain assumptions [Cohen et al., 2019, Raghunathan et al., 2018,
Wong and Kolter, 2017]. Other works address questions of learnabiltiy [Shafahi et al., 2018, Cullina
et al., 2018, Bubeck et al., 2018, Tsipras et al., 2018] or sample complexity [Schmidt et al., 2018, Yin
et al., 2018, Tu et al., 2019], in the hope of better characterizing the increased difficulty of learning
hypotheses that are robust to adversarial attacks. While many of these results are promising, the
analysis is often limited to simple models.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

