Consistent Plug-in Classifiers for
Complex Objectives and Constraints
Shiv Kumar Tavker
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
shivtavker@smail.iitm.ac.in

Harish G. Ramaswamy
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
hariguru@cse.iitm.ac.in

Harikrishna Narasimhan
Google Research, USA
hnarasimhan@google.com

Abstract
We present a consistent algorithm for constrained classification problems where the
objective (e.g. F-measure, G-mean) and the constraints (e.g. demographic parity
fairness, coverage) are defined by general functions of the confusion matrix. Our
approach reduces the problem into a sequence of plug-in classifier learning tasks.
The reduction is achieved by posing the learning problem as an optimization over
the intersection of two sets: the set of confusion matrices that are achievable and
those that are feasible. This decoupling of the constraint space then allows us to
solve the problem by applying Frank-Wolfe style optimization over the individual
sets. For objective and constraints that are convex functions of the confusion matrix,
our algorithm requires O(1/✏2 ) calls to the plug-in subroutine, which improves on
the O(1/✏3 ) calls needed by the reduction-based algorithm of Narasimhan (2018)
[29]. We show empirically that our algorithm is competitive with prior methods,
while being more robust to choices of hyper-parameters.

1

Introduction

In an increasing number of machine learning tasks, one is required to train a classifier with constraints
on multiple metrics such as fairness, coverage, recall, etc [16, 17, 2, 9, 10]. Often, the objective and
constraints in these problems are not simple metrics such as classification error, and may have a
more complex non-decomposable structure, i.e. may not be expressible a simple average of errors on
individual data points. Examples of such metrics include the F-measure and G-mean used in classimbalanced problems [27, 24], the predictive parity criteria used in ML fairness [7], KL-divergence
based metrics used in distribution matching tasks [12, 14], and many more.
A common feature of the above metrics is that they can all be defined as a function of a classifier’s
confusion matrix. We are therefore interested in constrained learning problems where the objectives
and constraints are general functions of the confusion matrix. Our goal is to design a statistically
consistent algorithm for solving these problems, i.e. an algorithm that converges in the limit of infinite
training data to an optimal feasible classifier for these problems.
In previous work, Narasimhan (2018) [29] provide consistent algorithms for constrained learning
problems by reducing them into a sequence of easy-to-solve sub-problems. Each of these subproblems is a linear metric minimization task and involves learning a plug-in classifier, a classifier
constructed by fine-tuning a threshold (or a weight matrix for multiclass problems) on a pre-trained
class probability model. For convex functions of the confusion matrix, their method requires O(1/✏3 )
calls to the plug-in learning routine to converge to a classifier that is ✏-optimal and ✏-feasible. In this
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

