Log-Likelihood Ratio Minimizing Flows:
Towards Robust and Quantifiable
Neural Distribution Alignment

Ben Usman 1,2
usmn@bu.edu

Avneesh Sud 2
asud@google.com

Boston University 1

Nick Dufour 2
ndufour@google.com

Google AI 2

Kate Saenko 1,3
saenko@bu.edu

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3

Abstract
Distribution alignment has many applications in deep learning, including domain
adaptation and unsupervised image-to-image translation. Most prior work on unsupervised distribution alignment relies either on minimizing simple non-parametric
statistical distances such as maximum mean discrepancy or on adversarial alignment. However, the former fails to capture the structure of complex real-world
distributions, while the latter is difficult to train and does not provide any universal
convergence guarantees or automatic quantitative validation procedures. In this
paper, we propose a new distribution alignment method based on a log-likelihood
ratio statistic and normalizing flows. We show that, under certain assumptions,
this combination yields a deep neural likelihood-based minimization objective that
attains a known lower bound upon convergence. We experimentally verify that
minimizing the resulting objective results in domain alignment that preserves the
local structure of input domains.

1

Introduction

The goal of unsupervised domain alignment is to find a transformation of one dataset that makes it
similar to another dataset while preserving the structure of the original. The majority of modern neural
approaches to domain alignment directly search for a transformation of the dataset that minimizes
an empirical estimate of some statistical distance - a non-negative quantity that takes lower values
as datasets become more similar. The variability of what “similar” means in this context, which
transformations are allowed, and whether data points themselves or their feature representations
are aligned, leads to a variety of domain alignment methods. Unfortunately, existing estimators of
statistical distances either restrict the notion of similarity to enable closed-form estimation [24], or
rely on adversarial (min-max) training [27] that makes it very difficult to quantitatively reason about
the performance of such methods [3; 5; 25]. In particular, the value of the optimized adversarial
objective conveys very little about the quality of the alignment, which makes it difficult to perform
automatic model selection on a new dataset pair. On the other hand, Normalizing Flows [20] are
an emerging class of deep neural density models that do not rely on adversarial training. They
model a given dataset as a random variable with a simple known distribution transformed by an
unknown invertible transformation parameterized using a deep neural network. Recent work on
normalizing flows for maximum likelihood density estimation made great strides in defining new rich
parameterizations for these invertible transforms [8; 11; 14], but little work focused on flow-based
density alignment [12; 29].
In this paper, we present the Log-likelihood Ratio Minimizing Flow (LRMF), a new non-adversarial
approach for aligning distributions in a way that makes them indistinguishable for a given family of
density models M . We consider datasets A and B indistinguishable with respect to the family M if
there is a single density model in M that is optimal for both A and B individually since in this case
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

