VAEM: a Deep Generative Model for
Heterogeneous Mixed Type Data

Chao Ma ∗
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
cm905@cam.ac.uk

Sebastian Tschiatschek ∗
University of Vienna
Vienna, Austria
sebastian@tschiatschek.net

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato ∗
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Richard Turner ∗
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Cheng Zhang
Microsoft Research Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
cheng.zhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
Deep generative models often perform poorly in real-world applications due to
the heterogeneity of natural data sets. Heterogeneity arises from data containing
different types of features (categorical, ordinal, continuous, etc.) and features of
the same type having different marginal distributions. We propose an extension
of variational autoencoders (VAEs) called VAEM to handle such heterogeneous
data. VAEM is a deep generative model that is trained in a two stage manner
such that the first stage provides a more uniform representation of the data to the
second stage, thereby sidestepping the problems caused by heterogeneous data. We
provide extensions of VAEM to handle partially observed data, and demonstrate
its performance in data generation, missing data prediction and sequential feature
selection tasks. Our results show that VAEM broadens the range of real-world
applications where deep generative models can be successfully deployed.

1

Introduction

Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [15] are highly flexible probabilistic models, making them promising tools for enabling automated decision making under uncertainty in real-life scenarios. They are
typically applied in standard settings in which each data dimension has a similar type and similar
statistical properties (e.g. consider the pixels of an image). However, many real-world datasets contain
variables with different types. For instance, in healthcare applications, a patient record may contain
demographic information such as nationality which is of categorical type, the age which is ordinal,
the height which is continuous.
Naively applying vanilla VAEs to such mixed type heterogeneous data can lead to unsatisfying
results. The reason for this is that it requires the use of different likelihood functions (e.g. Gaussian
likelihoods for real-valued variables and Bernoulli likelihoods for binary variables). In this case, the
contribution that each likelihood makes to the training objective can be very different, leading to
challenging optimization problems [13] in which some data dimensions may be poorly-modeled in
favor of others. Figure 1 (c) shows an example in which a vanilla VAE fits some of the categorical
variables, but performs poorly on the continuous ones.
To overcome the limitations of VAEs in this setting, we propose Variational Auto-encoder for
heterogeneous mixed type data (VAEM) and study its performance for decision making in real-world
∗

This work was performed when the authors were (part-time) associated with Microsoft Research, Cambridge

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

