FrugalML: How to Use ML Prediction APIs More
Accurately and Cheaply

1

Lingjiao Chen1 , Matei Zaharia 1 , James Zou1,2
Department of Computer Sciences, 2 Department of Biomedical Data Science
Stanford University

Abstract
Prediction APIs offered for a fee are a fast-growing industry and an important part of machine learning as a service. While many such services
are available, the heterogeneity in their price and performance makes it
challenging for users to decide which API or combination of APIs to use for
their own data and budget. We take a first step towards addressing this challenge by proposing FrugalML, a principled framework that jointly learns
the strength and weakness of each API on different data, and performs an
efficient optimization to automatically identify the best sequential strategy to adaptively use the available APIs within a budget constraint. Our
theoretical analysis shows that natural sparsity in the formulation can be
leveraged to make FrugalML efficient. We conduct systematic experiments
using ML APIs from Google, Microsoft, Amazon, IBM, Baidu and other
providers for tasks including facial emotion recognition, sentiment analysis
and speech recognition. Across various tasks, FrugalML can achieve up to
90% cost reduction while matching the accuracy of the best single API, or
up to 5% better accuracy while matching the best API’s cost.

1

Introduction

Machine learning as a service (MLaaS) is a rapidly growing industry. For example, one could
use Google prediction API [9] to classify an image for $0.0015 or to classify the sentiment of
a text passage for $0.00025. MLaaS services are appealing because using such APIs reduces
the need to develop one’s own ML models. The MLaaS market size was estimated at $1
billion in 2019, and it is expected to grow to $8.4 billion by 2025 [1].
Third-party ML APIs come with their own challenges, however. A major challenge is that
different companies charge quite different amounts for similar tasks. For example, for image
classification, Face++ charges $0.0005 per image [6], which is 67% cheaper than Google [9],
while Microsoft charges $0.0010 [11]. Moreover, the prediction APIs of different providers
perform better or worse on different types of inputs. For example, accuracy disparities in
gender classification were observed for different skin colors [23, 37]. As we will show later
in the paper, these APIs’ performance also varies by class—for example, we found that
on the FER+ dataset, the Face++ API had the best accuracy on surprise images while the
Microsoft API had the best performance on neutral images. The more expensive APIs are not
uniformly better; and APIs tend to have specific classes of inputs where they perform better
than alternatives. This heterogeneity in price and in performance makes it challenging for
users to decide which API or combination of APIs to use for their own data and budget.
In this paper, we propose FrugalML, a principled framework to address this challenge.
FrugalML jointly learns the strength and weakness of each API on different data, then
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

