Online Bayesian Goal Inference for
Boundedly-Rational Planning Agents

Tan Zhi-Xuan, Jordyn L. Mann, Tom Silver
Joshua B. Tenenbaum,
Vikash K. Mansinghka
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{xuan,jordynm,tslvr,jbt,vkm}@mit.edu

Abstract
People routinely infer the goals of others by observing their actions over time.
Remarkably, we can do so even when those actions lead to failure, enabling us to
assist others when we detect that they might not achieve their goals. How might we
endow machines with similar capabilities? Here we present an architecture capable
of inferring an agent’s goals online from both optimal and non-optimal sequences
of actions. Our architecture models agents as boundedly-rational planners that
interleave search with execution by replanning, thereby accounting for sub-optimal
behavior. These models are specified as probabilistic programs, allowing us to represent and perform efficient Bayesian inference over an agent’s goals and internal
planning processes. To perform such inference, we develop Sequential Inverse
Plan Search (SIPS), a sequential Monte Carlo algorithm that exploits the online
replanning assumption of these models, limiting computation by incrementally
extending inferred plans as new actions are observed. We present experiments
showing that this modeling and inference architecture outperforms Bayesian inverse
reinforcement learning baselines, accurately inferring goals from both optimal and
non-optimal trajectories involving failure and back-tracking, while generalizing
across domains with compositional structure and sparse rewards.

1

Introduction

Everyday experience tells us that it is impossible to plan ahead for everything. Yet, not only do
humans still manage to achieve our goals by piecing together partial and approximate plans, we also
appear to account for this cognitive strategy when inferring the goals of others, understanding that
they might plan and act sub-optimally, or even fail to achieve their goals. Indeed, even 18-month
old infants seem capable of such inferences, offering their assistance to adults after observing them
execute failed plans [1]. How might we understand this ability to infer goals from such plans? And
how might we endow machines with this capacity, so they might assist us when our plans fail?
While there has been considerable work on inferring the goals and desires of agents, much of this
work has assumed that agents act optimally to achieve their goals. Even when this assumption is
relaxed, the forms of sub-optimality considered are often highly simplified. In inverse reinforcement
learning, for example, agents are assumed to either act optimally [2] or to exhibit Boltzmann-rational
action noise [3], while in the plan recognition literature, longer plans are assigned exponentially
decreasing probability [4]. None of these approaches account for the difficulty of planning itself,
which may lead agents to produce sub-optimal or failed plans. This not only makes them ill-equipped
to infer goals from such plans, but also saddles them with a cognitively implausible burden: If
inferring an agent’s goals requires knowing the optimal solution to reach each goal, then an observer
would need to compute the optimal plan or policy for all of those goals in advance [5]. Outside of the
simplest problems and domains, this is deeply intractable.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

