Telescoping Density-Ratio Estimation

Benjamin Rhodes
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
ben.rhodes@ed.ac.uk

Kai Xu
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
kai.xu@ed.ac.uk

Michael U. Gutmann
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
michael.gutmann@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Density-ratio estimation via classification is a cornerstone of unsupervised learning.
It has provided the foundation for state-of-the-art methods in representation learning
and generative modelling, with the number of use-cases continuing to proliferate.
However, it suffers from a critical limitation: it fails to accurately estimate ratios
p/q for which the two densities differ significantly. Empirically, we find this
occurs whenever the KL divergence between p and q exceeds tens of nats. To
resolve this limitation, we introduce a new framework, telescoping density-ratio
estimation (TRE), that enables the estimation of ratios between highly dissimilar
densities in high-dimensional spaces. Our experiments demonstrate that TRE
can yield substantial improvements over existing single-ratio methods for mutual
information estimation, representation learning and energy-based modelling.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning via density-ratio estimation is a powerful paradigm in machine learning [60]
that continues to be a source of major progress in the field. It consists of estimating the ratio p/q
from their samples without separately estimating the numerator and denominator. A common way
to achieve this is to train a neural network classifier to distinguish between the two sets of samples,
since for many loss functions the ratio p/q can be extracted from the optimal classifier [60, 21, 41].
This discriminative approach has been leveraged in diverse areas such as covariate shift adaptation
[59, 63], energy-based modelling [22, 4, 53, 64, 36, 19], generative adversarial networks [15, 47, 43],
bias correction for generative models [20, 18], likelihood-free inference [50, 62, 8, 13], mutualinformation estimation [2], representation learning [29, 30, 48, 25, 27], Bayesian experimental design
[33, 34] and off-policy reward estimation in reinforcement learning [39]. Across this diverse set of
applications, density-ratio based methods have consistently yielded state-of-the-art results.
Despite the successes of discriminative density-ratio estimation, many existing loss functions share
a severe limitation. Whenever the ‘gap’ between p and q is large, the classifier can obtain almost
perfect accuracy with a relatively poor estimate of the density ratio. We refer to this failure mode
as the density-chasm problem—see Figure 1a for an illustration. We observe empirically that the
density-chasm problem manifests whenever the KL-divergence DKL (p k q) exceeds ∼ 20 nats1 .
This observation accords with recent findings in the mutual information literature regarding the
limitations of density-ratio based estimators of the KL [40, 52, 57]. In high dimensions, it can easily
occur that two densities p and q will have a KL-divergence measuring in the hundreds of nats, and so
the ratio may be virtually intractable to estimate with existing techniques.
In this paper, we propose a new framework for estimating density-ratios that can overcome the
density-chasm problem. Our solution uses a ‘divide-and-conquer’ strategy composed of two steps.
The first step is to gradually transport samples from p to samples from q, creating a chain of
intermediate datasets. We then estimate the density-ratio between consecutive datasets along this
1

‘nat’ being a unit of information measured using the natural logarithm (base e)

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

