Parameterized Explainer for Graph Neural Network

Dongsheng Luo1∗ Wei Cheng2∗ Dongkuan Xu1 Wenchao Yu2
Haifeng Chen2 Xiang Zhang1
1
The Pennsylvania State University
2
NEC Labs America
1
{dul262,dux19,xzz89}@psu.edu
2
{weicheng,wyu,bzong,haifeng}@nec-labs.com

Bo Zong2

Abstract
Despite recent progress in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), explaining predictions
made by GNNs remains a challenging open problem. The leading method independently addresses the local explanations (i.e., important subgraph structure and node
features) to interpret why a GNN model makes the prediction for a single instance,
e.g. a node or a graph. As a result, the explanation generated is painstakingly
customized for each instance. The unique explanation interpreting each instance
independently is not sufficient to provide a global understanding of the learned
GNN model, leading to the lack of generalizability and hindering it from being used
in the inductive setting. Besides, as it is designed for explaining a single instance,
it is challenging to explain a set of instances naturally (e.g., graphs of a given
class). In this study, we address these key challenges and propose PGExplainer, a
parameterized explainer for GNNs. PGExplainer adopts a deep neural network to
parameterize the generation process of explanations, which enables PGExplainer a
natural approach to explaining multiple instances collectively. Compared to the
existing work, PGExplainer has better generalization ability and can be utilized
in an inductive setting easily. Experiments on both synthetic and real-life datasets
show highly competitive performance with up to 24.7% relative improvement in
AUC on explaining graph classification over the leading baseline.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful tools for representation learning of graph-structured
data, such as social networks [46], document citation graphs [33], and microbiological graphs [44].
GNNs broadly adopt a message passing scheme to learn node representations by aggregating representation vectors of its neighbors [49, 16]. This scheme enables GNN to capture both node
features and graph topology. GNN-based methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance in node
classification, graph classification, and link prediction, etc [21, 45, 56].
Despite their remarkable effectiveness, the rationales of predictions made by GNNs are not easy
for humans to understand. Since GNNs aggregate both node features and graph topology to make
predictions, to understand predictions made by GNNs, important subgraphs and/or a set of features,
which are also known as explanations, need to be uncovered. In the literature, although a variety of
efforts have been undertaken to interpret general deep neural networks, existing approaches [6, 26,
12, 31, 43, 19, 20] in this line fall short in their ability to explain graph structures, which is essential
for GNNs. Explaining predictions made by GNNs remains a challenging open problem, on which
few methods have been proposed. The combinatorial nature of explaining graph structures makes it
difficult to design models that are both robust and efficient. Recently, the first general model-agnostic
∗

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

