Learning Representations from Audio-Visual
Spatial Alignment

Pedro Morgado∗
Yi Li∗
Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{pmaravil,yil898,nuno}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel self-supervised pretext task for learning representations from
audio-visual content. Prior work on audio-visual representation learning leverages
correspondences at the video level. Approaches based on audio-visual correspondence (AVC) predict whether audio and video clips originate from the same or
different video instances. Audio-visual temporal synchronization (AVTS) further
discriminates negative pairs originated from the same video instance but at different
moments in time. While these approaches learn high-quality representations for
downstream tasks such as action recognition, their training objectives disregard
spatial cues naturally occurring in audio and visual signals. To learn from these
spatial cues, we tasked a network to perform contrastive audio-visual spatial alignment of 360◦ video and spatial audio. The ability to perform spatial alignment
is enhanced by reasoning over the full spatial content of the 360◦ video using a
transformer architecture to combine representations from multiple viewpoints. The
advantages of the proposed pretext task are demonstrated on a variety of audio and
visual downstream tasks, including audio-visual correspondence, spatial alignment,
action recognition and video semantic segmentation. Dataset and code are available
at https://github.com/pedro-morgado/AVSpatialAlignment.

1

Introduction

Human perception is inherently multi-sensory. Since real-world events can manifest through multiple
modalities, the ability to integrate information from various sensory inputs can significantly benefit
perception. In particular, neural processes for audio and visual perception are known to influence each
other significantly. These interactions are responsible for several well known audio-visual illusions
such as the “McGurk effect” [38], the “sound induced flash effect” [52] or the “fusion effect” [2],
and can even be observed in brain activation studies, where areas of the brain dedicated to visual
processing have been shown to be activated by sounds that are predictive of visual events, even in the
absence of visual input [14, 58].
In computer vision, the natural co-occurrence of audio and video has been extensively studied. Prior
work has shown that this co-occurrence can be leveraged to learn representations in a self-supervised
manner, i.e., without human annotations. A common approach is to learn to match audio and video
clips of the same video instance [3, 4, 41]. Intuitively, if visual events are associated with a salient
sound signature, then the audio can be treated as a label to describe the visual content [49]. Prior
work has also demonstrated the value of temporal synchronization between audio and video clips for
learning representations for downstream tasks such as action recognition [30, 46].
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

