TinyTL: Reduce Memory, Not Parameters
for Efficient On-Device Learning

1

Han Cai1 , Chuang Gan2 , Ligeng Zhu1 , Song Han1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
http://tinyml.mit.edu/

Abstract
On-device learning enables edge devices to continually adapt the AI models to new
data, which requires a small memory footprint to fit the tight memory constraint
of edge devices. Existing work solves this problem by reducing the number of
trainable parameters. However, this doesn’t directly translate to memory saving
since the major bottleneck is the activations, not parameters. In this work, we
present Tiny-Transfer-Learning (TinyTL) for memory-efficient on-device learning.
TinyTL freezes the weights while only learns the bias modules, thus no need
to store the intermediate activations. To maintain the adaptation capacity, we
introduce a new memory-efficient bias module, the lite residual module, to refine
the feature extractor by learning small residual feature maps adding only 3.8%
memory overhead. Extensive experiments show that TinyTL significantly saves
the memory (up to 6.5×) with little accuracy loss compared to fine-tuning the
full network. Compared to fine-tuning the last layer, TinyTL provides significant
accuracy improvements (up to 34.1%) with little memory overhead. Furthermore,
combined with feature extractor adaptation, TinyTL provides 7.3-12.9× memory
saving without sacrificing accuracy compared to fine-tuning the full Inception-V3.

1

Introduction

Intelligent edge devices with rich sensors (e.g., billions of mobile phones and IoT devices)1 have been
ubiquitous in our daily lives. These devices keep collecting new and sensitive data through the sensor
every day while being expected to provide high-quality and customized services without sacrificing
privacy2 . These pose new challenges to efficient AI systems that could not only run inference but
also continually fine-tune the pre-trained models on newly collected data (i.e., on-device learning).
Though on-device learning can enable many appealing applications, it is an extremely challenging
problem. First, edge devices are memory-constrained. For example, a Raspberry Pi 1 Model A
only has 256MB of memory, which is sufficient for inference, but by far insufficient for training
(Figure 1 left), even using a lightweight neural network architecture (MobileNetV2 [1]). Furthermore,
the memory is shared by various on-device applications (e.g., other deep learning models) and the
operating system. A single application may only be allocated a small fraction of the total memory,
which makes this challenge more critical. Second, edge devices are energy-constrained. DRAM
access consumes two orders of magnitude more energy than on-chip SRAM access. The large
memory footprint of activations cannot fit into the limited on-chip SRAM, thus has to access DRAM.
For instance, the training memory of MobileNetV2, under batch size 16, is close to 1GB, which is by
far larger than the SRAM size of an AMD EPYC CPU3 (Figure 1 left), not to mention lower-end
1

https://www.statista.com/statistics/330695/number-of-smartphone-users-worldwide/
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection_en
3
https://www.amd.com/en/products/cpu/amd-epyc-7302
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

