GAN Memory with No Forgetting

Yulai Cong∗

Miaoyun Zhao∗
Jianqiao Li
Sijia Wang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University

Lawrence Carin

Abstract
As a fundamental issue in lifelong learning, catastrophic forgetting is directly
caused by inaccessible historical data; accordingly, if the data (information) were
memorized perfectly, no forgetting should be expected. Motivated by that, we
propose a GAN memory for lifelong learning, which is capable of remembering a
stream of datasets via generative processes, with no forgetting. Our GAN memory
is based on recognizing that one can modulate the “style” of a GAN model to form
perceptually-distant targeted generation. Accordingly, we propose to do sequential
style modulations atop a well-behaved base GAN model, to form sequential targeted
generative models, while simultaneously benefiting from the transferred base
knowledge. The GAN memory – that is motivated by lifelong learning – is therefore
itself manifested by a form of lifelong learning, via forward transfer and modulation
of information from prior tasks. Experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
method over existing approaches and its effectiveness in alleviating catastrophic
forgetting for lifelong classification problems. Code is available at https://
github.com/MiaoyunZhao/GANmemory_LifelongLearning.

1

Introduction

Lifelong learning (or continual learning) is a long-standing challenge for machine learning and
artificial intelligence systems [76, 28, 73, 11, 14, 60], concerning the ability of a model to continually
learn new knowledge without forgetting previously learned experiences. An important issue associated
with lifelong learning is the notorious catastrophic forgetting of deep neural networks [48, 36, 87],
i.e., training a model with new information severely interferes with previously learned knowledge.
To alleviate catastrophic forgetting, many methods have been proposed, with most focusing on
discriminative/classification tasks [36, 65, 95, 55, 94]. Reviewing existing methods, [77] revealed
generative replay (or pseudo-rehearsal) [72, 69, 86, 66, 88] is an effective and general strategy for
lifelong learning, with this further supported by [40, 78]. That revelation is anticipated, for if the
characteristics of previous data are remembered perfectly (e.g., via realistic generative replay), no
forgetting should be expected for lifelong learning. Compared with the coreset idea, that saves
representative samples of previous data [55, 65, 11], generative replay has advantages in addressing
privacy concerns and remembering potentially more complete data information (via the generative
process). However, most existing generative replay methods either deliver blurry generated samples
[10, 40] or only work well on simple datasets [40, 78, 40] like MNIST; besides, they often don’t scale
well to practical situations with high resolution [60] or a long sequence [86], sometimes even with
negative backward transfer [96, 82]. Therefore, it’s challenging to continually learn a well-behaved
generative replay model [40], even for moderately complex datasets like CIFAR10.
We seek a realistic generative replay framework to alleviate catastrophic forgetting; going further,
we consider developing a realistic generative memory with growing (expressive) power, believed to
be a fundamental building block toward general lifelong learning systems. We leverage the popular
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to: Miaoyun Zhao <miaoyun9zhao@gmail.com>.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

