A Spectral Energy Distance
for Parallel Speech Synthesis
Alexey A. Gritsenko⇤† Tim Salimans⇤ Rianne van den Berg
Jasper Snoek Nal Kalchbrenner
{agritsenko,salimans,riannevdberg,jsnoek,nalk}@google.com
Google Research

Abstract
Speech synthesis is an important practical generative modeling problem that has
seen great progress over the last few years, with likelihood-based autoregressive
neural models now outperforming traditional concatenative systems. A downside
of such autoregressive models is that they require executing tens of thousands
of sequential operations per second of generated audio, making them ill-suited
for deployment on specialized deep learning hardware. Here, we propose a new
learning method that allows us to train highly parallel models of speech, without
requiring access to an analytical likelihood function. Our approach is based on
a generalized energy distance between the distributions of the generated and real
audio. This spectral energy distance is a proper scoring rule with respect to the
distribution over magnitude-spectrograms of the generated waveform audio and
offers statistical consistency guarantees. The distance can be calculated from
minibatches without bias, and does not involve adversarial learning, yielding a
stable and consistent method for training implicit generative models. Empirically,
we achieve state-of-the-art generation quality among implicit generative models, as
judged by the recently-proposed cFDSD metric. When combining our method with
adversarial techniques, we also improve upon the recently-proposed GAN-TTS
model in terms of Mean Opinion Score as judged by trained human evaluators.

1

Introduction

Text-to-speech synthesis (TTS) has seen great advances in recent years, with neural network-based
methods now significantly outperforming traditional concatenative and statistical parametric approaches [39, 35]. While autoregressive models such as WaveNet [35] or WaveRNN [15] constitute
the current state of the art in speech synthesis, their sequential nature is often seen as a drawback.
They generate only a single sample at a time, and since audio is typically sampled at a frequency of
18kHz to 44kHz this means that tens of thousands of sequential steps are necessary for generating
a single second of audio. The sequential nature of these models makes them ill-suited for use with
modern deep learning hardware such as GPUs and TPUs that are built around parallelism.
At the same time, parallel speech generation remains challenging. Existing likelihood-based models
either rely on elaborate distillation approaches [27, 36], or require large models and long training
times [29, 22]. Recent GAN-based methods provide a promising alternative to likelihood-based
methods for TTS [3, 22]. Although they do not yet match the speech quality of autoregressive models,
they are efficient to train and employ fully-convolutional architectures, allowing for efficient parallel
generation. However, due to their reliance on adversarial training, they can be difficult to train.
⇤

Equal contribution. † Work completed as a Google AI resident.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

