Optimal Best-arm Identification in Linear Bandits

Alexandre Proutiere
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Yassir Jedra
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
jedra@kth.se

Abstract
We study the problem of best-arm identification with fixed confidence in stochastic
linear bandits. The objective is to identify the best arm with a given level of certainty while minimizing the sampling budget. We devise a simple algorithm whose
sampling complexity matches known instance-specific lower bounds, asymptotically almost surely and in expectation. The algorithm relies on an arm sampling
rule that tracks an optimal proportion of arm draws, and that remarkably can be
updated as rarely as we wish, without compromising its theoretical guarantees.
Moreover, unlike existing best-arm identification strategies, our algorithm uses a
stopping rule that does not depend on the number of arms. Experimental results
suggest that our algorithm significantly outperforms existing algorithms. The paper
further provides a first analysis of the best-arm identification problem in linear
bandits with a continuous set of arms.

1

Introduction

The stochastic linear bandit [1, 2] is a sequential decision-making problem that generalizes the
classical stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem [3, 4] by assuming that the average reward
is a linear function of the arm. Linear bandits have been extensively applied in online services such us
online advertisement and recommendation systems [5, 6, 7], and constitute arguably the most relevant
structured bandit model in practice. Most existing analyses of stochastic linear bandits concern regret
minimization [2, 8, 9, 10, 11], i.e., the problem of devising an online algorithm maximizing the
expected reward accumulated over a given time horizon. When the set of arms is finite, this problem
is solved in the sense that we know an instance-specific regret lower bound, and a simple algorithm
whose regret matches this fundamental limit [10, 11].
The best-arm identification problem (also referred to as pure exploration problem) in linear bandits
with finite set of arms has received less attention [12, 13, 14, 15, 16], and does not admit a fully
satisfactory solution. In the pure exploration problem with fixed confidence, one has to design a
δ-PAC algorithm (able to identify the best arm with probability at least 1 − δ) using as few samples
as possible. Such an algorithm consists of a sampling rule (an active policy to sequentially select
arms), a stopping rule, and a decision rule that outputs the estimated best arm. The number of rounds
before the algorithm stops is referred to as its sample complexity. An instance-specific informationtheoretical lower bound of the expected sample complexity has been derived in [17]. However, we
are lacking simple and practical algorithms achieving this bound. Importantly, existing algorithms
exhibit scalability issues as they always include subroutines that explicitly depend on the number of
arms (refer to the related work for details). They may also be computationally involved.
In this paper, we present a new best-arm identification algorithm for linear bandits with finite set of
arms, whose sample complexity matches the information-theoretical lower bound. The algorithm
follows the track-and-stop principle proposed in [18] for pure exploration in bandits without structure.
Its sampling rule tracks the optimal proportion of arm draws, predicted by the sample complexity
lower bound and estimated using the least-squares estimator of the system parameter. Remarkably,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

