Sharp Representation Theorems for ReLU Networks
with Precise Dependence on Depth

Guy Bresler
Department of EECS
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
guy@mit.edu

Dheeraj Nagaraj
Department of EECS
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
dheeraj@mit.edu

Abstract
We prove sharp dimension-free representation results for neural networks with D
ReLU layers under square loss for a class of functions GD defined in the paper.
These results capture the precise benefits of depth in the following sense:
1. The rates for representing the class of functions GD via D ReLU layers is
sharp up to constants, as shown by matching lower bounds.
2. For each D, GD ⊆ GD+1 and as D grows the class of functions GD contains
progressively less smooth functions.
3. If D0 < D, then the approximation rate for the class GD achieved by depth
D0 networks is strictly worse than that achieved by depth D networks.
This constitutes a fine-grained characterization of the representation power of
feedforward networks of arbitrary depth D and number of neurons N , in contrast
to existing representation results which either require D growing quickly with N
or assume that the function being represented is highly smooth. In the latter case
similar rates can be obtained with a single nonlinear layer. Our results confirm the
prevailing hypothesis that deeper networks are better at representing less smooth
functions, and indeed, the main technical novelty is to fully exploit the fact that deep
networks can produce highly oscillatory functions with few activation functions.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are the workhorse of modern machine learning [1]. An important reason for
this is the universal approximation property of deep networks which allows them to represent any
continuous real valued function with arbitrary accuracy. Various representation theorems, establishing
the universal approximation property of neural networks have been shown [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Under
regularity conditions on the functions, a long line of work gives rates for approximation in terms
of number of neurons [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. By now the case of a single layer of
nonlinearities is fairly well understood, while the corresponding theory for deep networks is lacking.
Deep networks have been shown empirically to significantly outperform their shallow counterparts
and a flurry of theoretical papers has aimed to understand this. For instance, [17] shows that letting
depth scale with the number of samples gives minimax optimal error rates for non-parametric
regression tasks. [18] considers hierarchical learning in deep networks, where training with SGD
yields layers that successively construct more complex features to represent the function. While an
understanding of the generalization performance of neural networks trained on data is a holy grail,
motivated by the logic that expressivity of the network determines the fundamental barriers under
arbitrary optimization procedures, in this paper we focus on the more basic question of representation.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

