Automatically Learning Compact Quality-aware
Surrogates for Optimization Problems

Kai Wang
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
kaiwang@g.harvard.edu

Bryan Wilder
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
bwilder@g.harvard.edu

Andrew Perrault
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
aperrault@g.harvard.edu

Milind Tambe
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
milind_tambe@harvard.edu

Abstract
Solving optimization problems with unknown parameters often requires learning a
predictive model to predict the values of the unknown parameters and then solving
the problem using these values. Recent work has shown that including the optimization problem as a layer in the model training pipeline results in predictions
of the unobserved parameters that lead to higher decision quality. Unfortunately,
this process comes at a large computational cost because the optimization problem
must be solved and differentiated through in each training iteration; furthermore,
it may also sometimes fail to improve solution quality due to non-smoothness
issues that arise when training through a complex optimization layer. To address
these shortcomings, we learn a low-dimensional surrogate model of a large optimization problem by representing the feasible space in terms of meta-variables,
each of which is a linear combination of the original variables. By training a
low-dimensional surrogate model end-to-end, and jointly with the predictive model,
we achieve: i) a large reduction in training and inference time; and ii) improved performance by focusing attention on the more important variables in the optimization
and learning in a smoother space. Empirically, we demonstrate these improvements
on a non-convex adversary modeling task, a submodular recommendation task and
a convex portfolio optimization task.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty is a common feature of many real-world decision-making problems because critical
data may not be available when a decision must be made. Here is a set of representative examples:
recommender systems with missing user-item ratings [21], portfolio optimization where future
performance is uncertain [29], and strategic decision-making in the face of an adversary with
uncertain objectives [24]. Often, the decision-maker has access to features that provide information
about the values of interest. In these settings, a predict-then-optimize [12] approach naturally arises,
where we learn a model that maps from the features to a value for each parameter and optimize
using this point estimate [44]. In principle, any predictive modeling approach and any optimization
approach can be applied, but using a generic loss function to train the model may result in poor
decision performance. For example, a typical ratings prediction approach in recommendation system
may equally weight errors across different items, but in the recommendation task, misclassifying a
trendy item can result in more revenue loss than misclassifying an ordinary item. We may instead
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

