Reinforcement Learning for
Control with Multiple Frequencies

Jongmin Lee1 , Byung-Jun Lee1 , Kee-Eung Kim1,2
1
School of Computing, KAIST, Republic of Korea
2
Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Republic of Korea
{jmlee,bjlee}@ai.kaist.ac.kr, kekim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Many real-world sequential decision problems involve multiple action variables
whose control frequencies are different, such that actions take their effects at different periods. While these problems can be formulated with the notion of multiple
action persistences in factored-action MDP (FA-MDP), it is non-trivial to solve
them efficiently since an action-persistent policy constructed from a stationary
policy can be arbitrarily suboptimal, rendering solution methods for the standard
FA-MDPs hardly applicable. In this paper, we formalize the problem of multiple
control frequencies in RL and provide its efficient solution method. Our proposed
method, Action-Persistent Policy Iteration (AP-PI), provides a theoretical guarantee on the convergence to an optimal solution while incurring only a factor of
|A| increase in time complexity during policy improvement step, compared to the
standard policy iteration for FA-MDPs. Extending this result, we present ActionPersistent Actor-Critic (AP-AC), a scalable RL algorithm for high-dimensional
control tasks. In the experiments, we demonstrate that AP-AC significantly outperforms the baselines on several continuous control tasks and a traffic control
simulation, which highlights the effectiveness of our method that directly optimizes
the periodic non-stationary policy for tasks with multiple control frequencies.

1

Introduction

In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) [23] has shown great promise in various domains, such
as complex games [14, 21, 22] and high-dimensional continuous control [11, 19]. These problems
have been mostly formulated as discrete-time Markov decision processes (MDPs) [17], assuming
all decision variables are simultaneously determined at every time step. However, many real-world
sequential decision-making problems involve multiple decision variables whose control frequencies
are different by requirement. For example, when managing a financial portfolio of various assets, the
frequency of rebalancing may need to be different for each asset, e.g. weekly for stock and monthly
for real estate. Similarly, robotic systems typically consist of a number of controllers operating at
different frequencies due to their system specification.
Different control frequencies can be formulated with the notion of different action persistence in the
discrete-time factored-action MDP (FA-MDP), where the base time interval is determined by the
reciprocal of the least common multiple of the control frequencies. However, while algorithms for
single action persistence has been proposed in order to improve the empirical performance of online
[9] or offline [13] RL agents, to the best of our knowledge, addressing multiple action persistences
in RL has been mostly unexplored due to its difficulty involved in the non-stationarity nature of the
optimal policy.
In this paper, we formalize the problem of multiple action persistences in FA-MDPs. We first show
that any persistent policy induced by a stationary policy can be arbitrarily bad via a simple example.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

