CircleGAN: Generative Adversarial Learning
across Spherical Circles

Woohyeon Shim
POSTECH CiTE
wh.shim@postech.ac.kr

Minsu Cho
POSTECH CSE & GSAI
mscho@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a novel discriminator for GANs that improves realness and diversity of
generated samples by learning a structured hypersphere embedding space using
spherical circles. The proposed discriminator learns to populate realistic samples
around the longest spherical circle, i.e., a great circle, while pushing unrealistic
samples toward the poles perpendicular to the great circle. Since longer circles
occupy larger area on the hypersphere, they encourage more diversity in representation learning, and vice versa. Discriminating samples based on their corresponding
spherical circles can thus naturally induce diversity to generated samples. We also
extend the proposed method for conditional settings with class labels by creating
a hypersphere for each category and performing class-wise discrimination and
update. In experiments, we validate the effectiveness for both unconditional and
conditional generation on standard benchmarks, achieving the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9] aim at learning to produce high-quality data samples,
as observed from a target dataset. To this end, it trains a generator, which synthesizes samples, adversarially against a discriminator, which classifies the samples into real or fake ones; the discriminator’s
gradient in backpropagation guides the generator to improve the quality of the generated samples. As
the gradient is difficult to stabilize, recent methods [2, 10, 18, 31] have suggested using the Lipschitz
continuous space for the discriminator so that its gradient is bounded under some constant with
respect to input. In a similar spirit, recent work [22] introduces a hypersphere as an embedding space,
which enjoys its boundedness of distances between samples and also their gradients, showing its
superior performance against the precedent models.
The most important qualities of the generated samples are realness and diversity. In conventional
GAN frameworks including [22], the discriminator can be viewed as evaluating realness based on a
prototype representation, i.e., the closer a generated sample is to the prototype of real samples, the
more realistic it is evaluated as. The single prototype, however, may not be sufficient for capturing all
modes of real samples, and thus recent work [1, 7, 19, 26] attempts to tackle this issue by employing
multiple discriminators, i.e., multiple prototypes. But, training with multiple discriminators requires
higher memory footprints and computation costs, and also introduces another hyperparameter, i.e.,
the number of discriminators. Conditional GANs [17, 21] use additional information of class labels
to increase the coverage of modes across different categories. However, the class label does not
ensure the intra-class diversity [21] while being beneficial to learn representative features of the class.
Hence, the problem of mode collapse remains even in conditional models.
In this paper, we address the sample diversity issue by learning a structured hypersphere embedding
space for the discriminator in GANs. Our discriminator learns to populate realistic samples around a
great circle, which is the largest spherical circle, while pushing unrealistic samples toward the poles
perpendicular to the great circle. In doing so, since the longer circles occupy the larger area on the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

