Graph Information Bottleneck
Tailin Wu⇤, Hongyu Ren⇤ , Pan Li, Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{tailin, hyren, panli0, jure}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Representation learning of graph-structured data is challenging because both graph
structure and node features carry important information. Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) provide an expressive way to fuse information from network structure
and node features. However, GNNs are prone to adversarial attacks. Here we
introduce Graph Information Bottleneck (GIB), an information-theoretic principle
that optimally balances expressiveness and robustness of the learned representation
of graph-structured data. Inheriting from the general Information Bottleneck
(IB), GIB aims to learn the minimal sufficient representation for a given task by
maximizing the mutual information between the representation and the target, and
simultaneously constraining the mutual information between the representation
and the input data. Different from the general IB, GIB regularizes the structural as
well as the feature information. We design two sampling algorithms for structural
regularization and instantiate the GIB principle with two new models: GIB-Cat and
GIB-Bern, and demonstrate the benefits by evaluating the resilience to adversarial
attacks. We show that our proposed models are more robust than state-of-theart graph defense models. GIB-based models empirically achieve up to 31%
improvement with adversarial perturbation of the graph structure as well as node
features.

1

Introduction

Representation learning on graphs aims to learn representations of graph-structured data for downstream tasks such as node classification and link prediction [1, 2]. Graph representation learning is a
challenging task since both node features as well as graph structure carry important information [3, 4].
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [1, 3, 5–7] have demonstrated impressive performance, by learning
to fuse information from both the node features and the graph structure [8].
Recently, many works have been focusing on developing more powerful GNNs [8–13], in a sense
that they can fit more complex graph-structured data. However, at present GNNs still suffer from a
few problems. For example, the features of a neighborhood node can contain non-useful information
that may negatively impact the prediction of the current node [14]. Also, GNN’s reliance on message
passing over the edges of the graph also makes it prone to noise and adversarial attacks that target at
the graph structure [15, 16].
Here we address the above problems and rethink what is a “good” representation for graph-structured
data. In particular, the Information Bottleneck (IB) [18, 19] provides a critical principle for representation learning: an optimal representation should contain the minimal sufficient information for the
downstream prediction task. IB encourages the representation to be maximally informative about
the target to make the prediction accurate (sufficient). On the other hand, IB also discourages the
representation from acquiring additional information from the data that is irrelevant for predicting the
⇤

Equal contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

