All-or-nothing statistical and computational phase
transitions in sparse spiked matrix estimation

Jean Barbier
International Center for Theoretical Physics
Strada Costiera 11, 34151 Trieste, Italy
jbarbier@ictp.it

Nicolas Macris
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
CH 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
nicolas.macris@epfl.ch

Cynthia Rush
Department of Statistics, Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
cynthia.rush@columbia.edu

Abstract
We determine statistical and computational limits for estimation of a rank-one
matrix (the spike) corrupted by an additive gaussian noise matrix, in a sparse limit,
where the underlying hidden vector (that constructs the rank-one matrix) has a
number of non-zero components that scales sub-linearly with the total dimension
of the vector, and the signal-to-noise ratio tends to infinity at an appropriate
speed. We prove explicit low-dimensional variational formulas for the asymptotic
mutual information between the spike and the observed noisy matrix and analyze
the approximate message passing algorithm in the sparse regime. For Bernoulli
and Bernoulli-Rademacher distributed vectors, and when the sparsity and signal
strength satisfy an appropriate scaling relation, we find all-or-nothing phase
transitions for the asymptotic minimum and algorithmic mean-square errors.
These jump from their maximum possible value to zero, at well defined signal-tonoise thresholds whose asymptotic values we determine exactly. In the asymptotic
regime the statistical-to-algorithmic gap diverges indicating that sparse recovery
is hard for approximate message passing.

1 Introduction and setting
In modern machine learning and high dimensional statistics one often faces regression, classification,
or estimation tasks, where the dimension of the feature vectors is much larger than the effective
underlying dimensionality of the structure at hand. For example, hand-written MNIST digits are
presented as vectors consisting of 28 × 28 pixels, in other words, they are binary vectors with 784
dimensions, whereas [1, 2] estimate their effective dimension to be in the orders of 10’s. Similarly
the ISOMAP face database consists of images (256 levels of gray) of size 64 × 64, i.e., vectors in
R4096 , whereas the correct intrinsic dimension is only 3 (for the vertical, horizontal pause and
lighting direction). Natural images, which are generally sparse in a wavelet basis [3], are another
popular example of low effective dimensionality. For natural images, a very simple model of lowdimensional structure, namely vectors with a sparse number of non-zero components, has proven
immensely useful for studying these types of data structures and has led to the development of the
whole area of compressed sensing [4, 5]. Similarly, matrix completion can be performed successfully
when the number of sampled matrix elements is much smaller than the total number of elements,
as long as one assumes the matrix is low-rank [6].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

