Fair Regression via Plug-In Estimator and
Recalibration
Evgenii Chzhen∗
LMO, Université Paris-Saclay
CNRS, Inria

Christophe Denis
LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel
MIA-Paris, AgroParisTech
INRAE, Université Paris-Saclay

Mohamed Hebiri
LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris

Luca Oneto
DIBRIS, University of Genoa

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University College London

Abstract
We study the problem of learning an optimal regression function subject to a
fairness constraint. It requires that, conditionally on the sensitive feature, the
distribution of the function output remains the same. This constraint naturally
extends the notion of demographic parity, often used in classification, to the
regression setting. We tackle this problem by leveraging on a proxy-discretized
version, for which we derive an explicit expression of the optimal fair predictor.
This result naturally suggests a two stage approach, in which we first estimate
the (unconstrained) regression function from a set of labeled data and then we
recalibrate it with another set of unlabeled data. The recalibration step can be
efficiently performed via a smooth optimization. We derive rates of convergence of
the proposed estimator to the optimal fair predictor both in terms of the risk and
fairness constraint. Finally, we present numerical experiments illustrating that the
proposed method is often superior or competitive with state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

During the recent years algorithmic fairness has emerged as a fundamental area of machine learning,
due to the potential risk that standard learning algorithms, when trained on sensitive datasets, may
inherit or amplify bias present in the data. This has raised the challenge to design novel algorithms
that, while still optimizing prediction performance, mitigate or remove unfairness of the learned
predictor, see the papers and books [4, 13, 15, 21, 24, 29, 31, 33, 34, 40, 41, 57–60] and references
therein. Until very recently, most work has focused on classification problems, with regression
receiving far less attention. However regression problems are equally important for algorithmic
fairness. For example, both the problems of predicting students’ performance without discriminating
based on the gender, or predicting the crime risk of a community without discriminating based on the
race, can be cast as regression.
In this paper we study the problem of designing computationally efficient and statistically principled
learning methods for fair regression. We define the optimal fair regression function as the one that
∗

evgenii.chzhen@universite-paris-saclay.fr

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

