Contrastive Learning with Adversarial Examples

Chih-Hui Ho Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{chh279, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) is a popular technique for self-supervised learning (SSL)
of visual representations. It uses pairs of augmentations of unlabeled training
examples to define a classification task for pretext learning of a deep embedding.
Despite extensive works in augmentation procedures, prior works do not address
the selection of challenging negative pairs, as images within a sampled batch are
treated independently. This paper addresses the problem, by introducing a new
family of adversarial examples for constrastive learning and using these examples
to define a new adversarial training algorithm for SSL, denoted as CLAE. When
compared to standard CL, the use of adversarial examples creates more challenging
positive pairs and adversarial training produces harder negative pairs by accounting
for all images in a batch during the optimization. CLAE is compatible with many
CL methods in the literature. Experiments show that it improves the performance
of several existing CL baselines on multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have enabled significant advances in many machine learning tasks over the last decade.
However, this usually requires supervised learning, based on large and carefully curated datasets.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) [25] aims to alleviate this limitation, by leveraging unlabeled data
to define surrogate tasks that can be used for network training. Early advances in SSL were mostly
due to the introduction of many different surrogate tasks [2, 51, 34, 78, 81, 33], including solving
image [47, 27] or video [3] puzzles, filling image patches [51, 15, 44] or discriminating between
image rotations [18]. Recently, there have also been advances in learning techniques specifically
tailored to SSL, such as contrastive learning (CL) [78, 12, 22, 74, 63, 23, 55, 39], which is the focus
of this paper. CL is based on a surrogate task that treats instances as classes and aims to learn an
invariant instance representation. This is implemented by generating a pair of examples per instance,
and feeding them through an encoder, which is trained with a constrastive loss. This encourages the
embeddings of pairs generated from the same instance, known as positive pairs, to be close together
and embeddings originated from different instances, known as negative pairs, to be far apart.
The design of positive pairs is one of the research focuses of CL [5]. These pairs can include data
from one or two modalities. For single-modality approaches, a common procedure is to rely on
data augmentation techniques. For example, instances from image datasets are frequently subject
to transformations such as rotation, color jittering, or scaling [12, 78, 22, 74, 39] to generate the
corresponding pairs. This type of data augmentation has been shown critical for the success of CL,
with different augmentation approaches having a different impact on SSL performance [12]. For
video datasets, positive pairs are usually derived from temporal coherence constraints [56, 21]. For
multi-view data, augmentations can be more elaborate. For example, [63] considers augmentations
of color channels, depth or surface normal and shows that the performance of CL improves as the
augmentations increase in diversity. Multi-modal CL approaches tend to rely on audio and video
from a common video clip to design positive pairs [52]. In general, CL benefits from definitions of
positive pairs that pose a greater challenge to the learning of the invariant instance representation.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

