The Generalization-Stability Tradeoff In Neural
Network Pruning

Brian R. Bartoldson∗
Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory
bartoldson@llnl.gov

Ari S. Morcos
Facebook AI Research
arimorcos@fb.com

Adrian Barbu
Florida State University
abarbu@stat.fsu.edu

Gordon Erlebacher
Florida State University
gerlebacher@fsu.edu

Abstract
Pruning neural network parameters is often viewed as a means to compress models,
but pruning has also been motivated by the desire to prevent overfitting. This
motivation is particularly relevant given the perhaps surprising observation that
a wide variety of pruning approaches increase test accuracy despite sometimes
massive reductions in parameter counts. To better understand this phenomenon,
we analyze the behavior of pruning over the course of training, finding that pruning’s benefit to generalization increases with pruning’s instability (defined as the
drop in test accuracy immediately following pruning). We demonstrate that this
“generalization-stability tradeoff” is present across a wide variety of pruning settings
and propose a mechanism for its cause: pruning regularizes similarly to noise injection. Supporting this, we find less pruning stability leads to more model flatness
and the benefits of pruning do not depend on permanent parameter removal. These
results explain the compatibility of pruning-based generalization improvements
and the high generalization recently observed in overparameterized networks.

1

Introduction

Studies of generalization in deep neural networks (DNNs) have increasingly focused on the observation that adding parameters improves generalization (as measured by model accuracy on previously
unobserved inputs), even when the DNN already has enough parameters to fit large datasets of
randomized data [1, 2]. This surprising phenomenon has been addressed by an array of empirical and
theoretical analyses [3–13], all of which study generalization measures other than parameter counts.
Reducing memory-footprint and inference-FLOPs requirements of such well-generalizing but overparameterized DNNs is necessary to make them broadly applicable [14], and it is achievable through
neural network pruning, which can substantially shrink parameter counts without harming accuracy
[15–21]. Moreover, many pruning methods actually improve generalization [15–17, 22–30].
At the interface of pruning and generalization research, then, there’s an apparent contradiction. If
larger parameter counts don’t increase overfitting in overparameterized DNNs, why would pruning
DNN parameters throughout training improve generalization?
We provide an answer to this question by illuminating a regularization mechanism in pruning separate
from its effect on parameter counts. Specifically, we show that simple magnitude pruning [17, 18]
produces an effect similar to noise-injection regularization [31–37]. We explore this view of pruning
∗

Corresponding author. Majority of work completed as a student at Florida State University.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

