Learning Implicit Credit Assignment for
Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Meng Zhou∗

Ziyu Liu∗

Pengwei Sui
Yixuan Li
The University of Sydney

Yuk Ying Chung

Abstract
We present a multi-agent actor-critic method that aims to implicitly address the
credit assignment problem under fully cooperative settings. Our key motivation
is that credit assignment among agents may not require an explicit formulation as
long as (1) the policy gradients derived from a centralized critic carry sufficient information for the decentralized agents to maximize their joint action value through
optimal cooperation and (2) a sustained level of exploration is enforced throughout training. Under the centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE)
paradigm, we achieve the former by formulating the centralized critic as a hypernetwork such that a latent state representation is integrated into the policy gradients
through its multiplicative association with the stochastic policies; to achieve the
latter, we derive a simple technique called adaptive entropy regularization where
magnitudes of the entropy gradients are dynamically rescaled based on the current
policy stochasticity to encourage consistent levels of exploration. Our algorithm,
referred to as LICA, is evaluated on several benchmarks including the multi-agent
particle environments and a set of challenging StarCraft II micromanagement tasks,
and we show that LICA significantly outperforms previous methods.

1

Introduction

Many complex real-world problems such as autonomous vehicle coordination [3], network routing [55], and robot swarm control [17] can naturally be formulated as multi-agent cooperative games,
where reinforcement learning (RL) presents a powerful and general framework for training robust
agents. Though single-agent RL algorithms can be trivially applied to these environments by treating
the multi-agent system as a single actor with a joint action space, the limited scalability and the
inherent constraints on agent observability and communication in many multi-agent environments
necessitate decentralized policies that act only on their local observations. A straightforward approach to learn decentralized policies is to train the agents independently, but the simultaneous
exploration of the agents often results in non-stationary environments where learning becomes highly
unstable. To this end, previous work relies on a standard paradigm known as centralized training with
decentralized execution (CTDE) [34, 25, 37, 10, 28, 4], where the independent agents can access
additional state information that is unavailable during policy inference.
However, one major challenge of CTDE in cooperative settings is credit assignment, which refers
to the task of attributing a global, shared reward from the environment to the agents’ individual
actions. Solving the credit assignment problem explicitly may give useful insights into which agents
or agent actions were responsible for the collective reward signal and may thus substantially facilitate
policy optimization, but doing so is often nontrivial since the interactions between the agents and
the environment can be highly complex. A notable approach is to assess individual agent actions by
calculating difference rewards against a certain reward baseline [48, 36, 10], but these methods can
∗
Equal contribution. Author ordering is random. Correspondence to Meng Zhou <mzho7212@gmail.com>
and Ziyu Liu <kenziyuliu@outlook.com>.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

