Node Embeddings and Exact Low-Rank
Representations of Complex Networks

Sudhanshu Chanpuriya
University of Massachusetts Amherst
schanpuriya@umass.edu

Cameron Musco
University of Massachusetts Amherst
cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Charalampos E. Tsourakakis
Boston University & ISI Foundation
tsourolampis@gmail.com

Konstantinos Sotiropoulos
Boston University
ksotirop@bu.edu

Abstract
Low-dimensional embeddings, from classical spectral embeddings to modern
neural-net-inspired methods, are a cornerstone in the modeling and analysis of
complex networks. Recent work by Seshadhri et al. (PNAS 2020) suggests that
such embeddings cannot capture local structure arising in complex networks. In
particular, they show that any network generated from a natural low-dimensional
model cannot be both sparse and have high triangle density (high clustering coefficient), two hallmark properties of many real-world networks.
In this work we show that the results of Seshadhri et al. are intimately connected to
the model they use rather than the low-dimensional structure of complex networks.
Specifically, we prove that a minor relaxation of their model can generate sparse
graphs with high triangle density. Surprisingly, we show that this same model leads
to exact low-dimensional factorizations of many real-world networks. We give
a simple algorithm based on logistic principal component analysis (LPCA) that
succeeds in finding such exact embeddings. Finally, we perform a large number of
experiments that verify the ability of very low-dimensional embeddings to capture
local structure in real-world networks.

1

Introduction

Graphs naturally model a wide variety of complex systems including the internet, social networks,
transportation networks, protein-protein interaction networks, the human brain, and co-authorship
networks. Understanding and analyzing such networks lies at the heart of computer science. In
recent years there has been a surge of interest in developing node embedding techniques that map
the nodes of a graph to low-dimensional Euclidean space in such way that the geometry of the
embedding reflects important structure in the graph. Specifically, a node embedding method takes
as input a graph G with n nodes v1 , . . . , vn and maps each node vi to a vector xi ∈ Rk , where k is
an embedding dimension typically with k  n. The learned embeddings can be used as input for
downstream machine learning tasks such as clustering, classification, and link prediction [HYL17].
Geometric representations of graphs and low-rank factorizations have a long history, cf. the
text of Lovász and Vesztergombi [LV99], and important successes including spectral clustering
[SM00, NJW02], Laplacian eigenmaps [BN03], IsoMap [TDSL00], locally linear embeddings
[RS00], and community detection algorithms [ABH15, McS01, RCY+ 11, CRV15]. The stunning
successes of deep learning in recent years have also led to a new generation of neural network-based
node embedding methods. Such methods include DeepWalk [PARS14], node2vec [GL16], LINE
[TQW+ 15], NetMF [QDM+ 18], and many others [TQM15, CLX16, KW16, WCZ16].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

