Hausdorff Dimension, Heavy Tails, and
Generalization in Neural Networks
Umut Şimşekli1,2 , Ozan Sener3 , George Deligiannidis2,4 , Murat A. Erdogdu5,6
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris1 , University of Oxford2 , Intel Labs3
The Alan Turing Institute4 , University of Toronto5 , Vector Institute6

Abstract
Despite its success in a wide range of applications, characterizing the generalization properties of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in non-convex deep learning
problems is still an important challenge. While modeling the trajectories of SGD
via stochastic differential equations (SDE) under heavy-tailed gradient noise has recently shed light over several peculiar characteristics of SGD, a rigorous treatment
of the generalization properties of such SDEs in a learning theoretical framework
is still missing. Aiming to bridge this gap, in this paper, we prove generalization
bounds for SGD under the assumption that its trajectories can be well-approximated
by a Feller process, which defines a rich class of Markov processes that include
several recent SDE representations (both Brownian or heavy-tailed) as its special
case. We show that the generalization error can be controlled by the Hausdorff
dimension of the trajectories, which is intimately linked to the tail behavior of the
driving process. Our results imply that heavier-tailed processes should achieve
better generalization; hence, the tail-index of the process can be used as a notion of
“capacity metric”. We support our theory with experiments on deep neural networks
illustrating that the proposed capacity metric accurately estimates the generalization error, and it does not necessarily grow with the number of parameters unlike
the existing capacity metrics in the literature.

1

Introduction

Many important tasks in deep learning can be represented by the following optimization problem,
n
o
1 Xn
min f (w) :=
f (i) (w) ,
(1)
i=1
n
w∈Rd
where w ∈ Rd denotes the network weights, n denotes the number of training data points, f denotes
a non-convex cost function, and f (i) denotes the cost incurred by a single data point. Gradient-based
optimization algorithms, perhaps Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) being the most popular one,
have been the primary algorithmic choice for attacking such optimization problems. Given an initial
point w0 , the SGD algorithm is based on the following recursion,
1 X
wk+1 = wk − η∇f˜k (wk ) with ∇f˜k (w) :=
∇f (i) (w),
(2)
i∈B̃k
B
where η is the step-size, and ∇f˜k is the unbiased stochastic gradient with batch size B = |B̃k | for a
random subset B̃k of {1, . . . , n} for all k ∈ N, | · | denoting cardinality.
In contrast to convex optimization setting where the behavior of SGD is fairly well-understood
(see e.g. [DDB19, SSBD14]), the generalization properties of SGD in non-convex deep learning
problems is an active area of research [PBL19, AZL19, AZLL19]. In the last decade, there has been
considerable progress around this topic, where several generalization bounds have been proven in
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

