Instance Selection for GANs
Terrance DeVries
University of Guelph
Vector Institute

Michal Drozdzal
Facebook AI Research

Graham W. Taylor
University of Guelph
Vector Institute

Abstract
Recent advances in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have led to their
widespread adoption for the purposes of generating high quality synthetic imagery.
While capable of generating photo-realistic images, these models often produce
unrealistic samples which fall outside of the data manifold. Several recently
proposed techniques attempt to avoid spurious samples, either by rejecting them
after generation, or by truncating the model’s latent space. While effective, these
methods are inefficient, as a large fraction of training time and model capacity
are dedicated towards samples that will ultimately go unused. In this work we
propose a novel approach to improve sample quality: altering the training dataset
via instance selection before model training has taken place. By refining the
empirical data distribution before training, we redirect model capacity towards
high-density regions, which ultimately improves sample fidelity, lowers model
capacity requirements, and significantly reduces training time. Code is available at
https://github.com/uoguelph-mlrg/instance_selection_for_gans.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have enabled these models to be
considered a tool of choice for vision synthesis tasks that demand high fidelity outputs, such as image
and video generation [6, 12], image editing [41], inpainting [35], and superresolution [32]. However,
when sampling from a trained GAN model, outputs may be unrealistic just as often as they appear
photo-realistic.
GANs fit a model to a data distribution with the help of a discriminator network. Low quality samples
produced by these models are often attributed to poor modeling of the low-density regions of the data
manifold [11]. The majority of current techniques attempt to eliminate low quality samples after the
model is trained, either by changing the model distribution by truncating the latent space [2, 11] or
by performing some form of rejection sampling using a trained discriminator to inform the rejection
process [1, 5, 31]. Nevertheless, these methods are inefficient with respect to model capacity and
training time, since much of the capacity and optimization efforts dedicated to representing the sparse
regions of the data manifold are wasted.
In this paper, we analyze the use of instance selection [21] in the generative setting. We address the
problem of uneven model sample quality before GAN model training has begun, rather than after
it has finished. We note that dataset collection is a noisy process, and that many of the currently
used datasets for generative model training and evaluation were not purposely created for this task.
Thus, through a dataset curation step, we remove low density regions from the data manifold prior
to model optimization and show that this direct dataset intervention (1) improves overall image
sample quality in exchange for some reduction in diversity, (2) lowers model capacity requirements,
and (3) reduces training time. To remove the sparsest parts of the image manifold, images are first
projected into an embedding space of perceptually meaningful representations. A scoring function
is then fit to asses the manifold density in the neighbourhood of each embedded data point in the
dataset. Finally, data points with the lowest manifold density scores are removed from the dataset. In
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

