Theoretical Insights Into Multiclass Classification:
A High-dimensional Asymptotic View
Christos Thrampoulidis
UC, Santa Barbara
cthrampo@ucsb.edu

Samet Oymak
UC, Riverside
oymak@ece.ucr.edu

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
University of Southern California
soltanol@usc.edu

Abstract
Contemporary machine learning applications often involve classification tasks with
many classes. Despite their extensive use, a precise understanding of the statistical
properties and behavior of classification algorithms is still missing, especially in
modern regimes where the number of classes is rather large. In this paper, we take a
step in this direction by providing the first asymptotically precise analysis of linear
multiclass classification. Our theoretical analysis allows us to precisely characterize how the test error varies over different training algorithms, data distributions,
problem dimensions as well as number of classes, inter/intra class correlations
and class priors. Specifically, our analysis reveals that the classification accuracy
is highly distribution-dependent with different algorithms achieving optimal performance for different data distributions and/or training/features sizes. Unlike
linear regression/binary classification, the test error in multiclass classification
relies on intricate functions of the trained model (e.g., correlation between some of
the trained weights) whose asymptotic behavior is difficult to characterize. This
challenge is already present in simple classifiers, such as those minimizing a square
loss. Our novel theoretical techniques allow us to overcome some of these challenges. The insights gained may pave the way for a precise understanding of other
classification algorithms beyond those studied in this paper.

1

Introduction

Multiclass classification is fundamental to a large number of real-world machine learning applications that demand the ability to automatically distinguish between thousands of different classes.
Applications include essentially any problem with categorical outputs spanning natural language
processing [SVL14], where a seq2seq decoder has to choose the correct word token, reinforcement
learning [JGP16, MXSS20], where the agent has to choose the correct action, to recommendation
systems, where the model should recommend the correct movie out of many other options. For
instance, YouTube’s recommendation system is modeled as an extreme multiclass problem with more
than a million classes where each video corresponds to a viable class [CAS16].
The growing list of applications motivate an in-depth exploration of multiclass classification algorithms. Despite their extensive use however, a precise understanding of the statistical properties and
behavior of classification algorithms is still missing with many open questions: What is the total
and per class test accuracy? How does this quantity depend on various problem parameters such as
data distributions, problem dimensions, etc.? What is the highest test accuracy achievable by any
algorithm? What is the best algorithm for each scenario? Which algorithm achieves the highest
accuracy on rare or minority classes? How does the answer to the above question change in modern
regimes where the number of classes is large?
Asymptotic analysis in modern high-dimensional regimes where the number of training data and
feature sizes grow in tandem with each other provides a promising setting for precisely quantifying the
accuracy of classification algorithms as a function of problem variables and resolving the questions
above. However, despite the rich literature on precise high-dimensional estimation and more recently
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

