OTLDA: A Geometry-Aware Optimal Transport
Approach for Topic Modeling

Viet Huynh, He Zhao, Dinh Phung
Faculty of Information Technology
Monash University, Australia
viet.huynh, ethan.zhao,dinh.phung@monash.edu

Abstract
We present an optimal transport framework for learning topics from textual
data. While the celebrated Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic model and
its variants have been applied to many disciplines, they mainly focus on wordoccurrences and neglect to incorporate semantic regularities in language. Even
though recent works have tried to exploit the semantic relationship between words
to bridge this gap, they, however, these models which are usually extensions of
LDA or Dirichlet Multinomial mixture (DMM) are tailored to deal effectively
with either regular or short documents. The optimal transport distance provides
an appealing tool to incorporate the geometry of word semantics into it. Moreover, recent developments on efficient computation of optimal transport distance
also promote its application in topic modeling. In this paper we ground on optimal
transport theory to naturally exploit the geometric structures of semantically related words in embedding spaces which leads to more interpretable learned topics.
Comprehensive experiments illustrate that the proposed framework outperforms
competitive approaches in terms of topic coherence on assorted text corpora which
include both long and short documents. The representation of learned topic also
leads to better accuracy on classification downstream tasks, which is considered
as an extrinsic evaluation.

1

Introduction

Topic models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [3] and its extensions have been successfully applied to various domains such as science publication, social science, and machine translation
[4]. Fundamentally, topic models are probabilistic models that infer a set of latent topics from a
corpus using word co-occurrences within each document. However, when there are a small number
of documents or the corpus contains short documents, topic models will tend to infer poor quality
topics from little evidence of co-occurrences. Moreover, infrequently occurring words in the corpus
might be grouped into irrelevant topics although there are significant statistics of synonyms of those
words in the corpus.
Several existing studies have targeted to incorporate synonyms or semantic relationship between
words into topic models to improve the topic representations. The source of semantic regularities
may come from thesauri or knowledge base [20, 25] or distributional similarity [25, 28, 19]. Distributional representation of word semantics, aka word embeddings, has been widely utilized to
improve the performance as well as the robustness of learned topics. Much research focuses on
adapting existing frameworks to integrate semantic relationships of words [19, 28, 1, 7], while other
authors developed non-conjugate models for topic modeling with word embedding awareness and
inference with using deep neural networks [8, 14].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

