Hierarchical Patch VAE-GAN:
Generating Diverse Videos from a Single Sample

Shir Gur∗ , Sagie Benaim∗ , Lior Wolf
The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University

Abstract
We consider the task of generating diverse and novel videos from a single video
sample. Recently, new hierarchical patch-GAN based approaches were proposed
for generating diverse images, given only a single sample at training time. Moving
to videos, these approaches fail to generate diverse samples, and often collapse
into generating samples similar to the training video. We introduce a novel patchbased variational autoencoder (VAE) which allows for a much greater diversity
in generation. Using this tool, a new hierarchical video generation scheme is
constructed: at coarse scales, our patch-VAE is employed, ensuring samples are of
high diversity. Subsequently, at finer scales, a patch-GAN renders the fine details,
resulting in high quality videos. Our experiments show that the proposed method
produces diverse samples in both the image domain, and the more challenging
video domain. Our code and supplementary material (SM) with additional samples
are available at https://shirgur.github.io/hp-vae-gan.

1

Introduction

Video is often considered an extension of images, and in many cases, methods that are applied to
images, such as CNNs, are also applied to video sequences, perhaps with 3D convolutions instead
of 2D ones. However, when considering synthesis, video generation introduces challenges that do
not exist for images. First, one needs to generate, not just one, but many images. Second, video
generation requires accurate continuity in time, especially since the human visual system easily spots
violations of continuity. Third, the composition of the scene needs to make sense both with regards to
object placement, and with regards to their motion and interactions.
A fourth challenge, that has become apparent during the development process, is that the problem of
mode collapse is much more severe in videos than in images. Recent GAN-based approaches for
synthesis from a single-sample have shown that variability is readily created by hierarchical patch
modeling. However, in video, each patch is constrained along three different axes, and the temporal
axis does not necessarily comply with the fractal structure of images [1, 2, 3]. Therefore, a direct
generalization of such models to video results in a generation that collapses to the original video.
To overcome this, we first offer a novel patch-VAE formulation that explicitly models the patch
distribution of a video. This approach enables the faithful reconstruction of each patch in the video, as
well as the generation of novel samples, thus avoiding the problem of mode collapse and memorization
of the input video sample. We subsequently use our patch-VAE in a novel hierarchical formulation.
The newly formulated hierarchical patch-VAE employs a multi-scale decoder but only one encoder.
The VAE’s KL constraint is only applied to the activation map that this single encoder outputs. The
different scales of the decoder are trained sequentially, such that the encoder and the top part of the
decoder are trained at each step with a reconstruction term.
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

