Every View Counts: Cross-View Consistency in 3D
Object Detection with Hybrid-Cylindrical-Spherical
Voxelization
Qi Chen∗
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, USA

Lin Sun∗
Samsung Semiconductor, Inc.
San Jose, CA, USA

Ernest Cheung
Samsung Semiconductor, Inc.
San Jose, CA, USA

Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, USA

Abstract
Recent voxel-based 3D object detectors for autonomous vehicles learn point cloud
representations either from bird eye view (BEV) or range view (RV, a.k.a. perspective view). However, each view has its own strengths and weaknesses. In this paper,
we present a novel framework to unify and leverage the benefits from both BEV
and RV. The widely-used cuboid-shaped voxels in Cartesian coordinate system only
benefit BEV feature map. Therefore, to enable learning both BEV and RV feature
maps, we introduce Hybrid-Cylindrical-Spherical voxelization. Our findings show
that simply adding detection on another view as auxiliary supervision will lead to
poor performance. We proposed a pair of cross-view transformers to transform
the feature maps into the other view and introduce cross-view consistency loss on
them. Comprehensive experiments on the challenging NuScenes Dataset validate
the effectiveness of our proposed method which leverages joint optimization and
complementary information on both views. Remarkably, our approach achieved
mAP of 55.8%, outperforming all published approaches by at least 3% in overall
performance and up to 16.5% in safety-crucial categories like cyclist.

1

Introduction

With a great surge of autonomous vehicles and accessibility of cheaper laser sensors, e.g. LiDAR,
learning directly from 3D LiDAR point clouds has become increasingly popular. Among LiDARbased 3D object detectors, a line of works [1, 2, 3, 4] borrow the success of convolutional neural
networks on 2D images, and group the unordered, irregular and sparse point clouds into cuboidshaped volumetric grids, i.e. voxels. 3D feature maps are memory-consuming, and therefore most of
the recent works [4, 5, 6, 2, 7, 8] project the feature maps into 2D at different stages in their pipelines.
When choosing 2D representations, it is important that objects in the input point cloud are still visible
in the projected view. In autonomous driving scenarios, object do not overlap in the bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) and the size of the objects are consistent regardless of its distance from the ego-vehicle. Hence
each object projected into BEV remains visible. Alternatively, RV projection suffers from occlusion
and object size variation with respect to distance but it generates dense features. Both BEV and RV
representation are suitable for 3D detection. State-of-the-art voxel based detectors [4, 5, 2, 7] detect
objects based on features from either BEV or RV.
* indicates equal contributions

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

