Estimating decision tree learnability
with polylogarithmic sample complexity

Guy Blanc
Stanford University
gblanc@cs.stanford.edu

Neha Gupta
Stanford University
nehagupta@cs.stanford.edu

Jane Lange
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jlange@mit.edu

Li-Yang Tan
Stanford University
liyang@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We show that top-down decision tree learning heuristics (such as ID3, C4.5, and
CART) are amenable to highly efficient learnability estimation: for monotone target
functions, the error of the decision tree hypothesis constructed by these heuristics
can be estimated with polylogarithmically many labeled examples, exponentially
smaller than the number necessary to run these heuristics, and indeed, exponentially
smaller than information-theoretic minimum required to learn a good decision tree.
This adds to a small but growing list of fundamental learning algorithms that have
been shown to be amenable to learnability estimation.
En route to this result, we design and analyze sample-efficient minibatch versions
of top-down decision tree learning heuristics and show that they achieve the same
provable guarantees as the full-batch versions. We further give “active local”
versions of these heuristics: given a test point x? , we show how the label T (x? )
of the decision tree hypothesis T can be computed with polylogarithmically many
labeled examples, exponentially smaller than the number necessary to learn T .

1

Introduction

We study the problem of estimating learnability, recently introduced by Kong and Valiant [KV18]
and Blum and Hu [BH18]. Consider a learning algorithm A and a dataset S of unlabeled examples.
Can we estimate the performance of A on S—that is, the error of the hypothesis that A would return
if we were to label the entire dataset S and train A on it—by labeling only very few of the examples
in S? Are there learning tasks and algorithms for which an accurate estimate of learnability can be
obtained with far fewer labeled examples than the information-theoretic minimum required to learn a
good hypothesis?
Motivating applications. Across domains and applications, the labeling of datasets is often an
expensive process, requiring either significant computational resources or a large number of personhours. There are therefore numerous natural scenarios in which an efficient learnability estimation
procedure could serve as a useful exploratory precursor to learning. For example, suppose the error
estimate returned by this procedure is large. This tells us that if we were to label the entire dataset S
and run A on it, the error of the hypothesis h that A would return is large. With this information,
we may decide that h would not have been of much utility anyway, thereby saving ourselves the
resources and effort to label the entire dataset S (and to run A). Alternatively, we may decide to
collect more data or to enlarge the feature space of S, in hopes of improving the performance of A.
The learnability estimation procedure could again serve as a guide in this process, telling us how
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

