A Limitation of the PAC-Bayes Framework

Roi Livni
Department of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University
Israel
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Shay Moran
Department of Mathematics
Technion, Haifa
Israel
shaymoran1@gmail.com

Abstract
PAC-Bayes is a useful framework for deriving generalization bounds which was
introduced by McAllester (’98). This framework has the flexibility of deriving
distribution- and algorithm-dependent bounds, which are often tighter than VCrelated uniform convergence bounds. In this manuscript we present a limitation
for the PAC-Bayes framework. We demonstrate an easy learning task which is not
amenable to a PAC-Bayes analysis.
Specifically, we consider the task of linear classification in 1D; it is well-known
that this task is learnable using just O(log(1/δ)/) examples. On the other hand,
we show that this fact can not be proved using a PAC-Bayes analysis: for any
algorithm that learns 1-dimensional linear classifiers there exists a (realizable)
distribution for which the PAC-Bayes bound is arbitrarily large.

1

Introduction

The classical setting of supervised binary classification considers learning algorithms that receive
(binary) labelled examples and are required to output a predictor or a classifier that predicts the
label of new and unseen examples. Within this setting, Probably Approximately Correct (PAC)
generalization bounds quantify the success of an algorithm to approximately predict with high
probability. The PAC-Bayes framework, introduced in [22, 34] and further developed in [21, 20, 30],
provides PAC-flavored bounds to Bayesian algorithms that produce Gibbs-classifiers (also called
stochastic-classifiers). These are classifiers that, instead of outputting a single classifier, output a
probability distribution over the family of classifiers. Their performance is measured by the expected
success of prediction where expectation is taken with respect to both sampled data and sampled
classifier.
A PAC-Bayes generalization bound relates the generalization error of the algorithm to a KL distance
between the stochastic output classifier and some prior distribution P . In more detail, the generalization bound is comprised of two terms: first, the empirical error of the output Gibbs-classifier,
and second, the KL distance between the output Gibbs classifier and some arbitrary (but sampleindependent) prior distribution. This standard bound captures a basic intuition that a good learner
needs to balance between bias, manifested in the form of a prior, and fitting the data, which is
measured by the empirical loss. A natural task is then, to try and characterize the potential as well as
limitations of such Gibbs-learners that are amenable to PAC-Bayes analysis. As far as the potential,
several past results established the strength and utility of this framework (e.g. [33, 31, 18, 13, 17]).
In this work we focus on the complementary task, and present the first limitation result showing that
there are classes that are learnable, even in the strong distribution-independent setting of PAC, but do
not admit any algorithm that is amenable to a non-vacuous PAC-Bayes analysis. We stress that this is
true even if we exploit the bound to its fullest and allow any algorithm and any possible, potentially
distribution-dependent, prior.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

