First Order Constrained Optimization in Policy Space

Yiming Zhang
New York University
yiming.zhang@cs.nyu.edu

Quan Vuong
UC San Diego
qvuong@ucsd.edu

Keith W. Ross
New York University Shanghai
New York University
keithwross@nyu.edu

Abstract
In reinforcement learning, an agent attempts to learn high-performing behaviors
through interacting with the environment, such behaviors are often quantified in
the form of a reward function. However some aspects of behavior—such as ones
which are deemed unsafe and to be avoided—are best captured through constraints.
We propose a novel approach called First Order Constrained Optimization in Policy
Space (FOCOPS) which maximizes an agent’s overall reward while ensuring the
agent satisfies a set of cost constraints. Using data generated from the current policy,
FOCOPS first finds the optimal update policy by solving a constrained optimization
problem in the nonparameterized policy space. FOCOPS then projects the update
policy back into the parametric policy space. Our approach has an approximate
upper bound for worst-case constraint violation throughout training and is firstorder in nature therefore simple to implement. We provide empirical evidence that
our simple approach achieves better performance on a set of constrained robotics
locomotive tasks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) saw major breakthroughs in several challenging
high-dimensional tasks such as Atari games (Mnih et al., 2013, 2016; Van Hasselt et al., 2016;
Schaul et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017), playing go (Silver et al., 2016, 2018), and robotics (Peters
and Schaal, 2008; Schulman et al., 2015, 2017b; Wu et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018). However
most modern DRL algorithms allow the agent to freely explore the environment to obtain desirable
behavior, provided that it leads to performance improvement. No regard is given to whether the
agent’s behavior may lead to negative or harmful consequences. Consider for instance the task
of controlling a robot, certain maneuvers may damage the robot, or worse harm people around it.
RL safety (Amodei et al., 2016) is a pressing topic in modern reinforcement learning research and
imperative to applying reinforcement learning to real-world settings.
Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDP) (Kallenberg, 1983; Ross, 1985; Beutler and Ross,
1985; Ross and Varadarajan, 1989; Altman, 1999) provide a principled mathematical framework
for dealing with such problems as it allows us to naturally incorporate safety criteria in the form of
constraints. In low-dimensional finite settings, an optimal policy for CMDPs with known dynamics
can be found by linear programming (Kallenberg, 1983) or Lagrange relaxation (Ross, 1985; Beutler
and Ross, 1985).
While we can solve problems with small state and action spaces via linear programming and value
iteration, function approximation is required in order to generalize over large state spaces. Based
on recent advances in local policy search methods (Kakade and Langford, 2002; Peters and Schaal,
2008; Schulman et al., 2015), Achiam et al. (2017) proposed the Constrained Policy Optimization
(CPO) algorithm. However policy updates for the CPO algorithm involve solving an optimization
problem through Taylor approximations and inverting a high-dimensional Fisher information matrix.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

