Domain Generalization for Medical Imaging
Classification with Linear-Dependency
Regularization

Haoliang Li1 YuFei Wang1 Renjie Wan1 Shiqi Wang2 Tie-Qiang Li3,4 Alex C. Kot1
1
Rapid-Rich Object Search Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, China
3
Department of Clinical Science, Intervention, and Technology, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
4
Department of Medical Radiation and Nuclear Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Sweden
{lihaoliang,yufei001,rjwan,eackot}@ntu.edu.sg shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk tie-qiang.li@ki.se

Abstract
Recently, we have witnessed great progress in the field of medical imaging classification by adopting deep neural networks. However, the recent advanced models
still require accessing sufficiently large and representative datasets for training,
which is often unfeasible in clinically realistic environments. When trained on
limited datasets, the deep neural network is lack of generalization capability, as
the trained deep neural network on data within a certain distribution (e.g. the data
captured by a certain device vendor or patient population) may not be able to generalize to the data with another distribution. In this paper, we introduce a simple but
effective approach to improve the generalization capability of deep neural networks
in the field of medical imaging classification. Motivated by the observation that the
domain variability of the medical images is to some extent compact, we propose
to learn a representative feature space through variational encoding with a novel
linear-dependency regularization term to capture the shareable information among
medical data collected from different domains. As a result, the trained neural
network is expected to equip with better generalization capability to the “unseen"
medical data. Experimental results on two challenging medical imaging classification tasks indicate that our method can achieve better cross-domain generalization
capability compared with state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Due to the breakthrough in machine learning and deep learning, recent years have witnessed numerous
significant successes in various medical imaging tasks. However, one of the limitations of deep
learning is that it lacks generalization capability when the number of training data is not sufficient
[43]. In practice, it is often the case that the testing data (a.k.a. target domain) can be dissimilar to
the training data (a.k.a. source domain) in terms of many factors, such as imaging protocol, device
vendors and patient populations. Such domain shift problem can lead to a significantly negative
impact on the performance of medical imaging classification. To tackle such domain shift problem,
domain adaptation [30] aims to transfer the knowledge from a source domain to a different but
relevant target domain. Recently, many studies have been conducted to improve the transferable
capability in the field of medical imaging classification with domain adaptation by assuming that
target domain data are accessible [42, 8].
In many cases, requiring to access the target domain data in advance may not be feasible. For example,
in the real-time clinical application scenario, it is difficult to collect sufficient target domain data to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

