NanoFlow: Scalable Normalizing Flows with
Sublinear Parameter Complexity

Sungwon Kim
Sungroh Yoon∗
Data Science & AI Lab.
Seoul National University
{tkdrlf9202, ksw0306, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Sang-gil Lee

Abstract
Normalizing flows (NFs) have become a prominent method for deep generative
models that allow for an analytic probability density estimation and efficient synthesis. However, a flow-based network is considered to be inefficient in parameter
complexity because of reduced expressiveness of bijective mapping, which renders
the models unfeasibly expensive in terms of parameters. We present an alternative
parameterization scheme called NanoFlow, which uses a single neural density
estimator to model multiple transformation stages. Hence, we propose an efficient
parameter decomposition method and the concept of flow indication embedding,
which are key missing components that enable density estimation from a single
neural network. Experiments performed on audio and image models confirm that
our method provides a new parameter-efficient solution for scalable NFs with
significant sublinear parameter complexity.

1

Introduction

Flow-based models have become a prominent approach for density estimation and generative models
in recent times. These models are based on normalizing flows (NFs) [27], wherein a deep invertible
model is trained with an analytically estimated likelihood of data. The model learns a bijective
mapping between the data and a known prior (typically isotropic Gaussian), and its reverse operation
synthesizes realistic samples from the prior. Compared with the variational autoencoder [18] and
generative adversarial network [10], NFs exhibit the distinct characteristic of an exact probability
density estimation from a principled maximum likelihood training. When combined with nonautoregressive coupling methods [6, 19], NFs become a powerful generative model that offers a
significantly simplified training and efficient inference.
Since the introduction of the framework into neural networks, the existing studies on flow-based
models have focused on improving the expressiveness of the bijective operation [2,7,12,19]. However,
parameter complexity and memory efficiency are less emphasized by the research community.
The small efforts to maximize the expressiveness under a specified amount of capacity of the
neural network has recently become problematic when expanding a flow-based model for realworld applications. A notable example is the waveform synthesis model [15, 26]. Although the
aforementioned studies have achieved audio generation faster than real-time (thereby removing the
slow inference bottleneck of WaveNet [29]), they resulted in an increase in the number of parameters
by an order of magnitude, which is unfeasibly expensive in terms of memory. Hence, building a
complex, scalable, and memory-efficient flow-based model remains challenging.
This scenario raised a question: Is it true that NFs require a significantly larger network capacity to
perform expressive bijections, or is the representational power of deep neural networks inefficiently
∗

Corresponding author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

