Taming Discrete Integration via the Boon of
Dimensionality

Jeffrey M. Dudek
Rice University
Houston, USA

Dror Fried
The Open University of Israel
Israel

Kuldeep S. Meel
National University of Singapore
Singapore

Abstract
Discrete integration is a fundamental problem in computer science that concerns
the computation of discrete sums over exponentially large sets. Despite intense
interest from researchers for over three decades, the design of scalable techniques
for computing estimates with rigorous guarantees for discrete integration remains
the holy grail. The key contribution of this work addresses this scalability challenge
via an efficient reduction of discrete integration to model counting. The proposed
reduction is achieved via a significant increase in the dimensionality that, contrary to
conventional wisdom, leads to solving an instance of the relatively simpler problem
of model counting. Building on the promising approach proposed by Chakraborty
et al [9], our work overcomes the key weakness of their approach: a restriction
to dyadic weights. We augment our proposed reduction, called DeWeight, with a
state of the art efficient approximate model counter and perform detailed empirical
analysis over benchmarks arising from neural network verification domains, an
emerging application area of critical importance. DeWeight, to the best of our
knowledge, is the first technique to compute estimates with provable guarantees
for this class of benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Given a large set of items S and a weight function W that assigns weight to each of the items, the
problem of discrete integration, also known as weighted counting, is to compute the weight of S,
defined as the weighted sum of items of S. Often the set S is implicitly represented, for example
as the set of assignments that satisfy a given set of constraints. Such a representation allows one
to represent an exponentially large set with polynomially many constraints, and thus capture other
representation forms such as probabilistic graphical models [12, 40]. In particular, it is commonplace
to implicitly represent S as the set of assignments that satisfy a Boolean formula F by using standard
transformations from discrete domains to Boolean variables [6]. This allows one to leverage powerful
combinatorial solvers within the process of answering the discrete integration query [24, 25, 8].
Discrete integration is a fundamental problem in computer science with a wide variety of applications
covering partition function computations [23, 1], probabilistic inference [33, 51], network reliability
estimation [20], and the verification of neural networks [5, 36, 37], which is the topic of this work.
In particular, recent work demonstrated that determining properties of neural networks, such as
adversarial robustness, fairness, and susceptibility to trojan attacks, can be reduced to discrete
integration. Since discrete integration is #P-complete even when the weight function is constant [47],
this has motivated theoreticians and practitioners alike to focus on approximation techniques.
Of particular interest in many settings, including neural network verification, is the case where the
weight function can be expressed as log-linear distribution. Log-linear models are employed to
capture a wide variety of distributions that arise from graphical models, conditional random fields,
skip-gram models, and the like [28]. In the context of discrete integration, log-linear models are also
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

