Consistent Feature Selection for Analytic Deep
Neural Networks
Vu Dinh ⇤
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Delaware
Delaware, USA
vucdinh@udel.edu

Lam Si Tung Ho ⇤
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Dalhousie University
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Lam.Ho@dal.ca

Abstract
One of the most important steps toward interpretability and explainability of neural
network models is feature selection, which aims to identify the subset of relevant
features. Theoretical results in the field have mostly focused on the prediction
aspect of the problem with virtually no work on feature selection consistency for
deep neural networks due to the model’s severe nonlinearity and unidentifiability.
This lack of theoretical foundation casts doubt on the applicability of deep learning
to contexts where correct interpretations of the features play a central role.
In this work, we investigate the problem of feature selection for analytic deep
networks. We prove that for a wide class of networks, including deep feed-forward
neural networks, convolutional neural networks, and a major sub-class of residual
neural networks, the Adaptive Group Lasso selection procedure with Group Lasso
as the base estimator is selection-consistent. The work provides further evidence
that Group Lasso might be inefficient for feature selection with neural networks
and advocates the use of Adaptive Group Lasso over the popular Group Lasso.

1

Introduction

In recent years, neural networks have become one of the most popular models for learning systems for
their strong approximation properties and superior predictive performance. Despite their successes,
their “black box” nature provides little insight into how predictions are being made. This lack of
interpretability and explainability stems from the fact that there has been little work that investigates
statistical properties of neural networks due to its severe nonlinearity and unidentifiability.
One of the most important steps toward model interpretability is feature selection, which aims to
identify the subset of relevant features with respect to an outcome. Numerous techniques have
been developed in the statistics literature and adapted to neural networks over the years. For neural
networks, standard Lasso is not ideal because a feature can only be dropped if all of its connections
have been shrunk to zero together, an objective that Lasso does not actively pursue. Zhao et al. [2015],
Scardapane et al. [2017] and Zhang et al. [2019] address this concern by utilizing Group Lasso
and its variations for selecting features of deep neural networks (DNNs). Feng and Simon [2017]
propose fitting a neural network with a Sparse Group Lasso penalty on the first-layer input weights
while adding a sparsity penalty to later layers. Li et al. [2016] propose adding a sparse one-to-one
linear layer between the input layer and the first hidden layer of a neural network and performing `1
regularization on the weights of this extra layer. Similar ideas are also applied to various types of
networks and learning contexts [Tank et al., 2018, Ainsworth et al., 2018, Lemhadri et al., 2019].
Beyond regularization-based methods, Horel and Giesecke [2019] develop a test to assess the
statistical significance of the feature variables of a neural network. Alternatively, a ranking of feature
⇤

These authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

