Meta-Neighborhoods

Siyuan Shan
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
siyuanshan@cs.unc.edu

Yang Li
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
yangli95@cs.unc.edu

Junier B. Oliva
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
joliva@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Making an adaptive prediction based on one’s input is an important ability for
general artificial intelligence. In this work, we step forward in this direction and propose a semi-parametric method, Meta-Neighborhoods, where predictions are made
adaptively to the neighborhood of the input. We show that Meta-Neighborhoods
is a generalization of k-nearest-neighbors. Due to the simpler manifold structure around a local neighborhood, Meta-Neighborhoods represent the predictive
distribution p(y | x) more accurately. To reduce memory and computation overhead, we propose induced neighborhoods that summarize the training data into
a much smaller dictionary. A meta-learning based training mechanism is then
exploited to jointly learn the induced neighborhoods and the model. Extensive
studies demonstrate the superiority of our method.1

1

Introduction

Discriminative machine learning models typically learn the predic𝑥1
𝑦1
tive distribution p(y | x). There are two paradigms to build a model,
𝑓
(∙)
𝑥
𝑦
𝜙
parametric methods and non-parametric methods [12]. Parametric
2
2
methods assume that a set of fixed parameters θ dominates the pre𝑥3
𝑦3
dictive distribution, i.e., p(y | x; θ). The training process estimates θ
predict with fixed model
and then discard the training data completely, as the learned parameters θ are responsible for the following prediction. This paradigm
𝐍(𝑥 )
𝜙neighbor-based𝑖adjustment 𝜙𝑖
has proven effective, however, it leaves the entire burden on learning
a complex predictive distribution over potentially large support. Non𝑓𝜙1 (∙)
𝑥1
𝑦1
parametric models differ in that the number of parameters scales
𝑓
(∙)
𝑥2
𝑦2
with data. They typically reuse the training data during the testing
𝜙2
phase to make predictions. For instance, the well-known k-nearest
𝑓𝜙3 (∙)
𝑥3
𝑦3
neighbor (KNN) estimator often achieves surprisingly good results predict with instance-specific model
by leveraging neighbors from the training data, which reduces the
problem to a much simpler local-manifold. Despite its flexibility, Figure 1: Top: traditional paranon-parametric methods are required to store the training data and metric models. Bottom: our
traverse them during testing, which may impose significant memory per-instance adapted model.
and computation overhead for large training sets.
1

The code is available at https://github.com/lupalab/Meta-Neighborhoods

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

