Removing Bias in Multi-modal Classifiers:
Regularization by Maximizing Functional Entropies

Itai Gat
Technion

Idan Schwartz
Technion

Alexander Schwing
UIUC

Tamir Hazan
Technion

Abstract
Many recent datasets contain a variety of different data modalities, for instance, image, question, and answer data in visual question answering (VQA). When training
deep net classifiers on those multi-modal datasets, the modalities get exploited at
different scales, i.e., some modalities can more easily contribute to the classification
results than others. This is suboptimal because the classifier is inherently biased
towards a subset of the modalities. To alleviate this shortcoming, we propose a
novel regularization term based on the functional entropy. Intuitively, this term
encourages to balance the contribution of each modality to the classification result.
However, regularization with the functional entropy is challenging. To address this,
we develop a method based on the log-Sobolev inequality, which bounds the functional entropy with the functional-Fisher-information. Intuitively, this maximizes
the amount of information that the modalities contribute. On the two challenging
multi-modal datasets VQA-CPv2 and SocialIQ, we obtain state-of-the-art results
while more uniformly exploiting the modalities. In addition, we demonstrate the
efficacy of our method on Colored MNIST.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal data is ubiquitous and commonly used in many real-world applications. For instance,
discriminative visual question answering systems take into account the question, the image and a
variety of answers. In general, we treat data as multi-modal if it can be partitioned into semantic
features, e.g., color and shape can be treated as multi-modal data.
Training of discriminative classifiers on multi-modal datasets like discriminative visual question
answering almost always follows the classical machine learning paradigm: use a common loss
function like cross-entropy and employ a standard `2 -norm regularizer (a.k.a. weight decay). The
regularizer favors ‘simple’ classifiers over more complex ones. These classical regularizers are
suitable in traditional machine learning settings that predominantly use a single data modality.
Unfortunately, because they favor ‘simple’ models, their use is detrimental when learning from
multi-modal data. Simplicity encourages use of information from a single modality, which often
ends up biasing the learner. For instance, visual question answering models end up being driven by a
language prior rather than visual understanding [1, 2, 3, 4]. E.g., answering ‘how many...?’ questions
with ‘2’ regardless of the question. Another popular example consists of colored images whose label
is correlated with their color modality and their shape modality. In these cases, standard learners
often focus on the ‘simple’ color modality and largely ignore the shape modality [5, 6].
To address this issue, we develop a novel regularization term based on the functional entropy.
Intuitively, this term encourages to balance the contribution of each modality to classification. To
address the computational challenges of computing the functional entropy we develop a method
based on the log-Sobolev inequality which bounds the functional entropy with the functional Fisher
information.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

