Parametric Instance Classification for Unsupervised
Visual Feature Learning

Yue Cao∗1 , Zhenda Xie∗12 , Bin Liu∗12 , Yutong Lin13 , Zheng Zhang1 , Han Hu1
1
Microsoft Research Asia
2
Tsinghua University
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University
{yuecao,t-zhxie,v-liubin,v-yutlin,zhez,hanhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper presents parametric instance classification (PIC) for unsupervised visual feature learning. Unlike the state-of-the-art approaches which do instance
discrimination in a dual-branch non-parametric fashion, PIC directly performs a
one-branch parametric instance classification, revealing a simple framework similar
to supervised classification and without the need to address the information leakage
issue. We show that the simple PIC framework can be as effective as the stateof-the-art approaches, i.e. SimCLR and MoCo v2, by adapting several common
component settings used in the state-of-the-art approaches. We also propose two
novel techniques to further improve effectiveness and practicality of PIC: 1) a
sliding-window data scheduler, instead of the previous epoch-based data scheduler, which addresses the extremely infrequent instance visiting issue in PIC and
improves the effectiveness; 2) a negative sampling and weight update correction
approach to reduce the training time and GPU memory consumption, which also
enables application of PIC to almost unlimited training images. We hope that the
PIC framework can serve as a simple baseline to facilitate future study. The code
and network configurations are available at https://github.com/bl0/PIC.

1

Introduction

Visual feature learning has long been dominated by supervised image classification tasks, e.g.
ImageNet-1K classification. Recently, unsupervised visual feature learning has started to demonstrate on par or superior transfer performance on several downstream tasks compared to supervised
approaches [15, 5, 22]. This is encouraging, as unsupervised visual feature learning could utilize
nearly unlimited data without annotations.
These unsupervised approaches [15, 22, 5, 6], which achieve revolutionary performance, are all built
on the same pre-text task of instance discrimination [12, 32, 27], where each image instance is treated
as a distinct class. To solve the instance discrimination task, often a dual-branch structure is employed
where two augmentation views from the same image are encouraged to agree and views from different
images to disperse. In general, for dual-branch approaches, special designs are usually required
to address the information leakage issue, e.g. specialized networks [1], specialized BatchNorm
layers [15, 5], momentum encoder [15], and limited negative pairs [5].
Unlike these dual-branch non-parametric approaches, this paper presents a framework which solves
instance discrimination by direct parametric instance classification (PIC) [12]. PIC is a one-branch
scheme where only one view for each image is required per iteration, which avoids the need to
∗
Equal Contribution. The work is done when Zhenda Xie, Bin Liu and Yutong Lin are interns at Microsoft
Research Asia.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

