Demystifying Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning:
Invariances, Augmentations and Dataset Biases

Senthil Purushwalkam∗
Carnegie Mellon University
spurushw@cs.cmu.edu

Abhinav Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University &
Facebook AI Research
abhinavg@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised representation learning approaches have recently surpassed their
supervised learning counterparts on downstream tasks like object detection and
image classification. Somewhat mysteriously the recent gains in performance
come from training instance classification models, treating each image and it’s
augmented versions as samples of a single class. In this work, we first present
quantitative experiments to demystify these gains. We demonstrate that approaches
like MOCO[1] and PIRL[2] learn occlusion-invariant representations. However,
they fail to capture viewpoint and category instance invariance which are crucial
components for object recognition. Second, we demonstrate that these approaches
obtain further gains from access to a clean object-centric training dataset like
Imagenet. Finally, we propose an approach to leverage unstructured videos to learn
representations that possess higher viewpoint invariance. Our results show that the
learned representations outperform MOCOv2 trained on the same data in terms of
invariances encoded and the performance on downstream image classification and
semantic segmentation tasks.

1

Introduction

Inspired by biological agents and necessitated by the manual annotation bottleneck, there has been
growing interest in self-supervised visual representation learning. Early work in self-supervised
learning focused on using “pretext” tasks for which ground-truth is free and can be procured through
an automated process [3, 4]. Most pretext tasks include prediction of some hidden portion of input
data (e.g., predicting future frames [5] or color of a grayscale image [6]). However, the performance
of the learned representations have been far from their supervised counterparts.
The past six months have been revolutionary in the field of self-supervised learning. Several recent
works [2, 1, 5, 7, 8] have reported significant improvements in self-supervised learning performance
and now surpassing supervised learning seems like a foregone conclusion. So, what has changed
dramatically? The common theme across recent works is the focus on the instance discrimination
task [9] – treating every instance as a class of its own. The image and its augmentations are positive
examples of this class; all other images are treated as negatives. The contrastive loss[5, 7] has
proven to be a useful objective function for instance discrimination, but requires gathering pairs
of samples belonging to the same class (or instance in this case). To achieve this, all recent works
employ an “aggressive” data augmentation strategy where numerous samples can be generated from
a single image. Instance discrimination, contrastive loss and aggressive augmentation are the three
key ingredients underlying these new gains.
While there have been substantial gains reported on object recognition tasks, the reason behind
the gains is still unclear. Our work attempts to demystify these gains and unravel the hidden story
behind this success. The utility of a visual representation can be understood by investigating the
invariances (see Section 4.1 for definition) it encodes. First, we identify the different invariances that
∗

Project webpage: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~spurushw/publication/demystifyssl/

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

