Security Analysis of Safe and Seldonian
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms

1

A. Pinar Ozisik1
Philip S. Thomas1
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts
{pinar, pthomas}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We analyze the extent to which existing methods rely on accurate training data
for a specific class of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, known as Safe and
Seldonian RL. We introduce a new measure of security to quantify the susceptibility
to perturbations in training data by creating an attacker model that represents a
worst-case analysis, and show that a couple of Seldonian RL methods are extremely
sensitive to even a few data corruptions. We then introduce a new algorithm that
is more robust against data corruptions, and demonstrate its usage in practice on
some RL problems, including a grid-world and a diabetes treatment simulation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have been proposed for many high-risk applications, such as
improving type 1 diabetes and sepsis treatments [44; 18]. One type of safe RL algorithm [41; 43],
subsequently referred to as Safe and/or Seldonian RL [44], enables these high-risk applications by
providing high-confidence guarantees that the application will not cause undesirable behavior like
increasing the frequency of dangerous patient outcomes.
However, existing safe RL algorithms rely on the assumption that training data is free from anomalies
such as errors, missing entries, and malicious attacks. In real applications, anomalies are common
when training data comes from a pipeline that includes human interactions, natural language processing, device malfunctions, etc. For example, the recent application of RL to sepsis treatment in the
intensive care unit (ICU) used training data generated from hand-written doctors’ notes [18]. In a
high-stress ICU environment, missing records and poorly written notes are difficult to automatically
parse [1]. Furthermore, Petit et al. [35] demonstrated the importance of using reliable training data
for self-driving cars, a potential area for the real application of RL. They executed a series of attacks
on the camera and sensors of self-driving cars in a lab environment to demonstrate how the safety of
passengers can be compromised.
In this paper, we analyze how robust Seldonian RL algorithms are to perturbations in data. Specifically,
we analyze the robustness of a specific component, called the safety test. This component makes
current Seldonian algorithms safe: the safety test checks whether necessary safety constraints are
satisfied with high probability. Using data collected from a baseline policy, it outputs new policies that
are highly likely to perform at least as well as the baseline. The safety test first computes estimates of
the expected performance of a new policy from training data, using importance sampling (IS). It then
uses concentration inequalities (CI) to bound the expectation of the IS estimates.
First, we propose a new measure, which we call α-security, for quantifying how robust the safety
test of a Seldonian RL algorithm is to data anomalies. To create this measure, we define an attacker
that adds adversarially corrupt data points to training data. Although anomalies in data are often
not due to an adversarial attacker, if we create algorithms that are robust to adversarial attacks, they
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

