Intra-Processing Methods for Debiasing Neural
Networks
Yash Savani
Abacus.AI
San Francisco, CA 94103
yash@abacus.ai

Colin White
Abacus.AI
San Francisco, CA 94103
colin@abacus.ai

Naveen Sundar Govindarajulu
RAIR Lab RPI
Troy, NY 12180
naveensundarg@gmail.com

Abstract
As deep learning models become tasked with more and more decisions that impact
human lives, such as criminal recidivism, loan repayment, and face recognition
for law enforcement, bias is becoming a growing concern. Debiasing algorithms
are typically split into three paradigms: pre-processing, in-processing, and postprocessing. However, in computer vision or natural language applications, it is
common to start with a large generic model and then fine-tune to a specific usecase. Pre- or in-processing methods would require retraining the entire model
from scratch, while post-processing methods only have black-box access to the
model, so they do not leverage the weights of the trained model. Creating debiasing
algorithms specifically for this fine-tuning use-case has largely been neglected.
In this work, we initiate the study of a new paradigm in debiasing research, intraprocessing, which sits between in-processing and post-processing methods. Intraprocessing methods are designed specifically to debias large models which have
been trained on a generic dataset, and fine-tuned on a more specific task. We show
how to repurpose existing in-processing methods for this use-case, and we also
propose three baseline algorithms: random perturbation, layerwise optimization,
and adversarial debiasing. We evaluate these methods across three popular datasets
from the AIF360 toolkit, as well as on the CelebA faces dataset. 1

1

Introduction

The last decade has seen a huge increase in applications of machine learning in a wide variety
of domains such as credit scoring, fraud detection, hiring decisions, criminal recidivism, loan
repayment, face recognition, and so on [43, 7, 45, 3, 36]. The outcome of these algorithms are
impacting the lives of people more than ever. There are clear advantages in the automation of
classification tasks, as machines can quickly process thousands of datapoints with many features.
However, algorithms are susceptible to bias towards individuals or groups of people from a variety of
sources [49, 46, 47, 60, 8, 28, 59].
For example, facial recognition algorithms are currently being used by the US government to match
application photos from people applying for visas and immigration benefits, to match mugshots,
and to match photos as people cross the border into the USA [24]. However, recent studies showed
that many of these algorithms exhibit bias based on race and gender [23]. For example, some of
the algorithms were 10 or 100 times more likely to have false positives for Asian or Black people,
compared to white people. When used for law enforcement, it means that a Black or Asian person is
more likely to be arrested and detained for a crime they didn’t commit [1].
1

See the full-length paper here: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.08564. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/abacusai/intraprocessing_debiasing.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

