Optimal Iterative Sketching with the Subsampled
Randomized Hadamard Transform
Sifan Liu∗
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
sfliu@stanford.edu

Jonathan Lacotte∗
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
lacotte@stanford.edu
Edgar Dobriban
Department of Statistics
University of Pennsylvania
dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu

Mert Pilanci
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
pilanci@stanford.edu

Abstract
Random projections or sketching are widely used in many algorithmic and learning
contexts. Here we study the performance of iterative Hessian sketch for leastsquares problems. By leveraging and extending recent results from random matrix
theory on the limiting spectrum of matrices randomly projected with the subsampled randomized Hadamard transform, and truncated Haar matrices, we can study
and compare the resulting algorithms to a level of precision that has not been
possible before. Our technical contributions include a novel formula for the second
moment of the inverse of projected matrices. We also find simple closed-form
expressions for asymptotically optimal step-sizes and convergence rates. These
show that the convergence rate for Haar and randomized Hadamard matrices are
identical, and asymptotically improve upon Gaussian random projections. These
techniques may be applied to other algorithms that employ randomized dimension
reduction.

1

Introduction

Random projections are a classical way of performing dimensionality reduction, and are widely
used in many algorithmic and learning contexts, e.g., [32, 17, 35, 9] etc. In this work, we study
the performance of the iterative Hessian sketch [24], in the context of overdetermined least-squares
problems


1
∗
2
x : = argmin f (x) : = kAx − bk
.
(1)
2
x∈Rd
Here A ∈ Rn×d is a given data matrix with n ⩾ d and b ∈ Rn is a vector of observations. For
simplicity of notations, we assume throughout this work that rank(A) = d. We will leverage and
extend recent results on the limiting spectral distributions of two classical subspace embeddings,
random uniform projections and the subsampled randomized Hadamard transform (SRHT), to
compare corresponding iterative Hessian sketch versions.
The iterative Hessian sketch (IHS) is an effective iterative method for solving least-squares [23, 24,
14, 28] (and more general convex optimal optimization problems [25]), and it aims to address the
condition number dependency of standard iterative solvers as follows. Given step sizes {µt } and
∗

Equal contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

