Can Graph Neural Networks Count Substructures?

Zhengdao Chen
New York University
zc1216@nyu.edu

Lei Chen
New York University
lc3909@nyu.edu

Soledad Villar
Johns Hopkins University
soledad.villar@jhu.edu

Joan Bruna
New York University
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
The ability to detect and count certain substructures in graphs is important for
solving many tasks on graph-structured data, especially in the contexts of computational chemistry and biology as well as social network analysis. Inspired by this,
we propose to study the expressive power of graph neural networks (GNNs) via
their ability to count attributed graph substructures, extending recent works that
examine their power in graph isomorphism testing and function approximation. We
distinguish between two types of substructure counting: induced-subgraph-count
and subgraph-count, and establish both positive and negative answers for popular
GNN architectures. Specifically, we prove that Message Passing Neural Networks
(MPNNs), 2-Weisfeiler-Lehman (2-WL) and 2-Invariant Graph Networks (2-IGNs)
cannot perform induced-subgraph-count of any connected substructure consisting
of 3 or more nodes, while they can perform subgraph-count of star-shaped substructures. As an intermediary step, we prove that 2-WL and 2-IGNs are equivalent
in distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs, partly answering an open problem raised
in [38]. We also prove positive results for k-WL and k-IGNs as well as negative
results for k-WL with a finite number of iterations. We then conduct experiments
that support the theoretical results for MPNNs and 2-IGNs. Moreover, motivated
by substructure counting and inspired by [45], we propose the Local Relational
Pooling model and demonstrate that it is not only effective for substructure counting
but also able to achieve competitive performance on molecular prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved empirical success on processing data
from various fields such as social networks, quantum chemistry, particle physics, knowledge graphs
and combinatorial optimization [4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 29, 31, 47, 55, 58, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74].
Thanks to such progress, there have been growing interests in studying the expressive power of GNNs.
One line of work does so by studying their ability to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs. In this
regard, Xu et al. [64] and Morris et al. [44] show that GNNs based on neighborhood-aggregation
schemes are at most as powerful as the classical Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test [60] and propose
GNN architectures that can achieve such level of power. While graph isomorphism testing is very
interesting from a theoretical viewpoint, one may naturally wonder how relevant it is to real-world
tasks on graph-structured data. Moreover, WL is powerful enough to distinguish almost all pairs of
non-isomorphic graphs except for rare counterexamples [3]. Hence, from the viewpoint of graph
isomorphism testing, existing GNNs are in some sense already not far from being maximally powerful,
which could make the pursuit of more powerful GNNs appear unnecessary.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

