On Infinite-Width Hypernetworks

Etai Littwin∗
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel
etai.littwin@gmail.com

Tomer Galanti∗
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel
tomerga2@tauex.tau.ac.il

Lior Wolf
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel
wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Greg Yang
Microsoft Research AI
gregyang@microsoft.com

Abstract
Hypernetworks are architectures that produce the weights of a task-specific primary
network. A notable application of hypernetworks in the recent literature involves
learning to output functional representations. In these scenarios, the hypernetwork
learns a representation corresponding to the weights of a shallow MLP, which
typically encodes shape or image information. While such representations have
seen considerable success in practice, they remain lacking in the theoretical guarantees in the wide regime of the standard architectures. In this work, we study
wide over-parameterized hypernetworks. We show that unlike typical architectures,
infinitely wide hypernetworks do not guarantee convergence to a global minima under gradient descent. We further show that convexity can be achieved by increasing
the dimensionality of the hypernetwork’s output, to represent wide MLPs. In the
dually infinite-width regime, we identify the functional priors of these architectures
by deriving their corresponding GP and NTK kernels, the latter of which we refer
to as the hyperkernel. As part of this study, we make a mathematical contribution
by deriving tight bounds on high order Taylor expansion terms of standard fully
connected ReLU networks.

1

Introduction

In this work, we analyze the training dynamics of over-parameterized
meta networks, which are networks that output the weights of other
networks, often referred to as hypernetworks. In the typical framework,
a function h involves two networks, f and g. The hypernetwork f
takes the input x (typically an image) and returns the weights of the
primary network, g, which then takes the input z and returns the output
of h.
The literature of hypernetworks is roughly divided into two main
categories. In the functional representation literature [22, 32, 38, 29,
16] the input to the hypernetwork f is typically an image. For shape
reconstruction tasks, the network g represents the shape via a signed
distance field, where the input are coordinates in 3D space. In image completion tasks, the inputs to
∗

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

