Learning Invariants through Soft Unification

Nuri Cingillioglu
Imperial College London
nuric@imperial.ac.uk

Alessandra Russo
Imperial College London
a.russo@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Human reasoning involves recognising common underlying principles across many
examples. The by-products of such reasoning are invariants that capture patterns
such as “if someone went somewhere then they are there”, expressed using variables
“someone” and “somewhere” instead of mentioning specific people or places.
Humans learn what variables are and how to use them at a young age. This paper
explores whether machines can also learn and use variables solely from examples
without requiring human pre-engineering. We propose Unification Networks, an
end-to-end differentiable neural network approach capable of lifting examples into
invariants and using those invariants to solve a given task. The core characteristic
of our architecture is soft unification between examples that enables the network to
generalise parts of the input into variables, thereby learning invariants. We evaluate
our approach on five datasets to demonstrate that learning invariants captures
patterns in the data and can improve performance over baselines.

1

Introduction

Humans have the ability to process symbolic knowledge and maintain symbolic thought [46]. When
reasoning, humans do not require combinatorial enumeration of examples but instead utilise invariant
patterns where specific entities are replaced with placeholders. Symbolic cognitive models [24]
embrace this perspective with the human mind seen as an information processing system operating
on formal symbols such as reading a stream of tokens in natural language. The language of thought
hypothesis [29] frames human thought as a structural construct with varying sub-components such as
“X went to Y”. By recognising what varies across examples, humans are capable of lifting examples
into invariant principles that account for other instances. This symbolic thought with variables is
learned at a young age through symbolic play [32]. For instance, a child learns that a sword can be
substituted with a stick [15] and engages in pretend play.
Although variables are inherent in symbolic forV:bernhard is a V:frog
malisms and their models of computation, as in
V:lily
is a V:frog
first-order logic [36], they are pre-engineered
V:lily is V:green
and used to solve specific tasks by means of aswhat colour is V:bernhard
signing values to them. However, when learning
from data only, being able to recognise when
green
and which symbols could act as variables and
therefore take on different values is crucial for Figure 1: Invariant learned for bAbI task 16, basic
lifting examples into general principles that are induction, where V:bernhard denotes a variable
invariant across multiple instances. Figure 1 with default symbol bernhard. This single invariant
shows an example invariant learned by our ap- accounts for all the training, validation and test
proach: if someone is the same thing as someone examples of this task.
else then they have the same colour. With this
invariant, our approach solves all training and test examples in task 16 of the bAbI dataset [48].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

