Synthesize, Execute and Debug: Learning to Repair
for Neural Program Synthesis
Kavi Gupta
UC Berkeley
kavi@berkeley.edu

Peter Ebert Christensen ∗
Technical University of Denmark
pebch@dtu.dk

Xinyun Chen*
UC Berkeley
xinyun.chen@berkeley.edu

Dawn Song
UC Berkeley
dawnsong@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
The use of deep learning techniques has achieved signiﬁcant progress for program
synthesis from input-output examples. However, when the program semantics become more complex, it still remains a challenge to synthesize programs that are
consistent with the speciﬁcation. In this work, we propose SED, a neural program generation framework that incorporates synthesis, execution, and debugging
stages. Instead of purely relying on the neural program synthesizer to generate the
ﬁnal program, SED ﬁrst produces initial programs using the neural program synthesizer component, then utilizes a neural program debugger to iteratively repair
the generated programs. The integration of the debugger component enables SED
to modify the programs based on the execution results and speciﬁcation, which
resembles the coding process of human programmers. On Karel, a challenging
input-output program synthesis benchmark, SED reduces the error rate of the neural program synthesizer itself by a considerable margin, and outperforms the standard beam search for decoding.

1

Introduction

Program synthesis is a fundamental problem that has attracted a lot of attention from both the artiﬁcial intelligence and programming languages community, with the goal of generating a program
that satisﬁes the given speciﬁcation [17, 10]. One of the most popular forms of speciﬁcations is to
provide a few examples of program inputs and the desired outputs, which has been studied in various
domains, including string manipulation [10, 5] and graphics applications [8, 7].
There has been an emerging line of work studying deep learning techniques for program synthesis
from input-output examples [5, 29, 2, 3]. Some recent work demonstrate that a large performance
gain can be achieved by properly leveraging the execution results to guide the program synthesis
process [23, 27, 31, 3, 7]. In particular, in [3, 31, 7], they propose to make predictions based on the
intermediate results obtained by executing the partially generated programs. This scheme is wellsuited for sequential programming tasks [31, 7]; however, for programs that are loop-containing,
the execution results of partial programs are not always informative. For example, in [3], to execute a partial while loop, its body is only executed once [3], making it effectively equivalent to an
if statement. Furthermore, existing work on program synthesis generate the entire program from
scratch without further editing, even if the predicted program is already inconsistent with the inputoutput speciﬁcation and thus incorrect. On the contrary, after observing wrong program outputs,
∗

Equal contribution. Work was done when Peter was visiting UC Berkeley.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

