Towards Scalable Bayesian Learning of Causal DAGs

Jussi Viinikka
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
jussi.viinikka@helsinki.fi
Johan Pensar
Department of Mathematics
University of Oslo
johanpen@math.uio.no

Antti Hyttinen
HIIT & Departiment of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
antti.hyttinen@helsinki.fi
Mikko Koivisto
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
mikko.koivisto@helsinki.fi

Abstract
We give methods for Bayesian inference of directed acyclic graphs, DAGs, and the
induced causal effects from passively observed complete data. Our methods build
on a recent Markov chain Monte Carlo scheme for learning Bayesian networks,
which enables efficient approximate sampling from the graph posterior, provided
that each node is assigned a small number K of candidate parents. We present
algorithmic techniques to significantly reduce the space and time requirements,
which make the use of substantially larger values of K feasible. Furthermore,
we investigate the problem of selecting the candidate parents per node so as to
maximize the covered posterior mass. Finally, we combine our sampling method
with a novel Bayesian approach for estimating causal effects in linear Gaussian
DAG models. Numerical experiments demonstrate the performance of our methods
in detecting ancestor–descendant relations, and in causal effect estimation our
Bayesian method is shown to outperform previous approaches.

1

Introduction

Bayesian learning of graphical models aims at assigning any event of interest a posterior probability
given observed data over the variables. In causal directed acylic graph (DAG) models, examples of
such events include presence of a causal path between two variables and the total causal effect of one
variable on another. While the posterior of the former event is quantified by a single number, the latter
is represented by a distribution. The Bayesian approach is particularly attractive in the causal setting
due to its ability to properly account for the often non-negligible uncertainty in the inferred causal
structure. In comparison, non-Bayesian structure learning methods are more limited in this aspect, as
they typically return a single DAG, or Markov equivalence class, without any associated measure
of uncertainty. In the case of linear Gaussian models, the prospects of the Bayesian approach have
recently been demonstrated [31, 2], showing an improved estimation accuracy over the original nonBayesian IDA method [22] and some of its later variants. However, the power of Bayesian learning
stems from model averaging which unfortunately has appeared to be computationally intractable in
the combinatorial space of DAGs. Hence, the currently existing and provably accurate algorithms are
feasible only with up to around 25 variables [14, 39, 37, 31], and algorithms with somewhat looser
accuracy guarantees to several dozens of variables [20].
There have been several attempts to scale up Bayesian learning of graphical models using Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). The first methods simulated a Markov chain on the space of DAGs by
applying edge operations (add, remove, and reverse edge), yielding a sample of DAGs approximately
from the posterior [24, 11]. To improve the sampler’s ability to escape from local optima, subsequent
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

