Passport-aware Normalization for Deep Model
Protection
Jie Zhang1∗
zjzac@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Weiming Zhang1
zhangwm@ustc.edu.cn
1

Dongdong Chen2†∗
cddlyf@gmail.com
Gang Hua4
ganghua@gmail.com

Jing Liao3
jingliao@cityu.edu.hk
Nenghai Yu1
ynh@ustc.edu.cn

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Cloud AI
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 Wormpex AI Research

Abstract
Despite tremendous success in many application scenarios, deep learning faces
serious intellectual property (IP) infringement threats. Considering the cost of
designing and training a good model, infringements will significantly infringe
the interests of the original model owner. Recently, many impressive works have
emerged for deep model IP protection. However, they either are vulnerable to
ambiguity attacks, or require changes in the target network structure by replacing
its original normalization layers and hence cause significant performance drops.
To this end, we propose a new passport-aware normalization formulation, which is
generally applicable to most existing normalization layers and only needs to add
another passport-aware branch for IP protection. This new branch is jointly trained
with the target model but discarded in the inference stage. Therefore it causes no
structure change in the target model. Only when the model IP is suspected to be
stolen by someone, the private passport-aware branch is added back for ownership
verification. Through extensive experiments, we verify its effectiveness in both
image and 3D point recognition models. It is demonstrated to be robust not only
to common attack techniques like fine-tuning and model compression, but also to
ambiguity attacks. By further combining it with trigger-set based methods, both
black-box and white-box verification can be achieved for enhanced security of
deep learning models deployed in real systems.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved huge success in broad artificial intelligent tasks, such as image recognition
[1, 2, 3], object detection [4, 5, 6], and neural language processing [7, 8]. In order to obtain highperformance deep models, we often need to design a good network architecture, collect massive
high-quality training dataset, and consume expensive computation resources. Therefore, these deep
models are of great commercial value and may even be the core techniques for some companies.
However, recent works [9, 10, 11] have shown that deep models are vulnerable to IP infringement.
For example, the attackers can utilize transfer learning to adapt the target model to a new task by
fine-tuning [12] or even get a new efficient model by model compression techniques [13]. All these
attack methods will seriously infringe the interests of the original model owner.
∗

Equal Contribution, † Dongdong Chen is the corresponding Author

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

