Deep Automodulators

Ari Heljakka1,2
1

Yuxin Hou1
Aalto University

Juho Kannala1
2
GenMind

Arno Solin1

{ari.heljakka, yuxin.hou, juho.kannala, arno.solin}@aalto.fi

Abstract
We introduce a new category of generative autoencoders called automodulators.
These networks can faithfully reproduce individual real-world input images like
regular autoencoders, but also generate a fused sample from an arbitrary combination of several such images, allowing instantaneous ‘style-mixing’ and other new
applications. An automodulator decouples the data flow of decoder operations from
statistical properties thereof and uses the latent vector to modulate the former by
the latter, with a principled approach for mutual disentanglement of decoder layers.
Prior work has explored similar decoder architecture with GANs, but their focus
has been on random sampling. A corresponding autoencoder could operate on real
input images. For the first time, we show how to train such a general-purpose model
with sharp outputs in high resolution, using novel training techniques, demonstrated
on four image data sets. Besides style-mixing, we show state-of-the-art results in
autoencoder comparison, and visual image quality nearly indistinguishable from
state-of-the-art GANs. We expect the automodulator variants to become a useful
building block for image applications and other data domains.

1

Introduction

This paper introduces a new category of generative autoencoders for learning representations of image
data sets, capable of not only reconstructing real-world input images, but also of arbitrarily combining
their latent codes to generate fused images. Fig. 1 illustrates the rationale: The same model can
encode input images (far-left), mix their features (middle), generate novel ones (middle), and sample
new variants of an image (conditional sampling, far-right). Without discriminator networks, training
such an autoencoder for sharp high resolution images is challenging. For the first time, we show a
way to achieve this.
Recently, impressive results have been achieved in random image generation (e.g., by GANs [5, 14,
25]). However, in order to manipulate a real input image, an ‘encoder’ must first infer the correct
representation of it. This means simultaneously requiring sufficient output image quality and the
ability for reconstruction and feature extraction, which then allow semantic editing. Deep generative
autoencoders provide a principled approach for this. Building on the P IONEER autoencoder [18], we
proceed to show that modulation of decoder layers by leveraging adaptive instance normalization
(AdaIn, [12, 23, 44]) further improves these capabilities. It also yields representations that are less
entangled, a property here broadly defined as something that allows for fine and independent control
of one semantic (image) sample attribute at a time. Here, the inductive bias is to assume each
such attribute to only affect certain scales, allowing disentanglement [33]. Unlike [23], previous
GAN-based works on AdaIn [6, 25] have no built-in encoder for new input images.
In a typical autoencoder, input images are encoded into a latent space, and the information of the
latent variables is then passed through successive layers of decoding until a reconstructed image has
been formed. In our model, the latent vector independently modulates the statistics of each layer of
the decoder so that the output of layer n is no longer solely determined by the input from layer n − 1.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

