Evaluating and Rewarding Teamwork Using
Cooperative Game Abstractions

Tom Yan
Carnegie Mellon University
Facebook AI Research
tyyan@cmu.edu

Christian Kroer
Columbia University
Facebook Core Data Science
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Alexander Peysakhovich
Facebook AI Research
alexpeys@fb.com

Abstract
Can we predict how well a team of individuals will perform together? How
should individuals be rewarded for their contributions to the team performance?
Cooperative game theory gives us a powerful set of tools for answering these
questions: the Characteristic Function (CF) and solution concepts like the Shapley
Value (SV). There are two major difficulties in applying these techniques to real
world problems: first, the CF is rarely given to us and needs to be learned from data.
Second, the SV is combinatorial in nature. We introduce a parametric model called
cooperative game abstractions (CGAs) for estimating CFs from data. CGAs are
easy to learn, readily interpretable, and crucially allow linear-time computation of
the SV. We provide identification results and sample complexity bounds for CGA
models as well as error bounds in the estimation of the SV using CGAs. We apply
our methods to study teams of artificial RL agents as well as real world teams from
professional sports.

1

Introduction

Suppose we have a group of individuals out of which we need to select a team to perform a
task. Besides maximizing team performance, we also wish to reward individuals fairly for their
contributions to the team [25]. This general problem arises in many real world contexts: choosing
athletes for a sports team [22], choosing workers for a project [28], choosing a subset of classifiers to
use in an ensemble [27] etc. In this paper we ask: how can we use data on past performance to figure
out which individuals complement each other? How can we then fairly compensate team members?
Standard game theory (sometimes called ‘non-cooperative’ game theory) explicitly specifies actions,
players, and utility functions. By contrast, cooperative game theory abstracts away from the ‘rules of
the game’ and simply has as primitives the agents and the characteristic function (henceforth CF).
The CF measures how much utility a coalition can create. Solution concepts in cooperative game
theory have been developed to be ‘fair’ divisions of the total utility created by the coalition. These
solution concepts can be viewed either as prescriptive (i.e. this is what an individual ‘deserves’ to
get given their contribution) or predictive of what will happen in real world negotiations, where the
intuition is that coalitions (or individuals) that don’t receive fair compensations will opt to leave the
game and simply transact amongst themselves.
These tools are useful for answering our main questions. The CF tells us how well a team will
perform and the solution concepts will tell us how to divide value across individuals. For the purposes
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

