Predictive Information Accelerates Learning in RL

Kuang-Huei Lee
Google Research
leekh@google.com

Ian Fischer
Google Research
iansf@google.com

Yijie Guo
University of Michigan
guoyijie@umich.edu

Honglak Lee
Google Research
honglak@google.com

Anthony Z. Liu
University of Michigan
anthliu@umich.edu
John Canny
Google Research
canny@google.com

Sergio Guadarrama
Google Research
sguada@google.com

Abstract
The Predictive Information is the mutual information between the past and the
future, I(Xpast ; Xfuture ). We hypothesize that capturing the predictive information
is useful in RL, since the ability to model what will happen next is necessary for
success on many tasks. To test our hypothesis, we train Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
agents from pixels with an auxiliary task that learns a compressed representation
of the predictive information of the RL environment dynamics using a contrastive
version of the Conditional Entropy Bottleneck (CEB) objective. We refer to these
as Predictive Information SAC (PI-SAC) agents. We show that PI-SAC agents can
substantially improve sample efficiency over challenging baselines on tasks from
the DM Control suite of continuous control environments. We evaluate PI-SAC
agents by comparing against uncompressed PI-SAC agents, other compressed
and uncompressed agents, and SAC agents directly trained from pixels. Our
implementation is given on GitHub.1

1

Introduction

Many Reinforcement Learning environments have specific dynamics and clear temporal structure:
observations of the past allow us to predict what is likely to happen in the future. However, it is also
commonly the case that not all information about the past is relevant for predicting the future. Indeed,
there is a common Markov assumption in the modeling of RL tasks: given the full state at time t, the
past and the future are independent of each other.
However, in general not all RL tasks are specified with a full state vector that can guarantee Markovity.
Instead, the environment may be only partially observable, or the state may be represented in very
high dimensions, such as an image. In such environments, the task of the agent may be described
as finding a representation of the past that is most useful for predicting the future, upon which an
optimal policy may more easily be learned.
In this work, we approach the problem of learning continuous control policies from pixel observations.
We do this by first explicitly modeling the Predictive Information, the mutual information between
the past and the future. In so doing, we are looking for a compressed representation of the past that
the agent can use to select its next action, since most of the information about the past is irrelevant
1

https://github.com/google-research/pisac

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

