Reinforcement Learning with Feedback Graphs
Christoph Dann
Google Research
cdann@cdann.net

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University
and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Ayush Sekhari
Cornell University
as3663@cornell.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research and
Courant Institute of Math. Sciences
mohri@google.com
Karthik Sridharan
Cornell University
ks999@cornell.edu

Abstract
We study RL in the tabular MDP setting where the agent receives additional observations per step in the form of transitions samples. Such additional observations
can be provided in many tasks by auxiliary sensors or by leveraging prior knowledge about the environment (e.g., when certain actions yield similar outcome).
We formalize this setting using a feedback graph over state-action pairs and show
that model-based algorithms can incorporate additional observations for more
sample-efficient learning. We give a regret bound that predominantly depends on
the size of the maximum acyclic subgraph of the feedback graph, in contrast with
a polynomial dependency on the number of states and actions in the absence of
side observations. Finally, we highlight fundamental challenges for leveraging a
small dominating set of the feedback graph, as compared to the well-studied bandit
setting, and propose a new algorithm that can use such a dominating set to learn a
near-optimal policy faster.

1

Introduction

For many real-world applications, the sample complexity of RL is still prohibitively high, making
it vital to simplify the learning task by incorporating domain knowledge. An effective approach to
do so is through imitation learning [1] but there are many applications where even an expert may
not know how to provide demonstrations of near-optimal policies (e.g. in drug discovery or tutoring
systems). In such applications, an expert may still be able to provide insights into the structure of the
task, for example, that certain actions yield similar behavior in certain states. These insights could, in
principle, be baked into a model or value-function class, but RL with complex function classes is still
very challenging, both in theory and practice [2, 3, 4, 5].
A more convenient approach to incorporate structure from domain knowledge is to directly provide
additional observations to the RL algorithm. In that case, an online RL algorithm not only gets to see
the outcome (reward and next state) of executing the current action in the current state, but also an
outcome of executing other actions, possibly even in other states. While there is often a trivial way to
include such observations of hypothetical transitions in existing methods, little is theoretically known
about the benefits of doing so. This raises the question:
How do additional observations of hypothetical transitions affect the sampleefficiency of online RL algorithms, and how to best incorporate such observations?
To study this question in full generality, we assume that the additional observations come from some
(black-box) oracle that provides the algorithm with a set of transition samples, in addition to the
current reward and next state (rh , sh+1 ) from the environment (Figure 1 left). To study how helpful
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

