All Word Embeddings from One Embedding

Sho Takase
Tokyo Institute of Technology
sho.takase@nlp.c.titech.ac.jp

Sosuke Kobayashi
Tohoku University
Preferred Networks, Inc.
sosk@preferred.jp

Abstract
In neural network-based models for natural language processing (NLP), the largest
part of the parameters often consists of word embeddings. Conventional models
prepare a large embedding matrix whose size depends on the vocabulary size.
Therefore, storing these models in memory and disk storage is costly. In this
study, to reduce the total number of parameters, the embeddings for all words are
represented by transforming a shared embedding. The proposed method, ALONE
(all word embeddings from one), constructs the embedding of a word by modifying
the shared embedding with a filter vector, which is word-specific but non-trainable.
Then, we input the constructed embedding into a feed-forward neural network to
increase its expressiveness. Naively, the filter vectors occupy the same memory size
as the conventional embedding matrix, which depends on the vocabulary size. To
solve this issue, we also introduce a memory-efficient filter construction approach.
We indicate our ALONE can be used as word representation sufficiently through
an experiment on the reconstruction of pre-trained word embeddings. In addition,
we also conduct experiments on NLP application tasks: machine translation and
summarization. We combined ALONE with the current state-of-the-art encoderdecoder model, the Transformer [36], and achieved comparable scores on WMT
2014 English-to-German translation and DUC 2004 very short summarization with
less parameters1 .

1

Introduction

Word embeddings have played a crucial role in the recent progress in the area of natural language
processing (NLP) [3, 17, 22, 23]. In particular, word embeddings are necessary to convert discrete
input representations into vector representations in neural network-based NLP methods [3]. To
convert an input word w into a vector representation in a conventional way, we prepare a one-hot
vector vw whose dimension size is equal to the vocabulary size V and an embedding matrix E whose
shape is De × V (De represents a word embedding size). Then, we multiply E and vw to obtain a
word embedding ew .
NLP researchers have used word embeddings as input in their models for several applications such
as language modeling [38], machine translation [30], and summarization [26]. However, in these
methods, the embedding matrix forms the largest part of the total parameters, because V is much
larger than the dimension sizes of other weight matrices. For example, the embedding matrix
makes up one-fourth of the parameters of the Transformer, a state-of-the-art neural encoder-decoder
model, on WMT English-to-German translation [36]. Thus, if we can represent each word with
fewer parameters without significant compromises on performance, we can reduce the model size to
conserve memory space. If we save the memory space for embeddings, we can also train a bigger
model to improve the performance.
1

The code is publicly available at https://github.com/takase/alone_seq2seq

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

