MuSCLE: Multi Sweep Compression of LiDAR using
Deep Entropy Models

Sourav Biswas1,2 Jerry Liu1 Kelvin Wong1,3 Shenlong Wang1,3 Raquel Urtasun1,3
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Waterloo 3 University of Toronto
{souravb,jerryl,kelvin.wong,slwang,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
We present a novel compression algorithm for reducing the storage of LiDAR
sensor data streams. Our model exploits spatio-temporal relationships across
multiple LiDAR sweeps to reduce the bitrate of both geometry and intensity values.
Towards this goal, we propose a novel conditional entropy model that models the
probabilities of the octree symbols by considering both coarse level geometry and
previous sweeps’ geometric and intensity information. We then use the learned
probability to encode the full data stream into a compact one. Our experiments
demonstrate that our method significantly reduces the joint geometry and intensity
bitrate over prior state-of-the-art LiDAR compression methods, with a reduction of
7–17% and 6–19% on the UrbanCity and SemanticKITTI datasets respectively.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed numerous innovations in intelligent systems, thanks to an explosion of
progress in sensing and AI algorithms. In particular, LiDAR sensors are extensively used in various
applications such as indoor rovers, unmanned aerial vehicles, and self-driving cars to accurately
capture the 3D geometry of the scene. Yet the rapid adoption of LiDAR has brought about a key
challenge—dealing with the mounting storage costs associated with the massive influx of LiDAR
data. For instance, a 64-line Velodyne LiDAR continuously scanning a given scene produces over 3
billion points in a single hour. Hence, developing efficient and effective compression algorithms to
store such 3D point cloud data streams is crucial to reduce the storage and communication bandwidth.
Unlike its well-studied image and video counterparts, point cloud stream compression is a challenging
yet under-explored problem. Many prior approaches have focused on encoding a point cloud stream
as independent sweeps, where each sweep captures a rough 360-degree rotation of the sensor. Early
approaches exploit a variety of compact data structures to represent the point cloud in a memoryefficient manner, such as octrees [1], KD-trees [2], and spherical images [3]. More recent works along
this direction utilize powerful machine learning models to encode redundant geometric correlations
within these data structures for better compression [4, 5, 6]. In general, most of these aforementioned
approaches do not make effective use of temporal correlations within point clouds. Moreover, these
prior approaches have largely focused on compressing the geometric structure of the point cloud (the
spatial coordinates); yet there has been little attention paid towards compression of other attributes,
e.g. LiDAR intensity, which are crucial for many downstream tasks. Compressing such attributes
along with geometric structure can make a significant impact on reducing storage.
In this paper, we present a novel, learning-based compression algorithm that comprehensively reduces
the storage of LiDAR sensor data streams. Our method extends the recent success of octree-structured
deep entropy models [6] for single LiDAR sweep compression to intensity-valued LiDAR streaming
data. Specifically, we propose a novel deep conditional entropy model that models the probabilities of
the octree symbols and associated intensity values by exploiting spatio-temporal correlations within
the data: taking both coarse level information at the current sweep, as well as relevant neighboring
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

