Efﬁcient Low Rank Gaussian Variational Inference
for Neural Networks
Marcin B. Tomczak
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
mbt27@cam.ac.uk

Siddharth Swaroop
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
ss2163@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks are enjoying a renaissance driven in part by recent
advances in variational inference (VI). The most common form of VI employs
a fully factorized or mean-ﬁeld distribution, but this is known to suffer from
several pathologies, especially as we expect posterior distributions with highly
correlated parameters. Current algorithms that capture these correlations with
a Gaussian approximating family are difﬁcult to scale to large models due to
computational costs and high variance of gradient updates. By using a new form
of the reparametrization trick, we derive a computationally efﬁcient algorithm for
performing VI with a Gaussian family with a low-rank plus diagonal covariance
structure. We scale to deep feed-forward and convolutional architectures. We ﬁnd
that adding low-rank terms to parametrized diagonal covariance does not improve
predictive performance except on small networks, but low-rank terms added to
a constant diagonal covariance improves performance on small and large-scale
network architectures.

1

Introduction

The application of Bayesian methods to neural networks (NNs) has the potential to address many
of their issues, such as enabling decision making in the low data regime [4], or capturing epistemic
uncertainty [19]. However, Bayesian methods tend to be computationally expensive, making their
direct application to large models like deep NNs impractical. Variational inference (VI), one of the
most commonly used approximate Bayesian schemes, has seen a series of advances, enabling it to
be applied to NNs [3, 12, 21]. The most common form of VI employs a mean-ﬁeld (MF) Gaussian
distribution as the variational posterior [21, 35]. This fully factorized posterior can take advantage of
local reparametrization [21], enabling practical applications of Bayesian NNs (BNNs).
In this paper, we focus on deriving a computationally efﬁcient algorithm for learning Gaussian
variational posteriors with correlations among hidden units. Adding correlations among hidden units
theoretically increases the closeness of the variational posterior to the true posterior, so we might
expect better performance, although there has also been evidence favoring simpler posteriors [40, 45].
Previous attempts to add correlations either rely on additional approximations [31], or apply the naive
global reparametrization trick resulting in high variance gradient updates [34, 41, 43]. This results in
slow learning and poor scalability, and this has not been shown to scale beyond very small NNs.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

