Decision trees as partitioning machines to
characterize their generalization properties

Jean-Samuel Leboeuf
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada
jean-samuel.leboeuf.1@ulaval.ca
Frédéric LeBlanc
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Université de Moncton, Moncton, NB, Canada
efl7151@umoncton.ca
Mario Marchand
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada
mario.marchand@ift.ulaval.ca

Abstract
Decision trees are popular machine learning models that are simple to build and
easy to interpret. Even though algorithms to learn decision trees date back to
almost 50 years, key properties affecting their generalization error are still weakly
bounded. Hence, we revisit binary decision trees on real-valued features from
the perspective of partitions of the data. We introduce the notion of partitioning
function, and we relate it to the growth function and to the VC dimension. Using
this new concept, we are able to find the exact VC dimension
 of decision stumps,
which is given by the largest integer d such that 2` ≥ b dd c , where ` is the number
2
of real-valued features. We provide a recursive expression to bound the partitioning
functions, resulting in a upper bound on the growth function of any decision tree
structure. This allows us to show that the VC dimension of a binary tree structure
with N internal nodes is of order N log(N `). Finally, we elaborate a pruning
algorithm based on these results that performs better than the CART algorithm on
a number of datasets, with the advantage that no cross-validation is required.

1

Introduction

Decision trees are popular decision models that are versatile, intuitive, and thus useful in critical
fields where the interpretability of a model is important. They are particularly useful when data is
limited and not organized as in a sequence or a picture. This makes them a good alternative to deep
neural networks in several cases.
Due to their expressive power, decision trees are prone to overfitting. To handle this problem,
algorithms usually make use of practical techniques such as cross-validation in the learning or the
pruning step. Unfortunately, cross-validation increases the running time of the learning algorithm
and impairs the generalization of the tree when the number of training examples is small.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

