On Adaptive Attacks
to Adversarial Example Defenses

Florian Tramèr∗
Stanford University
tramer@cs.stanford.edu

Nicholas Carlini∗
Google
nicholas@carlini.com

Wieland Brendel∗
University of Tübingen
wieland.brendel@uni-tuebingen.de

Aleksander M ˛
adry
MIT
madry@mit.edu

Abstract
Adaptive attacks have (rightfully) become the de facto standard for evaluating defenses to adversarial examples. We find, however, that typical adaptive evaluations
are incomplete. We demonstrate that thirteen defenses recently published at ICLR,
ICML and NeurIPS—and which illustrate a diverse set of defense strategies—can
be circumvented despite attempting to perform evaluations using adaptive attacks.
While prior evaluation papers focused mainly on the end result—showing that a
defense was ineffective—this paper focuses on laying out the methodology and the
approach necessary to perform an adaptive attack. Some of our attack strategies
are generalizable, but no single strategy would have been sufficient for all defenses.
This underlines our key message that adaptive attacks cannot be automated and
always require careful and appropriate tuning to a given defense. We hope that
these analyses will serve as guidance on how to properly perform adaptive attacks
against defenses to adversarial examples, and thus will allow the community to
make further progress in building more robust models.

1

Introduction

Over the last five years the research community has attempted to develop defenses to adversarial
examples [SZS+ 14, BCM+ 13]. This has proven extraordinarily difficult. Indeed, a common theme
has been proposing defenses that—due to having been tested only against static and relatively weak
attacks—were promptly circumvented by a stronger attack [CW17a, ACW18].
Recent community efforts and guidelines to improve defense evaluations have had a noticeably
positive impact. In particular, there has been a significant uptake of evaluations against adaptive
attacks, i.e., attacks that were specifically designed to target a given defense—the ratio of defenses
evaluated against adaptive attacks has increased from close to zero in 2017 [CW17a] to one third in
2018 [ACW18] and to nearly all of them today.1 This leads to the question:
With their much-improved evaluation practices, are these defenses truly robust?
We find that this is not the case. Specifically, in an analysis of thirteen defenses, selected from recent
ICLR, ICML, and NeurIPS conferences to illustrate diverse defensive strategies, we find that we can
circumvent all of them and substantially reduce the accuracy from what was originally claimed.
∗

Equal contribution
There is a similarly positive trend in terms of releasing source code for defenses. In particular, every defense
we analyzed either released source code, or made it available upon request.
1

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

