Multi-Fidelity Bayesian Optimization via Deep
Neural Networks
Shibo Li
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
shibo@cs.utah.edu

Wei Xing
Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
wxing@sci.utah.edu

Robert M. Kirby
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
kirby@cs.utah.edu

Shandian Zhe
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
zhe@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular framework for optimizing black-box
functions. In many applications, the objective function can be evaluated at multiple fidelities to enable a trade-off between the cost and accuracy. To reduce the
optimization cost, many multi-fidelity BO methods have been proposed. Despite
their success, these methods either ignore or over-simplify the strong, complex
correlations across the fidelities. While the acquisition function is therefore easy
and convenient to calculate, these methods can be inefficient in estimating the
objective function. To address this issue, we propose Deep Neural Network MultiFidelity Bayesian Optimization (DNN-MFBO) that can flexibly capture all kinds of
complicated relationships between the fidelities to improve the objective function estimation and hence the optimization performance. We use sequential, fidelity-wise
Gauss-Hermite quadrature and moment-matching to compute a mutual information
based acquisition function in a tractable and highly efficient way. We show the
advantages of our method in both synthetic benchmark datasets and real-world
applications in engineering design.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) (Mockus et al., 1978; Snoek et al., 2012) is a general and powerful
approach for optimizing black-box functions. It uses a probabilistic surrogate model (typically
Gaussian process (GP) (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006)) to estimate the objective function. By
repeatedly maximizing an acquisition function computed with the information of the surrogate model,
BO finds and queries at new input locations that are closer and closer to the optimum; meanwhile the
new training examples are incorporated into the surrogate model to improve the objective estimation.
In practice, many applications allow us to query the objective function at different fidelities, where
low fidelity queries are cheap yet inaccurate, and high fidelity queries more accurate but costly. For
example, in physical simulation (Peherstorfer et al., 2018), the computation of an objective (e.g., the
elasticity of a part or energy of a system) often involves solving partial differential equations. Running
a numerical solver with coarse meshes gives a quick yet rough result; using dense meshes substantially
improves the accuracy but dramatically increases the computational cost. The multi-fidelity queries
enable us to choose a trade-off between the cost and accuracy.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

