Cross-Scale Internal Graph Neural Network for
Image Super-Resolution

1

Shangchen Zhou1
Jiawei Zhang2
Wangmeng Zuo3
Chen Change Loy1∗
2
3
Nanyang Technological University
SenseTime Research
Harbin Institute of Technology
{s200094,ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg zhangjiawei@sensetime.com wmzuo@hit.edu.cn
https://github.com/sczhou/IGNN

Abstract
Non-local self-similarity in natural images has been well studied as an effective
prior in image restoration. However, for single image super-resolution (SISR), most
existing deep non-local methods (e.g., non-local neural networks) only exploit
similar patches within the same scale of the low-resolution (LR) input image.
Consequently, the restoration is limited to using the same-scale information while
neglecting potential high-resolution (HR) cues from other scales. In this paper,
we explore the cross-scale patch recurrence property of a natural image, i.e.,
similar patches tend to recur many times across different scales. This is achieved
using a novel cross-scale internal graph neural network (IGNN). Specifically, we
dynamically construct a cross-scale graph by searching k-nearest neighboring
patches in the downsampled LR image for each query patch in the LR image. We
then obtain the corresponding k HR neighboring patches in the LR image and
aggregate them adaptively in accordance to the edge label of the constructed graph.
In this way, the HR information can be passed from k HR neighboring patches to
the LR query patch to help it recover more detailed textures. Besides, these internal
image-specific LR/HR exemplars are also significant complements to the external
information learned from the training dataset. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of IGNN against the state-of-the-art SISR methods including
existing non-local networks on standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The goal of single image super-resolution (SISR) [9] is to recover the sharp high-resolution (HR)
counterpart from its low-resolution (LR) observation. Image SR is an ill-posed problem, since there
are multiple HR solutions for a LR input. To solve this inverse problem, many convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [6, 38, 17, 23, 43, 13, 5] have been proposed to capture useful priors by learning
mappings between LR and HR images. While immense performance has been achieved, learning
from external training data solely still falls short in recovering detailed textures for specific images,
especially when the up-scaling factor is large.
Apart from exploiting external paired data, internal image-specific information [30] has also been
widely studied in image restoration. Some classical non-local methods [2, 4, 25, 10] have shown the
values of capturing correlation among non-local self-similar patches for improving the restoration
quality. However, convolutional operations are not able to capture such patterns due to the locality
of convolutional kernels. Though the receptive fields are large in the deep networks, some longrange dependencies still cannot be well maintained. Inspired by the classical non-local means
method [2], non-local neural networks [37] are proposed to capture long-range dependencies for video
classification. Non-local neural networks are thereafter introduced to image restoration tasks [24, 44].
∗

Corresponding Author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

