Joint Policy Search for Multi-agent Collaboration
with Imperfect Information

Yuandong Tian
Facebook AI Research
yuandong@fb.com

Qucheng Gong
Facebook AI Research
qucheng@fb.com

Tina Jiang
Facebook AI Research
tinayujiang@fb.com

Abstract
To learn good joint policies for multi-agent collaboration with imperfect information remains a fundamental challenge. While for two-player zero-sum games,
coordinate-ascent approaches (optimizing one agent’s policy at a time, e.g., selfplay [35, 20]) work with guarantees, in multi-agent cooperative setting they often
converge to sub-optimal Nash equilibrium. On the other hand, directly modeling
joint policy changes in imperfect information game is nontrivial due to complicated
interplay of policies (e.g., upstream updates affect downstream state reachability).
In this paper, we show global changes of game values can be decomposed to
policy changes localized at each information set, with a novel term named policychange density. Based on this, we propose Joint Policy Search (JPS) that iteratively
improves joint policies of collaborative agents in imperfect information games,
without re-evaluating the entire game. On multi-agent collaborative tabular games,
JPS is proven to never worsen performance and can improve solutions provided by
unilateral approaches (e.g, CFR [44]), outperforming algorithms designed for collaborative policy learning (e.g. BAD [16]). Furthermore, for real-world game with
exponential states, JPS has an online form that naturally links with gradient updates.
We test it to Contract Bridge, a 4-player imperfect-information game where a team
of 2 collaborates to compete against the other. In its bidding phase, players bid
in turn to find a good contract through a limited information channel. Based on a
strong baseline agent that bids competitive Bridge purely through domain-agnostic
self-play, JPS improves collaboration of team players and outperforms WBridge5,
a championship-winning software, by +0.63 IMPs (International Matching Points)
per board over 1000 games, substantially better than previous SoTA (+0.41 IMPs/b
against WBridge5) under Double-Dummy evaluation. Note that +0.1 IMPs/b is
regarded as a nontrivial improvement in Computer Bridge. Part of the code is
released in https://github.com/facebookresearch/jps.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has demonstrated strong or even super-human performance in many
complex games (e.g., Atari [28], Dota 2 [30], Starcraft [42], Poker [5, 29], Find and Seek [1], Chess,
Go and Shogi [34, 36, 39]). While massive computational resources are used, the underlying approach
is quite simple: to iteratively improve the policy of the current agent, assuming stationary environment
and fixed policies of all other agents. Although for two-player zero-sum games this is effective, for
multi-agent collaborative with imperfect information, it often leads to sub-optimal Nash equilibria
where none of the agents is willing to change their policies unilaterally. For example, if speaking one
specific language becomes a convention, then unilaterally switching to a different one is not a good
choice, even if the other agent actually knows that language better.
In this case, it is necessary to learn to jointly change policies of multiple agents to achieve better
equilibria. One brute-force approach is to change policies of multiple agents simultaneously, and
re-evaluate them one by one on the entire game to seek for performance improvement, which is
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

