Most ReLU Networks Suffer from `2 Adversarial
Perturbations
Amit Daniely
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel and Google Research Tel-Aviv
amit.daniely@mail.huji.ac.il
Hadas Schacham
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
hadas.schacham@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
We consider ReLU networks with random weights, in which the dimension decreases at each layer. We show that for most such networks, most
x admit
 examples

kxk
√
an adversarial perturbation at an Euclidean distance of O
, where d is the
d
input dimension. Moreover, this perturbation can be found via gradient flow, as
well as gradient descent with sufficiently small steps. This result can be seen as an
explanation to the abundance of adversarial examples, and to the fact that they are
found via gradient descent.

1

Introduction

Since the seminal paper of Szegedy et al. [17], adversarial examples arose much attention in machine
learning, with various attacks (e.g. [1, 4, 5, 9, 10]) and defence methods (e.g. [12, 13, 11, 20, 7])
being developed, as well as various attempts to explain their presence (e.g. [6, 15, 16, 14, 3]). Yet, it
is still not clear why adversarial examples exist, and why they can be found via simple algorithms
such as gradient descent.
In this paper we shed new light on the source of this phenomenon, and show that for certain network
architectures, for most choices

 of weights and for most examples x, an adversarial example at a
√
Euclidean distance of Õ kxk
is guaranteed to exists. Specifically, we show that this holds if each
d
layer reduces the dimension.
Moreover, we show that gradient flow (a continuous analog of gradient descent), or gradient descent
with sufficiently small steps, is guaranteed to find these adversarial examples. This result demonstrates that unless we impose restrictions on the weights and/or the examples, we should expect the
phenomenon of adversarial examples to occur.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first result which shows existence of adversarial examples
w.r.t. the Euclidean distance for a large class of networks and distributions. Likewise, it is the first
result that shows that gradient based algorithms are guaranteed to find such perturbations.
1.1

Related Work

Several recent theoretical papers have addressed the question of why adversarial examples exist in
machine learning. Schmidt et al. [14] show that the sample complexity of training adversarially
robust classifiers might be larger than standard training, while Bubeck et al. [3] show other cases, in
which adversarially robust training is computationally harder than standard training.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

