Learning Composable Energy Surrogates
for PDE Order Reduction
Alex Beatson
Princeton University
abeatson@princeton.edu

Jordan T. Ash
Microsoft Research NYC
ash.jordan@microsoft.com

Tianju Xue
Princeton University
txue@princeton.edu

Geoffrey Roeder
Princeton University
roeder@princeton.edu

Ryan P. Adams
Princeton University
rpa@princeton.edu

Abstract
Meta-materials are an important emerging class of engineered materials in which
complex macroscopic behaviour–whether electromagnetic, thermal, or mechanical–
arises from modular substructure. Simulation and optimization of these materials
are computationally challenging, as rich substructures necessitate high-fidelity
finite element meshes to solve the governing PDEs. To address this, we leverage parametric modular structure to learn component-level surrogates, enabling
cheaper high-fidelity simulation. We use a neural network to model the stored
potential energy in a component given boundary conditions. This yields a structured prediction task: macroscopic behavior is determined by the minimizer of the
system’s total potential energy, which can be approximated by composing these
surrogate models. Composable energy surrogates thus permit simulation in the
reduced basis of component boundaries. Costly ground-truth simulation of the full
structure is avoided, as training data are generated by performing finite element
analysis of individual components. Using dataset aggregation to choose training
data allows us to learn energy surrogates which produce accurate macroscopic
behavior when composed, accelerating simulation of parametric meta-materials.

1

Introduction

Many physical, biological, and mathematical systems can be modeled by partial differential equations
(PDEs). Analytic solutions are rarely available for PDEs of practical importance; thus, computational
methods to approximate PDE solutions are critical for many problems in science and engineering.
Finite element analysis (FEA) is one of the most widely used techniques for solving PDEs on spatial
domains; the continuous problem is discretized and replaced by basis functions on a mesh.
The accuracy of FEA and related methods requires a sufficiently fine discrete approximation, i.e., finite
element mesh. Complicated domains can require fine meshes that make it prohibitively expensive
to solve the PDE. This problem is compounded for parameter identification or design optimization,
where the PDE must be repeatedly solved in the inner loop of a bi-level optimization problem.
An important domain where this challenge is particularly relevant is in modeling mechanical metamaterials. Meta-materials are solids in which microstructure leads to rich spaces of macroscopic
behavior, which can achieve electromagnetic and/or mechanical properties that are impossible with
homogenous materials and traditional design approaches (Poddubny et al., 2013; Cai and Shalaev,
2010; Bertoldi et al., 2017). We focus on the cellular mechanical meta-materials proposed by
Overvelde and Bertoldi (2014), which promise new high-performance materials for soft robotics
and other domains (see Sec 3). Simulation of these meta-materials is challenging due to the need to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

