Distributionally Robust Local Non-parametric
Conditional Estimation
Viet Anh Nguyen
Fan Zhang
José Blanchet
Stanford University, United States
{viet-anh.nguyen, fzh, jose.blanchet}@stanford.edu
Erick Delage
HEC Montréal, Canada
erick.delage@hec.ca
Yinyu Ye
Stanford University, United States
yinyu-ye@stanford.edu

Abstract
Conditional estimation given specific covariate values (i.e., local conditional estimation or functional estimation) is ubiquitously useful with applications in engineering, social and natural sciences. Existing data-driven non-parametric estimators
mostly focus on structured homogeneous data (e.g., weakly independent and stationary data), thus they are sensitive to adversarial noise and may perform poorly
under a low sample size. To alleviate these issues, we propose a new distributionally robust estimator that generates non-parametric local estimates by minimizing
the worst-case conditional expected loss over all adversarial distributions in a
Wasserstein ambiguity set. We show that despite being generally intractable, the
local estimator can be efficiently found via convex optimization under broadly
applicable settings, and it is robust to the corruption and heterogeneity of the data.
Experiments with synthetic and MNIST datasets show the competitive performance
of this new class of estimators.

1

Introduction

We consider the estimation of conditional statistics of a response variable, Y ∈ Rm , given the value
of a predictor or covariate X ∈ Rn . The single most important instance of these types of problems
involves estimating the conditional mean, or also known as the regression function. Under finite
variance assumptions, the conditional mean EP [Y |X = x0 ] is technically defined as ψ ? (x0 ) for some
measurable function ψ ? that solves the minimum mean square error problem
min EP [kY − ψ(X)k22 ],
ψ

where the minimization is taken over the space of all measurable functions from Rn to Rm . While
the optimal solution ψ ? is unique up to sets of P-measure zero, unfortunately, solving for ψ ? is
challenging because it is an infinite-dimensional optimization problem. The regression function ψ ?
can be efficiently found only under specific settings, for example, if one assumes that (X, Y ) follows
a jointly Gaussian distribution. However, these specific situations are overly restrictive in practice.
In order to bypass the infinite-dimensional challenge involved in directly computing ψ ? , we may
instead consider a family of optimization problems that are parametrized by x0 . More specifically,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

