Robust Quantization: One Model to Rule Them All
Moran Shkolnik †◦
Gil Shomron ◦

Brian Chmiel †◦

Yury Nahshan †

Ron Banner †

Alex Bronstein ◦

Uri Weiser ◦

†

◦

Habana Labs – An Intel company, Caesarea, Israel,
Department of Electrical Engineering - Technion, Haifa, Israel

{mshkolnik, bchmiel, rbanner, ynahshan}@habana.ai
gilsho@campus.technion.ac.il, bron@cs.technion.ac.il, uri.weiser@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Neural network quantization methods often involve simulating the quantization
process during training, making the trained model highly dependent on the target
bit-width and precise way quantization is performed. Robust quantization offers
an alternative approach with improved tolerance to different classes of data-types
and quantization policies. It opens up new exciting applications where the quantization process is not static and can vary to meet different circumstances and
implementations. To address this issue, we propose a method that provides intrinsic
robustness to the model against a broad range of quantization processes. Our
method is motivated by theoretical arguments and enables us to store a single
generic model capable of operating at various bit-widths and quantization policies.
We validate our method’s effectiveness on different ImageNet models. A reference
implementation accompanies the paper.

1

Introduction

Low-precision arithmetic is one of the key techniques for reducing deep neural networks computational costs and fitting larger networks into smaller devices. This technique reduces memory,
bandwidth, power consumption and also allows us to perform more operations per second, which
leads to accelerated training and inference.
Naively quantizing a floating point (FP32) model to 4 bits (INT4), or lower, usually incurs a significant
accuracy degradation. Studies have tried to mitigate this by offering different quantization methods.
These methods differ in whether they require training or not. Methods that require training (known as
quantization aware training or QAT) simulate the quantization arithmetic on the fly [Esser et al., 2019,
Zhang et al., 2018, Zhou et al., 2016], while methods that avoid training (known as post-training
quantization or PTQ) quantize the model after the training while minimizing the quantization noise
[Banner et al., 2019, Choukroun et al., 2019, Finkelstein et al., 2019, Zhao et al., 2019].
But these methods are not without disadvantages. Both create models sensitive to the precise way
quantization is done (e.g., target bit-width). Krishnamoorthi [2018] has observed that in order to
avoid accuracy degradation at inference time, it is essential to ensure that all quantization-related
artifacts are faithfully modeled at training time. Our experiments in this paper further assess this
observation. For example, when quantizing ResNet-18 [He et al., 2015] with DoReFa [Zhou et al.,
2016] to 4 bits, an error of less than 2% in the quantizer step size results in an accuracy drop of 58%.
There are many compelling practical applications where quantization-robust models are essential.
For example, we can consider the task of running a neural network on a mobile device with limited
resources. In this case, we have a delicate trade-off between accuracy and current battery life, which
can be controlled through quantization (lower bit-width => lower memory requirements => less
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

