Principal Neighbourhood Aggregation for Graph Nets

Gabriele Corso∗

Luca Cavalleri∗

University of Cambridge

University of Cambridge

InVivo AI

gc579@cam.ac.uk

lc737@cam.ac.uk

dominique@invivoai.com

Pietro Liò

Dominique Beaini

Petar Veličković

University of Cambridge

DeepMind

pietro.lio@cst.cam.ac.uk

petarv@google.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been shown to be effective models for
different predictive tasks on graph-structured data. Recent work on their expressive
power has focused on isomorphism tasks and countable feature spaces. We extend
this theoretical framework to include continuous features—which occur regularly
in real-world input domains and within the hidden layers of GNNs—and we
demonstrate the requirement for multiple aggregation functions in this context.
Accordingly, we propose Principal Neighbourhood Aggregation (PNA), a novel
architecture combining multiple aggregators with degree-scalers (which generalize
the sum aggregator). Finally, we compare the capacity of different models to
capture and exploit the graph structure via a novel benchmark containing multiple
tasks taken from classical graph theory, alongside existing benchmarks from realworld domains, all of which demonstrate the strength of our model. With this work,
we hope to steer some of the GNN research towards new aggregation methods
which we believe are essential in the search for powerful and robust models.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been an active research field for the last ten years with
significant advancements in graph representation learning [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, it is difficult to
understand the effectiveness of new GNNs due to the lack of standardized benchmarks [5] and of
theoretical frameworks for their expressive power.
In fact, most work in this domain has focused on improving the GNN architectures on a set of graph
benchmarks, without evaluating the capacity of their network to accurately characterize the graphs’
structural properties. Only recently there have been significant studies on the expressive power of
various GNN models [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. However, these have mainly focused on the isomorphism task
in domains with countable features spaces, and little work has been done on understanding their
capacity to capture and exploit the underlying properties of the graph structure.
We hypothesize that the aggregation layers of current GNNs are unable to extract enough information
from the nodes’ neighbourhoods in a single layer, which limits their expressive power and learning
abilities.
We first mathematically prove the need for multiple aggregators and propose a solution for the
uncountable multiset injectivity problem introduced by [6]. Then, we propose the concept of degreescalers as a generalization to the sum aggregation, which allow the network to amplify or attenuate
signals based on the degree of each node. Combining the above, we design the proposed Principal
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

