Detecting Hands and Recognizing
Physical Contact in the Wild

Supreeth Narasimhaswamy1 Trung Nguyen2 Minh Hoai1,2
1
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA
2
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam
{sunarasimhas, minhhoai}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We investigate a new problem of detecting hands and recognizing their physical
contact state in unconstrained conditions. This is a challenging inference task
given the need to reason beyond the local appearance of hands. The lack of
training annotations indicating which object or parts of an object the hand is
in contact with further complicates the task. We propose a novel convolutional
network based on Mask-RCNN that can jointly learn to localize hands and predict
their physical contact to address this problem. The network uses outputs from
another object detector to obtain locations of objects present in the scene. It uses
these outputs and hand locations to recognize the hand’s contact state using two
attention mechanisms. The first attention mechanism is based on the hand and
a region’s affinity, enclosing the hand and the object, and densely pools features
from this region to the hand region. The second attention module adaptively selects
salient features from this plausible region of contact. To develop and evaluate our
method’s performance, we introduce a large-scale dataset called ContactHands,
containing unconstrained images annotated with hand locations and contact states.
The proposed network, including the parameters of attention modules, is end-toend trainable. This network achieves approximately 7% relative improvement
over a baseline network that was built on the vanilla Mask-RCNN architecture
and trained for recognizing hand contact states. Code and data are available at:
https://github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/ContactHands.

1

Introduction

The objective of this work is to detect hands in images and recognize their physical contact state. By
physical contact state, we mean to recognize the following four conditions for each hand instance,
namely (1) No-Contact: the hand is not in contact with any object in the scene; (2) Self-Contact: the
hand is in contact with another body part of the same person; (3) Other-Person-Contact: the hand is in
contact with another person; and (4) Object-Contact: the hand is holding or touching an object other
than people. These conditions are not mutually exclusive, and a hand can be in multiple states; for
example, a hand can contact another person and, at the same time, hold an object. Detecting hands
and recognizing their physical contact is an important problem with many potential applications,
including harassment detection, contamination prevention, and activity recognition.
However, recognizing the contact state of a hand in unconstrained conditions is challenging because
the hand’s appearance alone is insufficient to estimate its contact state. This task also requires us to
consider the relationships between the hand and other objects in the scene. This can be a complex
inference problem for many real-world situations, especially where numerous people and objects
surround the hand. Furthermore, even for a pair of hand and object with corresponding segmentation
masks, it is not easy to recognize whether the hand is in contact with the object due to the lack of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

