Field-wise Learning for Multi-field Categorical Data
Zhibin Li1 , Jian Zhang1 , Yongshun Gong1 , Yazhou Yao2 , and Qiang Wu1
2

1
University of Technology Sydney
Nanjing University of Science and Technology

zhibin.li@student.uts.edu.au, jian.zhang@uts.edu.au,
yongshun.gong@student.uts.edu.au, yazhou.yao@njust.edu.cn, qiang.wu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a new method for learning with multi-field categorical data. Multi-field
categorical data are usually collected over many heterogeneous groups. These
groups can reflect in the categories under a field. The existing methods try to learn
a universal model that fits all data, which is challenging and inevitably results in
learning a complex model. In contrast, we propose a field-wise learning method
leveraging the natural structure of data to learn simple yet efficient one-to-one
field-focused models with appropriate constraints. In doing this, the models can
be fitted to each category and thus can better capture the underlying differences
in data. We present a model that utilizes linear models with variance and lowrank constraints, to help it generalize better and reduce the number of parameters.
The model is also interpretable in a field-wise manner. As the dimensionality of
multi-field categorical data can be very high, the models applied to such data are
mostly over-parameterized. Our theoretical analysis can potentially explain the
effect of over-parametrization on the generalization of our model. It also supports
the variance constraints in the learning objective. The experiment results on two
large-scale datasets show the superior performance of our model, the trend of the
generalization error bound, and the interpretability of learning outcomes. Our code
is available at https://github.com/lzb5600/Field-wise-Learning.

1

Introduction

There are many machine learning tasks involving multi-field categorical data, including advertisement
click prediction [1], recommender system [2] and web search [3]. An example of such data is
presented in Table 1. Gender, Country, Product, and Publisher are four fields. Male and Female are
two categorical features/categories under field Gender. Such data are usually converted to binary
vectors through one-hot encoding and then fed into downstream machine learning models.
The scale of modern datasets has become unprecedentedly large. For multi-field categorical datasets,
more samples will normally involve more categorical features. More categorical features in the dataset
indicates more heterogeneity and higher dimensionality of feature vectors. To date, most effort on
learning with multi-field categorical data has been put on learning a universal model [4–7], despite
the fact that those data are often collected over many heterogeneous groups. Learning a universal
model that fits all the heterogeneous samples will be a challenging task and usually requires complex
models. To address this issue, we propose a field-wise learning method for multi-field categorical
data, which leverages the natural structure of categorical data to form one-to-one field-focused models.
Specifically, the models will be correlatively learned from different categories for the same field.
Such an approach is called field-wise learning. In this paper, we make use of linear models as the
basic field-wise models and constrain the variances and rank of corresponding weight matrices in
a field-wise way. This helps promote the generalization ability and reduce the model parameters,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

