Gaussian Gated Linear Networks
David Budden∗ Adam H. Marblestone∗ Eren Sezener∗
Tor Lattimore Greg Wayne† Joel Veness†
DeepMind
aixi@google.com

Abstract
We propose the Gaussian Gated Linear Network (G-GLN), an extension to the
recently proposed GLN family of deep neural networks. Instead of using backpropagation to learn features, GLNs have a distributed and local credit assignment
mechanism based on optimizing a convex objective. This gives rise to many
desirable properties including universality, data-efficient online learning, trivial
interpretability and robustness to catastrophic forgetting. We extend the GLN
framework from classification to multiple regression and density modelling by
generalizing geometric mixing to a product of Gaussian densities. The G-GLN
achieves competitive or state-of-the-art performance on several univariate and multivariate regression benchmarks, and we demonstrate its applicability to practical
tasks including online contextual bandits and density estimation via denoising.

1

Introduction

Recent studies have demonstrated that backpropagation-free deep learning, particularly the Gated
Linear Network (GLN) family [1, 2, 3], can yield surprisingly powerful models for solving classification tasks. This is particularly true in the online regime where data efficiency is paramount. In this
paper we extend GLNs to model real-valued and multi-dimensional data, and demonstrate that their
theoretical and empirical advantages apply to far broader domains than previously anticipated.
The distinguishing feature of a GLN is distributed and local credit assignment. A GLN associates a
separate convex loss to each neuron such that all neurons (1) predict the target distribution directly,
and (2) are optimized locally using online gradient descent. A half-space “context function” is applied
per neuron to select which weights to apply as a function of the input features, allowing the GLN to
learn highly nonlinear functions. This architecture gives rise to many desirable properties previously
shown in a classification setting: (1) trivial interpretability given its piecewise linear structure, (2)
exceptional robustness to catastrophic forgetting, and (3) provably universal learning; a sufficiently
large GLN can model any well-behaved, compactly supported density function to any accuracy, and
any no-regret convex optimization method will converge to the correct solution given enough data.
Related Work. We extend the previous Bernoulli GLN (B-GLN) formulation to model multivariate,
real-valued data by reformulating the GLN neuron as a gated product of Gaussians. This Gaussian
Gated Linear Network (G-GLN) formulation exploits the fact that exponential family densities are
closed under multiplication [4], a property that has seen much use in Gaussian Process and related
literature [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Similar to the B-GLN, every neuron in our G-GLN directly predicts the target
distribution. This idea is shared with work in supervised learning where targets are predicted from
intermediate layers. The motivations for local, layer-specific training include improving gradient
propagation and representation learning [10, 11, 12, 13], decoding for representation analysis [14] and
making neural networks more biologically plausible [15, 16, 17] by avoiding backpropagation. The
use of context-dependent weight selection (gating) in the GLN algorithm family resembles proposals
to improve the continual and multi-task learning properties of deep networks [18, 19, 20, 21, 22] by
using a conditioning network to gate a principal network solving the task.
∗†

Equal contributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

