Robust Sub-Gaussian Principal Component Analysis
and Width-Independent Schatten Packing

Arun Jambulapati
Stanford University
jmblpati@stanford.edu

Jerry Li
Microsoft Research
jerrl@microsoft.com

Kevin Tian
Stanford University
kjtian@stanford.edu

Abstract
We develop two methods for the following fundamental statistical task: given
an -corrupted set of n samples from a d-dimensional sub-Gaussian distribution,
return an approximate top eigenvector of the covariance matrix. Our first robust
PCA algorithm runs in polynomial time, returns a 1 − O( log −1 )-approximate
top eigenvector, and is based on a simple iterative filtering approach. Our second, which attains a slightly worse approximation factor, runs in nearly-linear
time and sample complexity under a mild spectral gap assumption. These are
the first polynomial-time algorithms yielding non-trivial information about the
covariance of a corrupted sub-Gaussian distribution without requiring additional
algebraic structure of moments. As a key technical tool, we develop the first widthindependent solvers for Schatten-p norm packing semidefinite programs, giving
−1
a (1 + )-approximate solution in O(p log( nd
) input-sparsity time iterations
 )
(where n, d are problem dimensions).

1

Introduction

We study two natural, but seemingly unrelated, problems in high dimensional robust statistics and
continuous optimization respectively. As we will see, these problems have an intimate connection.
Problem 1: Robust sub-Gaussian principal component analysis. We consider the following
statistical task, which we call robust sub-Gaussian principal component analysis (PCA). Given
samples X1 , . . . , Xn from sub-Gaussian1 distribution D with covariance Σ, an  fraction of which
are arbitrarily corrupted, the task asks to output unit vector u with u> Σu ≥ (1 − γ) kΣk∞ 2 for
tolerance γ. Ergo, the goal is to robustly return a (1 − γ)-approximate top eigenvector of the
covariance of sub-Gaussian D. This is the natural extension of PCA to the robust statistics setting.
There has been a flurry of recent work on efficient algorithms for robust statistical tasks, e.g. covariance estimation and PCA. From an information-theoretic perspective, sub-Gaussian concentration
suffices for robust covariance estimation. Nonetheless, to date all polynomial-time algorithms achieving nontrivial guarantees on covariance estimation (including PCA specifically) in the presence
of adversarial noise require additional algebraic structure. For instance, sum-of-squares certifiably bounded moments have been leveraged in polynomial time covariance estimation algorithms
[HL18, KSS18]; however, this is a stronger assumption than sub-Gaussianity.
In many applications (see discussion in [DKK+ 17]), the end goal of covariance estimation is PCA.
Thus, a natural question which relaxes robust covariance estimation is: can we robustly estimate the
top eigenvector of the covariance Σ, assuming only sub-Gaussian concentration? Our work answers
this question affirmatively via two incomparable algorithms. The first achieves γ = O( log −1 ) in
1
2

See Section 2 for a formal definition.
Throughout we use kMkp to denote the Schatten p-norm (cf. Section 2 for more details).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

