A Closer Look at the Training Strategy for Modern
Meta-Learning
Jiaxin Chen1 , Xiao-Ming Wu1,∗, Yanke Li2 , Qimai Li1 , Li-Ming Zhan1 , and Fu-lai Chung1,∗
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich
{jiax.chen, qee-mai.li, lmzhan.zhan}@connect.polyu.hk, {xiao-ming.wu,
korris.chung}@polyu.edu.hk, yankli@student.ethz.ch

Abstract
The support/query (S/Q) episodic training strategy has been widely used in modern
meta-learning algorithms and is believed to improve their generalization ability to
test environments. This paper conducts a theoretical investigation of this training
strategy on generalization. From a stability perspective, we analyze the generalization error bound of generic meta-learning algorithms trained with such strategy.
We show that the S/Q episodic √
training strategy naturally leads to a counterintuitive
generalization bound of O(1/ n), which only depends on the task number n
but independent of the inner-task sample size m. Under
the common assumption
√
m << n for few-shot learning, the bound of O(1/ n) implies strong generalization guarantees for modern meta-learning algorithms in the few-shot regime. To
further explore the influence of training strategies on generalization, we propose a
leave-one-out (LOO) training strategy for meta-learning and compare it with S/Q
training. Experiments on standard few-shot regression and classification tasks with
popular meta-learning algorithms validate our analysis.

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning [16] is a highly challenging problem due to the scarcity of training samples.
Meta-learning [3, 32] provides promising solutions for this problem and has attracted a surge of
interest recently. A meta-learning algorithm (meta-algorithm) trains over a large number of i.i.d.
tasks sampled from a task distribution and learns an algorithm (inner-task algorithm) that can quickly
adapt to a future task with few training data.
Early meta-algorithms directly minimize the averaged training error of a set of training tasks. To
improve the generalization of meta-algorithms, the pioneering work of [35] proposes a novel training
strategy – support/query episodic training strategy. In particular, episodic training treats each task
as a training instance and updates the inner-task algorithm by episode (task by task). Support/query
(S/Q) training mimics the test process in each task, i.e., a training set (support) for inner-task training
and a test set (query) for measuring the inner-task algorithm’s performance. Meta-training proceeds
by minimizing the error computed over the query set. This training strategy has been widely used to
train modern meta-algorithms such as MAML [18] and ProtoNet [31].
Although it is widely believed that the S/Q training strategy can improve the generalization of metaalgorithms due to the match of training condition and test condition, there is barely any theoretical
analysis of how it impacts generalization. Our key observation is that the generalization bound of
meta-algorithms is closely related to the training strategy. The S/Q training strategy leads to a bound
∗

Corresponding authors.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

