Stable and expressive recurrent vision models

Drew Linsley∗ , Alekh K Ashok∗ , Lakshmi N Govindarajan∗ , Rex Liu, Thomas Serre
Carney Institute for Brain Science
Department of Cognitive Linguistic & Psychological Sciences
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
{drew_linsley,alekh_ashok,lakshmi_govindarajan,
rex_liu,thomas_serre}@brown.edu

Abstract
Primate vision depends on recurrent processing for reliable perception [1–3]. A
growing body of literature also suggests that recurrent connections improve the
learning efficiency and generalization of vision models on classic computer vision
challenges. Why then, are current large-scale challenges dominated by feedforward
networks? We posit that the effectiveness of recurrent vision models is bottlenecked
by the standard algorithm used for training them, “back-propagation through time”
(BPTT), which has O(N ) memory-complexity for training an N step model. Thus,
recurrent vision model design is bounded by memory constraints, forcing a choice
between rivaling the enormous capacity of leading feedforward models or trying to
compensate for this deficit through granular and complex dynamics. Here, we develop a new learning algorithm, “contractor recurrent back-propagation” (C-RBP),
which alleviates these issues by achieving constant O(1) memory-complexity with
steps of recurrent processing. We demonstrate that recurrent vision models trained
with C-RBP can detect long-range spatial dependencies in a synthetic contour
tracing task that BPTT-trained models cannot. We further show that recurrent
vision models trained with C-RBP to solve the large-scale Panoptic Segmentation
MS-COCO challenge outperform the leading feedforward approach, with fewer
free parameters. C-RBP is a general-purpose learning algorithm for any application
that can benefit from expansive recurrent dynamics. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/c-rbp.

1

Introduction

Ullman (1984) famously theorized that humans reason about the visual world by composing sequences
of elemental computations into “visual routines” [2]. It has been found that many of these visual
routines, from perceptual grouping [4] to object categorization [5], depend on local and long-range
recurrent circuits of the visual cortex [1, 3, 6]. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with recurrent
connections – recurrent CNNs – also seem to learn visual routines that standard feedforward CNNs
do not [7–14]. For example, consider the Pathfinder challenge in Fig. 1a, which asks observers to
trace the contour extending from the white dot. Although Pathfinder is visually simple, clutter and
variations in path shape make it difficult for feedforward CNNs to solve, even very deep residual
networks [7,8]. By contrast, a one-layer recurrent CNN can learn to solve Pathfinder by incrementally
grouping paths from one end to the other, reminiscent of Gestalt-like visual routines used by human
observers [7, 8, 15]. Others have found that the visual routines learned by recurrent CNNs on small
computer vision datasets lead to better sample efficiency and out-of-distribution generalization than
feedforward CNNs [6, 16, 17]. There is also evidence that primate visual decisions and neural
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

