Deep Evidential Regression

Alexander Amini1 , Wilko Schwarting1 , Ava Soleimany2 , Daniela Rus1
1
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab (CSAIL),
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
2
Harvard Graduate Program in Biophysics

Abstract
Deterministic neural networks (NNs) are increasingly being deployed in safety
critical domains, where calibrated, robust, and efficient measures of uncertainty
are crucial. In this paper, we propose a novel method for training non-Bayesian
NNs to estimate a continuous target as well as its associated evidence in order
to learn both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. We accomplish this by placing
evidential priors over the original Gaussian likelihood function and training the
NN to infer the hyperparameters of the evidential distribution. We additionally
impose priors during training such that the model is regularized when its predicted
evidence is not aligned with the correct output. Our method does not rely on
sampling during inference or on out-of-distribution (OOD) examples for training,
thus enabling efficient and scalable uncertainty learning. We demonstrate learning
well-calibrated measures of uncertainty on various benchmarks, scaling to complex
computer vision tasks, as well as robustness to adversarial and OOD test samples.

1

Introduction

Regression-based neural networks (NNs) are being
deployed in safety critical domains in computer vision [15] as well as in robotics and control [1, 6],
where the ability to infer model uncertainty is crucial
for eventual wide-scale adoption. Furthermore, precise and calibrated uncertainty estimates are useful
for interpreting confidence, capturing domain shift
of out-of-distribution (OOD) test samples, and recognizing when the model is likely to fail.

Evidential Prior

Target,
Data,
• Images
• Timeseries
• Feature Vector

Aleatoric

There are two axes of NN uncertainty that can be
Epistemic
Neural Network
modeled: (1) uncertainty in the data, called aleatoric
uncertainty, and (2) uncertainty in the prediction, Figure 1: Evidential regression simultaneously
called epistemic uncertainty. While representations learns a continuous target along with aleatoric
of aleatoric uncertainty can be learned directly from (data) and epistemic (model) uncertainty. Given an
data, there exist several approaches for estimating input, the network is trained to predict the parameepistemic uncertainty, such as Bayesian NNs, which ters of an evidential distribution, which models a
place probabilistic priors over network weights and higher-order probability distribution2 over the indiuse sampling to approximate output variance [25]. vidual likelihood parameters, (µ, σ ).
However, Bayesian NNs face several limitations, including the intractability of directly inferring
the posterior distribution of the weights given data, the requirement and computational expense of
sampling during inference, and the question of how to choose a weight prior.
In contrast, evidential deep learning formulates learning as an evidence acquisition process [42, 32].
Every training example adds support to a learned higher-order, evidential distribution. Sampling
from this distribution yields instances of lower-order likelihood functions from which the data
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

