Directional Pruning of Deep Neural Networks
Shih–Kang Chao⇤
Department of Statistics
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
chaosh@missouri.edu

Zhanyu Wang
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
wang4094@purdue.edu

Yue Xing
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
xing49@purdue.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
chengg@purdue.edu

Abstract
In the light of the fact that the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) often finds a
flat minimum valley in the training loss, we propose a novel directional pruning
method which searches for a sparse minimizer in or close to that flat region. The
proposed pruning method does not require retraining or the expert knowledge on
the sparsity level. To overcome the computational formidability of estimating the
flat directions, we propose to use a carefully tuned `1 proximal gradient algorithm
which can provably achieve the directional pruning with a small learning rate after
sufficient training. The empirical results demonstrate the promising results of our
solution in highly sparse regime (92% sparsity) among many existing pruning
methods on the ResNet50 with the ImageNet, while using only a slightly higher
wall time and memory footprint than the SGD. Using the VGG16 and the wide
ResNet 28x10 on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we demonstrate that our solution
reaches the same minima valley as the SGD, and the minima found by our solution
and the SGD do not deviate in directions that impact the training loss. The code
that reproduces the results of this paper is available at https://github.com/
donlan2710/gRDA-Optimizer/tree/master/directional_pruning.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs), after properly trained, provide the state-of-the-art performance in
various domains. Overparameterization is a common practice in modern deep learning, which
facilitates better expressive power and faster convergence. On the other hand, overparameterization
makes DNN exceedingly large, especially for large-scale tasks. For example, the ImageNet [10, 52]
may need billions of parameters [4] to become sufficiently overparameterized. As the number of
parameters in DNN is growing fast, the cost to deploy and process large DNNs can be prohibitive on
devices with low memory/processing resources or with strict latency requirements, such as mobile
phones, augmented reality devices and autonomous cars. Many achievements have been made in
shrinking the DNN while maintaining accuracy, and the MIT Technological Review lists the “tiny AI”
as one of the breakthroughs in 2020 [1].
Among many methods for shrinking DNN, sparse DNN has attracted much attention. Here, sparsity
refers to the situation that most model parameters are zero in a DNN. Sparse DNN not only requires
⇤

Corresponding author.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

