Adaptive Discretization for Model-Based
Reinforcement Learning

Sean R. Sinclair
Cornell University
srs429@cornell.edu
Gauri Jain
Cornell University
gauri.g.jain@gmail.com

Tianyu Wang
Duke University
tianyu@cs.duke.edu

Siddhartha Banerjee
Cornell University
sbanerjee@cornell.edu

Christina Lee Yu
Cornell University
cleeyu@cornell.edu

Abstract
We introduce the technique of adaptive discretization to design an efficient modelbased episodic reinforcement learning algorithm in large (potentially continuous)
state-action spaces. Our algorithm is based on optimistic one-step value iteration
extended to maintain an adaptive discretization of the space. From a theoretical
perspective we provide worst-case regret bounds for our algorithm which are
competitive compared to the state-of-the-art model-based algorithms. Moreover,
our bounds are obtained via a modular proof technique which can potentially
extend to incorporate additional structure on the problem.
From an implementation standpoint, our algorithm has much lower storage and
computational requirements due to maintaining a more efficient partition of the state
and action spaces. We illustrate this via experiments on several canonical control
problems, which shows that our algorithm empirically performs significantly better
than fixed discretization in terms of both faster convergence and lower memory
usage. Interestingly, we observe empirically that while fixed discretization modelbased algorithms vastly outperform their model-free counterparts, the two achieve
comparable performance with adaptive discretization. 1

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a paradigm modeling an agent’s interactions with an unknown
environment with the goal of maximizing their cumulative reward throughout the trajectory [43]. In
online settings the dynamics of the system are unknown and the agent must learn the optimal policy
only through interacting with the environment. This requires the agent to navigate the exploration
exploitation trade-off, between exploring unseen parts of the system and exploiting historical highreward decisions. Most algorithms for learning the optimal policy in these online settings can be
classified as either model-free or model-based. Model-free algorithms construct estimates for the
Q-function of the optimal policy, the expected sum of rewards obtained from playing a specific action
and following the optimal policy thereafter, and create upper-confidence bounds on this quantity
[38, 16]. In contrast, model-based algorithms instead estimate unknown system parameters, namely
the average reward function and the dynamics of the system, and use this to learn the optimal policy
based on full or one-step planning [5, 13].
1

The code for the experiments are available at https://github.com/seanrsinclair/
AdaptiveQLearning. A full report is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.00717.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

