Optimal Query Complexity of Secure Stochastic
Convex Optimization
Wei Tang† , Chien-Ju Ho† , and Yang Liu⇤
Washington University in St. Louis, ⇤ UC Santa Cruz
{w.tang, chienju.ho}@wustl.edu, yangliu@ucsc.edu
†

Abstract
We study the secure stochastic convex optimization problem. A learner aims
to learn the optimal point of a convex function through sequentially querying a
(stochastic) gradient oracle. In the meantime, there exists an adversary who aims to
free-ride and infer the learning outcome of the learner from observing the learner’s
queries. The adversary observes only the points of the queries but not the feedback
from the oracle. The goal of the learner is to optimize the accuracy, i.e., obtaining
an accurate estimate of the optimal point, while securing her privacy, i.e., making
it difficult for the adversary to infer the optimal point. We formally quantify this
tradeoff between learner’s accuracy and privacy and characterize the lower and
upper bounds on the learner’s query complexity as a function of desired levels
of accuracy and privacy. For the analysis of lower bounds, we provide a general
template based on information theoretical analysis and then tailor the template to
several families of problems, including stochastic convex optimization and (noisy)
binary search. We also present a generic secure learning protocol that achieves the
matching upper bound up to logarithmic factors.

1

Introduction

Optimization, that seeks to find the optimal point of a function, is an important tool in various
domains, including decision making and machine learning. Modern optimization techniques, such
as gradient descent, often run in an iterative manner: the learner adaptively queries a (noisy) oracle,
obtains the information about the function (e.g., gradient) at the query point, and updates the estimate
of the optimal point. While such iterative techniques have been well studied and shown to be efficient,
the iterative nature introduces potential risks of information leak. A spying adversary, who can
observe the series of query points the learner sends to the oracle but not the oracle responses, may
free-ride and infer the optimal point from the queries alone.
For example, consider a company aiming to find the optimal price for a new product. The company
might hire market research firm that performs dynamic pricing on a test population. Assume the
market research firm is adopting an optimization algorithm that increases the price if the sale happens
and decreases the price otherwise. An adversary (e.g., a competing company), who knows the
algorithm and can observe the price changes (e.g., by entering the test population), may infer and
estimate the optimal price before the product launch even without knowing whether the transaction
happens or not during market research. As another example, in federated learning, the learner might
aim to optimize the parameters of their learning models using gradient decent. Since data might be
distributed, the learner needs to sequentially broadcast their models to data-holding users in order
to obtain the gradient information. An adversary can pretend to be data-holding user to receive the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

