Boundary thickness and robustness
in learning models
Yaoqing Yang, Rajiv Khanna, Yaodong Yu, Amir Gholami,
Kurt Keutzer, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Kannan Ramchandran, Michael W. Mahoney
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
{yqyang, rajivak, yaodong_yu, amirgh, keutzer, jegonzal, kannanr,
mahoneymw}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Robustness of machine learning models to various adversarial and non-adversarial
corruptions continues to be of interest. In this paper, we introduce the notion of
the boundary thickness of a classifier, and we describe its connection with and
usefulness for model robustness. Thick decision boundaries lead to improved
performance, while thin decision boundaries lead to overfitting (e.g., measured by
the robust generalization gap between training and testing) and lower robustness.
We show that a thicker boundary helps improve robustness against adversarial
examples (e.g., improving the robust test accuracy of adversarial training) as
well as so-called out-of-distribution (OOD) transforms, and we show that many
commonly-used regularization and data augmentation procedures can increase
boundary thickness. On the theoretical side, we establish that maximizing boundary
thickness during training is akin to the so-called mixup training. Using these
observations, we show that noise-augmentation on mixup training further increases
boundary thickness, thereby combating vulnerability to various forms of adversarial
attacks and OOD transforms. We can also show that the performance improvement
in several lines of recent work happens in conjunction with a thicker boundary.

1

Introduction

Recent work has re-highlighted the importance of various forms of robustness of machine learning
models. For example, it is by now well known that by modifying natural images with barely-visible
perturbations, one can get neural networks to misclassify images [1–4]. Researchers have come to
call these slightly-but-adversarially perturbed images adversarial examples. As another example, it
has become well-known that, even aside from such worst-case adversarial examples, neural networks
are also vulnerable to so-called out-of-distribution (OOD) transforms [5], i.e., those which contain
common corruptions and perturbations that are frequently encountered in natural images. These
topics have received interest because they provide visually-compelling examples that expose an
inherent lack of stability/robustness in these already hard-to-interpret models [6–12], but of course
similar concerns arise in other less visually-compelling situations.
In this paper, we study neural network robustness through the lens of what we will call boundary
thickness, a new and intuitive concept that we introduce. Boundary thickness can be considered a
generalization of the standard margin, used in max-margin type learning [13–15]. Intuitively speaking,
the boundary thickness of a classifier measures the expected distance to travel along line segments
between different classes across a decision boundary. We show that thick decision boundaries have
a regularization effect that improves robustness, while thin decision boundaries lead to overfitting
and reduced robustness. We also illustrate that the performance improvement in several lines of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

