Quantile Propagation for
Wasserstein-Approximate Gaussian Processes
Rui Zhang1,2 , Christian J. Walder1,2 , Edwin V. Bonilla2,4 , Marian-Andrei Rizoiu2,3 , and Lexing Xie1,2
1

The Australian National University
2
CSIRO’s Data61, Australia
3
University of Technology Sydney
4
The University of Sydney
{rui.zhang, lexing.xie}@anu.edu.au, {christian.walder, edwin.bonilla}@data61.csiro.au
marian-andrei.rizoiu@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Approximate inference techniques are the cornerstone of probabilistic methods
based on Gaussian process priors. Despite this, most work approximately optimizes
standard divergence measures such as the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which
lack the basic desiderata for the task at hand, while chiefly offering merely technical
convenience. We develop a new approximate inference method for Gaussian
process models which overcomes the technical challenges arising from abandoning
these convenient divergences. Our method—dubbed Quantile Propagation (QP)—is
similar to expectation propagation (EP) but minimizes the L2 Wasserstein distance
(WD) instead of the KL divergence. The WD exhibits all the required properties
of a distance metric, while respecting the geometry of the underlying sample
space. We show that QP matches quantile functions rather than moments as in
EP and has the same mean update but a smaller variance update than EP, thereby
alleviating EP’s tendency to over-estimate posterior variances. Crucially, despite
the significant complexity of dealing with the WD, QP has the same favorable
locality property as EP, and thereby admits an efficient algorithm. Experiments
on classification and Poisson regression show that QP outperforms both EP and
variational Bayes.

1

Introduction

Gaussian process (GP) models have attracted the attention of the machine learning community due to
their flexibility and their capacity to measure uncertainty. They have been widely applied to learning
tasks such as regression [32], classification [57, 21] and stochastic point process modeling [38, 62].
However, exact Bayesian inference for GP models is intractable for all but the Gaussian likelihood
function. To address this issue, various approximate Bayesian inference methods have been proposed,
such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo [MCMC, see e.g. 41], the Laplace approximation [57], variational
inference [26, 42] and expectation propagation [43, 37].
The existing approach most relevant to this work is expectation propagation (EP), which approximates
each non-Gaussian likelihood term with a Gaussian by iteratively minimizing a set of local forward
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergences. As shown by Gelman et al. [17], EP can scale to very large
datasets. However, EP is not guaranteed to converge, and is known to over-estimate posterior
variances [34, 27, 20] when approximating a short-tailed distribution. By over-estimation, we mean
that the approximate variances are larger than the true variances so that more distribution mass lies
in the ineffective domain. Interestingly, many popular likelihoods for GPs results in short-tailed
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

