On the Equivalence between Online and Private
Learnability beyond Binary Classification

Young Hun Jung∗
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
yhjung@umich.edu

Baekjin Kim∗
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
baekjin@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
Alon et al. [4] and Bun et al. [10] recently showed that online learnability and
private PAC learnability are equivalent in binary classification. We investigate
whether this equivalence extends to multi-class classification and regression. First,
we show that private learnability implies online learnability in both settings. Our
extension involves studying a novel variant of the Littlestone dimension that depends on a tolerance parameter and on an appropriate generalization of the concept
of threshold functions beyond binary classification. Second, we show that while
online learnability continues to imply private learnability in multi-class classification, current proof techniques encounter significant hurdles in the regression
setting. While the equivalence for regression remains open, we provide non-trivial
sufficient conditions for an online learnable class to also be privately learnable.

1

Introduction

Online learning and differentially-private (DP) learning have been well-studied in the machine
learning literature. While these two subjects are seemingly unrelated, recent papers have revealed a
strong connection between online and private learnability via the notion of stability [2, 3, 17]. The
notion of differential privacy is, at its core, less about privacy and more about algorithmic stability
since the output distribution of a DP algorithm should be robust to small changes in the input. Stability
also plays a key role in developing online learning algorithms such as follow-the-perturbed-leader
(FTPL) and follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) [1].
Recently Alon et al. [4] and Bun et al. [10] showed that online learnability and private PAC learnability
are equivalent in binary classification. Alon et al. [4] showed that private PAC learnability implies
finite Littlestone dimension (Ldim) in two steps; (i) every approximately DP learner for a class with
Ldim d requires Ω(log∗ d) thresholds (see Section 2.4 for the definition of log∗ ), and (ii) the class of
thresholds over N cannot be learned in a private manner. Bun et al. [10] proved the converse statement
via a notion of algorithmic stability, called global stability. They showed (i) every class with finite
Ldim can be learned by a globally-stable learning algorithm and (ii) they use global stability to
derive a DP algorithm. In this work, we investigate whether this equivalence extends to multi-class
classification (MC) and regression, which is one of open questions raised by Bun et al. [10].
In general, online learning and private learning for MC and regression have been less studied. In
binary classification without considering privacy, the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension (VCdim) of
hypothesis classes yields tight sample complexity bounds in the batch learning setting, and Littlestone
[20] defined Ldim as a combinatorial parameter that was later shown to fully characterize hypothesis
classes that are learnable in the online setting [8]. Until recently, however, it was unknown what
∗

Equal Contribution

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

