Riemannian Continuous Normalizing Flows

Emile Mathieu†∗, Maximilian Nickel‡
emile.mathieu@stats.ox.ac.uk, maxn@fb.com
† Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
‡ Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research, New York, USA

Abstract
Normalizing flows have shown great promise for modelling flexible probability
distributions in a computationally tractable way. However, whilst data is often
naturally described on Riemannian manifolds such as spheres, tori, and hyperbolic
spaces, most normalizing flows implicitly assume a flat geometry, making them
either misspecified or ill-suited in these situations. To overcome this problem, we
introduce Riemannian continuous normalizing flows, a model which admits the
parametrization of flexible probability measures on smooth manifolds by defining
flows as the solution to ordinary differential equations. We show that this approach
can lead to substantial improvements on both synthetic and real-world data when
compared to standard flows or previously introduced projected flows.

1

Introduction

Learning well-specified probabilistic models is at the heart of
many problems in machine learning and statistics. Much focus
has therefore been placed on developing methods for modelling
and inferring expressive probability distributions. Normalizing
flows (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015) have shown great promise
for this task as they provide a general and extensible framework
for modelling highly complex and multimodal distributions (Papamakarios et al., 2019).
An orthogonal but equally important aspect of well-specified
models is to correctly characterize the geometry which describes
the proximity of data points. Riemannian manifolds provide a
general framework for this purpose and are a natural approach to
model tasks in many scientific fields ranging from earth and cli- Figure 1: Trajectories generated on
mate science to biology and computer vision. For instance, storm the sphere to model volcano eruptrajectories may be modelled as paths on the sphere (Karpatne tions. Note that these converge to
et al., 2019), the shape of proteins can be parametrized using tori the known Ring of Fire.
(Hamelryck et al., 2006), cell developmental processes can be
described through paths in hyperbolic space (Klimovskaia et al., 2020), and human actions can be
recognized in video using matrix manifolds (Lui, 2012). If appropriately chosen, manifold-informed
methods can lead to improved sample complexity and generalization, improved fit in the low parameter regime, and guide inference methods to interpretable models. They can also be understood as a
geometric prior that encodes a practitioner’s assumption about the data and imposes an inductive bias.
However, conventional normalizing flows are not readily applicable to such manifold-valued data
since their implicit Euclidean assumption makes them unaware of the underlying geometry or borders
of the manifold. As a result they would yield distributions having some or all of their mass lying
∗

Work done while at Facebook AI research.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

