Assessing SATNet’s Ability to Solve the
Symbol Grounding Problem

Oscar Chang, Lampros Flokas, Hod Lipson
Data Science Institute
Columbia University
{oscar.chang,lampros.flokas,hod.lipson}@columbia.edu
Michael Spranger
Sony AI
michael.spranger@sony.com

Abstract
SATNet is an award-winning MAXSAT solver that can be used to infer logical
rules and integrated as a differentiable layer in a deep neural network [1]. It
had been shown to solve Sudoku puzzles visually from examples of puzzle digit
images, and was heralded as an impressive achievement towards the longstanding
AI goal of combining pattern recognition with logical reasoning. In this paper, we
clarify SATNet’s capabilities by showing that in the absence of intermediate labels
that identify individual Sudoku digit images with their logical representations,
SATNet completely fails at visual Sudoku (0% test accuracy). More generally, the
failure can be pinpointed to its inability to learn to assign symbols to perceptual
phenomena, also known as the symbol grounding problem [2], which has long
been thought to be a prerequisite for intelligent agents to perform real-world logical
reasoning. We propose an MNIST based test as an easy instance of the symbol
grounding problem that can serve as a sanity check for differentiable symbolic
solvers in general. Naive applications of SATNet on this test lead to performance
worse than that of models without logical reasoning capabilities. We report on the
causes of SATNet’s failure and how to prevent them.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems have become increasingly capable at a wide range of tasks, with neural
network based models outperforming humans at tasks like object recognition [3], speech recognition
[4, 5], the game of Go [6, 7], Atari videogames [8, 9], and more. Nonetheless, the success of deep
learning comes with significant caveats: neural networks require immense amounts of labeled data
for training, can be easily tricked by tiny input perturbations or spurious correlations, and succumb to
brittle generalization when tested on data that deviate ever so modestly from the training distribution.
Critics point to these caveats as evidence that deep learning, in its current incarnation, is really just
performing a sophisticated type of pattern matching, the likes of which can only ever constitute
intelligence in narrow, circumscribed domains [10, 11].
By comparison, human intelligence can be applied more generally. This has been argued to be a result
of two distinct modes of cognition: System 1 and System 2 [12, 13]. System 1 happens quickly and
without conscious effort, for example comparing the size of objects or locating the general source of
a sound. On the other hand, System 2 involves slow and deliberate attention, for example solving for
a complicated arithmetic equation or checking that an argument is logical. Current machine learning
systems have been likened to System 1 [14], because System 1 mostly involves the use of associative
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

