The MAGICAL Benchmark for Robust Imitation
Sam Toyer
Rohin Shah
Andrew Critch
Stuart Russell
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
{sdt,rohinmshah,critch,russell}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Imitation Learning (IL) algorithms are typically evaluated in the same environment
that was used to create demonstrations. This rewards precise reproduction of
demonstrations in one particular environment, but provides little information about
how robustly an algorithm can generalise the demonstrator’s intent to substantially
different deployment settings. This paper presents the MAGICAL benchmark suite,
which permits systematic evaluation of generalisation by quantifying robustness
to different kinds of distribution shift that an IL algorithm is likely to encounter
in practice. Using the MAGICAL suite, we conﬁrm that existing IL algorithms
overﬁt signiﬁcantly to the context in which demonstrations are provided. We also
show that standard methods for reducing overﬁtting are effective at creating narrow
perceptual invariances, but are not sufﬁcient to enable transfer to contexts that
require substantially different behaviour, which suggests that new approaches will
be needed in order to robustly generalise demonstrator intent. Code and data for
the MAGICAL suite is available at https://github.com/qxcv/magical/.

1

Introduction

Imitation Learning (IL) is a practical and accessible way of programming robots to perform useful
tasks [6]. For instance, the owner of a new domestic robot might spend a few hours using teleoperation to complete various tasks around the home: doing laundry, watering the garden, feeding
their pet salamander, and so on. The robot could learn from these demonstrations to complete the
tasks autonomously. For IL algorithms to be useful, however, they must be able to learn how to
perform tasks from few demonstrations. A domestic robot wouldn’t be very helpful if it required
thirty demonstrations before it ﬁgured out that you are deliberately washing your purple cravat
separately from your white breeches, or that it’s important to drop bloodworms inside the salamander
tank rather than next to it. Existing IL algorithms assume that the environment observed at test time
will be identical to the environment observed at training time, and so they cannot generalise to this
degree. Instead, we would like algorithms that solve the task of robust IL: given a small number of
demonstrations in one training environment, the algorithm should be able to generalise the intent
behind those demonstrations to (potentially very different) deployment environments.
One barrier to improved algorithms for robust IL is a lack of appropriate benchmarks. IL algorithms
are commonly tested on Reinforcement Learning (RL) benchmark tasks, such as those from OpenAI
Gym [37, 23, 27, 8]. However, the demonstrator intent in these benchmarks is often trivial (e.g. the
goal for most of Gym’s MuJoCo tasks is simply to run forward), and limited variation in the initial
state distribution means that algorithms are effectively being evaluated in the same setting that was
used to provide demonstrations. Recent papers on Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL)—which
is a form of IL that infers a reward under which the given demonstrations are near-optimal—have
instead used “testing” variants of standard Gym tasks which differ from the original demonstration
environment [17, 39, 32, 33]. For instance, Fu et al. [17] trained an algorithm on demonstrations from
the standard “Ant” task from Gym, then tested on a variant of the task where two of the creature’s
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

