Unifying Activation- and Timing-based Learning
Rules for Spiking Neural Networks

Jinseok Kim1
Kyungsu Kim1
Jae-Joon Kim1,2
1
Department of Creative IT Engineering,
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Korea
{jinseok.kim, kyungsu.kim, jaejoon}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
For the gradient computation across the time domain in Spiking Neural Networks
(SNNs) training, two different approaches have been independently studied. The
first is to compute the gradients with respect to the change in spike activation
(activation-based methods), and the second is to compute the gradients with respect
to the change in spike timing (timing-based methods). In this work, we present
a comparative study of the two methods and propose a new supervised learning
method that combines them. The proposed method utilizes each individual spike
more effectively by shifting spike timings as in the timing-based methods as well as
generating and removing spikes as in the activation-based methods. Experimental
results showed that the proposed method achieves higher performance in terms of
both accuracy and efficiency than the previous approaches.

1

Introduction

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have been studied not only for their biological plausibility but also
for computational efficiency that stems from information processing with binary spikes [1]. One of
the unique characteristics of SNNs is that the states of the neurons at different time steps are closely
related to each other. This may resemble the temporal dependency in recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), but in SNNs direct influences between neurons are only through the binary spikes. Since the
true derivative of the binary activation function, or thresholding function, is zero almost everywhere,
SNNs have an additional challenge in precise gradient computation unless the binary activation
function is replaced by an alternative as in [2].
Due to the difficulty of training SNNs, in some recent studies, parameters trained in non-spiking NNs
were employed in SNNs. However, this approach is only feasible by using the similarity between
rate-coded SNNs and non-spiking NNs [3, 4] or by abandoning several features of spiking neurons
to maximize the similarity between SNNs and non-spiking NNs [5–7]. The unique characteristics
of SNNs that enable efficient information processing can only be utilized with dedicated learning
methods for SNNs. In this context, several studies have reported promising results with the gradientbased supervised learning methods that takes account of those characteristics [8–13].
Previous works on gradient-based supervised learning for SNNs can be classified into two categories.
The methods in the first category work around the non-differentiability of the spiking function with
the surrogate derivative [14] and compute the gradients with respect to the spike activation [11–13].
The methods in the second category focus on the timings of existing spikes and computes the gradients
with respect to the spike timing [8–10, 15]. Let us call those methods as the activation-based methods
and the timing-based methods, respectively. Until now, the two approaches have been thought
irrelevant to each other and studied independently.
The problem with previous works is that both approaches have limitations in computing accurate
gradients, which become more problematic when the spike density is low. The computational cost of
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

