SLIP: Learning to Predict in Unknown Dynamical
Systems with Long-Term Memory

Paria Rashidiejad
Jiantao Jiao
Stuart Russell
EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley
{paria.rashidinejad, jiantao, russell}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present an efficient and practical (polynomial time) algorithm for online prediction in unknown and partially observed linear dynamical systems (LDS) under
stochastic noise. When the system parameters are known, the optimal linear predictor is the Kalman filter. However, in unknown systems, the performance of existing
predictive models is poor in important classes of LDS that are only marginally
stable and exhibit long-term forecast memory. We tackle this problem by bounding
the generalized Kolmogorov width of the Kalman filter coefficient set. This motivates the design of an algorithm, which we call spectral LDS improper predictor
(SLIP), based on conducting a tight convex relaxation of the Kalman predictive
model via spectral methods. We provide a finite-sample analysis, showing that our
algorithm competes with the Kalman filter in hindsight with only logarithmic regret.
Our regret analysis relies on Mendelson’s small-ball method, providing sharp error
bounds without concentration, boundedness, or exponential forgetting assumptions.
Empirical evaluations demonstrate that SLIP outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in LDS prediction. Our theoretical and experimental results shed light on the
conditions required for efficient probably approximately correct (PAC) learning of
the Kalman filter from partially observed data.

1

Introduction

Predictive models based on linear dynamical systems (LDS) have been successfully used in a wide
range of applications with a history of more than half a century. Example applications in AI-related
areas range from control systems and robotics [11] to natural language processing [4], healthcare
[41], and computer vision [6, 7]. Other applications are found throughout the physical, biological,
and social sciences in areas such as econometrics, ecology, and climate science.
The evolution of a discrete-time LDS is described by the following state-space model with t ≥ 1:
ht+1 = Aht + Bxt + ηt ,
yt = Cht + Dxt + ζt ,
where ht are the latent states, xt are the inputs, yt are the observations, and ηt and ζt are process and
measurement noise, respectively.
When the system parameters are known, the optimal linear predictor is the Kalman filter. When
they are unknown, a common approach for prediction is to first estimate the parameters of a Kalman
filter and then use them to predict system evolution. Direct parameter estimation usually involves
solving a non-convex optimization problem, such as in the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm,
whose theoretical guarantees may be difficult [55]. Several recent works have studied finite-sample
properties of LDS identification. For fully observed LDS, system identification is shown to be possible
without a strict stability (ρ(A) < 1) assumption, where ρ(A) is the spectral radius of A [46, 43, 13].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

