Mutual exclusivity as a challenge for deep neural
networks
Kanishk Gandhi
New York University
kanishk.gandhi@nyu.edu

Brenden Lake
New York University
Facebook AI Research
brenden@nyu.edu

Abstract
Strong inductive biases allow children to learn in fast and adaptable ways. Children
use the mutual exclusivity (ME) bias to help disambiguate how words map to
referents, assuming that if an object has one label then it does not need another. In
this paper, we investigate whether or not vanilla neural architectures have an ME
bias, demonstrating that they lack this learning assumption. Moreover, we show
that their inductive biases are poorly matched to lifelong learning formulations
of classification and translation. We demonstrate that there is a compelling case
for designing task-general neural networks that learn through mutual exclusivity,
which remains an open challenge.

1

Introduction

Children are remarkable learners, and thus their inductive biases should interest machine learning
researchers. To help learn the meaning of new words efficiently, children use the “mutual exclusivity”
(ME) bias – the assumption that once an object has one name, it does not need another [1] (Figure 1).
In this paper, we examine whether or not vanilla neural networks demonstrate the mutual exclusivity
bias, either as a built-in assumption or as a bias that develops through training. Moreover, we examine
common benchmarks in machine translation and object recognition to determine whether or not a
maximally efficient learner should use mutual exclusivity.
When children endeavour to learn a new word, they rely on inductive biases
to narrow the space of possible meanings. Children learn an average of
about 10 new words per day from the age of one until the end of high school
[2], a feat that requires managing a tractable set of candidate meanings. A
typical word learning scenario has many sources of ambiguity and uncertainty, including ambiguity in the mapping between words and referents.
Children hear multiple words and see multiple objects within a single scene,
often without clear supervisory signals to indicate which word goes with Figure 1: The mutual
which object [3].
exclusivity task used in
cognitive development re-

The mutual exclusivity assumption helps to resolve ambiguity in how words search [1]. Children tend
map to their referents. Markman and Watchel [1] examined scenarios like to associate the novel
Figure 1 that required children to determine the referent of a novel word. word (“dax”) with the
For instance, children who know the meaning of “cup” are presented with novel object (right).
two objects, one which is familiar (a cup) and another which is novel (an
unusual object). Given these two objects, children are asked to “Show me a
dax,” where “dax” is a novel nonsense word. Markman and Wachtel found that children tend to pick
the novel object rather than the familiar one. Although it is possible that the word “dax” could be
another word for referring to cups, children predict that the novel word refers to the novel object –
demonstrating a “mutual exclusivity” bias that familiar objects do not need another name. This is only
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

