Long-Horizon Visual Planning
with Goal-Conditioned Hierarchical Predictors
Karl Pertsch∗,1 Oleh Rybkin∗,2 Frederik Ebert3
Chelsea Finn4 Dinesh Jayaraman2 Sergey Levine3
1

USC

2

UPenn

3

UC Berkeley

4

Stanford University

Abstract
The ability to predict and plan into the future is fundamental for agents acting in
the world. To reach a faraway goal, we predict trajectories at multiple timescales,
first devising a coarse plan towards the goal and then gradually filling in details. In
contrast, current learning approaches for visual prediction and planning fail on longhorizon tasks as they generate predictions (1) without considering goal information,
and (2) at the finest temporal resolution, one step at a time. In this work we propose
a framework for visual prediction and planning that is able to overcome both of
these limitations. First, we formulate the problem of predicting towards a goal
and propose the corresponding class of latent space goal-conditioned predictors
(GCPs). GCPs significantly improve planning efficiency by constraining the search
space to only those trajectories that reach the goal. Further, we show how GCPs
can be naturally formulated as hierarchical models that, given two observations,
predict an observation between them, and by recursively subdividing each part of
the trajectory generate complete sequences. This divide-and-conquer strategy is
effective at long-term prediction, and enables us to design an effective hierarchical
planning algorithm that optimizes trajectories in a coarse-to-fine manner. We show
that by using both goal-conditioning and hierarchical prediction, GCPs enable us
to solve visual planning tasks with much longer horizon than previously possible.

1

Introduction

Intelligent agents aiming to solve
long-horizon tasks reason about the
future, make predictions, and plan accordingly. Several recent approaches
[11, 71, 19, 69, 42, 21] employ powerful predictive models [16, 4, 20, 37]
to enable agents to predict and plan in
complex environments directly from
visual sensory observations, without
needing to engineer a state estimator. To plan a sequence of actions,
these approaches usually use the predictive model to generate candidate
roll-outs starting from the current state
and then search for the sequence that
best reaches the goal using a cost function (see Fig. 1, left). However, such
∗

Non-GoalConditioned

Start

Goal

Goal-Conditioned
Sequential

Predicted First

Goal-Conditioned
Hierarchical

Predicted Last

Figure 1: When planning towards faraway goals, we propose
to condition the prediction of candidate trajectories on the
goal, which significantly reduces the search space of possible
trajectories (left vs. middle) and enables hierarchical planning approaches that break a long-horizon task into a series
of short-horizon tasks by placing subgoals (right).

Equal contribution. Ordering determined by a coin flip. Project page: orybkin.github.io/video-gcp

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

