Consistent Estimation of Identifiable Nonparametric
Mixture Models from Grouped Observations

Alexander Ritchie∗
Department of EECS
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
aritch@umich.edu

Robert A. Vandermeulen∗
ML group
Technische Universität Berlin
10587 Berlin, Germany
vandermeulen@tu-berlin.de

Clayton Scott
Departments of EECS, Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
clayscot@umich.edu

Abstract
Recent research has established sufficient conditions for finite mixture models to
be identifiable from grouped observations. These conditions allow the mixture
components to be nonparametric and have substantial (or even total) overlap. This
work proposes an algorithm that consistently estimates any identifiable mixture
model from grouped observations. Our analysis leverages an oracle inequality for
weighted kernel density estimators of the distribution on groups, together with
a general result showing that consistent estimation of the distribution on groups
implies consistent estimation of mixture components. A practical implementation
is provided for paired observations, and the approach is shown to outperform
existing methods, especially when mixture components overlap significantly.

1

Introduction

In statistics and machine learning, finite mixture models are often used to describe the distribution of
subpopulations within a larger population. A finite mixture model can be written
p=

M
X

∗ ∗
wm
pm ,

(1)

m=1

PM
∗
∗
where wm
> 0 are mixing weights such that m=1 wm
= 1, and p∗m are probability densities.
Without additional assumptions, the mixture model p is not identifiable from iid data. Typically,
identifiability is ensured by restricting the p∗m to some family of parametric distributions. Restricting
the p∗m to be Gaussian yields the Gaussian mixture model (GMM) which is identifiable [1, 2].
Most work on estimating mixture models assumes an iid sampling scheme. In this work we examine
an alternative sampling scheme where observations occur in iid groups. Each group is generated by
∗
sampling a component m ∈ [M ] according to wm
, and then drawing N iid observations from p∗m .
Recent work has shown that any finite mixture model is identifiable given grouped observations of
sufficient size [3]. In the worst case, any finite mixture model with M components is identifiable
given groups of size N ≥ 2M − 1. It was also shown that, if the underlying components of the
mixture model are jointly irreducible [4], then the mixture is identifiable given paired observations
(N = 2). This framework provides a setting where the potential exists to recover nonparametric and
highly overlapping mixture components. As of yet, however, no general theory or algorithms are
known for this estimation problem.
This work makes the following contributions. We introduce a novel variant of the kernel density
estimator that yields statistically consistent estimates of any identifiable nonparametric mixture
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

