Faster DBSCAN via subsampled similarity queries

Heinrich Jiang˚
Google Research
heinrichj@google.com

Jennifer Jang˚
Waymo
jangj@waymo.com

Jakub Ł ˛
acki
Google Research
jlacki@google.com

Abstract
DBSCAN is a popular density-based clustering algorithm. It computes the neighborhood graph of a dataset and uses the connected components of the highdegree nodes to decide the clusters. However, the full neighborhood graph may
be too costly to compute with a worst-case complexity of Opn2 q. In this paper,
we propose a simple variant called SNG-DBSCAN, which clusters based on a
subsampled -neighborhood graph, only requires access to similarity queries for
pairs of points and in particular avoids any complex data structures which need the
embeddings of the data points themselves. The runtime of the procedure is Opsn2 q,
where s is the sampling rate. We show under some natural theoretical assumptions
that s « log n{n is sufficient for statistical cluster recovery guarantees leading to
an Opn log nq complexity. We provide an extensive experimental analysis showing
that on large datasets, one can subsample as little as 0.1% of the neighborhood
graph, leading to as much as over 200x speedup and 250x reduction in RAM
consumption compared to scikit-learn’s implementation of DBSCAN, while still
maintaining competitive clustering performance.

1

Introduction

DBSCAN [13] is a popular density-based clustering algorithm which has had a wide impact on
machine learning and data mining. Recent applications include superpixel segmentation [40], object
tracking and detection in self-driving [51, 19], wireless networks [12, 53], GPS [10, 36], social
network analysis [29, 55], urban planning [14, 38], and medical imaging [46, 3]. The clusters that
DBSCAN discovers are based on the connected components of the neighborhood graph of the data
points of sufficiently high density (i.e. those with a sufficiently high number of data points in their
neighborhood), where the neighborhood radius and the density threshold are the hyperparameters.
One of the main differences of density-based clustering algorithms such as DBSCAN compared to
popular objective-based approaches such as k-means [2] and spectral clustering [50] is that densitybased algorithms are non-parametric. As a result, DBSCAN makes very few assumptions on the
data, automatically finds the number of clusters, and allows clusters to be of arbitrary shape and
size [13]. However, one of the drawbacks is that it has a worst-case quadratic runtime [16]. With
the continued growth of modern datasets in both size and richness, non-parametric unsupervised
procedures are becoming ever more important in understanding such datasets. Thus, there is a critical
need to establish more efficient and scalable versions of these algorithms.
The computation of DBSCAN can be broken up into two steps. The first is computing the neighborhood graph of the data points, where the -neighborhood graph is defined with data points
as vertices and edges between pairs of points that are distance at most  apart. The second is
processing the neighborhood graph to extract the clusters. The first step has worst-case quadratic
complexity simply due to the fact that each data point may have of order linear number of points
in its -neighborhood for sufficiently high . However, even if the -neighborhood graph does not
˚

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

