Projection Efficient Subgradient Method and
Optimal Nonsmooth Frank-Wolfe Method

Kiran Koshy Thekumparampil
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
thekump2@illinois.edu
Praneeth Netrapalli
Microsoft Research, India
praneeth@microsoft.com

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research, India
prajain@microsoft.com
Sewoong Oh
University of Washington, Seattle
sewoong@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We consider the classical setting of optimizing a nonsmooth Lipschitz continuous
convex function over a convex constraint set, when having access to a (stochastic)
first-order oracle (FO) for the function and a projection oracle (PO) for the constraint set. It is well known that to achieve ε-suboptimality in high-dimensions,
Θ(ε−2 ) FO calls are necessary [64]. This is achieved by the projected subgradient
method (PGD) [11]. However, PGD also entails O(ε−2 ) PO calls, which may be
computationally costlier than FO calls (e.g. nuclear norm constraints). Improving
this PO calls complexity of PGD is largely unexplored, despite the fundamental
nature of this problem and extensive literature. We present first such improvement.
This only requires a mild assumption that the objective function, when extended
to a slightly larger neighborhood of the constraint set, still remains Lipschitz and
accessible via FO. In particular, we introduce MOPES method, which carefully
combines Moreau-Yosida smoothing and accelerated first-order schemes. This is
guaranteed to find a feasible ε-suboptimal solution using only O(ε−1 ) PO calls and
optimal O(ε−2 ) FO calls. Further, instead of a PO if we only have a linear minimization oracle (LMO, à la Frank-Wolfe) to access the constraint set, an extension
of our method, MOLES, finds a feasible ε-suboptimal solution using O(ε−2 ) LMO
calls and FO calls—both match known lower bounds [54], resolving a question left
open since [84]. Our experiments confirm that these methods achieve significant
speedups over the state-of-the-art, for a problem with costly PO and LMO calls.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the nonsmooth convex optimization (NSCO) problem with the First-order
Oracle (FO) and the Projection Oracle (PO) defined as:
NSCO : min f (x), s.t. x ∈ X , FO(x) ∈ ∂f (x), and PO(x) = PX (x) = argmin ky − xk22 , (1)
x

y∈X

where f : Rd → R is a convex Lipschitz-continuous function, and X ⊆ Rd is a convex constraint.
When queried at a point x, FO returns a subgradient of f at x and PO returns the projection of x onto
X . NSCO is a fundamental problem with a long history and several important applications including
support vector machines (SVM) [12], robust learning [44], and utility maximization in finance [82].
Finding an ε-suboptimal solution for this problem requires Ω(ε−2 ) FO calls in the worst case, when
the dimension d is large [64]. This lower bound is tightly matched by the projected subgradient
method (PGD). Unfortunately, PGD also uses one PO call after every FO call, resulting in a PO calls
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

