Distributed Newton Can Communicate Less and
Resist Byzantine Workers

Avishek Ghosh
Department of EECS, UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
avishek_ghosh@berkeley.edu

Raj Kumar Maity
College of Information and Computer Sciences
UMass Amherst, MA-01002
rajkmaity@cs.umass.edu

Arya Mazumdar
College of Information and Computer Sciences
UMass Amherst, MA-01002
arya@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We develop a distributed second order optimization algorithm that is
communication-efficient as well as robust against Byzantine failures of the worker
machines. We propose COMRADE (COMunication-efficient and Robust Approximate Distributed nEwton), an iterative second order algorithm, where the worker
machines communicate only once per iteration with the center machine. This is
in sharp contrast with the state-of-the-art distributed second order algorithms like
GIANT [31] and DINGO[6], where the worker machines send (functions of) local
gradient and Hessian sequentially; thus ending up communicating twice with the
center machine per iteration. Moreover, we show that the worker machines can
further compress the local information before sending it to the center. In addition,
we employ a simple norm based thresholding rule to filter-out the Byzantine worker
machines. We establish the linear-quadratic rate of convergence of COMRADE
and establish that the communication savings and Byzantine resilience result in
only a small statistical error rate for arbitrary convex loss functions. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work that addresses the issue of Byzantine resilience
in second order distributed optimization. Furthermore, we validate our theoretical results with extensive experiments on synthetic and benchmark LIBSVM [4]
data-sets and demonstrate convergence guarantees.

1

Introduction

In modern data-intensive applications like image recognition, conversational AI and recommendation
systems, the size of training datasets has grown in such proportions that distributed computing have
become an integral part of machine learning. To this end, a fairly common distributed learning
framework, namely data parallelism, distributes the (huge) data-sets over multiple worker machines
to exploit the power of parallel computing. In many applications, such as Federated Learning
[17], data is stored in users’ personal devices and judicious exploitation of the on-device machine
intelligence can speed up computation. Usually, in a distributed learning framework, computation
(such as processing, training) happens in the worker machines and the local results are communicated
to a center machine (ex., a parameter server). The center machine updates the model parameters by
properly aggregating the local results.
Such distributed frameworks face the following two fundamental challenges: First, the parallelism
gains are often bottle-necked by the heavy communication overheads between worker and the center
machines. This issue is further exacerbated where large clusters of worker machines are used for
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

