Online Matrix Completion with Side Information
Mark Herbster, Stephen Pasteris, Lisa Tse
Department of Computer Science
University College London
London WC1E 6BT, England, UK
{m.herbster,s.pasteris,l.tse}@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We give an online algorithm and prove novel mistake and regret bounds for online
binary matrix completion with side information. The mistake bounds we prove
are of the form Õ( D2 ). The term 12 is analogous to the usual margin term in
SVM (perceptron) bounds. More specifically, if we assume that there is some
factorization of the underlying m ⇥ n matrix into P Q> , where the rows of P are
interpreted as “classifiers” in <d and the rows of Q as “instances” in <d , then is
is the maximum (normalized) margin over all factorizations P Q> consistent with
the observed matrix. The quasi-dimension term D measures the quality of side
information. In the presence of vacuous side information, D = m + n. However, if
the side information is predictive of the underlying factorization of the matrix, then
in an ideal case, D 2 O(k + `) where k is the number of distinct row factors and `
is the number of distinct column factors. We additionally provide a generalization
of our algorithm to the inductive setting. In this setting, we provide an example
where the side information is not directly specified in advance. For this example,
the quasi-dimension D is now bounded by O(k 2 + `2 ).

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of online binary matrix completion with side information. In our setting
the learner receives data sequentially, so that on a trial t = 1, . . . , T : 1) the learner is queried by
the environment to predict matrix entry (it , jt ); 2) the learner predicts a label ŷt 2 { 1, 1}; 3) the
learner receives a label yt 2 { 1, 1} from the environment and 4) a mistake is incurred if yt 6= ŷt .
There are no probabilistic assumptions on how the environment generates its instances or their labels;
it is an arbitrary process which in fact may be adversarial. The only restriction on the environment is
that it does not “see” the learner’s ŷt until after it reveals yt . The learner’s aim will be to minimize
PT
PT
its expected regret, t=1 E[yt 6= ŷt ] minU t=1 [yt 6= Uit jt ], where the minimization is over
U 2 { 1, 1}m⇥n and the expectation is with respect to the learner’s internal randomization. We
will also consider mistake bounds where the aim is to minimize the learner’s mistakes under the
assumption (realizability) that there exists a U such that Uit jt = yt for all t 2 [T ]. To aid the
learner, side information is associated with each row and column. For instance, in the classic “Netflix
challenge” [1], the rows of the matrix correspond to viewers and the columns to movies, with entries
representing movie ratings. It is natural to suppose that we have side information in the form of
demographic information for each user, and metadata for the movies. In this work, we consider both
transductive and inductive models. In the former model, the side information associated with each
row and column is specified completely in advance in the form of a pair of positive definite matrices
that inform similarity between row pairs and column pairs. For the inductive model, a pair of kernel
functions is specified over potentially continuous domains, where one is for the rows and the other
is for the columns. What is not specified is the mapping from the domain of the kernel function to
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

