Learning Invariances in Neural Networks
Gregory Benton

Marc Finzi Pavel Izmailov Andrew Gordon Wilson
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University

Abstract
Invariances to translations have imbued convolutional neural networks with powerful generalization properties. However, we often do not know a priori what
invariances are present in the data, or to what extent a model should be invariant
to a given symmetry group. We show how to learn invariances and equivariances
by parameterizing a distribution over augmentations and optimizing the training
loss simultaneously with respect to the network parameters and augmentation
parameters. With this simple procedure we can recover the correct set and extent
of invariances on image classification, regression, segmentation, and molecular
property prediction from a large space of augmentations, on training data alone.

1

Introduction

The ability to learn constraints or symmetries is a foundational property of intelligent systems.
Humans are able to discover patterns and regularities in data that provide compressed representations
of reality, such as translation, rotation, intensity, or scale symmetries. Indeed, we see the value of
such constraints in deep learning. Fully connected networks are more flexible than convolutional
networks, but convolutional networks are more broadly impactful because they enforce the translation
equivariance symmetry: when we translate an image, the outputs of a convolutional layer translate
in the same way [24, 7]. Further gains have been achieved by recent work hard-coding additional
symmetries, such as rotation equivariance, into convolutional neural networks [e.g., 7, 41, 44, 31]
But we might wonder whether it is possible to learn that we want to use a convolutional neural
network. Moreover, we typically do not know which constraints are suitable for a given problem, and
to what extent those constraints should be enforced. The class label for the digit ‘6’ is rotationally
invariant up until it becomes a ‘9’. Like biological systems, we would like to automatically discover
the appropriate symmetries. This task appears daunting, because standard learning objectives such as
maximum likelihood select for flexibility, rather than constraints [29, 32].
In this paper, we provide an extremely simple and practical approach to automatically discovering
invariances and equivariances, from training data alone. Our approach operates by learning a
distribution over augmentations, then training with augmented data, leading to the name Augerino.
Augerino (1) can learn both invariances and equivariances over a wide range of symmetry groups,
including translations, rotations, scalings, and shears; (2) can discover partial symmetries, such
as rotations not spanning the full range from [ ⇡, ⇡]; (3) can be combined with any standard
architectures, loss functions, or optimization algorithm with little overhead; (4) performs well on
regression, classification, and segmentation tasks, for both image and molecular data.
To our knowledge, Augerino is the first approach that can learn symmetries in neural networks
from training data alone, without requiring a validation set or a special loss function. In Sections
3-5 we introduce Augerino and show why it works. The accompanying code can be found at
https://github.com/g-benton/learning-invariances.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

