Robust Multi-object Matching via Iterative
Reweighting of the Graph Connection Laplacian
Yunpeng Shi*
Shaohan Li†
Gilad Lerman†
* Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics, Princeton University
†
School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota
yunpengs@princeton.edu, {li000743, lerman}@umn.edu

Abstract
We propose an efficient and robust iterative solution to the multi-object matching problem.
We first clarify serious limitations of current methods as well as the inappropriateness
of the standard iteratively reweighted least squares procedure. In view of these limitations,
we suggest a novel and more reliable iterative reweighting strategy that incorporates information from higher-order neighborhoods by exploiting the graph connection Laplacian.
We provide partial theoretical guarantees and demonstrate the superior performance of
our procedure over state-of-the-art methods using both synthetic and real datasets.

1 Introduction
The problem of matching multiple objects is crucial in many data-oriented tasks, such as structure from
motion (SfM) [21], simultaneous localization and mapping [4], multi-graph matching [28, 32, 33], community
detection [1] and solving jigsaw puzzles [15]. One important instance of this problem is multi-image
matching, where one is given a set of 2D images, whose 3D scenes include a fixed set of 3D points, and
each image contains a set of 2D keypoints that correspond to the set of 3D points. The goal is to recover the
correspondences between the keypoints of all images and the fixed 3D points, given measurements of keypoint
matches between some pairs of images. Ideally, a keypoint match between two given images aligns pairs of
keypoints that describe the same 3D point. In practice, measurements of keypoint matches can be corrupted. A
solution of this problem thus requires the design and analysis of methods with provable robustness to corruption.
The multi-object matching problem can be cast as permutation synchronization (PS) [22]. The latter problem
assumes a connected graph G(V,E), where each node has a hidden permutation of a fixed size. For example,
in image matching it is the correspondence between indices of the keypoints of the image and the 3D points.
These hidden permutations determine relative permutations between graph nodes. In the case of image
matching, the relative permutations represent the keypoint matches between pairs of images. Permutation
synchronization asks to recover the hidden permutations given measurements of the relative permutations.
The measured relative permutations can be highly corrupted. For example, in SfM, the pairwise keypoint
matches are commonly derived by SIFT [18] descriptors, whose accuracy is affected by the scene occlusion,
change of illumination, viewing distance and perspective. Moreover, repetitive patterns and ambiguous symmetry in common objects of realistic scenarios result in malicious and self-consistent corruption of matches [31].
More work is needed to address such nontrivial practical cases of inaccurate pairwise measurements. Existing
guarantees for permutation synchronization often consider a “uniform” corruption model, which does not
reflect real scenarios. Uniformity is pursued in two ways: 1) Using the “uniform” Haar distribution on the
permutation group to generate corrupted relative permutations; 2) Choosing the corrupted edges in the graph
in a uniform manner, such as randomly corrupting an edge with the same probability, while assuming graphs
with uniform topology (e.g., generated by the Erdős-Rényi model). Here we try to carefully understand the
drawbacks of previous approaches and develop instead a practically efficient method, with partial guarantees,
for nonuniform corruption. We find a surprising relationship of our proposed method to Cycle-Edge Message
Passing (CEMP) [17]; thus we also clarify CEMP and improve its implementation in our setting.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

