On Efficiency in Hierarchical Reinforcement
Learning

Zheng Wen
DeepMind
zhengwen@google.com
Andre Barreto
DeepMind
andrebarreto@google.com

Doina Precup
DeepMind
doinap@google.com
Benjamin Van Roy
DeepMind
benvanroy@google.com

Morteza Ibrahimi
DeepMind
mibrahimi@google.com
Satinder Singh
DeepMind
baveja@google.com

Abstract
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) approaches promise to provide more
efficient solutions to sequential decision making problems, both in terms of statistical as well as computational efficiency. While this has been demonstrated
empirically over time in a variety of tasks, theoretical results quantifying the benefits of such methods are still few and far between. In this paper, we discuss
the kind of structure in a Markov decision process which gives rise to efficient
HRL methods. Specifically, we formalize the intuition that HRL can exploit well
repeating "subMDPs", with similar reward and transition structure. We show
that, under reasonable assumptions, a model-based Thompson sampling-style HRL
algorithm that exploits this structure is statistically efficient, as established through
a finite-time regret bound. We also establish conditions under which planning with
structure-induced options is near-optimal and computationally efficient.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) refers to the ability of an agent to act and plan at multiple
levels of temporal abstraction [Sutton et al., 1999, Barto and Mahadevan, 2003]. In principle, this
ability can present several benefits: (1) more efficient exploration, by employing policies that help an
agent circulate more efficiently over the state space; (2) more efficient credit assignment, because
temporally extended models propagate credit over many time steps, and the same stream of data
can be re-used to learn about many possible contingencies (for example, expressed as sub-goals);
and (3) the ability to solve smaller problems and compose the resulting policies and models quickly
in new situations. From a theoretical point of view, (1) has been investigated in recent work [Fruit
et al., 2017]. Aspects (2) and (3) have received empirical validation in a large number of papers,
but not much theoretical analysis, except for some special cases, such as the work of Mann et al.
[2015]. In this paper, we present two general results which highlight the types of problems in which
HRL is expected to provide benefits, in terms of planning speed, as well as in terms of statistical
efficiency. First, as has been highlighted empirically in the past, having repeated structure in the
Markov decision process (MDP) can lead to large speedups in both aspects. Second, in terms of
planning, HRL provides benefits when we are able to "insulate" well sub-problems that can be solved
in isolation, and whose solutions can then be "stitched" together. We formalize the latter intuition.
Contributions: First, we formalize a notion of MDP decomposition into sub-problems, using state
partitions. Second, we show that the existence of hierarchical structure in the environment can lead to
statistically efficient learning, by extending the results in Osband et al. [2013] to establish a regret
bound that separates errors due to sub-optimal planning and errors due to learning. If the original
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

