Towards Crowdsourced Training of Large Neural
Networks using Decentralized Mixture-of-Experts

Max Ryabinin∗
Yandex
National Research University
Higher School of Economics
mryabinin@hse.ru

Anton Gusev
Independent
uartman@mail.ru

Abstract
Many recent breakthroughs in deep learning were achieved by training increasingly larger models on massive datasets. However, training such models can be
prohibitively expensive. For instance, the cluster used to train GPT-3 costs over
$250 million2 . As a result, most researchers cannot afford to train state of the art
models and contribute to their development. Hypothetically, a researcher could
crowdsource the training of large neural networks with thousands of regular PCs
provided by volunteers. The raw computing power of a hundred thousand $2500
desktops dwarfs that of a $250M server pod, but one cannot utilize that power
efficiently with conventional distributed training methods. In this work, we propose
Learning@home: a novel neural network training paradigm designed to handle
large amounts of poorly connected participants. We analyze the performance,
reliability, and architectural constraints of this paradigm and compare it against
existing distributed training techniques.

1

Introduction

Our investigation begins with a thought experiment. Imagine a deep neural network with capacity
1000 times greater than today’s most powerful architectures: for example, a language model trained
on all digitally available texts or a generative model for all images ever uploaded to the Internet. How
can we train such a model?
Viewed from a historical perspective, the 1000-fold increase in capacity is not unrealistic. Over the
past decade, the deep learning community has made remarkable progress by training large models
on abundant data, and the scale of those models keeps growing. Since the advent of the ImageNet
challenge [1] with 1.3M labeled images, the typical size of convolutional neural networks increased
from a few megabytes to hundreds of megabytes [2, 3, 4]. Recent studies report even larger models
for datasets with hundreds of millions of images [5, 6].
Another trend from natural language processing is to train large Transformer-like language models [7,
8, 9]. The data for this task is nearly unlimited, allowing researchers to train models with tens or even
hundreds of gigabytes of parameters [10, 11, 12, 13]. While we may not need the 1000-fold increase
at the moment, planning for it will prepare us for the next big leap in model capacity.
To be specific, let us focus on training large Transformer networks for the language modeling task. At
the time of writing, the largest conventional model for that task is GPT-3 with 175 billion parameters.
Scaling it up 1000 times gives us 175 trillion; depending on whether you use single or half-precision,
this requires 300–600 terabytes of memory just to store the model. No modern mass-produced
hardware accelerator is up to such task. Even high-end servers with 16x V100 accelerators can store
only 0.15% of that model in combined GPU memory, let alone train it.
∗

Corresponding author.
A conservative estimate based on https://blogs.microsoft.com/ai/openai-azure-supercomputer

2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

