Asymptotic Guarantees for Generative Modeling
Based on the Smooth Wasserstein Distance
Ziv Goldfeld
Cornell University
goldfeld@cornell.edu

Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com

Kengo Kato
Cornell University
kk976@cornell.edu

Abstract
Minimum distance estimation (MDE) gained recent attention as a formulation of
(implicit) generative modeling. It considers minimizing, over model parameters, a
statistical distance between the empirical data distribution and the model. This formulation lends itself well to theoretical analysis, but typical results are hindered
by the curse of dimensionality. To overcome this and devise a scalable finitesample statistical MDE theory, we adopt the framework of smooth 1-Wasserstein
(σ)
distance (SWD) W1 . The SWD was recently shown to preserve the metric and
topological structure of classic Wasserstein distances, while enjoying dimensionfree empirical convergence rates. In this work, we conduct a thorough statistical
study of the minimum smooth Wasserstein estimators (MSWEs), first proving the
estimator’s measurability and asymptotic consistency. We then characterize the
limit distribution of the optimal model parameters and their associated minimal
SWD. These results imply an O(n−1/2 ) generalization bound for generative modeling based on MSWE, which holds in arbitrary dimension. Our main technical
(σ)
tool is a novel high-dimensional limit distribution result for empirical W1 . The
characterization of a nondegenerate limit stands in sharp contrast with the classic
empirical 1-Wasserstein distance, for which a similar result is known only in the
one-dimensional case. The validity of our theory is supported by empirical results,
posing the SWD as a potent tool for learning and inference in high dimensions.

1

Introduction

Minimum distance estimation (MDE) considers the minimization of a statistical distance (SD) between the empirical data distribution and a parametric model class. Given an identically and independently distributed (i.i.d.) dataset X1 , . . . , Xn sampled from PP
, the goal is to learn a model Qθ ,
n
for θ ∈ Θ, that approximates the empirical measure Pn := n−1 i=1 δXi under a SD1 δ, i.e., we
aim to find θbn ∈ argminθ∈Θ δ(Pn , Qθ ). This classic mathematical statistics problem [1–3] was
adopted in recent years as a formulation of generative modeling. Indeed, both generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [4–11] and variational (or Wasserstein) autoencoders [12, 13] stem from different
strategies for (approximately) solving MDE2 for various choices of δ.
Beyond the practical effectiveness of MDE-based generative models, this formulation is well-suited
for a theoretic analysis. This inspired a recent line of works studying GAN generalization in terms of
MDEs [9, 14, 15]. Such sample-complexity results boil down to the rate of empirical approximation
under the chosen SD, i.e., the speed at which δ(Pn , P ) converges to zero. Unfortunately, popular
SDs, such as Wasserstein distances [16], f -divergences [17], and integral probability metrics [18]
1
2

Recall that δ is an SD if δ(P, Q) = 0 ⇐⇒ P = Q.
or a variant thereof, where Qθ is also estimated from samples.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

