MCUNet: Tiny Deep Learning on IoT Devices

Ji Lin1

Wei-Ming Chen1,2 Yujun Lin1 John Cohn3 Chuang Gan3 Song Han1
1
MIT 2 National Taiwan University 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
https://tinyml.mit.edu

Abstract
Machine learning on tiny IoT devices based on microcontroller units (MCU) is
appealing but challenging: the memory of microcontrollers is 2-3 orders of magnitude smaller even than mobile phones. We propose MCUNet, a framework that
jointly designs the efficient neural architecture (TinyNAS) and the lightweight
inference engine (TinyEngine), enabling ImageNet-scale inference on microcontrollers. TinyNAS adopts a two-stage neural architecture search approach that
first optimizes the search space to fit the resource constraints, then specializes the
network architecture in the optimized search space. TinyNAS can automatically
handle diverse constraints (i.e. device, latency, energy, memory) under low search
costs. TinyNAS is co-designed with TinyEngine, a memory-efficient inference
library to expand the search space and fit a larger model. TinyEngine adapts
the memory scheduling according to the overall network topology rather than
layer-wise optimization, reducing the memory usage by 3.4×, and accelerating
the inference by 1.7-3.3× compared to TF-Lite Micro [3] and CMSIS-NN [28].
MCUNet is the first to achieves >70% ImageNet top1 accuracy on an off-the-shelf
commercial microcontroller, using 3.5× less SRAM and 5.7× less Flash compared
to quantized MobileNetV2 and ResNet-18. On visual&audio wake words tasks,
MCUNet achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and runs 2.4-3.4× faster than MobileNetV2 and ProxylessNAS-based solutions with 3.7-4.1× smaller peak SRAM.
Our study suggests that the era of always-on tiny machine learning on IoT devices
has arrived.

1

Introduction

The number of IoT devices based on always-on microcontrollers is increasing rapidly at a historical
rate, reaching 250B [2], enabling numerous applications including smart manufacturing, personalized
healthcare, precision agriculture, automated retail, etc. These low-cost, low-energy microcontrollers
give rise to a brand new opportunity of tiny machine learning (TinyML). By running deep learning
models on these tiny devices, we can directly perform data analytics near the sensor, thus dramatically
expand the scope of AI applications.
However, microcontrollers have a very limited resource budget, especially memory (SRAM) and
storage (Flash). The on-chip memory is 3 orders of magnitude smaller than mobile devices, and 5-6
orders of magnitude smaller than cloud GPUs, making deep learning deployment extremely difficult.
As shown in Table 1, a state-of-the-art ARM Cortex-M7 MCU only has 320kB SRAM and 1MB
Flash storage, which is impossible to run off-the-shelf deep learning models: ResNet-50 [21] exceeds
the storage limit by 100×, MobileNetV2 [43] exceeds the peak memory limit by 22×. Even the
int8 quantized version of MobileNetV2 still exceeds the memory limit by 5.3×* , showing a big gap
between the desired and available hardware capacity.
Different from the cloud and mobile devices, microcontrollers are bare-metal devices that do not have
an operating system. Therefore, we need to jointly design the deep learning model and the inference
* Not including the runtime buffer overhead (e.g., Im2Col buffer); the actual memory consumption is larger.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

