Robustness of Community Detection to Random
Geometric Perturbations
Sandrine Péché
LPSM, University Paris Diderot
peche@lpsm.fr

Vianney Perchet
Crest, ENSAE & Criteo AI Lab
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
We consider the stochastic block model where connection between vertices is
perturbed by some latent (and unobserved) random geometric graph. The objective
is to prove that spectral methods are robust to this type of noise, even if they are
agnostic to the presence (or not) of the random graph. We provide explicit regimes
where the second eigenvector of the adjacency matrix is highly correlated to the
true community vector (and therefore when weak/exact recovery is possible). This
is possible thanks to a detailed analysis of the spectrum of the latent random graph,
of its own interest.

Introduction
In a d-dimensional random geometric graph, N vertices are assigned random coordinates in Rd , and
only points close enough to each other are connected by an edge. Random geometric graphs are used
to model complex networks such as social networks, the world wide web and so on. We refer to [19] and references therein - for a comprehensive introduction to random geometric graphs. On the other
hand, in social networks, users are more likely to connect if they belong to some specific community
(groups of friends, political party, etc.). This has motivated the introduction of the stochastic block
models (see the recent survey [1] and the more recent breakthrough [5] for more details), where in
the simplest case, each of the N vertices belongs to one (and only one) of the two communities that
are present in the network.
The two types of connections – geometric graph vs. block model – are conceptually quite different
and co-exist independently. Two users might be connected because they are “endogenously similar”
(their latent coordinates are close enough to each others) or because they are “exogenously similar”
(they belong to the same community). For instance, to oversimplify a social network, we can consider
that two different types of connections can occur between users: either they are childhood friends
(with similar latent variables) or they have the same political views (right/left wing).
We therefore model these simultaneous types of interaction in social networks as a simple stochastic
block model (with 2 balanced communities) perturbed by a latent geometric graph. More precisely,
we are going to assume that the probability of endogenous connections between vertices i and j,
with respective latent variables Xi , Xj 2 Rd , is given by the Gaussian1 kernel exp( kXi Xj k2 )
where is the (inverse) width. On the other hand, exogenous connections are defined by the block
model where half of the N vertices belong to some community, half of them to the other one. The
probability of connection between two members of the same community is equal to p1 and between
two members from different communities is equal to p2 . We also consider an extra parameter
1
We emphasize here that geometric interactions are defined through some kernel so that different recovery
regimes can be identified with respect to a unique, simple width parameter . Similarly, the choice of the
Gaussian kernel might seem a bit specific and arbitrary, but this purely for the sake of presentation: our approach
can be generalized to other kernels (the “constants” will be different; they are defined w.r.t. the kernel chosen).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

