Complex Dynamics in Simple Neural Networks:
Understanding Gradient Flow in Phase Retrieval

Stefano Sarao Mannelli1 , Giulio Biroli2 , Chiara Cammarota3,4 ,
Florent Krzakala5 , Pierfrancesco Urbani1 , and Lenka Zdeborová6

Abstract
Despite the widespread use of gradient-based algorithms for optimizing highdimensional non-convex functions, understanding their ability of finding good
minima instead of being trapped in spurious ones remains to a large extent an
open problem. Here we focus on gradient flow dynamics for phase retrieval from
random measurements. When the ratio of the number of measurements over the
input dimension is small the dynamics remains trapped in spurious minima with
large basins of attraction. We find analytically that above a critical ratio those
critical points become unstable developing a negative direction toward the signal.
By numerical experiments we show that in this regime the gradient flow algorithm
is not trapped; it drifts away from the spurious critical points along the unstable
direction and succeeds in finding the global minimum. Using tools from statistical
physics we characterize this phenomenon, which is related to a BBP-type transition
in the Hessian of the spurious minima.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning applications one optimizes a non-convex loss function; this is often
achieved using simple descending algorithms such as gradient descent or its stochastic variations.
The positive results obtained in practice are often hard to justify from the theoretical point of view,
and this apparent contradiction between non-convex landscapes and good performance of simple
algorithms is a recurrent problem in machine learning.
A successful line of research has studied the geometrical properties of the loss landscape, distinguishing between good minima - that lead to good generalization error - and spurious minima - associated
with bad generalization error. The results showed that in some regimes, for several problems from
matrix completion [1] to wide neural networks [2, 3], spurious minima disappear and consequently
under weak assumptions [4] gradient descent will converge to good minima. However, these results
do not justify numerous other results showing that good and spurious minima are present, but systematically gradient descent works [5, 6]. In [7] it was theoretically shown that in a toy model - the
spiked matrix-tensor model - it is possible to find good minima with high probability in a regime
where exponentially many spurious minima are provably present. In [8] it was shown that this is
due to the presence of the so-called threshold states in the landscape, that play a key role in the
1. Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CEA, Institut de physique théorique, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette,France.
2. Laboratoire de Physique de l’Ecole normale supérieure ENS, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université,
Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité Paris, France
3. Dipartimento di Fisica, Sapienza Università di Roma, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy
4. Department of Mathematics, King’s College London, Strand London WC2R 2LS, UK
5. IdePHICS laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland
6. SPOC laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

