Trust the Model When It Is Confident:
Masked Model-based Actor-Critic
Feiyang Pan⇤1,3
Jia He⇤2
Dandan Tu2
Qing He1,3
IIP, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2
Huawei EI Innovation Lab.
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
{pfy824, hejia0149}@gmail.com, tudandan@huawei.com, heqing@ict.ac.cn
1

Abstract
It is a popular belief that model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) is more
sample efficient than model-free RL, but in practice, it is not always true due to
overweighed model errors. In complex and noisy settings, model-based RL tends
to have trouble using the model if it does not know when to trust the model.
In this work, we find that better model usage can make a huge difference. We show
theoretically that if the use of model-generated data is restricted to state-action
pairs where the model error is small, the performance gap between model and real
rollouts can be reduced. It motivates us to use model rollouts only when the model
is confident about its predictions. We propose Masked Model-based Actor-Critic
(M2AC), a novel policy optimization algorithm that maximizes a model-based
lower-bound of the true value function. M2AC implements a masking mechanism
based on the model’s uncertainty to decide whether its prediction should be used
or not. Consequently, the new algorithm tends to give robust policy improvements.
Experiments on continuous control benchmarks demonstrate that M2AC has strong
performance even when using long model rollouts in very noisy environments, and
it significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Deep RL has achieved great successes in complex decision-making problems [17, 21, 9]. Most of
the advances are due to deep model-free RL, which can take high-dimensional raw inputs to make
decisions without understanding the dynamics of the environment. Although having good asymptotic
performance, current model-free RL methods usually require a tremendous number of interactions
with the environment to learn a good policy. On the other hand, model-based reinforcement learning
(MBRL) enhances sample efficiency by searching the policy under a fitted model that approximates
the true dynamics, so it is favored in problems where only a limited number of interactions are
available. For example, in continuous control, recently model-based policy optimization (MBPO,
[11]) yields comparable results to state-of-the-art model-free methods with much fewer samples,
which is appealing for real applications.
However, there is a fundamental concern of MBRL [7] that learning a good policy requires an
accurate model, which in turn requires a large number of interactions with the true environment.
For this issue, theoretical results of MBPO [11] suggest to use the model when the model error is
“sufficiently small”, which contradicts the intuition that MBRL should be used in low-data scenario.
In other words, “when to trust the model?” remains an open problem, especially in settings with
nonlinear and noisy dynamics and one wants to use a deep neural network as the model.
⇤

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

