WOR and p’s:
Sketches for `p-Sampling Without Replacement

Edith Cohen
Google Research
Tel Aviv University
edith@cohenwang.com

Rasmus Pagh
IT University of Copenhagen
BARC
Google Research
pagh@itu.dk

David P. Woodruff
CMU
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Weighted sampling is a fundamental tool in data analysis and machine learning
pipelines. Samples are used for efficient estimation of statistics or as sparse
representations of the data. When weight distributions are skewed, as is often the
case in practice, without-replacement (WOR) sampling is much more effective than
with-replacement (WR) sampling: it provides a broader representation and higher
accuracy for the same number of samples. We design novel composable sketches
for WOR `p sampling, weighted sampling of keys according to a power p ∈ [0, 2]
of their frequency (or for signed data, sum of updates). Our sketches have size
that grows only linearly with the sample size. Our design is simple and practical,
despite intricate analysis, and based on off-the-shelf use of widely implemented
heavy hitters sketches such as CountSketch. Our method is the first to provide
WOR sampling in the important regime of p > 1 and the first to handle signed
updates for p > 0.

1

Introduction

Weighted random sampling is a fundamental tool that is pervasive in machine learning and data
analysis pipelines. A sample serves as a sparse summary of the data and provides efficient estimation
of statistics and aggregates.
We consider data E presented as elements in the form of key value pairs e = (e.key,
P e.val). We
operate with respect to the aggregated form of keys and their frequencies νx := e|e.key=x e.val,
defined as the sum of values of elements with key x. Examples of such data sets are stochastic
gradient updates (keys are parameters and element values are signed and the aggregated form is the
combined gradient), search (keys are queries, elements have unit values, and the aggregated form are
query-frequency pairs), or training examples for language models (keys are co-occurring terms).
The data is commonly distributed across servers or devices or is streamed and the number of distinct
keys is very large. In this scenario it is beneficial to perform computations without explicitly
producing a table of key-frequency pairs, as this requires storage or communication that grows
linearly with the number of keys. Instead, we use composable sketches which are data structures that
support (i) processing a new element e: Computing a sketch of E ∪ {e} from a sketch of E and e (ii)
merging: Computing a sketch of E1 ∪ E2 from sketches of each Ei and (iii) are such that the desired
output can be produced from the sketch. Composability facilitates parallel, distributed, or streaming
computation. We aim to design sketches of small size, because the sketch size determines the storage
and communication requirements. For sampling, we aim for the sketch size to be not much larger
than the desired sample size.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

