ColdGANs: Taming Language GANs
with Cautious Sampling Strategies

Thomas Scialom?‡ , Paul-Alexis Dray? , Sylvain Lamprier‡ ,
Benjamin Piwowarski‡ , Jacopo Staiano?

CNRS, France
‡
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France
?
reciTAL, Paris, France
{thomas,paul-alexis,jacopo}@recital.ai
{sylvain.lamprier,benjamin.piwowarski}@lip6.fr

Abstract
Training regimes based on Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) suffer from
known limitations, often leading to poorly generated text sequences. At the root of
these limitations is the mismatch between training and inference, i.e. the so-called
exposure bias, exacerbated by considering only the reference texts as correct, while
in practice several alternative formulations could be as good. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) can mitigate those limitations but the discrete nature of text
has hindered their application to language generation: the approaches proposed so
far, based on Reinforcement Learning, have been shown to underperform MLE.
Departing from previous works, we analyze the exploration step in GANs applied
to text generation, and show how classical sampling results in unstable training.
We propose to consider alternative exploration strategies in a GAN framework
that we name ColdGAN s, where we force the sampling to be close to the distribution modes to get smoother learning dynamics. For the first time, to the best
of our knowledge, the proposed language GANs compare favorably to MLE, and
obtain improvements over the state-of-the-art on three generative tasks, namely
unconditional text generation, question generation, and abstractive summarization.

1

Introduction

Deep learning approaches have paved the way for significant achievements in Natural Language
Generation (NLG). Under the most popular paradigm, sequence to sequence models [40] are trained
with Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) via Teacher Forcing [50]. Training neural networks
under MLE does not succeed in modeling sequence probabilities [48], since, at inference, the model
is conditioned on sequences that may have never been observed at training time. Indeed, generated
texts using this approach are often degenerate [16], e.g. prone to repetition.
Nonetheless, these same architectures, when used as discriminators, are able to distinguish human
from machine-generated text with a disconcerting efficiency: reported values are around 97% for
long article generation [53] or abstractive summarization [37]. In the generative architectures, the
encoder part can reach such performances, supporting the hypothesis that generation failures are
mostly due to the decoding step: under MLE training regimes, the decoding suffers from exposure
bias [33, 1] and lacks a sequence-level loss to optimize [26].
To mitigate MLE limitations, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been applied to text generation
tasks [33, 29], considering sequence level metrics such as BLEU or ROUGE as the reward. However,
such metrics, based on n-grams similarity, are known to poorly correlate with human judgments [27],
and do not preserve meaning [39]. Hence, when reinforced on them, models yield to poorer genera34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

