The Mean-Squared Error of Double Q-Learning

Wentao Weng
Tsinghua University
wwt17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Harsh Gupta
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
hgupta10@illinois.edu

Niao He
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
niaohe@illinois.edu

Lei Ying
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
leiying@umich.edu

R. Srikant
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
rsrikant@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we establish a theoretical comparison between the asymptotic meansquared error of Double Q-learning and Q-learning. Our result builds upon an
analysis for linear stochastic approximation based on Lyapunov equations and
applies to both tabular setting and with linear function approximation, provided
that the optimal policy is unique and the algorithms converge. We show that the
asymptotic mean-squared error of Double Q-learning is exactly equal to that of Qlearning if Double Q-learning uses twice the learning rate of Q-learning and outputs
the average of its two estimators. We also present some practical implications of
this theoretical observation using simulations.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) seeks to design efficient algorithms to find optimal policies for Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs) without any knowledge of the underlying model (known as modelfree learning) [31]. In this paper, we study the performance of double Q-learning [20, 33], which
is a popular variant of the standard Watkins’s model-free Q-learning algorithm [34, 35]. Double
Q-learning was proposed to remedy the stability issues associated with the standard Q-learning
algorithm (due to maximization bias of the Q-function) by using two estimators instead of one. It has
been shown empirically that double Q-learning finds a better policy in the tabular setting [20] and
converges faster when coupled with deep neural networks for function approximation [33]. Several
variations of Double Q-learning were proposed in [36, 1]. However, to the best of our knowledge,
there has been no analysis of double Q-learning vis-à-vis how it performs theoretically as compared
to standard Q-learning. The objective of this paper is to address this question by providing a tight
theoretical comparison between double Q-learning and Q-learning while also drawing experimental
insights that allow us to corroborate the theory.
Stochastic Approximation (SA) has proven to be a powerful framework to analyze reinforcement
learning algorithms [7, 4, 22]. Several different types of guarantees for various reinforcement
learning algorithms have been established using techniques from stochastic approximation. The
most commonplace result is the asymptotic convergence of algorithms by analyzing the stability
of an associated ODE. Examples include [32], [30] for classical TD-learning with linear function
approximation, [8] for synchronous Q-learning, [24] for double TD-learning, and [27, 25] for
Q-learning with linear function approximation. To the best of our knowledge, establishing the
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

