Beyond Lazy Training for Over-parameterized
Tensor Decomposition

Xiang Wang∗
Duke University
xwang@cs.duke.edu

Chenwei Wu∗
Duke University
cwwu@cs.duke.edu

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Over-parametrization is an important technique in training neural networks. In both
theory and practice, training a larger network allows the optimization algorithm to
avoid bad local optimal solutions. In this paper we study a closely related tensor
decomposition problem: given an l-th order tensor in (Rd )⊗l of rank r (where
r  d), can variants of gradient descent find a rank m decomposition where
m > r? We show that in a lazy training regime (similar to the NTK regime for
neural networks) one needs at least m = Ω(dl−1 ), while a variant of gradient
descent can find an approximate tensor when m = O∗ (r2.5l log d). Our results
show that gradient descent on over-parametrized objective could go beyond the
lazy training regime and utilize certain low-rank structure in the data.

1

Introduction

The success of training neural networks has sparked theoretical research in understanding non-convex
optimization. Over-parametrization – using more neurons than the number of training data or than
what is necessary for expressivity – is crucial to the success of optimizing neural networks (Livni
et al., 2014; Jacot et al., 2018; Mei et al., 2018). The idea of over-parametrization also applies to other
related or simplified problems, such as matrix factorization and tensor decomposition, which are of
their own interests and also serve as testbeds for analysis techniques of non-convex optimization.
We focus on over-parameterized tensor decomposition in this paper (which is closely connected to
over-parameterized neural networks (Ge et al., 2018)).
Concretely, given an order-l symmetric tensor T ∗ in (Rd )⊗l with rank r, we aim to decompose it into
a sum of rank-1 tensors with as few components as possible. Finding the low-rank decomposition
with the smallest possible rank r is known to be NP-hard (Hillar and Lim, 2013). The problem
becomes easier if we relax the goal to finding a decomposition with m components where m is
allowed to be larger than r. The natural approach is to optimize the following objective using gradient
descent
2
m
r
X
X
⊗l
∗ ∗ ⊗l
min
ci ui −
ci [ui ]
.
(1)
ui ∈Rd ,ci ∈R

i=1

i=1

F

When m = r, gradient descent on the objective above will empirically get stuck at a bad local
minimum even for orthogonal tensors (Ge et al., 2015). On the other hand, when m = Ω(dl−1 ),
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

