Patch2Self: Denoising Diffusion MRI with
Self-Supervised Learning

Shreyas Fadnavis1∗ , Joshua Batson2† , Eleftherios Garyfallidis1†
1
Indiana University Bloomington, 2 CZ Biohub

Abstract
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) is the only noninvasive
method for quantifying microstructure and reconstructing white-matter pathways in
the living human brain. Fluctuations from multiple sources create significant additive noise in DWI data which must be suppressed before subsequent microstructure
analysis. We introduce a self-supervised learning method for denoising DWI data,
Patch2Self, which uses the entire volume to learn a full-rank locally linear denoiser
for that volume. By taking advantage of the oversampled q-space of DWI data,
Patch2Self can separate structure from noise without requiring an explicit model
for either. We demonstrate the effectiveness of Patch2Self via quantitative and
qualitative improvements in microstructure modeling, tracking (via fiber bundle
coherency) and model estimation relative to other unsupervised methods on real
and simulated data.

1

Introduction

Diffusion Weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DWI) [3] is a powerful method for measuring
tissue microstructure [33, 34]. Estimates of the diffusion signal in each voxel can be integrated using
mathematical models to reconstruct the white matter pathways in the brain. The fidelity of those
inferred structures is limited by the substantial noise present in DWI acquisitions, due to numerous
factors including thermal fluctuations. With new acquisition schemes or diffusion-encoding strategies,
the sources and distribution of the noise can vary, making it difficult to model and remove. The
noise confounds both qualitative (visual) and quantitative (microstructure and tractography) analysis.
Denoising is therefore a vital processing step for DWI data prior to anatomical inference.
DWI data consist of many 3D acquisitions, in which diffusion along different gradient directions is
measured. Simple models of Gaussian diffusion are parametrized by a six-dimensional tensor, for
which six measurements would be sufficient, but as each voxel may contain an assortment of tissue
microstructure with different properties, many more gradient directions are often acquired. While
each of these acquired volumes may be quite noisy, the fact that the same structures are represented
in each offers the potential for significant denoising.
The first class of denoising methods used for DWI data were extensions of techniques developed for
2D images, such as non-local means (NL-means [9] and its variants [36, 8]), total variation norm
minimization [24], cosine transform filtering [30], empirical Bayes [2] and correlation based joint
filtering [47]. Other methods take more direct advantage of the fact that DWI measurements have a
special 4D structure, representing many acquisitions of the same 3D volume at different b-values and
in different gradient directions. Assuming that small spatial structures are more-or-less consistent
across these measurements, these methods project to a local low-rank approximation of the data
[37, 31]. The top performing methods are overcomplete Local-PCA (LPCA) [31] and its MarchenkoPastur extension [48]. The current state-of-the-art unsupervised method for denoising DWI is the
Marchenko-Pastur PCA, which handles the choice of rank in a principled way by thresholding based
on the eigenspectrum of the expected noise covariance matrix. Note that Marchenko-Pastur PCA,
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

