Robust Gaussian Covariance Estimation in
Nearly-Matrix Multiplication Time

Jerry Li
Microsoft Research
jerrl@microsoft.com

Guanghao Ye
University of Washington
ghye@uw.edu

Abstract
Robust covariance estimation is the following, well-studied problem in high dimensional statistics: given N samples from a d-dimensional Gaussian N (0, Σ),
but where an ε-fraction of the samples have been arbitrarily corrupted, outb minimizing the total variation distance between N (0, Σ) and N (0, b
put Σ
Σ).
This corresponds to learning Σ in a natural affine-invariant variant of the Frobenius norm known as the Mahalanobis norm. Previous work of [CDGW19]
demonstrated an algorithm that, given N = Ω(d2 /ε2 ) samples, achieved a
near-optimal error of O(ε log 1/ε), and moreover, their algorithm ran in time
e
O(T (N, d) log κ/ poly(ε)), where T (N, d) is the time it takes to multiply a d × N
matrix by its transpose, and κ is the condition number of Σ. When ε is relatively small, their polynomial dependence on 1/ε in the runtime is prohibitively
large. In this paper, we demonstrate a novel algorithm which achieves the same
e (N, d) log κ). In particular our
statistical guarantees, but which runs in time O(T
runtime has no dependence on ε. When Σ is reasonably conditioned, our runtime
matches that of the fastest algorithm for covariance estimation without outliers, up
to poly-logarithmic factors, showing that we can get robustness essentially “for
free.”

1

Introduction

Covariance estimation is one of the most fundamental high dimensional statistical estimation tasks,
see e.g. [BL+ 08a, BL+ 08b], and references therein. In this paper, we study the problem of covariance
estimation in high dimensions, in the presence of a small fraction of adversarial data. We consider
the following standard generative model: we are given samples X1 , . . . , XN drawn from a Gaussian
N (0, Σ), but an ε-fraction of these points have been arbitrarily corrupted. The goal is then to output
b As we shall see, this
b minimizing the total variation distance between N (0, Σ) and N (0, Σ).
Σ
naturally corresponds to learning Σ in an affine-invariant version of the Frobenius norm, known as
the Mahalanobis norm (see Section 2).
In the non-robust setting, where there are no corruptions, the problem is well-understood from both a
information-theoretic and computational perspective. It is known that the empirical covariance of the
data converges to the true covariance at an optimal
√ statistical rate: the empirical covariance matrix
has expected Mahalanobis error at most O(d/ N ); and this is the optimal bound up to a constant
factor. That is, when we have N = Ω(d2 /ε2 ), the empirical covariance matrix will have Mahalanobis
error O(ε). In fact, it satisfies a stronger and more natural affine-invariant error guarantee, as we will
discuss later in this Section. Moreover, it is easy to compute: it can be computed in time T (N, d),
where T (n, m) is the time it takes to multiply a m × n matrix by its transpose. When N = Θ(d2 /ε2 ),

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

