Penalized Langevin dynamics with vanishing penalty
for smooth and log-concave targets

Avetik Karagulyan
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
avetik.karagulyan@ensae.fr

Arnak S. Dalalyan
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
arnak.dalalyan@ensae.fr

Abstract
We study the problem of sampling from a probability distribution on Rp defined
via a convex and smooth potential function. We first consider a continuous-time
diffusion-type process, termed Penalized Langevin dynamics (PLD), the drift of
which is the negative gradient of the potential plus a linear penalty that vanishes
when time goes to infinity. An upper bound on the Wasserstein-2 distance between
the distribution of the PLD at time t and the target is established. This upper bound
highlights the influence of the speed of decay of the penalty on the accuracy of
approximation. As a consequence, considering the low-temperature limit we infer
a new nonasymptotic guarantee of convergence of the penalized gradient flow for
the optimization problem.

1

Introduction

The problem of sampling from a probability distribution received a great deal of attention in machine
learning literature. Gradient based MCMC methods such as the Langevin MC, the underdamped
Langevin Monte Carlo, the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and their Metropolis adjusted counterparts were
shown to have attractive features both in practice and in theory. In particular, thanks to a large number
of recent results, the case of smooth and strongly log-concave densities is now fairly well understood.
In this case, non-asymptotic theoretical guarantees for various distances on probability distributions
have been established, showing that the number of gradient evaluations necessary to achieve an error
upper bounded by ε is a low order polynomial of the dimension, the condition number and the inverse
precision 1/ε. The dependence on the latter is even logarithmic for Metropolis adjusted methods.
The main focus of this paper is on the problem of sampling from densities1
π(θ) ∝ exp(−f (θ)),

θ ∈ Rp ,

corresponding to a (weakly) convex potential function f : Rp → R. In the sequel, a twice differentiable function f : Rp → R is said to satisfy (m, M )-SCGL condition (m-strongly convex and
M -gradient Lipschitz), for some M ≥ m ≥ 0, if the following inequality is satisfied:
mIp  ∇2 f (θ)  M Ip ,

∀θ ∈ Rp .

Here, for two square matrices A and B, the relation A  B means that B−A is positive semidefinite.
In this work, we wish to define a class of continuous-time processes, such that for every element
{Lt : t ≥ 0} of the class, the distribution of L at time t is close to the target distribution π. When the
potential function f satisfies (m, M )-SCGL condition with m ≥ 0, it is well-known that the vanilla
1

We will use the same notation for the probability density functions and corresponding distributions.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

