Learning the Geometry of Wave-Based Imaging

Konik Kothari
UIUC
kkothar3@illinois.edu

Maarten de Hoop
Rice University
mvd2@rice.edu

Ivan Dokmanić
University of Basel
ivan.dokmanic@unibas.ch

Abstract
We propose a general physics-based deep learning architecture for wave-based
imaging problems. A key difficulty in imaging problems with a varying background
wave speed is that the medium “bends” the waves differently depending on their
position and direction. This space-bending geometry makes the equivariance to
translations of convolutional networks an undesired inductive bias. We build an
interpretable neural architecture inspired by Fourier integral operators (FIOs) which
approximate the wave physics. FIOs model a wide range of imaging modalities,
from seismology and radar to Doppler and ultrasound. We focus on learning the
geometry of wave propagation captured by FIOs, which is implicit in the data, via
a loss based on optimal transport. The proposed FIONet performs significantly
better than the usual baselines on a number of imaging inverse problems, especially
in out-of-distribution tests.

1

Introduction

We propose a deep learning approach for wavebased imaging with applications ranging from medical photoacoustic tomography to reflection seismology. A simple intuition for imaging with waves
can be gleaned from Figure 1. Elementary wave
packets propagate from where they are created
(sources S1,2,3 in 1A), and then possibly scattered
(an interface, 1D), to where they are sensed. When
and where a wave packet arrives at a sensor (1B) depends on its orientation and position and the geometry associated with the background wave speed. To
the first approximation, imaging is accomplished
by routing the wave packets back where they were
created or scattered.
We consider the problem of estimating an image,
v from measurements, u obtained by an imaging
forward operator, Aσ given as
u = Aσ v (+errors).

(1)

The unknown v could, for example, represent the
interfaces within the subsurface of Earth. The forward operator (and, hence, its inverse) is parameterized by σ. Here, σ is the background wave speed,
a material parameter of the medium. Note that σ
varies across the domain and controls the ray paths
of wave packets (see Figure 1A,D); thus defining a

Recording surface

Sensor traces

Trace at
Inverse source problem
Source

Recording
surface

Interface

Dyadic-parabolic decomposition

Reflector imaging

Figure 1: A: Sources S1 , S2 and S3 are recorded
at the surface at times t1 , t2 and t3 . B: The
recording surface generates sensor traces that
are used to image the sources. C: Wave packets are localized in frequency by directional
bandpass filters χ2ν,k . D: In reflection imaging,
reflections of waves are recorded on the surface
(see Appendix A.6).

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

