Optimal Epoch Stochastic Gradient Descent Ascent
Methods for Min-Max Optimization

Yan Yan
School of EECS
Washington State University
yanyan.1@wsu.edu
Qihang Lin
Department of Business Analytics
University of Iowa
qihang-lin@uiowa.edu

Yi Xu
Machine Intelligence Technology
Alibaba Group US Inc
statxy@gmail.com

Wei Liu
Tencent AI Lab
wl2223@columbia.edu

Tianbao Yang
Department of CS
University of Iowa
tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu

Abstract
Epoch gradient descent method (a.k.a. Epoch-GD) proposed by [16] was deemed
a breakthrough for stochastic strongly convex minimization, which achieves the
optimal convergence rate of O(1/T ) with T iterative updates for the objective
gap. However, its extension to solving stochastic min-max problems with strong
convexity and strong concavity still remains open, and it is still unclear whether
a fast rate of O(1/T ) for the duality gap is achievable for stochastic min-max
optimization under strong convexity and strong concavity. Although some recent studies have proposed stochastic algorithms with fast convergence rates for
min-max problems, they require additional assumptions about the problem, e.g.,
smoothness, bi-linear structure, etc. In this paper, we bridge this gap by providing
a sharp analysis of epoch-wise stochastic gradient descent ascent method (referred
to as Epoch-GDA) for solving strongly convex strongly concave (SCSC) min-max
problems, without imposing any additional assumption about smoothness or the
function’s structure. To the best of our knowledge, our result is the first one that
shows Epoch-GDA can achieve the optimal rate of O(1/T ) for the duality gap
of general SCSC min-max problems. We emphasize that such generalization of
Epoch-GD for strongly convex minimization problems to Epoch-GDA for SCSC
min-max problems is non-trivial and requires novel technical analysis. Moreover,
we notice that the key lemma can also be used for proving the convergence of
Epoch-GDA for weakly-convex strongly-concave min-max problems, leading to
a nearly optimal complexity without resorting to smoothness or other structural
conditions.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider stochastic algorithms for solving the following min-max saddle-point
problem with a general objective function f without smoothness or any other special structure:
min max f (x, y),

x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where X ⊆ Rd and Y ⊆ Rn are closed convex sets and f : X × Y → R is continuous. It is of
great interest to find a saddle-point solution to the above problem, which is defined as (x∗ , y ∗ ) such
thatf (x∗ , y) ≤ f (x∗ , y ∗ ) ≤ f (x, y ∗ ), ∀x ∈ X, y ∈ Y. Problem (1) covers a number of applications
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

