Beyond Homophily in Graph Neural Networks:
Current Limitations and Effective Designs

Jiong Zhu
University of Michigan
jiongzhu@umich.edu

Yujun Yan
University of Michigan
yujunyan@umich.edu

Mark Heimann
University of Michigan
mheimann@umich.edu

Leman Akoglu
Carnegie Mellon University
lakoglu@andrew.cmu.edu

Lingxiao Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University
lingxia1@andrew.cmu.edu
Danai Koutra
University of Michigan
dkoutra@umich.edu

Abstract
We investigate the representation power of graph neural networks in the semisupervised node classification task under heterophily or low homophily, i.e., in
networks where connected nodes may have different class labels and dissimilar
features. Many popular GNNs fail to generalize to this setting, and are even
outperformed by models that ignore the graph structure (e.g., multilayer perceptrons). Motivated by this limitation, we identify a set of key designs—ego- and
neighbor-embedding separation, higher-order neighborhoods, and combination of
intermediate representations—that boost learning from the graph structure under
heterophily. We combine them into a graph neural network, H2 GCN, which we
use as the base method to empirically evaluate the effectiveness of the identified
designs. Going beyond the traditional benchmarks with strong homophily, our
empirical analysis shows that the identified designs increase the accuracy of GNNs
by up to 40% and 27% over models without them on synthetic and real networks
with heterophily, respectively, and yield competitive performance under homophily.

1

Introduction

We focus on the effectiveness of graph neural networks (GNNs) [42] in tackling the semi-supervised
node classification task in challenging settings: the goal of the task is to infer the unknown labels of
the nodes by using the network structure [44], given partially labeled networks with node features
(or attributes). Unlike most prior work that considers networks with strong homophily, we study the
representation power of GNNs in settings with different levels of homophily or class label smoothness.
Homophily is a key principle of many real-world networks, whereby linked nodes often belong to the
same class or have similar features (“birds of a feather flock together”) [21]. For example, friends are
likely to have similar political beliefs or age, and papers tend to cite papers from the same research
area [23]. GNNs model the homophily principle by propagating features and aggregating them
within various graph neighborhoods via different mechanisms (e.g., averaging, LSTM) [17, 11, 36].
However, in the real world, there are also settings where “opposites attract”, leading to networks with
heterophily: linked nodes are likely from different classes or have dissimilar features. For instance,
the majority of people tend to connect with people of the opposite gender in dating networks, different
amino acid types are more likely to connect in protein structures, fraudsters are more likely to connect
to accomplices than to other fraudsters in online purchasing networks [24].
Since many existing GNNs assume strong homophily, they fail to generalize to networks with
heterophily (or low/medium level of homophily). In such cases, we find that even models that ignore
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

