Is normalization indispensable
for training deep neural networks?

Jie Shao1∗ , Kai Hu2∗, Changhu Wang3 , Xiangyang Xue1 , Bhiksha Raj2
1
Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
3
Byte Dance AI Lab, Shanghai, China
{kaihu, bhiksha}@cs.cmu.edu, {shaojie, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn,
wangchanghu@bytedance.com

Abstract
Normalization operations are widely used to train deep neural networks, and they
can improve both convergence and generalization in most tasks. The theories for
normalization’s effectiveness and new forms of normalization have always been hot
topics in research. To better understand normalization, one question can be whether
normalization is indispensable for training deep neural networks? In this paper,
we analyze what would happen when normalization layers are removed from the
networks, and show how to train deep neural networks without normalization layers
and without performance degradation. Our proposed method can achieve the
same or even slightly better performance in a variety of tasks: image classification
in ImageNet, object detection and segmentation in MS-COCO, video classification
in Kinetics, and machine translation in WMT English-German, etc. Our study may
help better understand the role of normalization layers and can be a competitive
alternative to normalization layers. Codes are available at https://github.com/
hukkai/rescaling.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have greatly advanced the benchmarks in many artificial intelligence applications, such as image recognition [19], speech recognition [1], and natural language processing
[32], etc. However, training effective deep neural networks is often non-trivial, and beset by many
problems, one of most annoying of which might be that of vanishing or exploding gradients, which
directly relates to the problem of vanishing or exploding variance of a signal (i.e. an input) as it passes
through the network [13]. Batch Normalization (BN) [17] greatly mitigates this problem. Since the
introduction of BN, several variants have been proposed that apply the underlying principle to a wider
range of tasks: Layer Normalization for recurrent neural networks [2], Instance Normalization (IN)
[33] for stylization, Group Normalization (GN) [36] for small-batch training, etc. Normalization
operations are, by now, default components of the state of the art in many tasks.
Despite the popularity and success of normalization, the theory behind the effectiveness of such
operations in neural networks is not yet fully understood. The original motivation provided in [17]
is that BN can reduce internal covariate shift. Other studies [29, 22, 4, 38] also show several other
advantages provided by normalization in terms of loss landscape, regularization, etc. However,
most theoretical analyses require assumptions about the data/feature distribution, and the developed
theories are only evaluated on small datasets. Analyzing the optimization and generalization of
normalization in deep networks is still an open problem.
∗

Equal contribution.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

