High-Throughput Synchronous Deep RL

Iou-Jen Liu, Raymond A. Yeh, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{iliu3, yeh17, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) is computationally demanding and requires
processing of many data points. Synchronous methods enjoy training stability
while having lower data throughput. In contrast, asynchronous methods achieve
high throughput but suffer from stability issues and lower sample efficiency due
to ‘stale policies.’ To combine the advantages of both methods we propose HighThroughput Synchronous Deep Reinforcement Learning (HTS-RL). In HTS-RL,
we perform learning and rollouts concurrently, devise a system design which
avoids ‘stale policies’ and ensure that actors interact with environment replicas
in an asynchronous manner while maintaining full determinism. We evaluate
our approach on Atari games and the Google Research Football environment.
Compared to synchronous baselines, HTS-RL is 2 − 6× faster. Compared to
state-of-the-art asynchronous methods, HTS-RL has competitive throughput and
consistently achieves higher average episode rewards.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been impressively successful on a wide variety of tasks,
including playing of video games [1, 6, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23–25, 32] and robotic control [10, 18, 22].
However, a long training time is a key challenge hindering deep RL to scale to even more complex
tasks. To counter the often excessive training time, RL frameworks aim for two properties: (1) A
high throughput which ensures that the framework collects data at very high rates. (2) A high sample
efficiency which ensures that the framework learns the desired policy with fewer data. To achieve
both, synchronous and asynchronous parallel actor-learners have been developed which accelerate
RL training [1, 6–8, 19, 25, 29, 34].
State-of-the-art synchronous methods, such as synchronous advantage actor critic (A2C) [6, 25]
and related algorithms [26, 27, 35] are popular because of their data efficiency, training stability,
full determinism, and reproducibility. However, synchronous methods suffer from idle time as
all actors need to finish experience collection before trainable parameters are updated. This is
particularly problematic when the time for an environment step varies significantly. As a result,
existing synchronous methods don’t scale to environments where the step time varies significantly
due to computationally intensive 3D-rendering and (physics) simulation.
Instead, asynchronous methods, e.g., asynchronous advantage actor-critic on a GPU (GA3C) [1] and
importance weighted actor-learner architectures (IMPALA) [7], achieve high throughput. However,
these methods suffer from a stale-policy issue [1, 7] as learning and data collecting are performed
asynchronously. The policy which is used to collect data (behavior policy) is several updates behind
the latest policy (target policy) used for parameter updates. This lag leads to noisy gradients and thus
lower data efficiency. Consequently, asynchronous methods trade training stability for throughput.
We show that this trade-off is not necessary and propose High-Throughput Synchronous RL (HTSRL), a technique, which achieves both high throughput and high training stability. HTS-RL can
be applied to many off-the-shelf deep RL algorithms, such as A2C, proximal policy optimization
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

