Multipole Graph Neural Operator for
Parametric Partial Differential Equations

Zongyi Li
Caltech
zongyili@caltech.edu

Nikola Kovachki
Caltech
nkovachki@caltech.edu

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli
Purdue University
kamyar@purdue.edu
Kaushik Bhattacharya
Caltech
bhatta@caltech.edu

Burigede Liu
Caltech
bgl@caltech.edu

Andrew Stuart
Caltech
astuart@caltech.edu

Anima Anandkumar
Caltech
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
One of the main challenges in using deep learning-based methods for simulating
physical systems and solving partial differential equations (PDEs) is formulating
physics-based data in the desired structure for neural networks. Graph neural
networks (GNNs) have gained popularity in this area since graphs offer a natural
way of modeling particle interactions and provide a clear way of discretizing the
continuum models. However, the graphs constructed for approximating such tasks
usually ignore long-range interactions due to unfavorable scaling of the computational complexity with respect to the number of nodes. The errors due to these
approximations scale with the discretization of the system, thereby not allowing for
generalization under mesh-refinement. Inspired by the classical multipole methods,
we propose a novel multi-level graph neural network framework that captures
interaction at all ranges with only linear complexity. Our multi-level formulation
is equivalent to recursively adding inducing points to the kernel matrix, unifying
GNNs with multi-resolution matrix factorization of the kernel. Experiments confirm our multi-graph network learns discretization-invariant solution operators to
PDEs and can be evaluated in linear time.

1

Introduction

A wide class of important scientific applications involve numerical approximation of parametric PDEs.
There has been immense research efforts in formulating and solving the governing PDEs for a variety
of physical and biological phenomena ranging from the quantum to the cosmic scale. While this
endeavor has been successful in producing solutions to real-life problems, major challenges remain.
Solving complex PDE systems such as those arising in climate modeling, turbulent flow of fluids,
and plastic deformation of solid materials requires considerable time, computational resources, and
domain expertise. Producing accurate, efficient, and automated data-driven approximation schemes
has the potential to significantly accelerate the rate of innovation in these fields. Machine learning
based methods enable this since they are much faster to evaluate and require only observational data
to train, in stark contrast to traditional Galerkin methods [50] and classical reduced order models[40].

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

