Can Implicit Bias Explain Generalization?
Stochastic Convex Optimization as a Case Study

Assaf Dauber
Department of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University
assafdauber@mail.tau.ac.il

Meir Feder
Department of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University
meir@tauex.tau.ac.il

Tomer Koren
School of CS, Tel Aviv University
& Google Research Tel Aviv
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Roi Livni
Department of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
The notion of implicit bias, or implicit regularization, has been suggested as a means
to explain the surprising generalization ability of modern-days overparameterized
learning algorithms. This notion refers to the tendency of the optimization
algorithm towards a certain structured solution that often generalizes well. Recently,
several papers have studied implicit regularization and were able to identify this
phenomenon in various scenarios. We revisit this paradigm in arguably the simplest
non-trivial setup, and study the implicit bias of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
in the context of Stochastic Convex Optimization. As a first step, we provide a simple
construction that rules out the existence of a distribution-independent implicit
regularizer that governs the generalization ability of SGD. We then demonstrate
a learning problem that rules out a very general class of distribution-dependent
implicit regularizers from explaining generalization, which includes strongly convex
regularizers as well as non-degenerate norm-based regularizations. Certain aspects
of our constructions point out to significant difficulties in providing a comprehensive
explanation of an algorithm’s generalization performance by solely arguing about
its implicit regularization properties.

1

Introduction

One of the great mysteries of contemporary machine learning is the impressive success of unregularized
and overparameterized learning algorithms. In detail, current machine learning practice is to train
models with far more parameters than samples and let the algorithm fit the data, oftentimes without
any type of regularization. In fact, these algorithms are so overcapacitated that they can even
memorize and fit random data. Yet, when trained on real-life data, these algorithms show remarkable
performance in generalizing to unseen samples [18, 30].
This phenomenon is often attributed to what is described as the implicit-regularization of an
algorithm [18]. Implicit regularization roughly refers to the learner’s preference to implicitly choosing
certain structured solutions as if some explicit regularization term appeared in its objective. As a
canonical example, in linear optimization one can show that various forms of gradient descent, an
apriori unregularized algorithm, behaves identically as regularized risk minimization penalized with
the squared Euclidean norm on the parameters [24].
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

