Dark Experience for General Continual Learning:
a Strong, Simple Baseline

Pietro Buzzega

Matteo Boschini

Angelo Porrello

Davide Abati

Simone Calderara

AImageLab - University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy
name.surname@unimore.it

Abstract
Continual Learning has inspired a plethora of approaches and evaluation settings;
however, the majority of them overlooks the properties of a practical scenario,
where the data stream cannot be shaped as a sequence of tasks and offline training
is not viable. We work towards General Continual Learning (GCL), where task
boundaries blur and the domain and class distributions shift either gradually or
suddenly. We address it through mixing rehearsal with knowledge distillation
and regularization; our simple baseline, Dark Experience Replay, matches the
network’s logits sampled throughout the optimization trajectory, thus promoting
consistency with its past. By conducting an extensive analysis on both standard
benchmarks and a novel GCL evaluation setting (MNIST-360), we show that such
a seemingly simple baseline outperforms consolidated approaches and leverages
limited resources. We further explore the generalization capabilities of our objective, showing its regularization being beneficial beyond mere performance.
Code is available at https://github.com/aimagelab/mammoth.

1

Introduction

Practical applications of neural networks may require to go beyond the classical setting where all data
are available at once: when new classes or tasks emerge, such models should acquire new knowledge
on-the-fly, incorporating it with the current one. However, if the learning focuses on the current
set of examples solely, a sudden performance deterioration occurs on the old data, referred to as
catastrophic forgetting [29]. As a trivial workaround, one could store all incoming examples and
re-train from scratch when needed, but this is impracticable in terms of required resources. Continual
Learning (CL) methods aim at training a neural network from a stream of non i.i.d. samples, relieving
catastrophic forgetting while limiting computational costs and memory footprint [32].
It is not always easy to have a clear picture of the merits of these works: due to subtle differences
in the way methods are evaluated, many state-of-the-art approaches only stand out in the setting
where they were originally conceived. Several recent papers [10, 11, 17, 39] address this issue and
conduct a critical review of existing evaluation settings, leading to the formalization of three main
experimental settings [17, 39]. By conducting an extensive comparison on them, we surprisingly
observe that a simple Experience Replay baseline (i.e. interleaving old examples with ones from the
current task) consistently outperforms cutting-edge methods in the considered settings.
Also, the majority of the compared methods are unsuited for real-world applications, where memory
is bounded and tasks intertwine and overlap. Recently, [10] introduced a series of guidelines that CL
methods should realize to be applicable in practice: i) no task boundaries: do not rely on boundaries
between tasks during training; ii) no test time oracle: do not require task identifiers at inference
time; iii) constant memory: have a bounded memory footprint throughout the entire training phase.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

