Group-Fair Online Allocation in Continuous Time

Semih Cayci∗
scayci@illinois.edu

Swati Gupta†
swatig@gatech.edu

Atilla Eryilmaz‡
eryilmaz.2@osu.edu

Abstract
The theory of discrete-time online learning has been successfully applied in many
problems that involve sequential decision-making under uncertainty. However,
in many applications including contractual hiring in online freelancing platforms
and server allocation in cloud computing systems, the outcome of each action
is observed only after a random and action-dependent time. Furthermore, as a
consequence of certain ethical and economic concerns, the controller may impose
deadlines on the completion of each task, and require fairness across different
groups in the allocation of total time budget B. In order to address these applications, we consider continuous-time online learning problem with fairness
considerations, and present a novel framework based on continuous-time utility
maximization. We show that this formulation recovers reward-maximizing, maxmin fair and proportionally fair allocation rules across different groups as special
cases. We characterize the optimal offline policy, which allocates the total time between different actions in an optimally fair way (as defined by the utility function),
and impose deadlines to maximize time-efficiency. In the absence of any statistical
knowledge, we propose a novel online learning algorithm based on dual ascent
optimization for time averages, and prove that it achieves e
O(B −1/2 ) regret bound.

1

Introduction

With the prevalence of automated decision methods and machine learning methods, it is important to
analyze the impact of learning and evaluate models not only with respect to traditional objectives
such as reward or model accuracy, but also to account for the impact on individuals that interact with
the system. Indeed, there are many studies highlighting algorithmic discrimination due to problems
in the machine learning pipeline: imbalance in data [1], learnt representations [2, 3], choice of model
proxies [4], demographic group-dependent difference in error rates of the learned models [5, 6, 7],
to name a few. With rising ethical and legal concerns, addressing such issues has become urgent,
specially as these impact critical societal decisions involving job opportunities and hiring. In 2014, it
was estimated that 25% of the total workforce in the US was involved in some form of freelancing,
and this number was predicted to grow to 40% by 2020 [8]. In reality, this percentage might be
much higher, due to COVID-19 restrictions leading to increased work-from-home and changes in
job opportunities [9, 10]. In online platforms however, there has been a strong evidence of bias
observed in number of user reviews and user ratings4 on completing jobs with significant correlations
∗

Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
GA 30332
‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210
4
The mean (median) normalized rating score for White workers was 0.98 (1), while it is 0.97 (1) for Black
workers on TASK R ABBIT. The mean (median) rating of White workers was found to be 3.3 (4.8), 3.0 (4.6) for
Black workers, 3.3 (4.8) for Asian workers, 3.6 (4.8) for workers with a picture that does not depict a person,
and 1.7 (0.0) for workers with no image on F IVERR [11].
†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

