Knowledge Augmented Deep Neural Networks for
Joint Facial Expression and Action Unit Recognition

Zijun Cui
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
cuiz3@rpi.edu

Tengfei Song
Southeast University
songtf@seu.edu.cn

Yuru Wang
Northeast Normal University
wangyr915@nenu.edu.cn

Qiang Ji
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Facial expression and action units (AUs) represent two levels of descriptions of
the facial behavior. Due to the underlying facial anatomy and the need to form a
meaningful coherent expression, they are strongly correlated. This paper proposes
to systematically capture their dependencies and incorporate them into a deep
learning framework for joint facial expression recognition and action unit detection.
Specifically, we first propose a constraint optimization method to encode the
generic knowledge on expression-AUs probabilistic dependencies into a Bayesian
Network (BN). The BN is then integrated into a deep learning framework as a
weak supervision for an AU detection model. A data-driven facial expression
recognition(FER) model is then constructed from data. Finally, the FER model
and AU detection model are trained jointly to refine their learning. Evaluations
on benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed knowledge
integration in improving the performance of both the FER model and the AU
detection model. The proposed AU detection model is demonstrated to be able
to achieve competitive performance without AU annotations. Furthermore, the
proposed Bayesian Network capturing the generic knowledge is demonstrated to
generalize well to different datasets.

1

Introduction

Facial expression is a key signal of human emotion. From the facial expression analysis perspective,
there are two levels of expression descriptors: the global facial expression and the local Facial Action
Units(AUs). These two descriptors lead to two research topics: Facial Expression Recognition(FER)
and Facial Action Units Detection. AU is defined as facial muscle movements that correspond to a
displayed expression according to Facial Action Coding System(FACS)[7]. AU activation is usually
subtle and hard to annotate, thus the annotated AU data is limited and error prone. In comparison, the
expression is global and easier to label. In addition, for both AU detection and FER problems, the
data-driven models trained within datasets may generalize poorly to other datasets.
To learn a more generalizable model with limited AU annotation data, domain knowledge are
considered. Some work used the manually designed knowledge directly from FACS [7] or muscle
knowledge([23, 54]), whereas others constructed the dependencies among AUs from data ([48, 56,
52]) which are usually represented as a structural model (e.g. tree[14], graph[20], and graphical
model[48, 45]). AU detection is then carried out by label propagation[23] or model training[44]
using the captured knowledge. Though the relationships among AUs are included, the knowledge
is based on local AU labels. Furthermore, the knowledge learned from a specific dataset cannot
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

