Liberty or Depth: Deep Bayesian Neural Nets Do Not
Need Complex Weight Posterior Approximations

Sebastian Farquhar

Lewis Smith

Yarin Gal

OATML, Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
sebastian.farquhar@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We challenge the longstanding assumption that the mean-field approximation for
variational inference in Bayesian neural networks is severely restrictive, and show
this is not the case in deep networks. We prove several results indicating that deep
mean-field variational weight posteriors can induce similar distributions in functionspace to those induced by shallower networks with complex weight posteriors.
We validate our theoretical contributions empirically, both through examination
of the weight posterior using Hamiltonian Monte Carlo in small models and by
comparing diagonal- to structured-covariance in large settings. Since complex
variational posteriors are often expensive and cumbersome to implement, our
results suggest that using mean-field variational inference in a deeper model is both
a practical and theoretically justified alternative to structured approximations.

1

Introduction

While performing variational inference (VI) in Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) researchers often
make the ‘mean-field’ approximation which assumes that the posterior distribution factorizes over
weights (i.e., diagonal weight covariance). Researchers have assumed that using this mean-field
approximation in BNNs is a severe limitation. This has motivated extensive exploration of VI methods
that explicitly model correlations between weights (see Related Work §2). Furthermore, Foong et al.
[2020] have identified pathologies in single-hidden-layer mean-field regression models, and have
conjectured that these might exist in deeper models as well.
However, the rejection of mean-field methods comes at a price. Structured covariance methods have
worse time complexity (see Table 1) and even efficient implementations take over twice as long to
train an epoch as comparable mean-field approaches [Osawa et al., 2019]. Moreover, recent work
has succeeded in building mean-field BNNs which perform well (e.g., Wu et al. [2019]), creating a
puzzle for those who have assumed that the mean-field approximation is too restrictive.
We argue that for larger, deeper, networks the mean-field approximation matters less to the downstream task of approximating posterior predictive distributions over functions than it does in smaller
shallow networks. In essence: simple parametric functions need complicated weight-distributions to
induce rich distributions in function-space; but complicated parametric functions can induce the same
function-space distributions with simple weight-distributions. Complex covariance is computationally
expensive and often cumbersome to implement though, while depth can be easy to implement and
cheap to compute with standard deep learning packages.
Rather than introducing a new method, we provide empirical and theoretical evidence that some of
the widely-held assumptions present in the research community about the strengths and weaknesses
of existing methods are incorrect. Even when performing VI in weight-space, one does not care
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

