Semi-Supervised Neural Architecture Search

1

Renqian Luo∗, 2 Xu Tan, 2 Rui Wang, 2 Tao Qin, 1 Enhong Chen, 2 Tie-Yan Liu
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
1
lrq@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
2
{xuta, ruiwa, taoqin, tyliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) relies on a good controller to generate better
architectures or predict the accuracy of given architectures. However, training the
controller requires both abundant and high-quality pairs of architectures and their
accuracy, while it is costly to evaluate an architecture and obtain its accuracy. In
this paper, we propose SemiNAS, a semi-supervised NAS approach that leverages
numerous unlabeled architectures (without evaluation and thus nearly no cost).
Specifically, SemiNAS 1) trains an initial accuracy predictor with a small set of
architecture-accuracy data pairs; 2) uses the trained accuracy predictor to predict
the accuracy of large amount of architectures (without evaluation); and 3) adds
the generated data pairs to the original data to further improve the predictor. The
trained accuracy predictor can be applied to various NAS algorithms by predicting
the accuracy of candidate architectures for them. SemiNAS has two advantages:
1) It reduces the computational cost under the same accuracy guarantee. On
NASBench-101 benchmark dataset, it achieves comparable accuracy with gradientbased method while using only 1/7 architecture-accuracy pairs. 2) It achieves higher
accuracy under the same computational cost. It achieves 94.02% test accuracy
on NASBench-101, outperforming all the baselines when using the same number
of architectures. On ImageNet, it achieves 23.5% top-1 error rate (under 600M
FLOPS constraint) using 4 GPU-days for search. We further apply it to LJSpeech
text to speech task and it achieves 97% intelligibility rate in the low-resource setting
and 15% test error rate in the robustness setting, with 9%, 7% improvements over
the baseline respectively.

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) for automatic architecture design has been successfully applied in
several tasks including image classification and language modeling [42, 26, 6]. NAS typically contains
two components, a controller (also called generator) that controls the generation of new architectures,
and an evaluator that trains candidate architectures and evaluates their accuracy2 . The controller
learns to generate relatively better architectures via a variety of techniques (e.g., reinforcement
learning [41, 42], evolution [20], gradient optimization [15, 17], Bayesian optimization [39]), and
plays an important role in NAS [41, 42, 18, 20, 17, 15, 39]. To ensure the performance of the
controller, a large number of high-quality pairs of architectures and their corresponding accuracy are
required as the training data.
∗

The work was done when the first author was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
Although a variety of metrics including accuracy, model size, and inference speed have been used as search
criterion, the accuracy of an architecture is the most important and costly one, and other metrics can be easily
calculated with almost zero computation cost. Therefore, we focus on accuracy in this work.
2

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

