Generating Adjacency-Constrained Subgoals in
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

Tianren Zhang∗,1 , Shangqi Guo∗,1 , Tian Tan2 , Xiaolin Hu†,3,4,5 , Feng Chen†,1,6,7
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
4
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
5
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems
6
Beijing Innovation Center for Future Chip
7
LSBDPA Beijing Key Laboratory
{zhang-tr19,gsq15}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; tiantan@stanford.edu;
{xlhu,chenfeng}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Goal-conditioned hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) is a promising approach for scaling up reinforcement learning (RL) techniques. However, it often
suffers from training inefficiency as the action space of the high-level, i.e., the goal
space, is often large. Searching in a large goal space poses difficulties for both
high-level subgoal generation and low-level policy learning. In this paper, we show
that this problem can be effectively alleviated by restricting the high-level action
space from the whole goal space to a k-step adjacent region of the current state
using an adjacency constraint. We theoretically prove that the proposed adjacency
constraint preserves the optimal hierarchical policy in deterministic MDPs, and
show that this constraint can be practically implemented by training an adjacency
network that can discriminate between adjacent and non-adjacent subgoals. Experimental results on discrete and continuous control tasks show that incorporating the
adjacency constraint improves the performance of state-of-the-art HRL approaches
in both deterministic and stochastic environments.1

1

Introduction

Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) has shown great potentials in scaling up reinforcement
learning (RL) methods to tackle large, temporally extended problems with long-term credit assignment
and sparse rewards [39, 31, 2]. As one of the prevailing HRL paradigms, goal-conditioned HRL
framework [5, 37, 20, 42, 26, 22], which comprises a high-level policy that breaks the original task
into a series of subgoals and a low-level policy that aims to reach those subgoals, has recently achieved
significant success. However, the effectiveness of goal-conditioned HRL relies on the acquisition of
effective and semantically meaningful subgoals, which still remains a key challenge.
As the subgoals can be interpreted as high-level actions, it is feasible to directly train the high-level
policy to generate subgoals using external rewards as supervision, which has been widely adopted
in previous research [26, 25, 22, 20, 42]. Although these methods require little task-specific design,
they often suffer from training inefficiency. This is because the action space of the high-level, i.e., the
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: Xiaolin Hu and Feng Chen.
1
Code is available at https://github.com/trzhang0116/HRAC.

†

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

