Learning identifiable and interpretable latent models
of high-dimensional neural activity using pi-VAE
Ding Zhou
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
dz2336@columbia.edu

Xue-Xin Wei
Department of Neuroscience
UT Austin
weixx@utexas.edu

Abstract
The ability to record activities from hundreds of neurons simultaneously in the brain
has placed an increasing demand for developing appropriate statistical techniques
to analyze such data. Recently, deep generative models have been proposed to
fit neural population responses. While these methods are flexible and expressive,
the downside is that they can be difficult to interpret and identify. To address
this problem, we propose a method that integrates key ingredients from latent
models and traditional neural encoding models. Our method, pi-VAE, is inspired
by recent progress on identifiable variational auto-encoder, which we adapt to make
appropriate for neuroscience applications. Specifically, we propose to construct
latent variable models of neural activity while simultaneously modeling the relation
between the latent and task variables (non-neural variables, e.g. sensory, motor, and
other externally observable states). The incorporation of task variables results in
models that are not only more constrained, but also show qualitative improvements
in interpretability and identifiability. We validate pi-VAE using synthetic data, and
apply it to analyze neurophysiological datasets from rat hippocampus and macaque
motor cortex. We demonstrate that pi-VAE not only fits the data better, but also
provides unexpected novel insights into the structure of the neural codes.

1

Introduction

Popular analysis methods of neural responses in neurophysiology mainly come in two classes: one
based on regression, the other on latent variable modeling. Generalized Linear Model (e.g., (67; 56))
and tuning curve analysis (24; 73; 50) are notable examples of the regression-based approach, and
both have been widely used in neuroscience in the past few decades (63; 60; 73; 54; 11). These
methods express the neural firing rate as a function of the stimulus variable, thus naturally define
encoding models, which can be inverted to decode the stimulus variables (24; 59; 73; 6; 51). In
contrast, the latent-based approach aims to account to variability of the neural responses using a
relatively small number of latent variables which are typically not observed. Recently, various latentbased methods have been developed or applied to analyze neural data and in particular simultaneously
recorded neural population data, including principal component analysis (66; 46; 4; 13; 45), factor
analysis (10; 58; 18), linear/nonlinear dynamical systems (44; 7; 22; 17; 52), among others (e.g., (5;
74; 71; 34)). Each class of models carries certain advantages and disadvantages. Regression-based
methods tend to have higher interpretability, however, they often suffer the problem of under-fitting.
Latent-based models are more flexible in accounting for the neural variability, however they may be
difficult to interpret and sometimes not identifiable. Notably, some studies had incorporated latent
fluctuations into the encoding models (72; 39; 25; 19; 42; 11) yielding promising results, although
these models often assumed highly specialized latent structure, thus potentially limits the applicability
in practice.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

