Learning Restricted Boltzmann Machines
with Sparse Latent Variables

Rares-Darius Buhai∗
MIT
rbuhai@mit.edu

Guy Bresler
MIT
guy@mit.edu

Abstract
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) are a common family of undirected graphical models with latent variables. An RBM is described by a bipartite graph, with
all observed variables in one layer and all latent variables in the other. We consider
the task of learning an RBM given samples generated according to it. The best
algorithms for this task currently have time complexity Õ(n2 ) for ferromagnetic
RBMs (i.e., with attractive potentials) but Õ(nd ) for general RBMs, where n is the
number of observed variables and d is the maximum degree of a latent variable. Let
the MRF neighborhood of an observed variable be its neighborhood in the Markov
Random Field of the marginal distribution of the observed variables. In this paper,
s
we give an algorithm for learning general RBMs with time complexity Õ(n2 +1 ),
where s is the maximum number of latent variables connected to the MRF neighborhood of an observed variable. This is an improvement when s < log2 (d − 1),
which corresponds to RBMs with sparse latent variables. Furthermore, we give
a version of this learning algorithm that recovers a model with small prediction
error and whose sample complexity is independent of the minimum potential in the
Markov Random Field of the observed variables. This is of interest because the
sample complexity of current algorithms scales with the inverse of the minimum
potential, which cannot be controlled in terms of natural properties of the RBM.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

Undirected graphical models, also known as Markov Random Fields (MRFs), are probabilistic models
in which a set of random variables is described with the help of an undirected graph, such that the
graph structure corresponds to the dependence relations between the variables. Under mild conditions,
the distribution of the random variables is determined by potentials associated with each clique of the
graph [11].
The joint distribution of any set of random variables can be represented as an MRF on a complete
graph. However, MRFs become useful when the graph has nontrivial structure, such as bounded
degree or bounded clique size. In such cases, learning and inference can often be carried out with
greater efficiency. Since many phenomena of practical interest can be modelled as MRFs (e.g.,
magnetism [5], images [18], gene interactions and protein interactions [25, 8]), it is of great interest
to understand the complexity, both statistical and computational, of algorithmic tasks in these models.
The expressive power of graphical models is significantly strengthened by the presence of latent
variables, i.e., variables that are not observed in samples generated according to the model. However,
algorithmic tasks are typically more difficult in models with latent variables. Results on learning
∗

Current affiliation: ETH Zurich, rares.buhai@inf.ethz.ch.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

