Efficient Sampling on Riemannian Manifolds via
Langevin MCMC

Xiang Cheng
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
x.cheng@berkeley.edu

Jingzhao Zhang
Tsinghua University jzhzhang@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
suvrit@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the task of efficiently sampling from a Gibbs distribution dπ ∗ =
e−h dvolg over a Riemannian manifold M via (geometric) Langevin MCMC;
this algorithm involves computing exponential maps in random Gaussian directions
and is efficiently implementable in practice. The key to our analysis of Langevin
MCMC is a bound on the discretization error of the geometric Euler-Murayama
scheme, assuming ∇h is Lipschitz and M has bounded sectional curvature. Our
error bound matches the error of Euclidean Euler-Murayama in terms of its stepsize
dependence. Combined with a contraction guarantee for the geometric Langevin
Diffusion under Kendall-Cranston coupling, we prove that the Langevin MCMC
iterates lie within ε-Wasserstein distance of π ∗ after Õ(ε−2 ) steps, which matches
the iteration complexity for Euclidean Langevin MCMC. Our results apply in
general settings where h can be nonconvex and M can have negative Ricci curvature. Under additional assumptions that the Riemannian curvature tensor has
bounded derivatives, and that π ∗ satisfies a CD(·, ∞) condition, we analyze the
stochastic gradient version of Langevin MCMC, and bound its iteration complexity
by Õ(ε−2 ) as well.

1

Introduction

Stochastic differential equations (SDEs) offer a powerful formalism for studying diffusion processes,
Brownian motion, and algorithms for sampling and optimization. We study in particular the following
geometric stochastic differential equation:
dx(t) = β(x(t))dt + dBtg ,
(1.1)
that evolves on a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold (M, g). Analogous to the Euclidean setting,
the map β : x → Tx M denotes a drift (Tx M is the tangent space at x ∈ M ), and dBtg denotes the
standard Brownian motion on M [Hsu, 2002, Ch. 3]. The notation in (1.1) is a shorthand; we can
define (1.1) more precisely as the unique diffusion process whose generator is the operator Lf =
⟨∇f, β⟩ + 12 ∆f , where ∆ is the Laplace-Beltrami operator (see [Hsu, 2002, Proposition. 3.2.1]).
When the drift β(x) = − 21 ∇h(x) (the gradient is taken w.r.t. the manifold metric), the SDE (1.1)
has an invariant distribution π ∗ with density e−h(x) , with respect to the Riemannian volume measure
volg (x); for M = Rd with metric g(x) = I, this reduces to the familiar result for Euclidean Langevin
diffusion. Using the Kendall-Cranston Coupling technique (Chapter 6.5, Hsu [2002]) together with a
carefully constructed Lyapunov function by Eberle [2016], we can quantify the mixing rate for (1.1)
in the 1-Wasserstein distance (w.r.t. the manifold distance) under suitable regularity conditions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

