DivBO: Diversity-aware CASH for Ensemble Learning

Yu Shen1 , Yupeng Lu1 , Yang Li4 , Yaofeng Tu3 , Wentao Zhang56 , Bin Cui12
Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies, Peking University, China
2
Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao), China
3
ZTE Corporation, China 4 Data Platform, TEG, Tencent Inc., China
5
Mila - Québec AI Institute 6 HEC, Montréal, Canada
1
{shenyu, xinkelyp, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn, 2 tu.yaofeng@zte.com.cn
3
thomasyngli@tencent.com 4 wentao.zhang@mila.quebec
1

Abstract
The Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameters optimization (CASH)
problem is one of the fundamental problems in Automated Machine Learning
(AutoML). Motivated by the success of ensemble learning, recent AutoML systems
build post-hoc ensembles to output the final predictions instead of using the best
single learner. However, while most CASH methods focus on searching for a single
learner with the best performance, they neglect the diversity among base learners
(i.e., they may suggest similar configurations to previously evaluated ones), which
is also a crucial consideration when building an ensemble. To tackle this issue and
further enhance the ensemble performance, we propose DivBO, a diversity-aware
framework to inject explicit search of diversity into the CASH problems. In the
framework, we propose to use a diversity surrogate to predict the pair-wise diversity
of two unseen configurations. Furthermore, we introduce a temporary pool and a
weighted acquisition function to guide the search of both performance and diversity
based on Bayesian optimization. Empirical results on 15 public datasets show that
DivBO achieves the best average ranks (1.82 and 1.73) on both validation and test
errors among 10 compared methods, including post-hoc designs in recent AutoML
systems and state-of-the-art baselines for ensemble learning on CASH problems.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning has made great strides in various application areas, e.g., computer
vision [14, 12], recommendation [36, 37], etc. However, it’s often knowledge-intensive to develop
customized solutions with promising performance, as the process includes selecting proper ML
algorithms and tuning the hyperparameters. To reduce the barrier and facilitate the deployment of
machine learning applications, the AutoML community raises the Combined Algorithm Selection
and Hyperparameters optimization (CASH) problem [39] and proposes several methods [33, 18, 15]
to automate the optimization.
While most AutoML methods [35, 17, 2] for CASH focus on searching for the optimal performance
of a single learner, it’s widely acknowledged that ensembles of promising learners often outperform
single ones [44, 3]. For example, He et al. [14] won first place in ILSRVC 2015 with an average of
several learners. And ensemble strategies can be frequently found in the top solutions of Kaggle competitions [16, 4]. Motivated by those achievements, recent AutoML systems (e.g., Auto-sklearn [11],
Auto-Pytorch [50], VolcanoML [25]) build post-hoc ensembles based on all base learners from the
entire optimization process and show better empirical results than using the best single learner.
Despite the effectiveness of those post-hoc ensemble designs, the target of CASH methods is
inconsistent with that of ensemble learning. In other words, a good ensemble should contain a pool of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

