Learnable Polyphase Sampling for Shift Invariant
and Equivariant Convolutional Networks

Renan A. Rojas-Gomez∗
Teck-Yian Lim∗
Alexander G. Schwing
Minh N. Do
Raymond A. Yeh†
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
†
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University

Abstract
We propose learnable polyphase sampling (LPS), a pair of learnable down/upsampling layers that enable truly shift-invariant and equivariant convolutional
networks. LPS can be trained end-to-end from data and generalizes existing handcrafted downsampling layers. It is widely applicable as it can be integrated into
any convolutional network by replacing down/upsampling layers. We evaluate
LPS on image classification and semantic segmentation. Experiments show that
LPS is on-par with or outperforms existing methods in both performance and
shift consistency. For the first time, we achieve true shift-equivariance on semantic segmentation (PASCAL VOC), i.e., 100% shift consistency, outperforming baselines by an absolute 3.3%. Our project page and code are available at
https://raymondyeh07.github.io/learnable_polyphase_sampling/

1

Introduction

For tasks like image classification, shifts of an object do not change the corresponding object label,
i.e., the task is shift-invariant. This shift-invariance property has been incorporated into deep-nets
yielding convolutional neural nets (CNN). Seminal works on CNNs [15, 24] directly attribute the
model design to shift-invariance. For example, Fukushima [15] states “the network has an ability
of position-invariant pattern recognition” and LeCun et al. [24] motivate CNNs by stating that they
“ensure some degree of shift invariance.”
CNNs have evolved since their conception. Modern deep-nets contain more layers, use different
non-linearities and pooling layers. Re-examining these modern architectures, Zhang [56] surprisingly
finds that modern deep-nets are not shift-invariant. To address this, Zhang [56] and Zou et al. [57]
propose to perform anti-aliasing before each downsampling layer, and found it to improve the
degree of invariance. More recently, Chaman and Dokmanic [5] show that deep-nets can be “truly
shift-invariant,” i.e., a model’s output is identical for given shifted inputs. For this, they replace all
downsampling layers with their adaptive polyphase sampling (APS) layer.
While APS achieves true shift-invariance by selecting the max-norm polyphase component (a handcrafted downsampling scheme), an important question arises: are there more effective downsampling
schemes that can achieve true shift-invariance? Consider an extreme case, a handcrafted deep-net
that always outputs zeros is truly shift-invariant, but does not accomplish any task. This motivates to
study how truly shift-invariant downsampling schemes can be learned from data.
For this we propose Learnable Polyphase Sampling (LPS), a pair of down/upsampling layers that
yield truly shift-invariant/equivariant deep-nets and can be trained in an end-to-end manner. For
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

