Movement Penalized Bayesian Optimization
with Application to Wind Energy Systems
Shyam Sundhar Ramesh
ETH Zurich
shramesh@ethz.ch
Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Pier Giuseppe Sessa
ETH Zurich
sessap@ethz.ch
Ilija Bogunovic
University College London
i.bogunovic@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Contextual Bayesian optimization (CBO) is a powerful framework for sequential
decision-making given side information, with important applications, e.g., in wind
energy systems. In this setting, the learner receives context (e.g., weather conditions) at each round, and has to choose an action (e.g., turbine parameters). Standard
algorithms assume no cost for switching their decisions at every round. However,
in many practical applications, there is a cost associated with such changes, which
should be minimized. We introduce the episodic CBO with movement costs problem and, based on the online learning approach for metrical task systems of Coester
and Lee [19], propose a novel randomized mirror descent algorithm that makes use
of Gaussian Process confidence bounds. We compare its performance with the offline optimal sequence for each episode and provide rigorous regret guarantees. We
further demonstrate our approach on the important real-world application of altitude
optimization for Airborne Wind Energy Systems. In the presence of substantial
movement costs, our algorithm consistently outperforms standard CBO algorithms.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a well-established framework for sequential black-box function optimization that relies on Gaussian Process (GP) models [42] to sequentially learn and optimize the
unknown objective. In many practical scenarios, however, one wants to additionally use available
contextual information when making decisions. In this setting, at each round, the learner receives a
context from the environment and has to choose an action based upon it. Previous works have developed contextual BO algorithms [32, 16, 31, 40], and applied them to various important applications,
e.g., vaccine design, nuclear fusion, database tuning, crop recommender systems, etc.
A potential practical issue with these standard algorithms is that they assume no explicit costs for
switching between their actions at every round. Frequent action changes can be extremely costly
in many real-world applications. This work is motivated by the problem of real-time control of the
altitude of an airborne wind energy (AWE) system.1 In AWE systems, the wind speed is often only
measurable at the system’s altitude, and determining the optimal operating altitude of an AWE system
as the wind speed varies represents a challenging problem. Another fundamental challenge is that
additional energy is required for adjusting the altitude, which makes the frequent altitude changes
costly. Consequently, this work is motivated by the following question: How can we efficiently learn
1
AWE system is a wind turbine with a rotor supported in the air without a tower that can benefit from the
persistence of wind at different high altitudes [22].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

