A Multilabel Classification Framework for
Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search

Ville Hyvönen
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology (HIIT)
ville.o.hyvonen@helsinki.fi

Elias Jääsaari
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
ejaeaesa@cs.cmu.edu

Teemu Roos
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology (HIIT)
teemu.roos@cs.helsinki.fi

Abstract
Both supervised and unsupervised machine learning algorithms have been used
to learn partition-based index structures for approximate nearest neighbor (ANN)
search. Existing supervised algorithms formulate the learning task as finding a
partition in which the nearest neighbors of a training set point belong to the same
partition element as the point itself, so that the nearest neighbor candidates can
be retrieved by naive lookup or backtracking search. We formulate candidate set
selection in ANN search directly as a multilabel classification problem where the
labels correspond to the nearest neighbors of the query point, and interpret the
partitions as partitioning classifiers for solving this task. Empirical results suggest
that the natural classifier based on this interpretation leads to strictly improved
performance when combined with any unsupervised or supervised partitioning
strategy. We also prove a sufficient condition for consistency of a partitioning
classifier for ANN search, and illustrate the result by verifying this condition for
chronological k-d trees.

1

Introduction

Approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search is a fundamental algorithmic problem. There is a large
body of literature on ANN search spanning several research communities, including the machine
learning community. Specifically, space-partitioning data structures—such as space-partitioning
trees (Friedman et al., 1976; Muja and Lowe, 2014; Dasgupta and Sinha, 2015) and data-dependent
hash tables (Indyk and Motwani, 1998; Datar et al., 2004; Weiss et al., 2009)—are machine learning
methods commonly used for ANN search.
In this article, we propose an intuitive theoretical framework for partition-based ANN search. In
particular, we formulate the candidate set selection directly as a multilabel classification problem
where the labels represent the indices of the nearest neighbors of the query point. This formulation
suggests that the performance of space-partitioning data structures can be improved by using them in
a theoretically justified fashion as partitioning classifiers (Devroye et al., 1996, Chapter 21) instead
of searching them under the earlier lookup-based paradigm. Our classification framework also
enables applying general purpose classifiers—such as a multilabel random forest—directly as an
index structure for ANN search.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

