Improving 3D-aware Image Synthesis with
A Geometry-aware Discriminator

Zifan Shi1∗

Yinghao Xu2∗
1

Yujun Shen3
HKUST

2

Deli Zhao3

CUHK

3

Qifeng Chen1

Dit-Yan Yeung1

Ant Group

Abstract
3D-aware image synthesis aims at learning a generative model that can render
photo-realistic 2D images while capturing decent underlying 3D shapes. A popular
solution is to adopt the generative adversarial network (GAN) and replace the
generator with a 3D renderer, where volume rendering with neural radiance field
(NeRF) is commonly used. Despite the advancement of synthesis quality, existing
methods fail to obtain moderate 3D shapes. We argue that, considering the twoplayer game in the formulation of GANs, only making the generator 3D-aware
is not enough. In other words, displacing the generative mechanism only offers
the capability, but not the guarantee, of producing 3D-aware images, because the
supervision of the generator primarily comes from the discriminator. To address
this issue, we propose GeoD through learning a geometry-aware discriminator to
improve 3D-aware GANs. Concretely, besides differentiating real and fake samples
from the 2D image space, the discriminator is additionally asked to derive the
geometry information from the inputs, which is then applied as the guidance of the
generator. Such a simple yet effective design facilitates learning substantially more
accurate 3D shapes. Extensive experiments on various generator architectures and
training datasets verify the superiority of GeoD over state-of-the-art alternatives.
Moreover, our approach is registered as a general framework such that a more
capable discriminator (i.e., with a third task of novel view synthesis beyond domain
classification and geometry extraction) can further assist the generator with a better
multi-view consistency. Project page can be found here.

1

Introduction

3D-aware image synthesis has received growing attention due to its potential in modeling the 3D
visual world. Compared to 2D generation [1, 13–16, 28], which primarily focuses on the image quality
and diversity, 3D-aware generation is expected to also learn an accurate 3D shape underlying the
synthesized image. However, existing generative models, such as the popular generative adversarial
network (GAN) [8], fail to capture the 3D information from 2D images, as they produce an image
based on 2D representations only. To bridge this gap, recent studies [2, 3, 5, 9, 23–25, 29, 30, 34, 36]
seek help from 3D rendering techniques, like neural radiance field (NeRF) [19], and propose to
replace the generator in a GAN with a 3D renderer. Such a replacement enables explicit control of
viewpoints when generating an image, benefiting from the 3D awareness of the generator.
Many attempts have been made to improve 3D-aware GANs from the generator side, with either better
representations [3, 5, 24, 25, 30, 34] or novel architectures [2, 9, 23, 29, 36]. Despite the advancement
of 2D synthesis quality, they still suffer from unsatisfactory 3D shapes, which appear as flatten, noisy,
or uneven surfaces as shown in Fig. 1a. We argue that, given the generator-discriminator competition
in training GANs, only making the generator 3D-aware is not enough. Specifically, the generator
* Work was done during an internship under Ant Group.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

