Lifting Weak Supervision To Structured Prediction

Harit Vishwakarma
hvishwakarma@wisc.edu

Frederic Sala
fredsala@cs.wisc.edu

Department of Computer Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA.

Abstract
Weak supervision (WS) is a rich set of techniques that produce pseudolabels by
aggregating easily obtained but potentially noisy label estimates from a variety of
sources. WS is theoretically well understood for binary classification, where simple
approaches enable consistent estimation of pseudolabel noise rates. Using this
result, it has been shown that downstream models trained on the pseudolabels have
generalization guarantees nearly identical to those trained on clean labels. While
this is exciting, users often wish to use WS for structured prediction, where the
output space consists of more than a binary or multi-class label set: e.g. rankings,
graphs, manifolds, and more. Do the favorable theoretical properties of WS for
binary classification lift to this setting? We answer this question in the affirmative
for a wide range of scenarios. For labels taking values in a finite metric space,
we introduce techniques new to weak supervision based on pseudo-Euclidean
embeddings and tensor decompositions, providing a nearly-consistent noise rate
estimator. For labels in constant-curvature Riemannian manifolds, we introduce
new invariants that also yield consistent noise rate estimation. In both cases, when
using the resulting pseudolabels in concert with a flexible downstream model, we
obtain generalization guarantees nearly identical to those for models trained on
clean data. Several of our results, which can be viewed as robustness guarantees in
structured prediction with noisy labels, may be of independent interest. Empirical
evaluation validates our claims and shows the merits of the proposed method1 .

1

Introduction

Weak supervision (WS) is an array of methods used to construct pseudolabels for training supervised
models in label-constrained settings. The standard workflow [RSW+ 16, RBE+ 18, FCS+ 20] is to
assemble a set of cheaply-acquired labeling functions—simple heuristics, small programs, pretrained
models, knowledge base lookups—that produce multiple noisy estimates of what the true label
is for each unlabeled point in a training set. These noisy outputs are modeled and aggregated
into a single higher-quality pseudolabel. Any conventional supervised end model can be trained
on these pseudolabels. This pattern has been used to deliver excellent performance in a range of
domains in both research and industry settings [DRS+ 20, RNGS20, SLB20], bypassing the need to
invest in large-scale manual labeling. Importantly, these successes are usually found in binary or
small-cardinality classification settings.
While exciting, users often wish to use weak supervision in structured prediction (SP) settings, where
the output space consists of more than a binary or multiclass label set [BHS+ 07, KL15]. In such
cases, there exists meaningful algebraic or geometric structure to exploit. Structured prediction
includes, for example, learning rankings used for recommendation systems [KAG18], regression in
metric spaces [PM19], learning on manifolds [RCMR18], graph-based learning [GS19], and more.
1

https://github.com/SprocketLab/WS-Struct-Pred

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

