xView3-SAR: Detecting Dark Fishing Activity Using
Synthetic Aperture Radar Imagery
Fernando S. Paolo1,⇤, Tsu-ting Tim Lin2,⇤, Ritwik Gupta3,4,⇤,†, Bryce Goodman3 ,
Nirav Patel3 , Daniel Kuster2 , David Kroodsma1 , Jared Dunnmon3
1

Global Fishing Watch, 2 Cambrio, 3 Defense Innovation Unit, 4 UC Berkeley

Abstract
Unsustainable fishing practices worldwide pose a major threat to marine resources
and ecosystems. Identifying vessels that do not show up in conventional monitoring systems—known as “dark vessels”—is key to managing and securing the health
of marine environments. With the rise of satellite-based synthetic aperture radar
(SAR) imaging and modern machine learning (ML), it is now possible to automate
detection of dark vessels day or night, under all-weather conditions. SAR images,
however, require a domain-specific treatment and are not widely accessible to the
ML community. Maritime objects (vessels and offshore infrastructure) are relatively small and sparse, challenging traditional computer vision approaches. We
present the largest labeled dataset for training ML models to detect and characterize vessels and ocean structures in SAR imagery. xView3-SAR consists of nearly
1,000 analysis-ready SAR images from the Sentinel-1 mission that are, on average,
29,400-by-24,400 pixels each. The images are annotated using a combination of
automated and manual analysis. Co-located bathymetry and wind state rasters accompany every SAR image. We also provide an overview of the xView3 Computer
Vision Challenge, an international competition using xView3-SAR for ship detection and characterization at large scale. We release the data (https://iuu.xview.us/)
and code (https://github.com/DIUx-xView) to support ongoing development and
evaluation of ML approaches for this important application.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in remote sensing technology have allowed fishing activity to be tracked across the
globe via the Automatic Identification System (AIS) that can broadcast vessels’ location [15]. The
use of AIS, however, varies by region and fleet; not all vessels are required to carry AIS [37] while
some turn off their AIS to engage in illicit activities [30]. This unknown number of non-broadcasting
vessels that are not tracked by conventional monitoring systems—referred to as “dark” vessels—
limits our ability to effectively manage marine resources. Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU)
fishing comprises more than 20% of all catch around the world [2]. In recent years, the largest
IUU fishing offenses were perpetrated by fleets that mostly did not use AIS [30], costing legitimate
fishermen and governments billions of dollars while also damaging critical ecological systems.
Satellite imagery provides an alternative means of sensing dark vessels. Common electro-optical
satellites, however, are limited by cloud coverage and low-light conditions. Synthetic Aperture Radar
(SAR) satellites, on the other hand, can image in all weather conditions and at night. The European
Space Agency (ESA) Sentinel-1 radar satellites cover most coastal waters around the world every
12 days (with a 6-day repeat cycle if combining the two satellites), offering open access to the full
⇤
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author, ritwik.ctr@diu.mil

