Margin-Based Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
with Class-Level Overﬁtting Mitigation

1

Yixiong Zou1 , Shanghang Zhang2 , Yuhua Li1 and Ruixuan Li1∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science, Peking University
1
{yixiongz, idcliyuhua, rxli}@hust.edu.cn, 2 shanghang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) is designed to incrementally recognize novel classes with only few training samples after the (pre-)training on base
classes with sufﬁcient samples, which focuses on both base-class performance and
novel-class generalization. A well known modiﬁcation to the base-class training
is to apply a margin to the base-class classiﬁcation. However, a dilemma exists
that we can hardly achieve both good base-class performance and novel-class generalization simultaneously by applying the margin during the base-class training,
which is still under explored. In this paper, we study the cause of such dilemma
for FSCIL. We ﬁrst interpret this dilemma as a class-level overﬁtting (CO) problem from the aspect of pattern learning, and then ﬁnd its cause lies in the easilysatisﬁed constraint of learning margin-based patterns. Based on the analysis, we
propose a novel margin-based FSCIL method to mitigate the CO problem by providing the pattern learning process with extra constraint from the margin-based
patterns themselves. Extensive experiments on CIFAR100, Caltech-USCD Birds200-2011 (CUB200), and miniImageNet demonstrate that the proposed method
effectively mitigates the CO problem and achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

With the development of deep learning, deep neural networks gradually demonstrate superior performance on the recognition of pre-deﬁned classes with large amount of training data [19, 10]. However, the model’s generalization capability on the downstream novel classes is much less explored
and still needs to be improved [13, 9]. To deal with this problem, the few-shot class-incremental
learning (FSCIL) task [11, 18, 2, 22, 28, 30] comes into sight. FSCIL ﬁrst (pre-)trains a model on
a set of pre-deﬁned classes (base classes), and then generalizes the model to the incremental novel
classes with only few training samples, simulating human’s ability of continually learning novel
concepts with only few examples, and emphasizing both the performance on the pre-deﬁned base
classes and the generalization on the downstream novel classes.
However, a dilemma is recently revealed [13, 5, 6, 7] that better loss functions, which lead to higher
performance on the pre-training data, could lead to worse generalization on the downstream tasks.
As introduced by [16] and depicted in Fig. 1, similar phenomenon also exists in the FSCIL task
that a positive classiﬁcation margin [16, 25, 8, 21] applied to the classiﬁcation of the base-class
(pre-)training could lead to higher base-class performance but lower novel-class performance, while
a negative margin could result in lower base-class performance but increase the novel-class performance. Although this dilemma widely exists in the tasks involving novel-class generalization such
as few-shot learning (FSL) and FSCIL, only few works [16] tried to explore its cause, and can hardly
be used to handle it. Due to space limitation, we will provide extended related works in the appendix.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

