Leveraging Factored Action Spaces for Efficient
Offline Reinforcement Learning in Healthcare

Shengpu Tang1 Maggie Makar1 Michael W. Sjoding2 Finale Doshi-Velez3 Jenna Wiens1
1

Division of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
2
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
3
SEAS, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA

Correspondence to: {tangsp,wiensj}@umich.edu
Reviewed on OpenReview: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Jd70afzIvJ4

Abstract
Many reinforcement learning (RL) applications have combinatorial action spaces,
where each action is a composition of sub-actions. A standard RL approach
ignores this inherent factorization structure, resulting in a potential failure to
make meaningful inferences about rarely observed sub-action combinations; this is
particularly problematic for offline settings, where data may be limited. In this work,
we propose a form of linear Q-function decomposition induced by factored action
spaces. We study the theoretical properties of our approach, identifying scenarios
where it is guaranteed to lead to zero bias when used to approximate the Q-function.
Outside the regimes with theoretical guarantees, we show that our approach can still
be useful because it leads to better sample efficiency without necessarily sacrificing
policy optimality, allowing us to achieve a better bias-variance trade-off. Across
several offline RL problems using simulators and real-world datasets motivated by
healthcare, we demonstrate that incorporating factored action spaces into valuebased RL can result in better-performing policies. Our approach can help an agent
make more accurate inferences within underexplored regions of the state-action
space when applying RL to observational datasets.

1

Introduction

In many real-world decision-making problems, the action space exhibits an inherent combinatorial
structure. For example, in healthcare, an action may correspond to a combination of drugs and treatments. When applying reinforcement learning (RL) to these tasks, past work [1–4] typically considers
each combination a distinct action, resulting in an exponentially large action space (Figure 1a). This
is inefficient as it fails to leverage any potential independence among dimensions of the action space.
This type of factorization structure in action space could be incorporated when designing the architecture of function approximators for RL (Figure 1b). Similar ideas have been used in the past, primarily
to improve online exploration [5, 6], or to handle multiple agents [7–11] or multiple rewards [12].
However, the applicability of this approach has not been systematically studied, especially in offline
settings and when the MDP presents no additional structure (e.g., when the state space cannot be
explicitly factorized).
In this work, we develop an approach for offline RL with factored action spaces by learning linearly
decomposable Q-functions. First, we study the theoretical properties of this approach, investigating
the sufficient and necessary conditions for it to lead to an unbiased estimate of the Q-function (i.e.,
zero approximation error). Even when the linear decomposition is biased, we note that our approach
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

