Zeroth-Order Negative Curvature Finding: Escaping
Saddle Points without Gradients
Hualin Zhang1 Huan Xiong2,3 Bin Gu1,3
Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology
2
Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{zhanghualin98,huan.xiong.math,jsgubin}@gmail.com
1

Abstract
We consider escaping saddle points of nonconvex problems where only the function
evaluations can be accessed. Although a variety of works have been proposed, the
majority of them require either second or first-order information, and only a few of
them have exploited zeroth-order methods, particularly the technique of negative
curvature finding with zeroth-order methods which has been proven to be the most
efficient method for escaping saddle points. To fill this gap, in this paper, we
propose two zeroth-order negative curvature finding frameworks that can replace
Hessian-vector product computations without increasing the iteration complexity.
We apply the proposed frameworks to ZO-GD, ZO-SGD, ZO-SCSG, ZO-SPIDER
and prove that these ZO algorithms can converge to (ϵ, δ)-approximate secondorder stationary points with less query complexity compared with prior zeroth-order
works for finding local minima.

1

Introduction

Nonconvex optimization has received wide attention in recent years due to its popularity in modern
machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) tasks. Specifically, in this paper, we study the
following unconstrained optimization problem:
n

min f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(1)

where both fi (·) and f (·) can be nonconvex. In general, finding the global optima of nonconvex
functions is NP-hard. Fortunately, finding local optima is an alternative because it has been shown in
theory and practice that local optima have comparable performance capabilities to global optima in
many machine learning problems [14, 15, 26, 17, 16, 19, 27]. Gradient-based methods have been
shown to be able to find an ϵ-approximate first-order stationary point (∥∇f (x)∥ ≤ ϵ) efficiently, both
in the deterministic setting (e.g., gradient descent [32]; accelerated gradient descent [8, 29]) and
stochastic setting (e.g., stochastic gradient descent [32, 37]; SCSG [28]; SPIDER [13]). However, in
nonconvex settings, first-order stationary points can be local minima, global minima, or even saddle
points. Converging to saddle points will lead to highly suboptimal solutions [20, 39] and destroy the
model’s performance. Thus, escaping saddle points has recently become an important research topic
in nonconvex optimization.
Several classical results have shown that, for ρ-Hessian Lipschitz functions (see Definition 1),
using the second-order information like computing the Hessian [33] or Hessian-vector products
[1, 9, 2], one √
can find an ϵ-approximate second-order stationary point (SOSP, ∥∇f (x)∥ ≤ ϵ and
∇2 f (x) ⪰ − ρϵI). However, when the dimension of x is large, even once access to the Hessian
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

