Generalized Delayed Feedback Model
with Post-Click Information in Recommender Systems

Jia-Qi Yang De-Chuan Zhan∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
yangjq@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhandc@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Predicting conversion rate (e.g., the probability that a user will purchase an item) is
a fundamental problem in machine learning based recommender systems. However, accurate conversion labels are revealed after a long delay, which harms the
timeliness of recommender systems. Previous literature concentrates on utilizing
early conversions to mitigate such a delayed feedback problem. In this paper,
we show that post-click user behaviors are also informative to conversion rate
prediction and can be used to improve timeliness. We propose a generalized delayed feedback model (GDFM) that unifies both post-click behaviors and early
conversions as stochastic post-click information, which could be utilized to train
GDFM in a streaming manner efficiently. Based on GDFM, we further establish a
novel perspective that the performance gap introduced by delayed feedback can
be attributed to a temporal gap and a sampling gap. Inspired by our analysis, we
propose to measure the quality of post-click information with a combination of
temporal distance and sample complexity. The training objective is re-weighted
accordingly to highlight informative and timely signals. We validate our analysis
on public datasets, and experimental performance confirms the effectiveness of our
method.

1

Introduction

Conversion rate (CVR) prediction has become a core problem in display advertising with the
prevalence of the cost-per-conversion (CPA) payment model[1–3]. With CPA, advertisers bid for
predefined user behaviors such as purchases or downloads. Similar demands also arise from online
retailers that aim to improve sales volume[4], which need to recommend items with high conversion
rates to users. However, conversions (e.g., purchases) may happen after a long delay [5], which leads
to a delay in conversion labels. The adverse impact of such a delayed feedback problem becomes
increasingly significant with a rapidly changing market, where the features of users and items are
updated every second. Thus, how to timely update the CVR prediction model with delayed feedback
attracts much attention in recent years [5–11].
Since conversions are gradually revealed after click events, previous literature concentrates on
utilizing available conversion labels that reveal earlier. Inserting early conversions into the training
data stream will also introduce many fake negative samples [6], which will eventually convert but
have not converted yet. To mitigate the adverse impact of fake negatives, Chapelle [5] proposes a
delayed feedback model (DFM) to model conversion rate along with expected conversion delay, then
the model is trained to maximize the likelihood of observed labels. The delayed feedback model
is further improved by introducing kernel distribution estimation method [12] and more expressive
neural networks [10, 13, 14]. However, the need to maintain a long time scale offline dataset impedes
∗

De-Chuan Zhan is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

