Torsional Diffusion for
Molecular Conformer Generation
Bowen Jing,∗ 1 Gabriele Corso,∗ 1 Jeffrey Chang,2 Regina Barzilay,1 Tommi Jaakkola1
1
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Dept. of Physics, Harvard University

Abstract
Molecular conformer generation is a fundamental task in computational chemistry.
Several machine learning approaches have been developed, but none have outperformed state-of-the-art cheminformatics methods. We propose torsional diffusion,
a novel diffusion framework that operates on the space of torsion angles via a
diffusion process on the hypertorus and an extrinsic-to-intrinsic score model. On a
standard benchmark of drug-like molecules, torsional diffusion generates superior
conformer ensembles compared to machine learning and cheminformatics methods in terms of both RMSD and chemical properties, and is orders of magnitude
faster than previous diffusion-based models. Moreover, our model provides exact
likelihoods, which we employ to build the first generalizable Boltzmann generator.
Code is available at https://github.com/gcorso/torsional-diffusion.

1

Introduction

Many properties of a molecule are determined by the set of low-energy structures, called conformers,
that it adopts in 3D space. Conformer generation is therefore a fundamental problem in computational
chemistry [Hawkins, 2017] and an area of increasing attention in machine learning. Traditional
approaches to conformer generation consist of metadynamics-based methods, which are accurate
but slow [Pracht et al., 2020]; and cheminformatics-based methods, which are fast but less accurate
[Hawkins et al., 2010, Riniker and Landrum, 2015]. Thus, there is growing interest in developing
deep generative models to combine high accuracy with fast sampling.
Diffusion or score-based generative models [Ho et al., 2020, Song et al., 2021]—a promising class of
generative models—have been applied to conformer generation under several different formulations.
These have so far considered diffusion processes in Euclidean space, in which Gaussian noise is
injected independently into every data coordinate—either pairwise distances in a distance matrix
[Shi et al., 2021, Luo et al., 2021] or atomic coordinates in 3D [Xu et al., 2022]. However, these
models require a large number of denoising steps and have so far failed to outperform the best
cheminformatics methods.
We instead propose torsional diffusion, in which the diffusion process over conformers acts only
on the torsion angles and leaves the other degrees of freedom fixed. This is possible and effective
because the flexibility of a molecule, and thus the difficulty of conformer generation, lies largely
in torsional degrees of freedom [Axelrod and Gómez-Bombarelli, 2022]; in particular, bond lengths
and angles can already be determined quickly and accurately by standard cheminformatics methods.
Leveraging this insight significantly reduces the dimensionality of the sample space; drug-like
molecules2 have, on average, n = 44 atoms, corresponding to a 3n-dimensional Euclidean space,
but only m = 7.9 torsion angles of rotatable bonds.
∗
2

Equal contribution. Correspondence to {bjing, gcorso}@mit.edu.
As measured from the standard dataset GEOM-DRUGS [Axelrod and Gómez-Bombarelli, 2022]

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

