OpenAUC: Towards AUC-Oriented
Open-Set Recognition
Zitai Wang1,2
Qianqian Xu3∗
5
Yuan He
Xiaochun Cao6,1
1

Zhiyong Yang4
Qingming Huang4,3,7,8∗

SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Tech., CAS
4
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Alibaba Group
6
School of Cyber Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus, Sun Yat-sen University
7
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
8
Peng Cheng Laboratory
2

wangzitai@iie.ac.cn
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
yangzhiyong21@ucas.ac.cn
heyuan.hy@alibaba-inc.com
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Traditional machine learning follows a close-set assumption that the training and
test set share the same label space. While in many practical scenarios, it is inevitable
that some test samples belong to unknown classes (open-set). To fix this issue,
Open-Set Recognition (OSR), whose goal is to make correct predictions on both
close-set samples and open-set samples, has attracted rising attention. In this
direction, the vast majority of literature focuses on the pattern of open-set samples.
However, how to evaluate model performance in this challenging task is still
unsolved. In this paper, a systematic analysis reveals that most existing metrics
are essentially inconsistent with the aforementioned goal of OSR: (1) For metrics
extended from close-set classification, such as Open-set F-score, Youden’s index,
and Normalized Accuracy, a poor open-set prediction can escape from a low
performance score with a superior close-set prediction. (2) Novelty detection
AUC, which measures the ranking performance between close-set and open-set
samples, ignores the close-set performance. To fix these issues, we propose a novel
metric named OpenAUC. Compared with existing metrics, OpenAUC enjoys a
concise pairwise formulation that evaluates open-set performance and close-set
performance in a coupling manner. Further analysis shows that OpenAUC is free
from the aforementioned inconsistency properties. Finally, an end-to-end learning
method is proposed to minimize the OpenAUC risk, and the experimental results
on popular benchmark datasets speak to its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Traditional classification algorithms have achieved tremendous success under the close-set assumption
that all the test classes are known during the training period. However, in many practical scenarios,
it is inevitable that some test samples belong to none of the known classes. In this case, a close-set
model will classify all the novel samples into known classes, inducing a significant performance
degeneration. To fix this issue, Open-Set Recognition (OSR) has attracted rising attention in recent
years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], where the model is required to not only (1) correctly
classify the close-set samples but also (2) discriminate the open-set samples from the close-set ones.
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

