TarGF: Learning Target Gradient Field to Rearrange
Objects without Explicit Goal Specification

1

Mingdong Wu* 1, 3 , Fangwei Zhong* 2, 3 , Yulong Xia1 , Hao Dong1, 4
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence (BIGAI)
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{wmingd, zfw, hao.dong}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Object Rearrangement is to move objects from an initial state to a goal state. Here,
we focus on a more practical setting in object rearrangement, i.e., rearranging
objects from shuffled layouts to a normative target distribution without explicit
goal specification. However, it remains challenging for AI agents, as it is hard
to describe the target distribution (goal specification) for reward engineering or
collect expert trajectories as demonstrations. Hence, it is infeasible to directly
employ reinforcement learning or imitation learning algorithms to address the
task. This paper aims to search for a policy only with a set of examples from
a target distribution instead of a handcrafted reward function. We employ the
score-matching objective to train a Target Gradient Field (TarGF), indicating a
direction on each object to increase the likelihood of the target distribution. For
object rearrangement, the TarGF can be used in two ways: 1) For model-based
planning, we can cast the target gradient into a reference control and output actions
with a distributed path planner; 2) For model-free reinforcement learning, the
TarGF is not only used for estimating the likelihood-change as a reward but also
provides suggested actions in residual policy learning. Experimental results in ball
rearrangement and room rearrangement demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in the quality of the terminal state, the
efficiency of the control process, and scalability. The code and demo videos are on
https://sites.google.com/view/targf.

1

Introduction

As shown in Fig. 1, we consider object rearrangement without explicit goal specification [1, 2],
where the agent is required to manipulate a set
of objects from an initial layout to a normative
distribution. This task is taken for granted by humans [3] and widely exists in our daily life, such
as tidying up a table [4], placing furniture [5] , and
sorting parcels [6].

✅
Initial State 𝑠𝑠0

...

✅

However, compared with conventional robot
❌
tasks [7, 8, 9, 10, 11], there are two critical challenges in our setting: 1) Hard to clearly define
Terminal State 𝑠𝑠𝑇𝑇
Target Examples
𝑠𝑠𝑡𝑡
the target state (goal), as the target distribution is
diverse and the patterns are difficult to describe Figure 1: Our goal: Learning to rearrange obin the program, e.g., how to evaluate the tidiness jects without explicit goal specification.
* indicates equal contribution
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

