Near-Optimal Bounds for
Testing Histogram Distributions

Clément L. Canonne
University of Sydney
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Ilias Diakonikolas∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane†
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Sihan Liu
University of California, San Diego
sil046@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We investigate the problem of testing whether a discrete probability distribution
over an ordered domain is a histogram on a specified number of bins. One of
the most common tools for the succinct approximation of data, k-histograms
over [n] are probability distributions that are piecewise constant over a set of
k intervals. Given samples from an unknown distribution p on [n], we want
to distinguish between the cases that p is a k-histogram versus far from any khistogram, in total variation distance. Our main result is a sample near-optimal and
computationally efficient algorithm for this testing problem, and a nearly-matching
(within logarithmic factors) sample complexity lower bound.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and Motivation

A classical approach for the efficient exploration of massive datasets involves the construction of
succinct data representations, see, e.g., the survey [CGHJ12]. One of the most useful and commonly
used compact representations are histograms. For a dataset S, whose elements are from the universe
[n] := {1, . . . , n}, a k-histogram is a function that is piecewise constant over k interval pieces.
Histograms constitute the oldest and most popular synopsis structure in databases and have been
extensively studied in the database community since their introduction in the 1980s [Koo80], see,
e.g., [GMP97, JKM+ 98, CMN98, TGIK02, GGI+ 02, GKS06, ILR12, ADH+ 15, Can16], for a
partial list of references. In both the statistics and computer science literatures, several methods have
been proposed to estimate histogram distributions in a range of natural settings [Sco79, FD81, DL04,
LN96, Kle09, CDSS14, ADH+ 15, ADLS17, DLS18].
In this work, we study the algorithmic task of deciding whether a (potentially very large) dataset S
over the domain [n] is a k-histogram (i.e., it has a succinct histogram representation with k interval
pieces) or is “far” from any k-histogram representation (in a well-defined technical sense). Our focus
is on sublinear time algorithms [Rub06]. Instead of reading the entire dataset S, which could be
highly impractical, one can instead use randomness to sample a small subset of the dataset. Note that
∗

Supported by NSF Medium Award CCF-2107079, NSF Award CCF-1652862 (CAREER), a Sloan Research
Fellowship, and a DARPA Learning with Less Labels (LwLL) grant. Some of this work was performed while
the author was visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
†
Supported by NSF Medium Award CCF-2107547, NSF Award CCF-1553288 (CAREER), and a Sloan
Research Fellowship.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

