Continual learning: a feature extraction
formalization, an efficient algorithm, and barriers
Binghui Peng
Columbia University
bp2601@columbia.edu

Andrej Risteski
Carnegie Mellon University
aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Continual learning is an emerging paradigm in machine learning, wherein a model
is exposed in an online fashion to data from multiple different distributions (i.e.
environments), and is expected to adapt to the distribution change. Precisely, the
goal is to perform well in the new environment, while simultaneously retaining the
performance on the previous environments (i.e. avoid “catastrophic forgetting”).
While this setup has enjoyed a lot of attention in the applied community, there
hasn’t be theoretical work that even formalizes the desired guarantees. In this
paper, we propose a framework for continual learning through the framework of
feature extraction—namely, one in which features, as well as a classifier, are being
trained with each environment. When the features are linear, we design an efficient
gradient-based algorithm DPGrad, that is guaranteed to perform well on the current
environment, as well as avoid catastrophic forgetting. In the general case, when the
features are non-linear, we show such an algorithm cannot exist, whether efficient
or not.

1

Introduction

In the last few years, there has been an increasingly large focus in the modern machine learning
community on settings which go beyond iid data. This has resulted in the proliferation of new
concepts and settings such as out-of-distribution generalization [16], domain generalization [3],
multi-task learning [41], continual learning [25] and etc. Continual learning, which is the focus of
this paper, concerns learning through a sequence of environments, with the hope of retaining old
knowledge while adapting to new environments.
Unfortunately, despite a lot of interest in the applied community—as evidenced by a multitude of
NeurIPS and ICML workshops [26, 12, 30]—approaches with formal theoretical guarantees are few
and far between. The main reason, similar encountered as its cousin fields like out-of-distribution
generalization or multi-tasks learning, usually come with some “intuitive” desiderata — but no formal
definitions. What’s worse, it’s often times clear that without strong data assumptions—the problem is
woefully ill-defined.
The intuitive desiderata the continual learning community has settled on is that the setting involves
cases where an algorithm is exposed (in an online fashion) to data sequentially coming from different
distributions (typically called “environments”, inspired from a robot/agent interacting with different
environments). Moreover, the goal is to keep the size of the model being trained fixed, and make
sure the model performs well on the current environment while simultaneously maintaining a good
performance in the previously seen environments. In continual learning parlance, this is termed
“resistance to catastrophic forgetting”.
It is clear that some of the above desiderata are shared with well-studied learning theory settings
(e.g. online learning, lifelong learning), while some aspects differ. For example, in online learning,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

