Learning from Few Samples:
Transformation-Invariant SVMs with Composition
and Locality at Multiple Scales

Tao Liu1 , P. R. Kumar1 , Ruida Zhou1 , Xi Liu2
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
2
Applied Machine Learning, Facebook AI, Menlo Park, CA, USA
{tliu, prk, ruida}@tamu.edu, xliu1@meta.com
1

Abstract
Motivated by the problem of learning with small sample sizes, this paper shows
how to incorporate into support-vector machines (SVMs) those properties that have
made convolutional neural networks (CNNs) successful. Particularly important
is the ability to incorporate domain knowledge of invariances, e.g., translational
invariance of images. Kernels based on the maximum similarity over a group of
transformations are not generally positive definite. Perhaps it is for this reason
that they have not been studied theoretically. We address this lacuna and show
that positive definiteness indeed holds with high probability for kernels based on
the maximum similarity in the small training sample set regime of interest, and
that they do yield the best results in that regime. We also show how additional
properties such as their ability to incorporate local features at multiple spatial
scales, e.g., as done in CNNs through max pooling, and to provide the benefits
of composition through the architecture of multiple layers, can also be embedded
into SVMs. We verify through experiments on widely available image sets that the
resulting SVMs do provide superior accuracy in comparison to well-established
deep neural network benchmarks for small sample sizes.

1

Introduction

With the goal of learning when the number of training samples is small, and motivated by the success
of CNNs [35, 31], we wish to endow SVMs with as much a priori domain knowledge as possible.
One such important domain property for image recognition is translational invariance. An image
of a dog remains an image of the same dog if the image is shifted to the left. Similarly, it is also
rotation-invariant. More generally, given a group of transformations under which the classification of
images is invariant, we show how to endow SVMs with the knowledge of such invariance.
One common approach is data augmentation [29, 6], where several transformations of each training
sample are added to the training set. When applying SVMs on this augmented training set, it corresponds to a kernel that defines the similarity between two vectors X1 and X2 as the average similarity
between X1 and all transformations of X2 . However the average also includes transformations that
are maximally dissimilar, and we show that it leads to poor margins and poor classification results.
More appealing is to construct a kernel that defines similarity as the maximum similarity between X1
and all transformations of X2 . We show that this kernel is positive definite with high probability in
the small sample size regime of interest to us, under a probabilistic model for features. We verify this
property on widely available datasets and show that the improvement obtained by endowing SVMs
with this transformation invariance yields considerably better test accuracy.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

