Sample-Efficient Reinforcement Learning of Partially
Observable Markov Games
Qinghua Liu
Princeton University
qinghual@princeton.edu

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind and University of Alberta
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Chi Jin
Princeton University
chij@princeton.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the challenging tasks of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) under partial observability, where each agent only sees her own individual
observations and actions that reveal incomplete information about the underlying state of system. This paper studies these tasks under the general model of
multiplayer general-sum Partially Observable Markov Games (POMGs), which is
significantly larger than the standard model of Imperfect Information ExtensiveForm Games (IIEFGs). We identify a rich subclass of POMGs—weakly revealing
POMGs—in which sample-efficient learning is tractable. In the self-play setting,
we prove that a simple algorithm combining optimism and Maximum Likelihood
Estimation (MLE) is sufficient to find approximate Nash equilibria, correlated
equilibria, as well as coarse correlated equilibria of weakly revealing POMGs, in a
polynomial number of samples when the number of agents is small. In the setting
of playing against adversarial opponents, we show that a variant of our optimistic
MLE algorithm is capable of achieving sublinear regret when being compared
against the optimal maximin policies. To our best knowledge, this work provides
the first line of sample-efficient results for learning POMGs.

1

Introduction

This paper studies Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) under partial observability, where
each player tries to maximize her own utility via interacting with an unknown environment as
well as other players. In addition, each agent only sees her own observations and actions, which
reveal incomplete information about the underlying state of system. A large number of real-world
applications can be cast into this framework: in Poker, cards in a player’s hand are hidden from the
other players; in many real-time strategy games, players have only access to their local observations;
in multi-agent robotic systems, agents with first-person cameras have to cope with noisy sensors and
occlusions. While practical MARL systems have achieved remarkable success in a set of partially
observable problems including Poker [9], Starcraft [40], Dota [6] and autonomous driving [36], the
theoretical understanding of MARL under partial observability remains very limited.
The combination of partial observability with multiagency introduces a number of unique challenges.
The non-Markovian nature of the observations forces the agent to maintain memory and reason
about beliefs of the system state, all while exploring to collect information about the environment.
Consequently, well-known complexity-theoretic results show that learning and planning in partially
observable environments is statistically and computationally intractable even in the single-agent
setting [35, 30, 41, 29]. The presence of interaction between multiple agents further complicates the
partially observable problems. In addition to dealing with the adaptive nature of other players who
can adjust their strategies according to the learner’s past behaviors, the learner is further required to
discover and exploit the information asymmetry due to the separate observations of each agent.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

