EpiGRAF: Rethinking training of 3D GANs
Ivan Skorokhodov
KAUST

Sergey Tulyakov
Snap Inc.

Yiqun Wang
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

Abstract
A recent trend in generative modeling is building 3D-aware generators from 2D
image collections. To induce the 3D bias, such models typically rely on volumetric
rendering, which is expensive to employ at high resolutions. Over the past months,
more than ten works have addressed this scaling issue by training a separate 2D
decoder to upsample a low-resolution image (or a feature tensor) produced from
a pure 3D generator. But this solution comes at a cost: not only does it break
multi-view consistency (i.e., shape and texture change when the camera moves),
but it also learns geometry in low fidelity. In this work, we show that obtaining a
high-resolution 3D generator with SotA image quality is possible by following a
completely different route of simply training the model patch-wise. We revisit and
improve this optimization scheme in two ways. First, we design a location- and
scale-aware discriminator to work on patches of different proportions and spatial
positions. Second, we modify the patch sampling strategy based on an annealed
beta distribution to stabilize training and accelerate the convergence. The resulting
model, named EpiGRAF, is an efficient, high-resolution, pure 3D generator, and we
test it on four datasets (two introduced in this work) at 2562 and 5122 resolutions.
It obtains state-of-the-art image quality, high-fidelity geometry and trains ⇡2.5⇥
faster than the upsampler-based counterparts.
Code/data/visualizations: https://universome.github.io/epigraf

1

Introduction

Figure 1: We build a pure NeRF-based generator trained in a patch-wise fashion. Left two grids:
samples on FFHQ 5122 [25] and Cats 2562 [77]. Middle grids: interpolations between samples
on M-Plants and M-Food (upper) and corresponding geometry interpolations (lower). Right grid:
background separation examples. In contrast to the upsampler-based methods, one can naturally
incorporate the techniques from the traditional NeRF literature into our generator: for background
separation, we simply copy-pasted the corresponding code from NeRF++ [76].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

