DualCoOp: Fast Adaptation to Multi-Label
Recognition with Limited Annotations

1

Ximeng Sun1 Ping Hu1 Kate Saenko1,2
Boston University, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
{sunxm, pinghu, saenko}@bu.edu

Abstract
Solving multi-label recognition (MLR) for images in the low-label regime is
a challenging task that has many real-world applications. Recent work learns
an alignment between textual and visual spaces to compensate for insufficient
image labels, but loses accuracy because of the limited amount of available MLR
annotations. In this work, we utilize the strong alignment of textual and visual
features pretrained with millions of auxiliary image-text pairs and propose Dual
Context Optimization (DualCoOp) as a unified framework for partial-label MLR and
zero-shot MLR. DualCoOp encodes positive and negative contexts with class names
as part of the linguistic input (i.e. prompts). Since DualCoOp only introduces a very
light learnable overhead upon the pretrained vision-language framework, it can
quickly adapt to multi-label recognition tasks that have limited annotations and even
unseen classes. Experiments on standard multi-label recognition benchmarks across
two challenging low-label settings demonstrate the advantages of our approach over
state-of-the-art methods. Project page: https://cs-people.bu.edu/sunxm/
DualCoOp/project.html

1

Introduction

Image recognition has become a very popular and successful research area in recent years, due to
the development of large-scale datasets [12, 28] and advanced model architectures [14, 19, 38, 54].
However, the majority of image recognition approaches have focused on single-label prediction, which
ignores the intrinsic multi-label nature of images. Unlike single-label recognition [14, 19, 38, 54],
multi-label image recognition aims to recognize all semantic labels present in an image [10, 11,
35, 37, 52, 66, 61], providing a more comprehensive understanding and benefiting applications like
image retrieval, video analysis, and recommendation systems.
Multi-label recognition typically deals with images of complex scenes and diverse objects. Collecting
multi-label annotations becomes difficult to scale up, for two reasons: (i) annotating images with the
full semantic label set is laborious and (ii) samples of particular categories can be hard to find. The
first challenge can be addressed by multi-label recognition with partial labels, where merely some
of the categories are annotated for each training image. Recent works proposed solutions to partiallabel MLR based on semi-supervised learning [24, 41], normalized training objectives [15], or label
correlations [8, 21, 46]. The second setting involves zero-shot MLR, where novel unseen categories
are recognized by transferring knowledge from seen categories, with solutions like principal image
features [3, 69], knowledge graphs [29], and attention mechanisms [22, 44]. Despite significant
progress on the two settings, existing approaches are not designed to handle both at once. We propose
to unify these settings as limited-annotation MLR and design a solution that can handle practical
scenarios with either partial or missing labels.
Successful solutions to the above problems transfer knowledge from fully-annotated categories
to partially-labeled and novel categories by learning an alignment between images and category
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

