Syndicated Bandits: A Framework for Auto Tuning
Hyper-parameters in Contextual Bandit Algorithms

Qin Ding
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
qding@ucdavis.edu

Yue Kang
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
yuekang@ucdavis.edu

Yi-Wei Liu
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
lywliu@ucdavis.edu

Thomas C. M. Lee
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
tcmlee@ucdavis.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

James Sharpnack
Amazon∗
Berkeley, CA
jsharpna@gmail.com

Abstract
The stochastic contextual bandit problem, which models the trade-off between
exploration and exploitation, has many real applications, including recommender
systems, online advertising and clinical trials. As many other machine learning
algorithms, contextual bandit algorithms often have one or more hyper-parameters.
As an example, in most optimal stochastic contextual bandit algorithms, there is an
unknown exploration parameter which controls the trade-off between exploration
and exploitation. A proper choice of the hyper-parameters is essential for contextual
bandit algorithms to perform well. However, it is infeasible to use offline tuning
methods to select hyper-parameters in contextual bandit environment since there
is no pre-collected dataset and the decisions have to be made in real time. To
tackle this problem, we first propose a two-layer bandit structure for auto tuning
the exploration parameter and further generalize it to the Syndicated Bandits
framework which can learn multiple hyper-parameters dynamically in contextual
bandit environment. We derive the regret bounds of our proposed Syndicated
Bandits framework and show it can avoid its regret dependent exponentially in
the number of hyper-parameters to be tuned. Moreover, it achieves optimal regret
bounds under certain scenarios. Syndicated Bandits framework is general enough
to handle the tuning tasks in many popular contextual bandit algorithms, such as
LinUCB, LinTS, UCB-GLM, etc. Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets
validate the effectiveness of our proposed framework.

1

Introduction

The stochastic contextual bandit problem models the well-known exploration-exploitation dilemma in
a repeated game between a player and an environment. At each round, the player sequentially interacts
with the environment by pulling an arm from a pool of K arms, where every arm is associated with a
∗

Work done prior to joining Amazon.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

