Multi-Game Decision Transformers
Kuang-Huei Lee∗
Daniel Freeman
Eric Jang

Ofir Nachum∗
Winnie Xu

Mengjiao Yang

Sergio Guadarrama

Henryk Michalewski

Lisa Lee
Ian Fischer

Igor Mordatch∗

Google Research

Abstract
A longstanding goal of the field of AI is a method for learning a highly capable,
generalist agent from diverse experience. In the subfields of vision and language,
this was largely achieved by scaling up transformer-based models and training
them on large, diverse datasets. Motivated by this progress, we investigate whether
the same strategy can be used to produce generalist reinforcement learning agents.
Specifically, we show that a single transformer-based model – with a single set of
weights – trained purely offline can play a suite of up to 46 Atari games simultaneously at close-to-human performance. When trained and evaluated appropriately,
we find that the same trends observed in language and vision hold, including scaling
of performance with model size and rapid adaptation to new games via fine-tuning.
We compare several approaches in this multi-game setting, such as online and
offline RL methods and behavioral cloning, and find that our Multi-Game Decision
Transformer models offer the best scalability and performance. We release the
pre-trained models and code to encourage further research in this direction.1

1

Introduction

Building large-scale generalist models that solve many tasks by training on massive task-agnostic
datasets has emerged as a dominant approach in natural language processing [18, 12], computer
vision [19, 6], and their intersection [61, 4]. These models can adapt to new tasks (such as translation
[63, 78]), make use of unrelated data (such as using high-resource language to improve translations of
low-resource languages [17]), or even incorporate new modalities by projecting images into language
space [46, 75]. The success of these methods largely derives from a combination of scalable model
architectures [77], an abundance of unlabeled task-agnostic data, and continuous improvements in
high performance computing infrastructure. Crucially, scaling laws [38, 31] indicate that performance
gains due to scale have not yet reached a saturation point.
In this work, we argue that a similar progression is possible in the field of reinforcement learning, and
take initial steps toward scalable methods that produce highly capable generalist agents. In contrast
to vision and language domains, reinforcement learning has seen advocacy for the use of smaller
models [16, 49, 8] and is usually either used to solve single tasks, or multiple tasks within the same
environment. Importantly, training across multiple environments – with very different dynamics,
rewards, visuals, and agent embodiments – has been studied less significantly.
∗
1

Equal contribution. [leekh, ofirnachum, imordatch]@google.com
Additional information, videos and code can be seen at sites.google.com/view/multi-game-transformers.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

