HAPI: A Large-scale Longitudinal Dataset of
Commercial ML API Predictions
Lingjiao Chen1 , Zhihua Jin2 , Sabri Eyuboglu1 , Christopher Ré1 , Matei Zaharia1 , James Zou1
Stanford University1 , Hong Kong University of Science and Technology2

Abstract
Commercial ML APIs offered by providers such as Google, Amazon and Microsoft have dramatically simplified ML adoption in many applications. Numerous
companies and academics pay to use ML APIs for tasks such as object detection,
OCR and sentiment analysis. Different ML APIs tackling the same task can have
very heterogeneous performance. Moreover, the ML models underlying the APIs
also evolve over time. As ML APIs rapidly become a valuable marketplace and a
widespread way to consume machine learning, it is critical to systematically study
and compare different APIs with each other and to characterize how APIs change
over time. However, this topic is currently underexplored due to the lack of data. In
this paper, we present HAPI (History of APIs), a longitudinal dataset of 1,761,417
instances of commercial ML API applications (involving APIs from Amazon,
Google, IBM, Microsoft and other providers) across diverse tasks including image
tagging, speech recognition and text mining from 2020 to 2022. Each instance consists of a query input for an API (e.g., an image or text) along with the API’s output
prediction/annotation and confidence scores. HAPI is the first large-scale dataset
of ML API usages and is a unique resource for studying ML-as-a-service (MLaaS).
As examples of the types of analyses that HAPI enables, we show that ML APIs’
performance change substantially over time—several APIs’ accuracies dropped on
specific benchmark datasets. Even when the API’s aggregate performance stays
steady, its error modes can shift across different subtypes of data between 2020
and 2022. Such changes can substantially impact the entire analytics pipelines that
use some ML API as a component. We further use HAPI to study commercial
APIs’ performance disparities across demographic subgroups over time. HAPI
can stimulate more research in the growing field of MLaaS.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) prediction APIs have dramatically simplified ML adoption. For example, one
can use the Google speech API to transform an utterance to a text paragraph, or the Microsoft vision
API to recognize all objects in an image. The ML-as-a-Service (MLaaS) market powered by these
APIs is increasingly growing and expected to exceed $16 billion USD in the next five years [1].
Despite its increasing popularity, systematic analysis of this MLaaS ecosystem is limited, and
many phenomena are not well understood. For example, APIs from different providers can have
heterogeneous performance on the same dataset. Deciding which API or combination of APIs to use
on a specific dataset can be challenging. Moreover, providers can update their ML APIs due to new
data availability and model architecture advancements, but users often do not know how the API’s
behavior on their data changes. Such API shifts can substantially affect (and hurt) the performance of
downstream applications. Certain biases or stereotypes in the ML APIs [30] can also be amplified
or mitigated by API shifts. Understanding the dynamics of ML APIs is critical for ensuring the
reliability of the entire user pipeline, for which the API is one component. It also helps users to
adjust their API usage strategies timely and appropriately. For example, one may trust a speech API’s
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

