Decoupling Knowledge from Memorization:
Retrieval-augmented Prompt Learning

Xiang Chen1,2∗, Lei Li1,2∗, Ningyu Zhang1,2†, Xiaozhuan Liang1,2 , Shumin Deng1,2 ,
Chuanqi Tan3 , Fei Huang3 , Luo Si3 , Huajun Chen1,2†
1
Zhejiang University & AZFT Joint Lab for Knowledge Engine, China
2
Hangzhou Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, China
3
Alibaba Group, China

{xiang_chen, leili21, zhangningyu, liangxiaozhuan, 231sm, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn,
{chuanqi.tcq, f.huang, luo.si}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Prompt learning approaches have made waves in natural language processing by
inducing better few-shot performance while they still follow a parametric-based
learning paradigm; the oblivion and rote memorization problems in learning may
encounter unstable generalization issues. Specifically, vanilla prompt learning may
struggle to utilize atypical instances by rote during fully-supervised training or overfit shallow patterns with low-shot data. To alleviate such limitations, we develop
R ETRO P ROMPT with the motivation of decoupling knowledge from memorization
to help the model strike a balance between generalization and memorization. In
contrast with vanilla prompt learning, R ETRO P ROMPT constructs an open-book
knowledge-store from training instances and implements a retrieval mechanism
during the process of input, training and inference, thus equipping the model with
the ability to retrieve related contexts from the training corpus as cues for enhancement. Extensive experiments demonstrate that R ETRO P ROMPT can obtain better
performance in both few-shot and zero-shot settings. Besides, we further illustrate
that our proposed R ETRO P ROMPT can yield better generalization abilities with
new datasets. Detailed analysis of memorization indeed reveals R ETRO P ROMPT
can reduce the reliance of language models on memorization; thus, improving
generalization for downstream tasks3 .

1

Introduction

Large parametric language models [45, 7, 22, 31] have achieved dramatic empirical success in
natural language processing (NLP). Notably, pre-trained language models (PLMs) have learned a
substantial amount of in-depth knowledge from data, and have archived tremendous promise in
few-shot/zero-shot learning ability with the natural language prompts [12, 50, 57]. However, Recent
studies [37, 39, 59] observe that prompt learning with PLMs usually generalizes unstably in an
extremely low-resource setting or emerging domains. One potential reason is that, it is non-trivial
for parametric models to learn rare or hard patterns well with rote memorization, thus, resulting in
inefficient generalizable performance.
Intuitively, if we regard the whole training set as a book and the test phase as the examination, the
current training-test procedure of prompt learning (based on batch data training) can be viewed as
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.
3
Code is available in https://github.com/zjunlp/PromptKG/tree/main/research/
RetroPrompt.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

