Distinguishing discrete and continuous behavioral
variability using warped autoregressive HMMs

Julia C. Costacurta
Stanford University
jcostac@stanford.edu
Blue Sheffer
Stanford University

Lea Duncker
Stanford University
lduncker@stanford.edu

Winthrop Gillis
Harvard Medical School

Caleb Weinreb
Harvard Medical School

Jeffrey E. Markowitz
Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory University

Sandeep R. Datta
Harvard Medical School

Alex H. Williams
New York University, Flatiron Institute
alex.h.williams@nyu.edu

Scott W. Linderman
Stanford University
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

Abstract
A core goal in systems neuroscience and neuroethology is to understand how
neural circuits generate naturalistic behavior. One foundational idea is that complex
naturalistic behavior may be composed of sequences of stereotyped behavioral
syllables, which combine to generate rich sequences of actions. To investigate this,
a common approach is to use autoregressive hidden Markov models (ARHMMs) to
segment video into discrete behavioral syllables. While these approaches have been
successful in extracting syllables that are interpretable, they fail to account for other
forms of behavioral variability, such as differences in speed, which may be better
described as continuous in nature. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a
class of warped ARHMMs (WARHMM). As is the case in the ARHMM, behavior
is modeled as a mixture of autoregressive dynamics. However, the dynamics under
each discrete latent state (i.e. each behavioral syllable) are additionally modulated
by a continuous latent “warping variable.” We present two versions of warped
ARHMM in which the warping variable affects the dynamics of each syllable either
linearly or nonlinearly. Using depth-camera recordings of freely moving mice, we
demonstrate that the failure of ARHMMs to account for continuous behavioral
variability results in duplicate cluster assignments. WARHMM achieves similar
performance to the standard ARHMM while using fewer behavioral syllables.
Further analysis of behavioral measurements in mice demonstrates that WARHMM
identifies structure relating to response vigor.

1

Introduction

A fundamental question in systems neuroscience is how neural activity generates complex behavior [1–
3]. Specifically, a key goal is to understand how changes in neural activity determine which actions
are selected or executed on a moment-by-moment basis. To make progress towards this goal, it is
essential to study ethologically relevant, naturalistic behavior. A common way of studying naturalistic
behavior is to observe animals as they freely explore an environment [4–6]. Such unconstrained,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

