On Computing Probabilistic Explanations
for Decision Trees
Marcelo Arenas1,2,4 , Pablo Barceló2,4,5 , Miguel Romero3,5 , Bernardo Subercaseaux6
Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Correspondence at bsuberca@cs.cmu.edu.
1
Department of Computer Science, PUC Chile
2
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering, PUC Chile
3
Faculty of Engineering and Science, UAI Chile
4
Millenium Institute for Foundational Research on Data, Chile
5
CENIA Chile
6
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract
Formal XAI (explainable AI) is a growing area that focuses on computing explanations with mathematical guarantees for the decisions made by ML models. Inside
formal XAI, one of the most studied cases is that of explaining the choices taken
by decision trees, as they are traditionally deemed as one of the most interpretable
classes of models. Recent work has focused on studying the computation of sufficient reasons, a kind of explanation in which given a decision tree T and an instance
x, one explains the decision T (x) by providing a subset y of the features of x
such that for any other instance z compatible with y, it holds that T (z) = T (x),
intuitively meaning that the features in y are already enough to fully justify the
classification of x by T . It has been argued, however, that sufficient reasons
constitute a restrictive notion of explanation. For such a reason, the community
has started to study their probabilistic counterpart, in which one requires that the
probability of T (z) = T (x) must be at least some value δ ∈ (0, 1], where z is a
random instance that is compatible with y. Our paper settles the computational
complexity of δ-sufficient-reasons over decision trees, showing that both (1) finding
δ-sufficient-reasons that are minimal in size, and (2) finding δ-sufficient-reasons
that are minimal inclusion-wise, do not admit polynomial-time algorithms (unless PTIME = NP). This is in stark contrast with the deterministic case (δ = 1)
where inclusion-wise minimal sufficient-reasons are easy to compute. By doing
this, we answer two open problems originally raised by Izza et al., and extend the
hardness of explanations for Boolean circuits presented by Wäldchen et al. to the
more restricted case of decision trees. On the positive side, we identify structural
restrictions of decision trees that make the problem tractable, and show how SAT
solvers might be able to tackle these problems in practical settings.

1

Introduction

Context. The trust that AI models generate in people has been repetitively linked to our ability of
explaining the decision of said models (Arrieta et al., 2020), thus suggesting the area of explainable
AI (XAI) as fundamental for the deployment of trustworthy models. A sub-area of explainability that
has received considerable attention over the last years, showing quick progress in theoretical and
practical terms, is that of local explanations, i.e., explanations for the outcome of a particular input to
an ML model after the model has been trained. Several queries and scores have been proposed to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

