WaveBound: Dynamic Error Bounds for Stable Time
Series Forecasting

Youngin Cho*

Daejin Kim*

Dongmin Kim Mohammad Azam Khan
KAIST AI

Jaegul Choo

{choyi0521,kiddj,tommy.dm.kim,azamkhan,jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Time series forecasting has become a critical task due to its high practicality in
real-world applications such as traffic, energy consumption, economics and finance, and disease analysis. Recent deep-learning-based approaches have shown
remarkable success in time series forecasting. Nonetheless, due to the dynamics of
time series data, deep networks still suffer from unstable training and overfitting.
Inconsistent patterns appearing in real-world data lead the model to be biased to a
particular pattern, thus limiting the generalization. In this work, we introduce the
dynamic error bounds on training loss to address the overfitting issue in time series
forecasting. Consequently, we propose a regularization method called WaveBound
which estimates the adequate error bounds of training loss for each time step and
feature at each iteration. By allowing the model to focus less on unpredictable data,
WaveBound stabilizes the training process, thus significantly improving generalization. With the extensive experiments, we show that WaveBound consistently
improves upon the existing models in large margins, including the state-of-the-art
model.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has gained a lot of attention due to its high practicality in real-world applications such as traffic [1], energy consumption [2], economics and finance [3], and disease analysis [4].
Recent deep-learning-based approaches, particularly transformer-based methods [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], have
shown remarkable success in time series forecasting. Nevertheless, inconsistent patterns and unpredictable behaviors in real data enforce the models to fit in patterns, even for the cases of unpredictable
incident, and induce the unstable training. In unpredictable cases, the model does not neglect them in
training, but rather receives a huge penalty (i.e., training loss). Ideally, small magnitudes of training
loss should be presented for unpredictable patterns. This implies the need for proper regularization of
the forecasting models in time series forecasting.
Recently, Ishida et al. [10] claimed that zero training loss introduces a high bias in training, hence
leading to an overconfident model and a decrease in generalization. To remedy this issue, they propose
a simple regularization called flooding and explicitly prevent the training loss from decreasing below
a small constant threshold called the flood level. In this work, we also focus on the drawbacks of zero
training loss in time series forecasting. In time series forecasting, the model is enforced to fit to an
inevitably appearing unpredictable pattern which mostly generates a tremendous error. However, the
original flooding is not applicable to time series forecasting mainly due to the following two main
reasons. (i) Unlike image classification, time series forecasting requires the vector output of the size
of the prediction length times the number of features. In this case, the original flooding considers the
average training loss without dealing with each time step and feature individually. (ii) In time series
*

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

