Revisiting Realistic Test-Time Training: Sequential
Inference and Adaptation by Anchored Clustering

1

Yongyi Su1∗ Xun Xu21∗† Kui Jia13†
South China University of Technology 2 Institute for Infocomm Research
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
eesuyongyi@mail.scut.edu.cn
alex.xun.xu@gmail.com
kuijia@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Deploying models on target domain data subject to distribution shift requires
adaptation. Test-time training (TTT) emerges as a solution to this adaptation
under a realistic scenario where access to full source domain data is not available
and instant inference on target domain is required. Despite many efforts into
TTT, there is a confusion over the experimental settings, thus leading to unfair
comparisons. In this work, we first revisit TTT assumptions and categorize TTT
protocols by two key factors. Among the multiple protocols, we adopt a realistic
sequential test-time training (sTTT) protocol, under which we further develop a
test-time anchored clustering (TTAC) approach to enable stronger test-time feature
learning. TTAC discovers clusters in both source and target domain and match
the target clusters to the source ones to improve generalization. Pseudo label
filtering and iterative updating are developed to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of anchored clustering. We demonstrate that under all TTT protocols
TTAC consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on six TTT datasets.
We hope this work will provide a fair benchmarking of TTT methods and future
research should be compared within respective protocols. A demo code is available
at https://github.com/Gorilla-Lab-SCUT/TTAC.

1

Introduction

The recent success in deep learning is attributed to the availability of large labeled data [15, 40] and
the assumption of i.i.d. between training and test datasets. Such assumptions could be violated when
test data features a drastic difference from the training data, e.g. training on synthetic images and
test on real ones, and this is often referred to as domain shift [22, 2]. To tackle this issue, domain
adaptation (DA) [32] emerges and the labeled training data and unlabeled testing data are often
referred to as source and target data/domains respectively.
The existing DA works either require the access to both source and target domain data during
training [5] or training on multiple domains simultaneously [39]. The former approach renders
the methods restrictive to limited scenarios where source domain data is always available during
adaptation while the latter ones are computationally more expensive. To alleviate the reliance
on source domain data, which may be inaccessible due to privacy issues or storage overhead,
source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) emerges which handles DA on target data without access to
source data [19, 16, 37, 35, 20]. SFDA is often achieved through self-training [19], self-supervised
∗
†

Equal contribution
Correspondence to <kuijia@scut.edu.cn> & <alex.xun.xu@gmail.com>

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

