Finite-Sample Maximum Likelihood Estimation of
Location
Shivam Gupta
The University of Texas at Austin
shivamgupta@utexas.edu

Jasper C.H. Lee
University of Wisconsin–Madison
jasper.lee@wisc.edu

Eric Price
The University of Texas at Austin
ecprice@cs.utexas.edu

Paul Valiant
Purdue University
pvaliant@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider 1-dimensional location estimation, where we estimate a parameter
from n samples + ⌘i , with each ⌘i drawn i.i.d. from a known distribution f .
For fixed f the maximum-likelihood estimate (MLE) is well-known to be optimal
in the limit as n ! 1: it is asymptotically normal with variance matching the
1
Cramér-Rao lower bound of nI
, where I is the Fisher information of f . However,
this bound does not hold for finite n, or when f varies with n. We show for arbitrary
f and n that one can recover a similar theory based on the Fisher information of a
smoothed version of f , where the smoothing radius decays with n.

1

Introduction

We revisit a fundamental problem in statistics: consider a translation-invariant parametric model
{f ✓ }✓2R of distributions, where f ✓ (x) = f (x ✓). Suppose there is an arbitrarily chosen unknown
true parameter , and we get i.i.d. samples from f . The task is to accurately estimate from the
samples. This problem is known as location parameter estimation in the statistics literature.
Location estimation is a well-studied and general model, including as a special case the important
setting of Gaussian mean estimation. In contrast to general mean estimation (where we want to
estimate the mean of a distribution given minimal assumptions such as moment conditions), in
location estimation we are given the shape of the distribution up to shift. This advantage lets us
handle some distributions where mean estimation is impossible (e.g., the mean may not exist), and
lets us aim for higher accuracy than is possible without knowing the distribution.
The classic theory of location estimation is asymptotic, see [vdV00] for a detailed background. On
the algorithmic side, it is well-known that the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) is asymptotically
normal. Specifically, as the number of samples n tends to infinity, the distribution of the MLE
converges to a Gaussian centered at the true parameter with variance 1/(nI), where I is the Fisher
information of the distribution f :
"✓
◆2 #
Z
(f 0 (x))2
@
I :=
dx = E
log f (x)
.
(1)
x⇠f
f (x)
@x
Conversely, the celebrated Cramér-Rao bound states that the variance of any unbiased estimator must
be at least 1/(nI), meaning that the MLE has mean-squared error that is asymptotically at least as
good as any unbiased estimator.

In the last few decades, motivated by an increasing dependence on data for high-stakes applications,
the statistics and computer science communities have shifted focus towards finite-sample and high
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

