LasUIE: Unifying Information Extraction with Latent
Adaptive Structure-aware Generative Language Model

Hao Fei 1 Shengqiong Wu 1 Jingye Li 2 Bobo Li 2 Fei Li 2
Libo Qin 1 Meishan Zhang 3∗ Min Zhang 3 Tat-Seng Chua 1
1
Sea-NExT Joint Lab, School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
3
Wuhan University
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{haofei37, liboqin, dcscts}@nus.edu.sg swu@u.nus.edu
{theodorelee, boboli, lifei_csnlp}@whu.edu.cn
mason.zms@gmail.com zhangmin2021@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Universally modeling all typical information extraction tasks (UIE) with one
generative language model (GLM) has revealed great potential by the latest study,
where various IE predictions are unified into a linearized hierarchical expression
under a GLM. Syntactic structure information, a type of effective feature which
has been extensively utilized in IE community, should also be beneficial to UIE. In
this work, we propose a novel structure-aware GLM, fully unleashing the power
of syntactic knowledge for UIE. A heterogeneous structure inductor is explored
to unsupervisedly induce rich heterogeneous structural representations by posttraining an existing GLM. In particular, a structural broadcaster is devised to
compact various latent trees into explicit high-order forests, helping to guide a
better generation during decoding. We finally introduce a task-oriented structure
fine-tuning mechanism, further adjusting the learned structures to most coincide
with the end-task’s need. Over 12 IE benchmarks across 7 tasks our system shows
significant improvements over the baseline UIE system. Further in-depth analyses
show that our GLM learns rich task-adaptive structural bias that greatly resolves
the UIE crux, the long-range dependence issue and boundary identifying.

1

Introduction

Information extraction (IE) is widely considered as one of the most kernel topics in natural language
processing (NLP), which is defined as to identify the desired structural information from the unstructured texts [4, 63, 47, 44, 39, 29, 15]. There is a variety of IE and IE-derived tasks, yet all of which
revolves around predicting two key elements: mention spans or/and their semantic relations. For
example as in Fig. 1(b), NER detects the mention spans, while RE recognizes each possible mention
and its associated mention with relation. In this regard, all the existing IE jobs can be reduced into
three prototypes: span extraction, pair extraction and hyper-pair extraction, as depicted in Fig. 1(a).
In the era of deep learning, IE witnesses extraordinary developments, where especially the recent
triumph of pre-trained language models (LMs) helps push the state-of-the-art (SoTA) IE performances
amazingly [10, 3, 25, 80, 73]. Prior related works mostly design particular models for certain IE
tasks in isolation; while the latest SoTA progress [42] is achieved by unifying all IE tasks with a
single encoder-decoder GLM, i.e., UIE. As different IE tasks essentially share the similar nature (i.e.,
modeling span and relation features), it is proven that universally modeling multiple IE tasks helps
further learning of general sharable knowledge from varying task sources, which makes UIE great
potentials in real-world scenarios. In this work we inherit this wisdom and also focus on UIE.
∗

Corresponding Author: Meishan Zhang

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

