Neural Network Architecture Beyond
Width and Depth

Zuowei Shen
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
matzuows@nus.edu.sg

Haizhao Yang
Department of Mathematics
University of Maryland, College Park
hzyang@umd.edu

Shijun Zhang∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
zhangshijun@u.nus.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a new neural network architecture by introducing an additional
dimension called height beyond width and depth. Neural network architectures
with height, width, and depth as hyper-parameters are called three-dimensional
architectures. It is shown that neural networks with three-dimensional architectures
are significantly more expressive than the ones with two-dimensional architectures
(those with only width and depth as hyper-parameters), e.g., standard fully connected networks. The new network architecture is constructed recursively via a
nested structure, and hence we call a network with the new architecture nested network (NestNet). A NestNet of height s is built with each hidden neuron activated
by a NestNet of height ≤ s−1. When s = 1, a NestNet degenerates to a standard network with a two-dimensional architecture. It is proved by construction that height-s
ReLU NestNets with O(n) parameters can approximate 1-Lipschitz continuous
functions on [0, 1]d with an error O(n−(s+1)/d ), while the optimal approximation
error of standard ReLU networks with O(n) parameters is O(n−2/d ). Furthermore, such a result is extended to generic continuous functions on [0, 1]d with
the approximation error characterized by the modulus of continuity. Finally, we
use numerical experimentation to show the advantages of the super-approximation
power of ReLU NestNets.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we design a new neural network architecture by introducing one more dimension, called
height, in addition to width and depth in the characterization of dimensions of neural networks. We
call neural network architectures with height, width, and depth as hyper-parameters three-dimensional
architectures. It is proved by construction that neural networks with three-dimensional architectures
improve the approximation power significantly, compared to standard networks with two-dimensional
architectures (those with only width and depth as hyper-parameters). The approximation power of
standard neural networks has been widely studied in recent years. The optimality of the approximation
of standard fully-connected rectified linear unit (ReLU) networks (e.g., see [35, 40, 49, 52]) implies
limited room for further improvements. This motivates us to design a new neural network architecture
by introducing an additional dimension of height beyond width and depth.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

