mRI: Multi-modal 3D Human Pose Estimation Dataset
using mmWave, RGB-D, and Inertial Sensors

Sizhe An
University of Wisconsin-Madison
sizhe.an@wisc.edu

Yin Li
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yin.li@wisc.edu

Umit Ogras
University of Wisconsin-Madison
uogras@wisc.edu

Abstract
The ability to estimate 3D human body pose and movement, also known as human pose estimation (HPE), enables many applications for home-based health
monitoring, such as remote rehabilitation training. Several possible solutions have
emerged using sensors ranging from RGB cameras, depth sensors, millimeterWave (mmWave) radars, and wearable inertial sensors. Despite previous efforts
on datasets and benchmarks for HPE, few dataset exploits multiple modalities and
focuses on home-based health monitoring. To bridge this gap, we present mRI 1 ,
a multi-modal 3D human pose estimation dataset with mmWave, RGB-D, and
Inertial Sensors. Our dataset consists of over 160k synchronized frames from 20
subjects performing rehabilitation exercises and supports the benchmarks of HPE
and action detection. We perform extensive experiments using our dataset and delineate the strength of each modality. We hope that the release of mRI can catalyze
the research in pose estimation, multi-modal learning, and action understanding,
and more importantly facilitate the applications of home-based health monitoring.

1

Introduction

3D Human pose estimation (HPE) refers to detecting and tracking human body parts or key joints (e.g.,
wrists, shoulders, and knees) in the 3D space. It is a fundamental and crucial task in human activity
understanding and movement analysis with numerous application areas, including rehabilitation [40,
31, 7, 6], professional sports [35], augmented/virtual reality, and autonomous driving [28]. In
particular, human pose estimation plays an increasingly important role in healthcare applications,
such as remote rehabilitation training [37, 19]. The current mainstream rehabilitation treatment
involves a physical therapist supervising the patients in person. In contrast, HPE-based health
monitoring systems can help clinicians correct patients’ movements or instruct them remotely. To
this end, multiple datasets have studied HPE with health-related physical movements [6, 40, 31, 7].
Many existing studies rely heavily on processing RGB frames from color cameras for human pose
estimation [20, 5, 16, 34, 17, 25]. RGB image and video frames are the most common input types
since they offer an non-invasive approach for HPE. However, the image quality depends heavily on
the environmental setting, such as light conditions and visibility [3]. Moreover, using image and
video data poses significant privacy concerns, especially in a household environment. Finally, the
data-intensive nature of real-time video processing requires computationally powerful equipment
with high cost and energy consumption.
1

Project page: http://sizhean.github.io/mri

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

