NOMAD: Nonlinear Manifold Decoders
for Operator Learning
Jacob H. Seidman ⇤
Graduate Program in Applied Mathematics
and Computational Science
University of Pennsylvania
seidj@sas.upenn.edu

Georgios Kissas ⇤
Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Applied Mechanics
University of Pennsylvania
gkissas@seas.upenn.edu

Paris Perdikaris
Department of Mechanical Engineering
and Applied Mechanics
University of Pennsylvania
pgp@seas.upenn.edu

George J. Pappas
Department of Electrical
and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
pappasg@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Supervised learning in function spaces is an emerging area of machine learning
research with applications to the prediction of complex physical systems such as
fluid flows, solid mechanics, and climate modeling. By directly learning maps
(operators) between infinite dimensional function spaces, these models are able to
learn discretization invariant representations of target functions. A common approach is to represent such target functions as linear combinations of basis elements
learned from data. However, there are simple scenarios where, even though the
target functions form a low dimensional submanifold, a very large number of basis
elements is needed for an accurate linear representation. Here we present NOMAD,
a novel operator learning framework with a nonlinear decoder map capable of
learning finite dimensional representations of nonlinear submanifolds in function
spaces. We show this method is able to accurately learn low dimensional representations of solution manifolds to partial differential equations while outperforming
linear models of larger size. Additionally, we compare to state-of-the-art operator
learning methods on a complex fluid dynamics benchmark and achieve competitive
performance with a significantly smaller model size and training cost.

1

Introduction
input functions

output functions

⇤

These authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

decoder

encoder

Machine learning techniques have been apG
plied to great success for modeling functions between finite dimensional vector
L2 (X )
L2 (Y)
spaces. For example, in computer vision
(vectors of pixel values) and natural language processing (vectors of word embeddings) these methods have produced stateof-the-art results in image recognition [18]
Rm
Rn
and translation tasks [48]. However, not
approximator
all data has an obvious and faithful representation as finite dimensional vectors. In Figure 1: The Operator Learning Manifold Hypothesis.

