On the Epistemic Limits of Personalized Prediction

Lucas Monteiro Paes*
Harvard SEAS
lucaspaes@g.harvard.edu

Carol Xuan Long*
Harvard SEAS
carol_long@g.harvard.edu

Berk Ustun
University of California, San Diego
berk@ucsd.edu

Flavio P. Calmon
Harvard SEAS
flavio@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models are often personalized by using group attributes that
encode personal characteristics (e.g., sex, age group, HIV status). In such settings,
individuals expect to receive more accurate predictions in return for disclosing
group attributes to the personalized model. We study when we can tell that a
personalized model upholds this principle for every group who provides personal
data. We introduce a metric called the benefit of personalization (BoP) to measure
the smallest gain in accuracy that any group expects to receive from a personalized
model. We describe how the BoP can be used to carry out basic routines to audit
a personalized model, including: (i) hypothesis tests to check that a personalized
model improves performance for every group; (ii) estimation procedures to bound
the minimum gain in personalization. We characterize the reliability of these routines in a finite-sample regime and present minimax bounds on both the probability
of error for BoP hypothesis tests and the mean-squared error of BoP estimates. Our
results show that we can only claim that personalization improves performance
for each group who provides data when we explicitly limit the number of group
attributes used by a personalized model. In particular, we show that it is impossible
to reliably verify that a personalized classifier with k ≥ 19 binary group attributes
will benefit every group who provides personal data using a dataset of n = 8 × 109
samples – one for each person in the world.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models often assign predictions on the basis of group attributes that denote personal
characteristics. In medicine, for example, clinical prediction models account for characteristics that
may be protected (e.g., sex), sensitive (e.g., HIV status), or costly to acquire (e.g., presence of a
malignant tumor as determined via a biopsy) [3, 32]. Unlike lending or hiring, models that use
personal characteristics in such applications are not subject to scrutiny due to an assumption that
everyone would benefit from a more accurate model [7, 31, 33]. In an effort to develop models
that are as accurate as possible, practitioners use every piece of information to maximize predictive
accuracy over a heterogeneous population.
The prevalence of machine learning models that use personal characteristics reflects a belief that
personalization will produce a uniform gain in performance across all groups. In effect, individuals
who provide personal data to models expect more accurate predictions in return. In practice, however,
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

