Orthogonal Transformer: An Efficient Vision
Transformer Backbone with Token Orthogonalization

Huaibo Huang1,2 , Xiaoqiang Zhou1,2,4 , Ran He1,2,3,∗
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA, Beijing, China
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA, Beijing, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, xq525@mail.ustc.edu.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
1

Abstract
We present a general vision transformer backbone, called as Orthogonal Transformer, in pursuit of both efficiency and effectiveness. A major challenge for
vision transformer is that self-attention, as the key element in capturing long-range
dependency, is very computationally expensive for dense prediction tasks (e.g.,
object detection). Coarse global self-attention and local self-attention are then
designed to reduce the cost, but they suffer from either neglecting local correlations
or hurting global modeling. We present an orthogonal self-attention mechanism
to alleviate these issues. Specifically, self-attention is computed in the orthogonal
space that is reversible to the spatial domain but has much lower resolution. The
capabilities of learning global dependency and exploring local correlations are
maintained because every orthogonal token in self-attention can attend to the entire
visual tokens. Remarkably, orthogonality is realized by constructing an endogenously orthogonal matrix that is friendly to neural networks and can be optimized
as arbitrary orthogonal matrices. We also introduce Positional MLP to incorporate
position information for arbitrary input resolutions as well as enhance the capacity
of MLP. Finally, we develop a hierarchical architecture for Orthogonal Transformer.
Extensive experiments demonstrate its strong performance on a broad range of
vision tasks, including image classification, object detection, instance segmentation
and semantic segmentation.

1

Introduction

Recently, transformer [46] has made a tremendous success in the field of natural language processing
(NLP). Benefiting from the self-attention (SA) mechanism, it has a strong capacity in building
long-range dependencies in sequential data. Since long-range modeling is also essential for a wide
range of vision tasks, transformer has been adapted into computer vision by converting an image into
a sequence of patches [13] (called as tokens) and achieved competitive performance compared to
CNN [43, 44]. Moreover, self-attention has a quadratic computational complexity to the number of
tokens, resulting in intolerably expensive computational cost for dense prediction tasks, e.g., object
detection and segmentation.
Many efforts have been made to design efficient self-attention mechanisms for vision transformer.
PVT [50] employs a pyramid architecture with downsampled key and value tokens to reduce the
computation of global attention. Swin [35] performs self-attention in a local region with shifted
window to allow cross-region connection. GG-Transformer [63] and CrossFormer [52] present dilated
* Ran He is the corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

