A Win-win Deal: Towards Sparse and Robust
Pre-trained Language Models

Yuanxin Liu1,2,3∗, Fandong Meng5 , Zheng Lin1,4†, Jiangnan Li1,4 , Peng Fu1 , Yanan Cao1,4 ,
Weiping Wang1 , Jie Zhou5
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
3
School of Computer Science, Peking University
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China
liuyuanxin@stu.pku.edu.cn, {fandongmeng,withtomzhou}@tencent.com
{linzheng,lijiangnan,fupeng,caoyanan,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of pre-trained language models (PLMs), they still
face two challenges: First, large-scale PLMs are inefficient in terms of memory
footprint and computation. Second, on the downstream tasks, PLMs tend to rely
on the dataset bias and struggle to generalize to out-of-distribution (OOD) data.
In response to the efficiency problem, recent studies show that dense PLMs can
be replaced with sparse subnetworks without hurting the performance. Such
subnetworks can be found in three scenarios: 1) the fine-tuned PLMs, 2) the
raw PLMs and then fine-tuned in isolation, and even inside 3) PLMs without
any parameter fine-tuning. However, these results are only obtained in the indistribution (ID) setting. In this paper, we extend the study on PLMs subnetworks
to the OOD setting, investigating whether sparsity and robustness to dataset bias
can be achieved simultaneously. To this end, we conduct extensive experiments
with the pre-trained BERT model on three natural language understanding (NLU)
tasks. Our results demonstrate that sparse and robust subnetworks (SRNets) can
consistently be found in BERT, across the aforementioned three scenarios, using
different training and compression methods. Furthermore, we explore the upper
bound of SRNets using the OOD information and show that there exist sparse and
almost unbiased BERT subnetworks. Finally, we present 1) an analytical study
that provides insights on how to promote the efficiency of SRNets searching process
and 2) a solution to improve subnetworks’ performance at high sparsity. The code
is available at https://github.com/llyx97/sparse-and-robust-PLM.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained language models (PLMs) have enjoyed impressive success in natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. However, they still face two major problems. On the one hand, the prohibitive model
size of PLMs leads to poor efficiency in terms of memory footprint and computational cost [11, 37].
On the other hand, despite being pre-trained on large-scale corpus, PLMs still tend to rely on dataset
bias [16, 30, 50, 35], i.e., the spurious features of input examples that strongly correlate with the
∗
†

Work was done when Yuanxin Liu was a graduate student of IIE, CAS.
Corresponding author: Zheng Lin.
Joint work with Pattern Recognition Center, WeChat AI, Tencent Inc, China.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

