Contrastive Intrinsic Control for Unsupervised
Reinforcement Learning

Michael Laskin
UC Berkeley
mlaskin@berkeley.edu
Denis Yarats
NYU, Meta AI

Hao Liu
UC Berkeley

Aravind Rajeswaran
UC Berkeley, Meta AI

Xue Bin Peng
UC Berkeley

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley, Covariant

Abstract
We introduce Contrastive Intrinsic Control (CIC), an unsupervised reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm that maximizes the mutual information between statetransitions and latent skill vectors. CIC utilizes contrastive learning between
state-transitions and skills vectors to learn behaviour embeddings and maximizes
the entropy of these embeddings as an intrinsic reward to encourage behavioural
diversity. We evaluate our algorithm on the Unsupervised RL Benchmark (URLB)
in the asymptotic state-based setting, which consists of a long reward-free pretraining phase followed by a short adaptation phase to downstream tasks with
extrinsic rewards. We find that CIC improves over prior exploration algorithms in
terms of adaptation efficiency to downstream tasks on state-based URLB. 1
Deep RL is a powerful approach toward solving complex control tasks in the presence of extrinsic
rewards. Successful applications include playing video games from pixels [1], mastering the game of
Go [2, 3], robotic locomotion [4, 5, 6] and dexterous manipulation [7, 8, 9] policies. While effective,
the above advances produced agents that are unable to generalize to new downstream tasks beyond the
one they were trained to solve. Humans and animals on the other hand are able to acquire skills with
minimal supervision and apply them to solve a variety of downstream tasks. In this work, we seek
to train agents that acquire skills without supervision with generalization capabilities by efficiently
adapting these skills to downstream tasks.
Over the last few years, unsupervised RL has emerged as a promising framework for developing RL
agents that can generalize to new tasks. In the unsupervised RL setting, agents are first pre-trained
with self-supervised intrinsic rewards and then finetuned to downstream tasks with extrinsic rewards.
Unsupervised RL algorithms broadly fall into three categories - knowledge-based, data-based, and
competence-based methods2 . Knowledge-based methods maximize the error or uncertainty of a
predictive model [12, 13, 14]. Data-based methods maximize the entropy of the agent’s visitation [15,
16]. Competence-based methods learn skills that generate diverse behaviors [17, 18]. This work falls
into the latter category of competence-based exploration methods.
Unlike knowledge-based and data-based algorithms, competence-based algorithms simultaneously
address both the exploration challenge as well as distilling the generated experience in the form
of reusable skills. This makes them particularly appealing, since the resulting skill-based policies
(or skills themselves) can be finetuned to efficiently solve downstream tasks. While there are many
self-supervised objectives that can be utilized, our work falls into a family of methods that learns skills
by maximizing the mutual information between visited states and latent skill vectors. Many earlier
1
2

Project website and code: https://sites.google.com/view/cicneurips2022/
These categories for exploration algorithms were introduced by [10] and inspired by [11].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

