Mean Estimation in High-Dimensional Binary Markov
Gaussian Mixture Models
Yihan Zhang
Institute of Science and Technology, Austria
zephyr.z798@gmail.com

Nir Weinberger
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
nirwein@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We consider a high-dimensional mean estimation problem over a binary hidden
Markov model, which illuminates the interplay between memory in data, sample
size, dimension, and signal strength in statistical inference. In this model, an
estimator observes n samples of a d-dimensional parameter vector θ∗ ∈ Rd ,
multiplied by a random sign Si (1 ≤ i ≤ n), and corrupted by isotropic standard
Gaussian noise. The sequence of signs {Si }i∈[n] ∈ {−1, 1}n is drawn from a
stationary homogeneous Markov chain with flip probability δ ∈ [0, 1/2]. As δ
varies, this model smoothly interpolates two well-studied models: the Gaussian
Location Model for which δ = 0 and the Gaussian Mixture Model for which δ =
1/2. Assuming that the estimator knows δ, we establish a nearly minimax optimal
(up to logarithmic factors) estimation error rate, as a function of ∥θ∗ ∥, δ, d, n. We
then provide an upper bound to the case of estimating δ, assuming a (possibly
inaccurate) knowledge of θ∗ . The bound is proved to be tight when θ∗ is an
accurately known constant. These results are then combined to an algorithm which
estimates θ∗ with δ unknown a priori, and theoretical guarantees on its error are
stated.

1

Introduction

Memory between data samples is ubiquitous in practical applications, as data collected from networks
or sampled time series inevitably inherit spatial or temporal statistical dependencies. Numerous
examples arise in imaging, meteorology, health care, finance, social science, and so on [Glaeser et al.,
1996, Bertrand et al., 2000, Sacerdote, 2001, Duflo and Saez, 2003, Christakis and Fowler, 2013]. In
principle, prior knowledge of the existence of such memory can be used to improve the performance
of statistical estimators compared to the performance obtained in memoryless models. Development
and analysis of statistical inference algorithms for models with memory has been extensively explored
from the algorithmic perspective, and computationally efficient algorithms such as Baum-Welch and
message-passing were developed [Ephraim and Merhav, 2002, van Handel, 2008, MacKay, 2003,
Wainwright and Jordan, 2008]. It was also extensively studied from the theoretical perspective in
the classical, fixed-dimensional and asymptotic regime, e.g., Györfi et al. [2002, Chapter 27 and
references therein]. However, much less is understood about the high dimensional, non-asymptotic
regime, which is of paramount importance in modern applications, and the focus of current extensive
research [Vershynin, 2018, Wainwright, 2019]. As we exemplify in this paper, the error in such
estimation problems depends in an intricate way on the interplay between the number of samples, the
dimension of the vector parameters to be estimated, the noise level (signal-to-noise ratio), and the
level of memory between the samples.
An ever popular and fundamental model is the Gaussian mixture model, in which memory exists
between samples whenever the latent variables determining the component of each sample are
dependent. Numerous recent papers, e.g., Balakrishnan et al. [2017], Xu et al. [2016], Klusowski
and Brinda [2016], Jin et al. [2016], Dwivedi et al. [2020b], Dwivedi et al. [2018], Dwivedi et al.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

