Data-Efficient Structured Pruning via
Submodular Optimization
Marwa El Halabi⇤
Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal

Suraj Srinivas†
Harvard University

Simon Lacoste-Julien
Mila, Université de Montreal
Samsung - SAIT AI Lab, Montreal
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Structured pruning is an effective approach for compressing large pre-trained
neural networks without significantly affecting their performance. However, most
current structured pruning methods do not provide any performance guarantees,
and often require fine-tuning, which makes them inapplicable in the limited-data
regime. We propose a principled data-efficient structured pruning method
based on submodular optimization. In particular, for a given layer, we select
neurons/channels to prune and corresponding new weights for the next layer, that
minimize the change in the next layer’s input induced by pruning. We show that
this selection problem is a weakly submodular maximization problem, thus it
can be provably approximated using an efficient greedy algorithm. Our method
is guaranteed to have an exponentially decreasing error between the original model
and the pruned model outputs w.r.t the pruned size, under reasonable assumptions.
It is also one of the few methods in the literature that uses only a limited-number of
training data and no labels. Our experimental results demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in the limited-data regime.

1

Introduction

As modern neural networks (NN) grow increasingly large, with some models reaching billions of
parameters [McGuffie and Newhouse, 2020], they require an increasingly large amount of memory,
power, hardware, and inference time, which makes it necessary to compress them. This is especially
important for models deployed on resource-constrained devices like mobile phones and smart speakers,
and for latency-critical applications such as self-driving cars.
Several approaches exist to compress NNs. Some methods approximate model weights using
quantization and hashing [Gong et al., 2014, Courbariaux et al., 2015], or low-rank approximation
and tensor factorization [Denil et al., 2013, Lebedev et al., 2015, Su et al., 2018]. In another
class of methods called knowledge distillation, a small network is trained to mimic a much larger
network [Bucila et al., 2006, Hinton et al., 2015]. Other methods employ sparsity and group-sparsity
regularisation during training, to induce sparse weights [Collins and Kohli, 2014, Voita et al., 2019].
In this work, we follow the network pruning approach, where the redundant units (weights, neurons
or filters/channels) of a pre-trained NN are removed; see [Kuzmin et al., 2019, Blalock et al., 2020,
⇤
†

work done partially at MIT, CSAIL.
work done partially at Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

