Diffusion Visual Counterfactual Explanations
Maximilian Augustin⇤

Valentyn Boreiko*
Francesco Croce
University of Tübingen

Matthias Hein

Abstract
Visual Counterfactual Explanations (VCEs) are an important tool to understand
the decisions of an image classifier. They are “small” but “realistic” semantic
changes of the image changing the classifier decision. Current approaches for
the generation of VCEs are restricted to adversarially robust models and often
contain non-realistic artefacts, or are limited to image classification problems
with few classes. In this paper, we overcome this by generating Diffusion Visual
Counterfactual Explanations (DVCEs) for arbitrary ImageNet classifiers via a
diffusion process. Two modifications to the diffusion process are key for our
DVCEs: first, an adaptive parameterization, whose hyperparameters generalize
across images and models, together with distance regularization and late start of
the diffusion process, allow us to generate images with minimal semantic changes
to the original ones but different classification. Second, our cone regularization via
an adversarially robust model ensures that the diffusion process does not converge
to trivial non-semantic changes, but instead produces realistic images of the target
class which achieve high confidence by the classifier. Code is available under
https://github.com/valentyn1boreiko/DVCEs.

1

Introduction

It can be argued that one of the main problems hindering the widespread use of machine learning,
and image classification in particular, is the missing possibility to explain the decisions of black-box
models such as neural networks. This is not only a problem for decisions affecting humans where the
current draft for AI regulation in Europe [10] requires “transparency”, but it is a pressing problem
in all applications of machine learning. The reason, to some extent, is that humans would like to
understand but also control if the learning algorithm has captured the “concepts” of the underlying
classes or if it just predicts well using spurious features, artefacts in the data set, or other sources of
error. In this paper, we focus on model-agnostic explanations which can, in principle, be applied to
any image classifier and do not rely on the specific structure of the classifier such as decision trees or
linear classifiers. In this area, in particular for image classification, sensitivity based explanations [4],
explanations based on feature attributions [3], saliency maps [47, 46, 17, 56, 51], Shapley additive
explanations [31], and local fits of interpretable models [39] have been proposed. Moreover, [55]
proposed counterfactual explanations (CEs), which are instance-specific explanations. They can
be applied to any classifier and it has been argued that they are close to the human justification of
decisions [34] using counterfactual reasoning: “I would recognize it as zebra (instead of horse) if
it had black and white stripes.” For a given classifier almost all methods for the generation of CEs
[55, 15, 35, 6, 38, 54, 44] try to solve the following problem: “Given a target class c what is the
minimal change of input x, such that x + is classified as class c with high probability and is a
realistic instance of my data generating distribution?” From the perspective of “debugging” existing
machine learning models, CEs are interesting as they construct a concrete input x + with a different
classification that allows the developer to test if the model has learned the correct features.
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

