Convexity Certificates from Hessians

Julien Klaus
Friedrich Schiller University Jena
julien.klaus@uni-jena.de

Niklas Merk
Friedrich Schiller University Jena
niklas.merk@uni-jena.de

Konstantin Wiedom
Friedrich Schiller University Jena
konstantin.wiedom@uni-jena.de

Sören Laue
Technical University of Kaiserslautern
Data Assessment Solutions GmbH
laue@cs.uni-kl.de

Joachim Giesen
Friedrich Schiller University Jena
joachim.giesen@uni-jena.de

Abstract
The Hessian of a differentiable convex function is positive semidefinite. Therefore,
checking the Hessian of a given function is a natural approach to certify convexity.
However, implementing this approach is not straightforward since it requires a
representation of the Hessian that allows its analysis. Here, we implement this
approach for a class of functions that is rich enough to support classical machine
learning. For this class of functions it was recently shown how to compute computational graphs of their Hessians. We show how to check these graphs for positive
semidefiniteness. We compare our implementation of the Hessian approach with
the well-established disciplined convex programming (DCP) approach and prove
that the Hessian approach is at least as powerful as the DCP approach for differentiable functions. Furthermore, we show for a state-of-the-art implementation
of the DCP approach that, for differentiable functions, the Hessian approach is
actually more powerful. That is, it can certify the convexity of a larger class of
differentiable functions.

1

Introduction

Convex optimization forms the backbone of classical machine learning. Formulating machine learning
problems as convex optimization problems is attractive because these problems can be solved globally
and efficiently. Several optimization frameworks consisting of a modeling language and solver exist
and are used in machine learning. Two examples of such frameworks are CVX [Grant and Boyd,
2014] and GENO [Laue et al., 2019], which take different approaches.
CVX takes a formal specification of an optimization problem and transforms it into a normal form,
such as a convex quadratic program (QP) or semidefinite program (SDP). The transformation is only
possible if the specified problem is convex. Therefore, a convexity test is performed first in CVX.
The test is based on a calculus for convex functions called disciplined convex programming (DCP) by
Grant et al. [2006a], which takes advantage, for example, of the fact that the sum of convex functions
and the positive scaling of a convex function are convex again. The convexity calculus requires a set
of functions, called atoms, whose convexity has to be certified by other means.
GENO also takes the formal specification of an optimization problem but does not transform it into
standard form. Instead, it uses the specification to generate a solver for the specified problem or
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

