On the difficulty of learning chaotic dynamics with
RNNs
Jonas M. Mikhaeil1,2,* , Zahra Monfared1,4* , and Daniel Durstewitz1,2,3
j.mikhaeil@columbia.edu, {zahra.monfared, daniel.durstewitz}@zi-mannheim.de
1

Department of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany
2
Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
3
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University
4
Department of Mathematics & Informatics and Cluster of Excellence STRUCTURES, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany
*
These authors contributed equally

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are wide-spread machine learning tools for
modeling sequential and time series data. They are notoriously hard to train because their loss gradients backpropagated in time tend to saturate or diverge during
training. This is known as the exploding and vanishing gradient problem. Previous
solutions to this issue either built on rather complicated, purpose-engineered architectures with gated memory buffers, or - more recently - imposed constraints that
ensure convergence to a fixed point or restrict (the eigenspectrum of) the recurrence
matrix. Such constraints, however, convey severe limitations on the expressivity of
the RNN. Essential intrinsic dynamics such as multistability or chaos are disabled.
This is inherently at disaccord with the chaotic nature of many, if not most, time
series encountered in nature and society. It is particularly problematic in scientific
applications where one aims to reconstruct the underlying dynamical system. Here
we offer a comprehensive theoretical treatment of this problem by relating the
loss gradients during RNN training to the Lyapunov spectrum of RNN-generated
orbits. We mathematically prove that RNNs producing stable equilibrium or cyclic
behavior have bounded gradients, whereas the gradients of RNNs with chaotic
dynamics always diverge. Based on these analyses and insights we suggest ways
of how to optimize the training process on chaotic data according to the system’s
Lyapunov spectrum, regardless of the employed RNN architecture.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are widely used across various fields in engineering and science
for learning sequential tasks or modeling and predicting time series [55]. Yet, they struggle when
long-term temporal dependencies, very slow, or hugely varying time scales are involved [6, 34, 53,
73, 80]. Time series or sequential data with such properties are, however, very common in fields
like climate physics [84], neuroscience [22, 75], ecology [87], or language processing [11]. Training
RNNs on such data is hard because the loss gradients backpropagated in time easily saturate or
diverge in this process. This is commonly referred to as the exploding and vanishing gradient problem
(EVGP) [6, 34, 67].
One solution to the EVGP is based on specifically designed RNN architectures with gating mechanisms, such as long short-term memory (LSTM) [35] or gated recurrent units (GRU) [10]. These
architectures allow states at earlier time steps to more easily influence activity much later through a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

