Composition Theorems for Interactive Differential
Privacy

Xin Lyu
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA, 94720
xinlyu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
An interactive mechanism is an algorithm that stores a data set and answers adaptively chosen queries to it. The mechanism is called differentially private, if any
adversary cannot distinguish whether a specific individual is in the data set by
interacting with the mechanism. We study composition properties of differential
privacy in concurrent compositions. In this setting, an adversary interacts with k
interactive mechanisms in parallel and can interleave its queries to the mechanisms
arbitrarily. Previously, Vadhan and Wang [2021] proved an optimal concurrent
composition theorem for pure-differential privacy. We significantly generalize and
extend their results. Namely, we prove optimal parallel composition properties for
several major notions of differential privacy in the literature, including approximate DP, Rényi DP, and zero-concentrated DP. Our results demonstrate that the
adversary gains no advantage by interleaving its queries to independently running
mechanisms. Hence, interactivity is a feature that differential privacy grants us for
free.
Concurrently and independently of our work, Vadhan and Zhang [2022] proved
an optimal concurrent composition theorem for f -DP [Dong et al., 2022], which
implies our result for the approximate DP case.

1

Introduction

By now, differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006b] has been widely accepted as a standard framework
for protecting individual privacy when performing data analysis on data sets that may contain sensitive
information of individuals (see, e.g., the surveys by Dwork and Roth [2014], Vadhan [2017]).
Let M be an algorithm that runs on a data set x and calculates some information about it. Roughly
speaking, M is called differentially private, if the output distribution of A remains nearly identical
when we arbitrarily modify a single entry in x.
One essential feature of differential privacy is its composability. Composition captures the scenario
where a data analyst runs k differentially private algorithms sequentially, and releases the results
afterward. Typically, a composition theorem has the following form: if each of the k algorithms
satisfies differential privacy, then the analyst’s output is still differentially private with moderately
degraded privacy parameters.
Composition theorems are important for at least two reasons. First, we might want to perform
computation tasks on the same data set multiple times and still have reasonable control over the
privacy loss. In this case, composition theorems reveal how the privacy guarantee degrades over time.
More importantly, composition theorems allow us to build more complex and powerful differentially36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

