Manifold Interpolating Optimal-Transport Flows for
Trajectory Inference

Guillaume Huguet1∗ D.S. Magruder2∗ Alexander Tong1∗ Oluwadamilola Fasina2
Manik Kuchroo2
1

Guy Wolf1† Smita Krishnaswamy2†

Université de Montréal; Mila - Quebec AI Institute

2

Yale University

Abstract
We present a method called Manifold Interpolating Optimal-Transport Flow
(MIOFlow) that learns stochastic, continuous population dynamics from static
snapshot samples taken at sporadic timepoints. MIOFlow combines dynamic models, manifold learning, and optimal transport by training neural ordinary differential
equations (Neural ODE) to interpolate between static population snapshots as penalized by optimal transport with manifold ground distance. Further, we ensure that
the flow follows the geometry by operating in the latent space of an autoencoder
that we call a geodesic autoencoder (GAE). In GAE the latent space distance
between points is regularized to match a novel multiscale geodesic distance on the
data manifold that we define. We show that this method is superior to normalizing
flows, Schrödinger bridges and other generative models that are designed to flow
from noise to data in terms of interpolating between populations. Theoretically, we
link these trajectories with dynamic optimal transport. We evaluate our method
on simulated data with bifurcations and merges, as well as scRNA-seq data from
embryoid body differentiation, and acute myeloid leukemia treatment.

1

Introduction

Here, we tackle the problem of continuous dynamics of probability distributions defined on a data
manifold. Data from naturalistic systems are often modeled as generated from an underlying low
dimensional manifold embedded in a high dimensional measurement space. Termed the manifold
hypothesis, this assumption has led to many successful models of biological, chemical, and physical
systems. Measurements in such systems are increasingly high dimensional. For instance, in single
cell data the entire transcriptomic profile of the cell is measured with each mRNA or gene species
a dimension. However, because of informational redundancy between these genes, the intrinsic
dimensionality of the data is low dimensional. Mathematically, a Riemannian manifold is a good
model for such a system, and much of manifold learning literature including, diffusion maps [9],
Laplacian eigenmaps [2], and the wider graph signal processing literature, has focused on learning
this structure via data graphs [31, 32] and autoencoders [30, 11].
Building on this literature, we consider snapshot measurements of cellular populations over time.
Current technology cannot follow a cell in time as the measurements are destructive. We frame this as
learning a population flow on a data manifold. Recently several neural networks that perform flows,
or transports between probability distributions, have been proposed in the literature. However, most
of these works have focused on generative modeling: i.e., flowing from a noise distribution such as a
Gaussian distribution to a data distribution in order to generate data. Examples include score-based
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding authors: guy.wolf@umontreal.ca and smita.krishnawamy@yale.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

