Efficient Active Learning with Abstention
Yinglun Zhu
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
yinglun@cs.wisc.edu

Robert Nowak
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
The goal of active learning is to achieve the same accuracy achievable by passive
learning, while using much fewer labels. Exponential savings in terms of label
complexity have been proved in very special cases, but fundamental lower bounds
show that such improvements are impossible in general. This suggests a need
to explore alternative goals for active learning. Learning with abstention is one
such alternative. In this setting, the active learning algorithm may abstain from
prediction and incur an error that is marginally smaller than random guessing. We
develop the first computationally efficient active learning algorithm with abstention.
Our algorithm provably achieves polylog( 1ε ) label complexity, without any low
noise conditions. Such performance guarantee reduces the label complexity by
an exponential factor, relative to passive learning and active learning that is not
allowed to abstain. Furthermore, our algorithm is guaranteed to only abstain on
hard examples (where the true label distribution is close to a fair coin), a novel
property we term proper abstention that also leads to a host of other desirable
characteristics (e.g., recovering minimax guarantees in the standard setting, and
avoiding the undesirable “noise-seeking” behavior often seen in active learning).
We also provide novel extensions of our algorithm that achieve constant label
complexity and deal with model misspecification.

1

Introduction

Active learning aims at learning an accurate classifier with a small number of labeled data points
(Settles, 2009; Hanneke, 2014). Active learning has become increasingly important in modern
application of machine learning, where unlabeled data points are abundant yet the labeling process
requires expensive time and effort. Empirical successes of active learning have been observed in
many areas (Tong and Koller, 2001; Gal et al., 2017; Sener and Savarese, 2018). In noise-free or
certain low-noise cases (i.e., under Massart noise (Massart and Nédélec, 2006)), active learning
algorithms with provable exponential savings over the passive counterpart have been developed
(Balcan et al., 2007; Hanneke, 2007; Dasgupta et al., 2009; Hsu, 2010; Dekel et al., 2012; Hanneke,
2014; Zhang and Chaudhuri, 2014; Krishnamurthy et al., 2019; Katz-Samuels et al., 2021). On the
other hand, however, not much can be said in the general case. In fact, Kääriäinen (2006) provides
a Ω( ε12 ) lower bound by reducing active learning to a simple mean estimation problem: It takes
Ω( ε12 ) samples to distinguish η(x) = 12 + ε and η(x) = 12 − ε. Even with the relatively benign
Tsybakov noise (Tsybakov, 2004), Castro and Nowak (2006, 2008) derive a Ω(poly( 1ε )) lower bound,
again, indicating that exponential speedup over passive learning is not possible in general. These
fundamental lower bounds lay out statistical barriers to active learning, and suggests considering a
refinement of the label complexity goals in active learning (Kääriäinen, 2006).
Inspecting these lower bounds, one can see that active learning suffers from classifying hard examples
that are close to the decision boundary. However, do we really require a trained classifier to do well
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

