Trading off Image Quality for Robustness is not
Necessary with Regularized Deterministic
Autoencoders
Amrutha Saseendran1 , Kathrin Skubch1 , Stefan Falkner1 , and Margret Keuper2,3
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
2
3
University of Siegen, Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
Amrutha.Saseendran@de.bosch.com

Abstract
The susceptibility of Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) to adversarial attacks indicates the necessity to evaluate the robustness of the learned representations along
with the generation performance. The vulnerability of VAEs has been attributed
to the limitations associated with their variational formulation. Deterministic autoencoders could overcome the practical limitations associated with VAEs and
offer a promising alternative for image generation applications. In this work, we
propose an adversarially robust deterministic autoencoder with superior performance in terms of both generation and robustness of the learned representations.
We introduce a regularization scheme to incorporate adversarially perturbed data
points to the training pipeline without increasing the computational complexity or compromising the generation fidelity when compared to the robust VAEs
by leveraging a loss based on the two-point Kolmogorov–Smirnov test between
representations. We conduct extensive experimental studies on popular image
benchmark datasets to quantify the robustness of the proposed approach based
on the adversarial attacks targeted at VAEs. Our empirical findings show that the
proposed method achieves significant performance in both robustness and fidelity
when compared to the robust VAE models. An implementation is available at
https://github.com/boschresearch/Robust_GMM_DAE.

1

Introduction

Variational autoencoders (VAEs) offer a powerful probabilistic framework to learn deep generative
models. They are widely employed in various domains such as computer vision, natural language
processing and representation learning [24, 16, 25, 26, 10]. A VAE is composed of two coupled
but independently parameterized models, an encoder or a recognition model that computes a latent
representation of the input space with stochastic latent variables and a decoder or a generative
model to map the latent representations back to the original input space [18]. One of the major
advantages of VAEs is that they provide semantically meaningful latent representations of highdimensional complex input distributions which can be further utilized for various downstream
tasks [17, 14, 28, 11]. However, VAEs are often limited due to theoretical and practical limitations
such as over-regularization, prior-posterior mismatch resulting in trade-offs between generation and
reconstruction fidelity [31, 9, 12]. Recently proposed deterministic versions of VAEs offer promising
alternatives to overcome these limitations [12, 27].
The semantically meaningful representations learned by VAEs can still be corrupted by so-called
adversarial attacks [30, 19, 20], where even small but specifically crafted changes to the input can
lead to very different reconstructions. This observation reveals a lack of generalization within such
models and is therefore a serious concern with respect to many practical applications. While it
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

