Efficient and Modular Implicit Differentiation

Mathieu Blondel, Quentin Berthet, Marco Cuturi∗, Roy Frostig,
Stephan Hoyer, Felipe Llinares-López, Fabian Pedregosa, Jean-Philippe Vert∗
Google Research

Abstract
Automatic differentiation (autodiff) has revolutionized machine learning. It allows
to express complex computations by composing elementary ones in creative ways
and removes the burden of computing their derivatives by hand. More recently,
differentiation of optimization problem solutions has attracted widespread attention
with applications such as optimization layers, and in bi-level problems such as
hyper-parameter optimization and meta-learning. However, so far, implicit differentiation remained difficult to use for practitioners, as it often required case-by-case
tedious mathematical derivations and implementations. In this paper, we propose
automatic implicit differentiation, an efficient and modular approach for implicit
differentiation of optimization problems. In our approach, the user defines directly
in Python a function F capturing the optimality conditions of the problem to be
differentiated. Once this is done, we leverage autodiff of F and the implicit function theorem to automatically differentiate the optimization problem. Our approach
thus combines the benefits of implicit differentiation and autodiff. It is efficient as
it can be added on top of any state-of-the-art solver and modular as the optimality
condition specification is decoupled from the implicit differentiation mechanism.
We show that seemingly simple principles allow to recover many existing implicit
differentiation methods and create new ones easily. We demonstrate the ease of
formulating and solving bi-level optimization problems using our framework. We
also showcase an application to the sensitivity analysis of molecular dynamics.

1

Introduction

Automatic differentiation (autodiff) is now an inherent part of machine learning software. It allows
to express complex computations by composing elementary ones in creative ways and removes the
tedious burden of computing their derivatives by hand. In parallel, the differentiation of optimization
problem solutions has found many applications. A classical example is bi-level optimization, which
typically involves computing the derivatives of a nested optimization problem in order to solve an
outer one. Examples of applications in machine learning include hyper-parameter optimization [23,
77, 70, 38, 12, 13], neural networks [59], and meta-learning [39, 72]. Another line of active research
involving differentiation of optimization problem solutions are optimization layers [55, 6, 65, 31, 46],
which can be used to encourage structured outputs, and implicit deep networks [8, 36, 43, 44, 73],
which have a smaller memory footprint than backprop-trained networks.
Since optimization problem solutions typically do not enjoy an explicit formula in terms of their
inputs, autodiff cannot be used directly to differentiate these functions. In recent years, two main
approaches have been developed to circumvent this problem. The first one consists of unrolling the
iterations of an optimization algorithm and using the final iteration as a proxy for the optimization
problem solution [83, 32, 29, 39, 1]. This allows to explicitly construct a computational graph
relating the algorithm output to the inputs, on which autodiff can then be used transparently. However,
this requires a reimplementation of the algorithm using the autodiff system, and not all algorithms
∗

Work done while at Google Research, now at Apple and Owkin, respectively.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

