Rethinking Knowledge Graph Evaluation Under the
Open-World Assumption

Haotong Yang12 Zhouchen Lin123∗ Muhan Zhang24∗
1
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
{haotongyang, zlin, muhan}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Most knowledge graphs (KGs) are incomplete, which motivates one important
research topic on automatically complementing knowledge graphs. However,
evaluation of knowledge graph completion (KGC) models often ignores the
incompleteness—facts in the test set are ranked against all unknown triplets which
may contain a large number of missing facts not included in the KG yet. Treating all
unknown triplets as false is called the closed-world assumption. This closed-world
assumption might negatively affect the fairness and consistency of the evaluation
metrics. In this paper, we study KGC evaluation under a more realistic setting,
namely the open-world assumption, where unknown triplets are considered to
include many missing facts not included in the training or test sets. For the currently most used metrics such as mean reciprocal rank (MRR) and Hits@K, we
point out that their behavior may be unexpected under the open-world assumption.
Specifically, with not many missing facts, their numbers show a logarithmic trend
with respect to the true strength of the model, and thus, the metric increase could be
insignificant in terms of reflecting the true model improvement. Further, considering the variance, we show that the degradation in the reported numbers may result
in incorrect comparisons between different models, where stronger models may
have lower metric numbers. We validate the phenomenon both theoretically and
experimentally. Finally, we suggest possible causes and solutions for this problem.
Our code and data are available at https://github.com/GraphPKU/Open-World-KG.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graph (KG) is a structural method to store facts about some field or the world. Because
most KGs are incomplete, the knowledge graph completion (KGC) task is proposed to automatically
complement the existing KG with missing facts. However, when we do not know the missing facts
in advance, we must manually evaluate whether each predicted completion is correct, which is an
impossible task for modern KGs. This problem is called the open-world problem and the assumption
that KGs are incomplete is called the open-world assumption. A general solution is to extract the
training, validation and test sets from the existing incomplete KG and then evaluate the trained models
on the test set. Then, a natural question is whether the conclusion drawn from the incomplete test set
is consistent with the true strength of the model, which should be measured on the complete KG.
To answer this question, we need to investigate the metrics used to evaluate KGC models. KGC
models are often evaluated by ranking-based metrics, such as mean reciprocal rank (MRR) and
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

