Long-Form Video-Language Pre-Training with
Multimodal Temporal Contrastive Learning

Yuchong Sun1∗, Hongwei Xue2∗, Ruihua Song1†, Bei Liu3†, Huan Yang3 , Jianlong Fu3
1
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China,
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China,
3
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China,
1
{ycsun, rsong}@ruc.edu.cn, 2 gh051120@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
3
{bei.liu, huayan, jianf}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Large-scale video-language pre-training has shown significant improvement in
video-language understanding tasks. Previous studies of video-language pretraining mainly focus on short-form videos (i.e., within 30 seconds) and sentences,
leaving long-form video-language pre-training rarely explored. Directly learning
representation from long-form videos and language may benefit many long-form
video-language understanding tasks. However, it is challenging due to the difficulty
of modeling long-range relationships and the heavy computational burden caused
by more frames. In this paper, we introduce a Long-Form VIdeo-LAnguage
pre-training model (LF-VILA) and train it on a large-scale long-form video and
paragraph dataset constructed from an existing public dataset. To effectively capture
the rich temporal dynamics and to better align video and language in an efficient
end-to-end manner, we introduce two novel designs in our LF-VILA model. We
first propose a Multimodal Temporal Contrastive (MTC) loss to learn the temporal relation across different modalities by encouraging fine-grained alignment
between long-form videos and paragraphs. Second, we propose a Hierarchical
Temporal Window Attention (HTWA) mechanism to effectively capture long-range
dependency while reducing computational cost in Transformer. We fine-tune
the pre-trained LF-VILA model on seven downstream long-form video-language
understanding tasks of paragraph-to-video retrieval and long-form video questionanswering, and achieve new state-of-the-art performances. Specifically, our model
achieves 16.1% relative improvement on ActivityNet paragraph-to-video retrieval
task and 2.4% on How2QA task, respectively. We release our code, dataset, and
pre-trained models at https://github.com/microsoft/XPretrain.

1

Introduction

In recent years, research on video understanding has attracted extensive attention due to the huge
amount of videos available everywhere in our daily life. Previous research works on video understanding [14, 15, 42, 46, 60] mainly focus on short-form video (i.e., < 30 seconds) analysis and the
semantics are limited to certain types (e.g., actions, scenes). However, there are so many long-form
videos (i.e., > 30 seconds) [50] in real scenarios. Human annotated labels (e.g., actions) are difficult
to cover the rich semantic and dynamic information contained in those videos. On the other hand,
the video-language pre-training paradigm provides a way to learn cross-modal representation from
∗

This work was performed when Yuchong Sun and Hongwei Xue were visiting Microsoft Research as
research interns.
†
Ruihua Song and Bei Liu are the corresponding authors.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

