A Character-Level Length-Control Algorithm for
Non-Autoregressive Sentence Summarization

Puyuan Liu, Xiang Zhang, Lili Mou∗
Dept. Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
University of Alberta, Canada
∗
Canada CIFAR AI Chair, Amii
{puyuan, xzhang23}@ualberta.ca, doublepower.mou@gmail.com

Abstract
Sentence summarization aims at compressing a long sentence into a short one that
keeps the main gist, and has extensive real-world applications such as headline
generation. In previous work, researchers have developed various approaches to
improve the ROUGE score, which is the main evaluation metric for summarization,
whereas controlling the summary length has not drawn much attention. In our work,
we address a new problem of explicit character-level length control for summarization, and propose a dynamic programming algorithm based on the Connectionist
Temporal Classification (CTC) model. Results show that our approach not only
achieves higher ROUGE scores but also yields more complete sentences.1

1

Introduction

Sentence summarization aims at compressing a long sentence into a short one that conveys the
main idea of the input. It is an established setting of summarization, and has extensive real-world
applications such as generating news headlines [26, 30, 8] and being a key component of document
summarization [40, 21]. Previous research has focused on improving the ROUGE score, a widely
used evaluation metric for summarization [17], while less attention has been paid to controlling the
length of the summary.
Recently, researchers argue that length control is the key to summarization, since it is typically
required by real-world applications [20]. Moreover, the ROUGE score is found to be sensitive to the
summary length [33, 32], and summarization systems can achieve higher scores by simply generating
longer output. Previous work mainly addresses length control in the word level, i.e., restricting the
summary length by a pre-defined number of words [33, 18].
In this paper, we address explicit length control in the character level for summarization, which is a
different setting from previous work. In other words, we restrict the summary length by the number
of characters, such as letters, punctuation marks, and whitespaces. We observe that this is a more
realistic setting in real-world applications than word-level length control. For example, the headline
shown in a mobile app or web page is constrained by the screen width (roughly speaking, the number
of characters), rather than the number of words. Likewise, a commercial LED display allows a certain
number of characters; ideally, the text shown should fit the character-level budget, or otherwise it
will be scrolling, making it difficult to read. However, the character-level constraint is unlikely to
be satisfied if we only perform word-level control, despite the positive correlation between word
and character lengths. Moreover, character-level length control is a common evaluation setting for
summarization systems. For example, a sub-task in the DUC evaluation requires the maximum target
length to be 75 bytes [27]. Such an important setting, unfortunately, is not adequately addressed
1

Our code, model, and output are released at: https://github.com/MANGA-UOFA/NACC

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

