Open-Ended Reinforcement Learning with Neural
Reward Functions
Asier Mujika ∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
asierm@inf.ethz.ch

Robert Meier ∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
romeier@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Inspired by the success of unsupervised learning in Computer Vision and Natural
Language Processing, the reinforcement learning community has recently started
to focus more on unsupervised discovery of skills. Most current approaches, like
DIAYN or DADS, optimize some form of mutual information objective. We propose a different approach that uses reward functions encoded by neural networks.
These are trained iteratively to reward more complex behavior. In high-dimensional
robotic environments our approach learns a wide range of interesting skills including front-flips for H ALF -C HEETAH and one-legged running for H UMANOID. It is
the first skill discovery algorithm that can learn such skills without relying on any
form of feature engineering. In the pixel-based Montezuma’s Revenge environment
our method also works with minimal changes and it learns complex skills that
involve interacting with items and visiting diverse locations. The implementation
of our approach can be found here.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has proven to be very successful in many challenging tasks (Mnih
et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017b; Berner et al., 2019). These were considered intractable just a
few years ago. However, current methods require enormous amounts of compute to achieve great
performance in individual tasks. Most of the time, previous models can not be utilised when new
tasks are considered, even if the environment does not change. This was also the case in Computer
Vision and Natural Language Processing. However, recently unsupervised learning has been shown
to be very effective in both fields. By using task agnostic pre-training schemes (Tenney et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2021), unsupervised models can solve most tasks with minimal
or even no fine-tuning. Unsupervised reinforcement learning aims to bring similar successes to the
reinforcement learning community.
Agents which learn a wide range of unsupervised skills may be able to leverage those to solve new
tasks faster and with minimal fine-tuning.
Here, we propose a new method for open-ended, unsupervised skill discovery.
We devise an iterative process which creates pairs of neural reward functions and policies. The policy
optimizes the corresponding reward function. Each of them corresponds to a skill that the agent has
learned. The neural reward function is a neural network that maps the current observation to a scalar
reward. In each iteration, the neural reward function is modified to differ from the previous one. This
results in increasing the complexity of the encoded task. Then, a new skill is trained to optimize this
reward function. We devise several techniques to transfer the knowledge from previously learned
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

