Multi-view Subspace Clustering
on Topological Manifold

Shudong Huang1∗, Hongjie Wu1∗,
Yazhou Ren , Ivor W. Tsang3 , Zenglin Xu4 , Wentao Feng1†, Jiancheng Lv1†
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, UESTC, China
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A∗ STAR, Singapore
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, China
2

{huangsd, Wtfeng2021, lvjiancheng}@scu.edu.cn, wuhongjie0818@gmail.com,
yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn, ivor.tsang@gmail.com, xuzenglin@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view subspace clustering aims to exploit a common affinity representation
by means of self-expression. Plenty of works have been presented to boost the
clustering performance, yet seldom considering the topological structure in data,
which is crucial for clustering data on manifold. Orthogonal to existing works, in
this paper, we argue that it is beneficial to explore the implied data manifold by
learning the topological relationship between data points. Our model seamlessly integrates multiple affinity graphs into a consensus one with the topological relevance
considered. Meanwhile, we manipulate the consensus graph by a connectivity
constraint such that the connected components precisely indicate different clusters.
Hence our model is able to directly obtain the final clustering result without reliance
on any label discretization strategy as previous methods do. Experimental results
on several benchmark datasets illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed model,
compared to the state-of-the-art competitors over the clustering performance.

1

Introduction

With the evolution of multimedia, now large amounts of data are represented by multiple types (i.e.,
views). A document, for example, can be presented by images, audio, text. Likewise, a text can be
expressed in different languages [1]. In order to integrate the complementary information among
multiple views, numerous sophisticated multi-view clustering algorithms have been proposed [2, 3],
which typically produce better results than single-view clustering [4, 5].
Over the past years, self-representation subspace clustering methods, which assume that each data
point can be reconstructed by a linear combination of other data points, have gained broad attention.
The self-representation property is able to capture the heterogeneous relationships between data and
therefore produces excellent clustering results [6]. Meanwhile, self-representation property based
multi-view subspace clustering algorithms have been developed up to now [7]. For instance, diversityinduced multi-view subspace clustering (DiMSC) [8] adopts the Hilbert-Schmidt independence
criterion (HSIC) as a diversity term to measure the dependence of different views. By minimizing the
diversity term, the subspace representations are compelled to be distinct from each other. Instead
of integrating multi-view graphs into a consensus one, [9] involves the spectral clustering into their
object function to derive a unified indicator matrix. Therefore, the consistent clustering results of
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

