TotalSelfScan: Learning Full-body Avatars from
Self-Portrait Videos of Faces, Hands, and Bodies

Junting Dong1∗
1

Qi Fang1∗ Yudong Guo2
Sida Peng1
Xiaowei Zhou1
Hujun Bao1†
Zhejiang University

2

Qing Shuai1

Image Derivative Inc.

Abstract
Recent advances in implicit neural representations make it possible to reconstruct a
human-body model from a monocular self-rotation video. While previous works
present impressive results of human body reconstruction, the quality of reconstructed face and hands are relatively low. The main reason is that the image region
occupied by these parts is very small compared to the body. To solve this problem,
we propose a new approach named TotalSelfScan, which reconstructs the full-body
model from several monocular self-rotation videos that focus on the face, hands, and
body, respectively. Compared to recording a single video, this setting has almost no
additional cost but provides more details of essential parts. To learn the full-body
model, instead of encoding the whole body in a single network, we propose a
multi-part representation to model separate parts and then fuse the part-specific
observations into a single unified human model. Once learned, the full-body model
enables rendering photorealistic free-viewpoint videos under novel human poses.
Experiments show that TotalSelfScan can significantly improve the reconstruction
and rendering quality on the face and hands compared to the existing methods. The
code is available at https://zju3dv.github.io/TotalSelfScan.

1

Introduction

3D human reconstruction and rendering can be ubiquitously applicable in promising areas such as
immersive viewing experiences and telepresence. In most applications for social communications,
high-quality face and hand models are essential components. While previous methods [24, 6, 52]
demonstrate impressive results of full-body reconstruction, they usually require hundreds of calibrated
and synchronized cameras, which makes them impractical to create personalized avatars for general
users.
To make human avatar creation more accessible, many recent methods propose to reconstruct the
human body model from monocular RGB inputs. Some works [44, 45, 60] propose to reconstruct the
human geometry and appearance from a single image by learning pixel-aligned implicit functions.
However, relying on the paired 3D data and images for training, these methods have difficulty in
generalizing to the in-the-wild images. Some other works propose to reconstruct a person-specific
model from a monocular video that records a self-rotation performer holding a fixed pose. The
subjects can scan themselves only using a fixed camera without any assistance, which makes the
personalized avatar creation possible. For example, VideoAvatar [3] relies on the statistical human
model and adds displacements to the vertices of the statistical model for modeling clothing. More
∗
The first two authors contributed equally. The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the
State Key Lab of CAD&CG.
†
Corresponding author: Hujun Bao

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

