Meta Reinforcement Learning with Finite Training
Tasks - a Density Estimation Approach

Zohar Rimon
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
zohar.rimon@campus.technion.ac.il

Aviv Tamar
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
avivt@technion.ac.il

Gilad Adler
Ford Research Center Israel
gadler3@ford.com

Abstract
In meta reinforcement learning (meta RL), an agent learns from a set of training
tasks how to quickly solve a new task, drawn from the same task distribution. The
optimal meta RL policy, a.k.a. the Bayes-optimal behavior, is well defined, and
guarantees optimal reward in expectation, taken with respect to the task distribution.
The question we explore in this work is how many training tasks are required to
guarantee approximately optimal behavior with high probability. Recent work
provided the first such PAC analysis for a model-free setting, where a historydependent policy was learned from the training tasks. In this work, we propose a
different approach: directly learn the task distribution, using density estimation
techniques, and then train a policy on the learned task distribution. We show that
our approach leads to bounds that depend on the dimension of the task distribution.
In particular, in settings where the task distribution lies in a low-dimensional
manifold, we extend our analysis to use dimensionality reduction techniques and
account for such structure, obtaining significantly better bounds than previous
work, which strictly depend on the number of states and actions. The key of our
approach is the regularization implied by the kernel density estimation method. We
further demonstrate that this regularization is useful in practice, when ‘plugged in’
the state-of-the-art VariBAD meta RL algorithm.

1

Introduction

In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) became a dominant algorithmic framework for a
variety of domains, including computer games [24], robotic manipulation [11], and autonomous
driving [18]. Popular RL algorithms, however, are characterized by a high sample inefficiency, due
to the exploration-exploitation problem – the need to balance between obtaining more information
about the environment versus acting based on such information. Indeed, most RL success stories
required a very long training process, only possible in simulation.
For an agent to learn fast, additional structure of the problem is required. In Meta RL [4; 39; 7; 26],
agents are allowed to train on a set of training tasks, sampled from the same task distribution as the
task they will eventually be tested on. The hope is that similar structure between the tasks could be
identified during learning, and exploited to quickly solve the test task. It has recently been observed
that the meta RL problem is related to the Bayesian RL formulation, where each task is modelled as a
Markov decision process (MDP), and the distribution over tasks is the Bayesian prior [25; 39]. In
this formulation, the optimal meta RL policy is the Bayes-optimal policy – the policy that maximizes
expected return, where the expectation is taken with respect to the prior MDP distribution.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

