CARLANE: A Lane Detection Benchmark for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation from Simulation to
multiple Real-World Domains

Julian Gebele∗,1 Bonifaz Stuhr∗,1,2 Johann Haselberger∗,1,3
1
University of Applied Science Kempten
2
Autonomous University of Barcelona
3
Technische Universität Berlin
carlane.benchmark@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation demonstrates great potential to mitigate domain shifts by transferring models from labeled source domains to unlabeled
target domains. While Unsupervised Domain Adaptation has been applied to a
wide variety of complex vision tasks, only few works focus on lane detection
for autonomous driving. This can be attributed to the lack of publicly available
datasets. To facilitate research in these directions, we propose CARLANE, a 3way sim-to-real domain adaptation benchmark for 2D lane detection. CARLANE
encompasses the single-target datasets MoLane and TuLane and the multi-target
dataset MuLane. These datasets are built from three different domains, which
cover diverse scenes and contain a total of 163K unique images, 118K of which
are annotated. In addition we evaluate and report systematic baselines, including
our own method, which builds upon Prototypical Cross-domain Self-supervised
Learning. We find that false positive and false negative rates of the evaluated domain adaptation methods are high compared to those of fully supervised baselines.
This affirms the need for benchmarks such as CARLANE to further strengthen
research in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for lane detection. CARLANE, all
evaluated models and the corresponding implementations are publicly available at
https://carlanebenchmark.github.io.

1

Introduction

Vision-based deep learning systems for autonomous driving have made significant progress in the
past years [1–5]. Recent state-of-the-art methods achieve remarkable results on public, real-world
benchmarks but require labeled, large-scale datasets. Annotations for these datasets are often hard to
acquire, mainly due to the high expenses of labeling in terms of cost, time, and difficulty. Instead,
simulation environments for autonomous driving, such as CARLA [6], can be utilized to generate
abundant labeled images automatically. However, models trained on data from simulation often
experience a significant performance drop in a different domain, i.e., the real world, mainly due to
the domain shift [7]. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) methods [8–15] try to mitigate the
domain shift by transferring models from a fully-labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
This eliminates the need for annotating images but assumes that the target domain is accessible at
training time. While UDA has been applied to complex tasks for autonomous driving such as object
detection [1, 16] and semantic segmentation [17, 18], only few works focus on lane detection [19, 5].
This can be attributed to the lack of public UDA datasets for lane detection.
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

