Hamiltonian latent operators for content and motion
disentanglement in image sequences

Asif Khan
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
asif.khan@ed.ac.uk

Amos Storkey
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
a.storkey@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce HALO – a deep generative model utilising HAmiltonian Latent Operators to reliably disentangle content and motion information in image sequences.
The content represents summary statistics of a sequence, and motion is a dynamic
process that determines how information is expressed in any part of the sequence.
By modelling the dynamics as a Hamiltonian motion, important desiderata are
ensured: (1) the motion is reversible, (2) the symplectic, volume-preserving structure in phase space means paths are continuous and are not divergent in the latent
space. Consequently, the nearness of sequence frames is realised by the nearness
of their coordinates in the phase space, which proves valuable for disentanglement
and long-term sequence generation. The sequence space is generally comprised of
different types of dynamical motions. To ensure long-term separability and allow
controlled generation, we associate every motion with a unique Hamiltonian that
acts in its respective subspace. We demonstrate the utility of HALO by swapping
the motion of a pair of sequences, controlled generation, and image rotations.

1

Introduction

The ability to learn to generate artificial image sequences has diverse uses, from animation, keyframe
generation, and summarisation to restoration that has been explored in previous work over many
decades (Hogg, 1983; Hurri and Hyvärinen, 2003; Cremers and Yuille, 2003; Storkey and Williams,
2003; Kannan et al., 2005). However, learning to generate arbitrary sequences is not enough; to hold
a practical application, the user must be able to control aspects of the sequence generation, such as
the motion being enacted or the characteristics of the agent doing an action. To enable this, we must
learn to decompose image sequences into content and motion characteristics so that we can apply
learnt motions to new objects or vary the motions being applied.
Deep generative models (DGMs) such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling,
2013) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) use neural networks
(NNs) to transform the samples from a prior distribution over lower-dimensional latent factors to
samples from the data distribution itself. Recent developments (Chung et al., 2015; Srivastava et al.,
2015; Hsu et al., 2017; Yingzhen and Mandt, 2018) extend VAEs to sequences using Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) on the representation of temporal frames. Similar approaches have been taken for
GAN models (Tulyakov et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2019; Dandi et al., 2020).
The dynamical processes creating the evolution of image sequences are highly constrained. Consider
the simplistic case of a person walking in a scene with a camera moving around that individual. The
walking pose will return to similar positions periodically, and likewise, the revolving camera will
revisit previous positions. Even without strict periodicity, many dynamical processes are reversible.
Any time that a dynamic could conceivably return to an earlier state suggests an implicit conservation
law—the conservation of information in the underlying scene generator—as it must be capable of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

