AVLEN: Audio-Visual-Language Embodied
Navigation in 3D Environments

Sudipta Paul1∗
Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
Anoop Cherian2∗
spaul007@ucr.edu
amitrc@ece.ucr.edu
cherian@merl.com
1
2
University of California, Riverside
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA

Abstract
Recent years have seen embodied visual navigation advance in two distinct directions: (i) in equipping the AI agent to follow natural language instructions, and (ii)
in making the navigable world multimodal, e.g., audio-visual navigation. However,
the real world is not only multimodal, but also often complex, and thus in spite
of these advances, agents still need to understand the uncertainty in their actions
and seek instructions to navigate. To this end, we present AVLEN – an interactive
agent for Audio-Visual-Language Embodied Navigation. Similar to audio-visual
navigation tasks, the goal of our embodied agent is to localize an audio event via
navigating the 3D visual world; however, the agent may also seek help from a
human (oracle), where the assistance is provided in free-form natural language.
To realize these abilities, AVLEN uses a multimodal hierarchical reinforcement
learning backbone that learns: (a) high-level policies to choose either audio-cues
for navigation or to query the oracle, and (b) lower-level policies to select navigation actions based on its audio-visual and language inputs. The policies are trained
via rewarding for the success on the navigation task while minimizing the number
of queries to the oracle. To empirically evaluate AVLEN, we present experiments
on the SoundSpaces framework for semantic audio-visual navigation tasks. Our
results show that equipping the agent to ask for help leads to a clear improvement
in performance, especially in challenging cases, e.g., when the sound is unheard
during training or in the presence of distractor sounds.

1

Introduction

Building embodied robotic agents that can harmoniously co-habit and assist humans has been one
of the early dreams of AI. A recent incarnation of this dream has been in designing agents that
are capable of autonomously navigating realistic virtual worlds for solving pre-defined tasks. For
example, in vision-and-language navigation (VLN) tasks [2], the goal is for the AI agent to either
navigate to a goal location following the instructions provided in natural language, or to explore the
visual world seeking answers to a given natural language question [10, 35, 36]. Typical VLN agents
are assumed deaf; i.e., they cannot hear any audio events in the scene – an unnatural restriction,
especially when the agent is expected to operate in the real world. To address this shortcoming,
SoundSpaces [6] reformulated the navigation task with the goal of localizing an audio source in the
virtual scene; however without any language instructions for the agent to follow.
Real-world navigation is not only audio-visual, but also is often complex and stochastic, so the agent
must inevitably seek a synergy between the audio, visual, and language modalities for successful
navigation. Consider, for example, a robotic agent that needs to find where the “thud of a falling
person” or the “intermittent dripping sound of water” is heard from. On the one hand, such a
sound may not last long and may not be continuously audible, and thus the agent must use semantic
∗

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

