Expansion and Shrinkage of Localization for
Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation

Jinlong Li1,2,∗
Zequn Jie2,∗
Xu Wang1,†
Xiaolin Wei2
Lin Ma2,†
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
2
Meituan Inc.
jinlong.szu@gmail.com, zequn.nus@gmail.com, wangxu@szu.edu.cn,
weixiaolin02@meituan.com, forest.linma@gmail.com

Abstract
Generating precise class-aware pseudo ground-truths, a.k.a, class activation maps
(CAMs), is essential for Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation. The original
CAM method usually produces incomplete and inaccurate localization maps. To
tackle with this issue, this paper proposes an Expansion and Shrinkage scheme
based on the offset learning in the deformable convolution, to sequentially improve
the recall and precision of the located object in the two respective stages. In
the Expansion stage, an offset learning branch in a deformable convolution layer,
referred to as “expansion sampler”, seeks to sample increasingly less discriminative
object regions ， driven by an inverse supervision signal that maximizes image-level
classification loss. The located more complete object region in the Expansion stage
is then gradually narrowed down to the final object region during the Shrinkage
stage. In the Shrinkage stage, the offset learning branch of another deformable
convolution layer, referred to as “shrinkage sampler”, is introduced to exclude the
false positive background regions attended in the Expansion stage to improve the
precision of the localization maps. We conduct various experiments on PASCAL
VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014 to well demonstrate the superiority of our method
over other state-of-the-art methods for Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation.
The code is available at https://github.com/TyroneLi/ESOL_WSSS.

1

Introduction

Image Semantic Segmentation is the task of pixel-level semantic label allocation for recognizing
objects in an image. The development of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has promoted the rapid
development of the semantic segmentation task [7, 20, 64] in recent years. However, training such a
Fully-Supervised Semantic Segmentation model requires large numbers of pixel-wise annotations.
Preparing such a segmentation dataset needs considerable human-labor and resources. Recently,
researchers have studied Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) methods to alleviate
the issue of high dependence on accurate pixel-level human annotations for training semantic
segmentation models under cheap supervision. Weak supervision takes the forms of image-level [2,
21, 52, 54, 55], point-level [3], scribbles [36, 50] or bounding box [11, 28, 32, 47]. In this paper, we
focus on WSSS method based on image-level labels only, because it is the cheapest and most popular
option of weak supervision annotation which only provides information on the existence of the target
object categories.
∗

Equal contributions. † Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

