PlasticityNet: Learning to Simulate Metal, Sand, and
Snow for Optimization Time Integration

Xuan Li
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
xuanli1@math.ucla.edu

Yadi Cao
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
yadicao95@cs.ucla.edu

Minchen Li
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
minchen@math.ucla.edu
Craig Schroeder
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Riverside
craigs@cs.ucr.edu

Yin Yang
School of Computing
University of Utah
yin.yang@utah.edu
Chenfanfu Jiang
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
cffjiang@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a neural network-based approach for learning to represent
the behavior of plastic solid materials ranging from rubber and metal to sand and
snow. Unlike elastic forces such as spring forces, these plastic forces do not result
from the positional gradient of any potential energy, imposing great challenges on
the stability and flexibility of their simulation. Our method effectively resolves this
issue by learning a generalizable plastic energy whose derivative closely matches
the analytical behavior of plastic forces. Our method, for the first time, enables
the simulation of a wide range of arbitrary elasticity-plasticity combinations using
time step-independent, unconditionally stable optimization-based time integrators.
We demonstrate the efficacy of our method by learning and producing challenging
2D and 3D effects of metal, sand, and snow with complex dynamics.

1

Introduction

Combining machine learning with physical simulations has recently attracted a lot of attention. A vast
amount of existing research adopts an end-to-end approach, where the specific underlying computational physics system is treated as a black box [46, 41]. Harnessing the power of neural networks, this
research has been successfully applied in computer animation [10], multibody systems [3, 6, 59, 12],
human musculature simulation [20], computational fluid dynamics [4, 13], and non-linear continuum mechanics [5]. An alternative direction is represented by physics-informed neural networks
(PINN) [44, 21], where in its original form, the residual of a partial differential equation is directly
used as the loss function so that the network training is a physics-aware learning process. PINN
becomes powerful when the design space of the input to the network can be parameterized, which
accelerates both the roll-out and the inverse optimization process [51]. Another noteworthy category
is learning the physical modeling where the machine can either help increase the model resolution in
a coarser grid [24], inject nonlinearity to a linear model [37], or apply a learnable model reduction to
reduce the system degrees-of-freedom (DOF) for acceleration [47, 48].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

