Patching open-vocabulary models
by interpolating weights

Gabriel Ilharco∗1 Mitchell Wortsman∗1 Samir Yitzhak Gadre∗2 Shuran Song2
Hannaneh Hajishirzi1,3 Simon Kornblith4 Ali Farhadi1 Ludwig Schmidt1,3
1
University of Washington 2 Columbia University 3 AI2 4 Google Research, Brain Team

Abstract
Open-vocabulary models like CLIP achieve high accuracy across many image
classification tasks. However, there are still settings where their zero-shot performance is far from optimal. We study model patching, where the goal is to improve
accuracy on specific tasks without degrading accuracy on tasks where performance
is already adequate. Towards this goal, we introduce PAINT, a patching method
that uses interpolations between the weights of a model before fine-tuning and
the weights after fine-tuning on a task to be patched. On nine tasks where zeroshot CLIP performs poorly, PAINT increases accuracy by 15 to 60 percentage
points while preserving accuracy on ImageNet within one percentage point of the
zero-shot model. PAINT also allows a single model to be patched on multiple
tasks and improves with model scale. Furthermore, we identify cases of broad
transfer, where patching on one task increases accuracy on other tasks even when
the tasks have disjoint classes. Finally, we investigate applications beyond common
benchmarks such as counting or reducing the impact of typographic attacks on
CLIP. Our findings demonstrate that it is possible to expand the set of tasks on
which open-vocabulary models achieve high accuracy without re-training them
from scratch.

1

Introduction

Open-vocabulary models are characterized by their ability to perform any image classification task
based on text descriptions of the classes [56]. Thanks to advances in large-scale pre-training, recent
examples of open-vocabulary models such as CLIP and BASIC have reached parity with or surpassed
important task-specific baselines, even when the open-vocabulary models are not fine-tuned on
task-specific data (i.e., in a zero-shot setting) [57, 31, 56, 88, 1, 86]. For instance, the largest CLIP
model from Radford et al. [57] used in a zero-shot setting matches the ImageNet accuracy of a
ResNet-50 trained on 1.2 million ImageNet images [14, 24].
Nevertheless, current open-vocabulary models still face challenges. The same CLIP model that
matches a ResNet-50 on ImageNet has lower MNIST accuracy than simple logistic regression in
pixel space [57]. Moreover, even when zero-shot models achieve good performance, they are usually
still worse than models trained or fine-tuned on specific downstream tasks.
To address these issues, several authors have proposed methods for adapting zero-shot models to a task
of interest using labeled data [82, 91, 21, 89, 37, 73]. A common practice is to fine-tune the zero-shot
model on the task of interest [82, 56]. However, fine-tuned models can suffer from catastrophic
forgetting [48, 76, 20, 33], performing poorly on tasks where the zero-shot model initially performed
well [2, 82, 56]. Additionally, fine-tuning typically produces a task-specific classification head,
sacrificing the flexible text-based API that makes open-vocabulary models so appealing. Whereas
an open-vocabulary model can perform any classification task in a zero-shot fashion, a fine-tuned
∗
Equal contribution. Code available at https://github.com/mlfoundations/patching. Correspondance to {gamaga,mitchnw,schmidt}@cs.washington.edu, sy@cs.columbia.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

