Best of Both Worlds Model Selection
Aldo Pacchiano
Microsoft Research, NYC
apacchiano@microsoft.com

Christoph Dann
Google, NYC
cdann@cdann.net

Claudio Gentile
Google, NYC
cgentile@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of model selection in bandit scenarios in the presence of
nested policy classes, with the goal of obtaining simultaneous adversarial and
stochastic (“best of both worlds") high-probability regret guarantees. Our approach
requires that each base learner comes with a candidate regret bound that may or
may not hold, while our meta algorithm plays each base learner according to a
schedule that keeps the base learner’s candidate regret bounds balanced until they
are detected to violate their guarantees. We develop careful mis-specification tests
specifically designed to blend the above model selection criterion with the ability to
leverage the (potentially benign) nature of the environment. We recover the model
selection guarantees of the CORRAL [3] algorithm for adversarial environments,
but with the additional benefit of achieving high probability regret bounds. More
importantly, our model selection results also hold simultaneously in stochastic
environments under gap assumptions. These are the first theoretical results that
achieve best of both world (stochastic and adversarial) guarantees while performing
model selection in contextual bandit scenarios.

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in sequential decision-making is the ability of the learning agent to adapt to
the unknown properties of the environment they interact with. While adversarial environments may
require some caution, we would also like to leverage situations where more benign scenarios may be
disclosed as a result of this interaction.
In the literature on multi-armed bandits, this adaptation capabilities has often taken two forms:
1. Best-of-both worlds guarantees, which were pioneered by [10] and subsequently studied by a
number of authors [e.g., 29, 5, 28, 30, 33, 21]. Here, the goal is to design algorithms achieving
both stochastic and adversarial environment guarantees simultaneously, without knowing the type
of environment in advance. Similar in spirit is the stream of literature on stochastic rewards with
adversarial corruptions [23, 17, 34, 21, 31], where an adversary is assumed to corrupt the stochastic
rewards observed by the algorithm, and the regret guarantees are expected to degrade gracefully with
the total amount of corruption, without knowing this amount in advance.
2. Model selection guarantees, which were initiated by [3], and subject since then to intense
investigations [e.g., 15, 1, 27, 4, 16, 12, 8, 14, 22, 26, 13]. Here, we assume we have access to a
pool of M base bandit algorithms each operating, say, within a different class of models or under
different assumptions on the environment, and the aim is to design a bandit meta-algorithm that
learns to simulate the best base algorithm in hindsight, without knowing in advance which one will
be best for the environment at hand. This approach has often been used in the literature to capture
bandit model selection problems. In fact, a natural instantiation of this framework is when we have a
sequence of nested policy classes, and the goal is to single out the best policy within this nested family,
by paying as price only the complexity of the policy class the optimal policy falls into. In some
sense, Item 2 is more general than Item 1, since one may attempt to achieve a best-of-both-world
performance by pooling a stochastic bandit algorithm with an adversarial bandit one, and expect the
meta-algorithm on top of them to eventually learn to follow one of the two. Similarly, in the setting of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

