Symbolic Distillation for Learned TCP
Congestion Control

S P Sharan1 , Wenqing Zheng1 , Kuo-Feng Hsu2 , Jiarong Xing2 , Ang Chen2 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin 2 Rice University
{spsharan,w.zheng,atlaswang}@utexas.edu; {kh42,jxing,angchen}@rice.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in TCP congestion control (CC) have achieved tremendous success
with deep reinforcement learning (RL) approaches, which use feedforward neural
networks (NN) to learn complex environment conditions and make better decisions.
However, such “black-box” policies lack interpretability and reliability, and often,
they need to operate outside the traditional TCP datapath due to the use of complex
NNs. This paper proposes a novel two-stage solution to achieve the best of both
worlds: first to train a deep RL agent, then distill its (over-)parameterized NN
policy into white-box, light-weight rules in the form of symbolic expressions that
are much easier to understand and to implement in constrained environments. At
the core of our proposal is a novel symbolic branching algorithm that enables the
rule to be aware of the context in terms of various network conditions, eventually
converting the NN policy into a symbolic tree. The distilled symbolic rules preserve
and often improve performance over state-of-the-art NN policies while being faster
and simpler than a standard neural network. We validate the performance of our
distilled symbolic rules on both simulation and emulation environments. Our code
is available at https://github.com/VITA-Group/SymbolicPCC.

1

Introduction

Congestion control (CC) is fundamental to Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) communication.
Congestion occurs when the data volume sent to a network reaches or exceeds its maximal capacity,
in which case the network drops excess traffic, and the performance unavoidably declines. CC
mitigates this problem by carefully adjusting the data transmission rate based on the inferred network
capacities, aiming to send data as fast as possible without creating congestion. For instance, a classic
and best-known strategy, Additive-Increase/Multiplicative-Decrease (AIMD) [1], gradually increases
the sending rate when there is no congestion but exponentially reduces the rate when the network is
congested. It ensures that TCP connections fairly share the network capacity in the converged state.
Figure 1 shows an example where two TCP connections share a link between routers 1 and 2. When
the shared link becomes a bottleneck, the CC algorithms running on sources A and B will alter the
traffic rate based on the feedback to avoid congestion. Efficient CC algorithms have been the bedrock
for network services such as DASH video streaming, VoIP (voice-over-IP), VR/AR games, and IoT
(Internet of Things), which ride atop the TCP protocol.
However, it is nontrivial to design a high-performance CC algorithm. Over the years, tens of CC
proposals have been made, all with different metrics and strategies to infer and address congestion,
and new designs are still emerging even today [2, 3]. There are two main challenges when designing
a CC algorithm. 1 it needs to precisely infer whether the network is congested, and if so, how
to adjust the sending rate, based on only partial or indirect observations. Note that CC runs on
end hosts while congestion happens in the network, so CC algorithms cannot observe congestion
directly. Instead, it can only rely on specific signals to infer the network status. For instance, TCP
Cubic [4] uses packet loss as a congestion signal, and TCP Vegas [5] opts for delay increase. 2 CC
algorithms operate within the OS kernel, where the computing and memory resources are limited,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

