Factuality Enhanced Language Models for
Open-Ended Text Generation
Nayeon Lee⇤ †1 , Wei Ping† 2 , Peng Xu2 , Mostofa Patwary2 , Pascale Fung1 ,
Mohammad Shoeybi2 , and Bryan Catanzaro2
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
NVIDIA

Abstract
Pretrained language models (LMs) are susceptible to generate text with nonfactual information. In this work, we measure and improve the factual accuracy
of large-scale LMs for open-ended text generation. We design the FACTUALI TY P ROMPTS test set and metrics to measure the factuality of LM generations.
Based on that, we study the factual accuracy of LMs with parameter sizes ranging
from 126M to 530B. Interestingly, we find that larger LMs are more factual than
smaller ones, although a previous study suggests that larger LMs can be less truthful
in terms of misconceptions. In addition, popular sampling algorithms (e.g., top-p)
in open-ended text generation can harm the factuality due to the “uniform randomness” introduced at every sampling step. We propose the factual-nucleus sampling
algorithm that dynamically adapts the randomness to improve the factuality of
generation while maintaining quality. Furthermore, we analyze the inefficiencies
of the standard training method in learning correct associations between entities
from factual text corpus (e.g., Wikipedia). We propose a factuality-enhanced
training method that uses T OPIC P REFIX for better awareness of facts and sentence
completion as the training objective, which can vastly reduce the factual errors.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained language models (LMs) have demonstrated impressive natural language
generation results [1–4]. However, the generative LMs (e.g., GPT-3) are solely trained to model the
statistical correlations between subword tokens [5], and have limited capability to generate factually
accurate text as illustrated in Table 1. As a result, there are increasing concerns about the nonfactual
generations from large-scale pre-trained LMs [e.g., 6–8], which needs to be adequately addressed for
their safe deployment in real-world applications, e.g., content creation [9] and dialogue [10].
In previous studies, different metrics and methods have been proposed to measure and improve the
factual accuracy of language generation within different tasks [11], including text summarization [e.g.,
12–15], question answering [e.g., 16–18], and table-to-text generation [e.g., 19, 20]. However, these
works focus on the faithfulness (or factuality) of the fine-tuned LMs for particular downstream
tasks (i.e., factual consistency between source and target text). Little exploration has been made to
address the factual errors in pretrained LMs for general-purpose open-ended text generation, where
the goal is to generate a coherent continuation from the given context (e.g., the use cases from GPT-2).
One of the popular methods for enhancing generation factuality is to incorporate external knowledge sources [21–23]. Structured knowledge bases and graphs have been utilized for grounded
⇤
†

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
Correspondence to: Nayeon Lee <nayeon.lee@connect.ust.hk>, Wei Ping <wping@nvidia.com>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

