General Cutting Planes for Bound-Propagation-Based
Neural Network Verification

1

CMU

Huan Zhang*,1 Shiqi Wang*,2 Kaidi Xu*,3
Linyi Li4 Bo Li4 Suman Jana2 Cho-Jui Hsieh5 J. Zico Kolter1,6
2
Columbia University 3 Drexel University 4 UIUC 5 UCLA 6 Bosch Center for AI
huan@huan-zhang.com
sw3215@columbia.edu kx46@drexel.edu
linyi2@illinois.edu lbo@illinois.edu suman@cs.columbia.edu
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu zkolter@cs.cmu.edu
* Equal Contribution

Abstract
Bound propagation methods, when combined with branch and bound, are among
the most effective methods to formally verify properties of deep neural networks
such as correctness, robustness, and safety. However, existing works cannot handle
the general form of cutting plane constraints widely accepted in traditional solvers,
which are crucial for strengthening verifiers with tightened convex relaxations. In
this paper, we generalize the bound propagation procedure to allow the addition
of arbitrary cutting plane constraints, including those involving relaxed integer
variables that do not appear in existing bound propagation formulations. Our
generalized bound propagation method, GCP-CROWN, opens up the opportunity
to apply general cutting plane methods for neural network verification while benefiting from the efficiency and GPU acceleration of bound propagation methods.
As a case study, we investigate the use of cutting planes generated by off-the-shelf
mixed integer programming (MIP) solver. We find that MIP solvers can generate
high-quality cutting planes for strengthening bound-propagation-based verifiers
using our new formulation. Since the branching-focused bound propagation procedure and the cutting-plane-focused MIP solver can run in parallel utilizing different
types of hardware (GPUs and CPUs), their combination can quickly explore a
large number of branches with strong cutting planes, leading to strong verification
performance. Experiments demonstrate that our method is the first verifier that can
completely solve the oval20 benchmark and verify twice as many instances on
the oval21 benchmark compared to the best tool in VNN-COMP 2021, and also
noticeably outperforms state-of-the-art verifiers on a wide range of benchmarks.
GCP-CROWN is part of the α,β-CROWN verifier, the VNN-COMP 2022 winner.
Code is available at http://PaperCode.cc/GCP-CROWN.

1

Introduction

Neural network (NN) verification aims to formally prove or disprove certain properties (e.g., correctness and safety properties) of a NN under a certain set of inputs. These methods can provide
worst-case performance guarantees of a NN, and have been applied to mission-critical applications that
involve neural networks, such as automatic aircraft control [31, 4], learning-enabled cyber-physical
systems [54], and NN based algorithms in an operating system [51].
The NN verification problem is generally NP-complete [30]. For piece-wise linear networks, it can
be encoded as a mixed integer programming (MIP) [53] problem with the non-linear ReLU neurons
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

