VeriDark: A Large-Scale Benchmark for Authorship
Verification on the Dark Web
Andrei Manolache⇤
Bitdefender
amanolache@bitdefender.com
Antonio Barbalau
University of Bucharest
abarbalau@fmi.unibuc.ro

Florin Brad⇤
Bitdefender
fbrad@bitdefender.com
Radu Tudor Ionescu
University of Bucharest
raducu.ionescu@gmail.com

Marius Popescu
University of Bucharest
popescunmarius@gmail.com

Abstract
The Dark Web represents a hotbed for illicit activity, where users communicate on
different market forums in order to exchange goods and services. Law enforcement
agencies benefit from forensic tools that perform authorship analysis, in order
to identify and profile users based on their textual content. However, authorship
analysis has been traditionally studied using corpora featuring literary texts such as
fragments from novels or fan fiction, which may not be suitable in a cybercrime
context. Moreover, the few works that employ authorship analysis tools for cybercrime prevention usually employ ad-hoc experimental setups and datasets. To
address these issues, we release VeriDark: a benchmark comprised of three large
scale authorship verification datasets and one authorship identification dataset
obtained from user activity from either Dark Web related Reddit communities or
popular illicit Dark Web market forums. We evaluate competitive NLP baselines
on the three datasets and perform an analysis of the predictions to better understand
the limitations of such approaches. We make the datasets and baselines publicly
available at https://github.com/bit-ml/VeriDark.

1

Introduction

The Dark Web is content found on the DarkNet, which is a restricted network of computers accessible using special software and communication protocols, such as Tor2 . This infrastructure offers
anonymity and protection from surveillance and tracking, which greatly benefits users whose privacy
is of great concern (e.g. journalists, whistleblowers, or people under oppressive regimes). However,
cybercriminals often exploit these services to conduct illegal activities via discussion forums and
illicit shops corresponding to different marketplaces, frequently referred to as hidden services.
Law enforcement agencies have started to crack down on DarkNet cybercriminals in the last decade.
One of the largest marketplaces was Silk Road, estimated to host between 30000 and 150000 active
customers [Christin, 2013], which was shutdown by the FBI in 2013. However, this success was
short-lived due to the quick shift of the customer base and vendors to other marketplaces. As of
⇤

2

Equal contribution.
https://www.torproject.org/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

