Adaptive Interest for Emphatic
Reinforcement Learning

Martin Klissarov∗
Mila, McGill University
Kavosh Asadi
Amazon Web Services

Rasool Fakoor
Amazon Web Services
Taesup Kim
Seoul National University

Jonas Mueller
Cleanlab
Alexander J. Smola
Amazon Web Services

Abstract
Emphatic algorithms have shown great promise in stabilizing and improving reinforcement learning by selectively emphasizing the update rule. Although the
emphasis fundamentally depends on an interest function which defines the intrinsic
importance of each state, most approaches simply adopt a uniform interest over
all states (except where a hand-designed interest is possible based on domain
knowledge). In this paper, we investigate adaptive methods that allow the interest
function to dynamically vary over states and iterations. In particular, we leverage
meta-gradients to automatically discover online an interest function that would
accelerate the agent’s learning process. Empirical evaluations on a wide range of
environments show that adapting the interest is key to provide significant gains.
Qualitative analysis indicates that the learned interest function emphasizes states
of particular importance, such as bottlenecks, which can be especially useful in a
transfer learning setting.

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in reinforcement learning (RL) is to approximate key quantities such as
value functions and optimal policies. Under the assumption that the world in which an RL agent
interacts is large and the computational capacity is limited, a natural trade-off emerges in which
certain quantities are more accurately predicted than others over the course of learning. Standard
RL algorithms, such as temporal differences (TD) [39], perform updates at every state, thereby
spending more resources on such frequent states at the expense of other potentially more useful
ones. A possible solution could be to selectively emphasize certain updates, for example through a
state-dependent interest function. However, when combined with standard bootstrapping as in TD(λ),
such update rules are known to be unstable [25].
Emphatic algorithms propose a solution in which state-dependent selective updating can be applied
while maintaining stability under linear function approximation [44]. At their core, emphatic
algorithms determine the emphasis to be applied at each update by accounting for how much the
current state is being bootstrapped from as well as an intrinsic measure of its importance relative to
other states. This intrinsic measure is encoded through an arbitrary state-dependent interest function
which the practitioner can set to any desired positive value. However, with this added flexibility
comes a problematic question: how should one select the interest function?
Previous works propose hand-crafted solutions for the interest function that showcase the usefulness of
selective updating [27, 3, 28]. However, when applying emphatic algorithms to complex environments
∗

Correspondence to: Martin [martin.klissarov@mail.mcgill.ca] and Rasool [fakoor@amazon.com].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

