Mind Reader:
Reconstructing complex images from brain activities
Sikun Lin

Thomas Sprague Ambuj K Singh
UC Santa Barbara
{sikun,tsprague,ambuj}@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Understanding how the brain encodes external stimuli and how these stimuli can
be decoded from the measured brain activities are long-standing and challenging
questions in neuroscience. In this paper, we focus on reconstructing the complex
image stimuli from fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) signals. Unlike
previous works that reconstruct images with single objects or simple shapes, our
work aims to reconstruct image stimuli that are rich in semantics, closer to everyday
scenes, and can reveal more perspectives. However, data scarcity of fMRI datasets
is the main obstacle to applying state-of-the-art deep learning models to this
problem. We find that incorporating an additional text modality is beneficial for the
reconstruction problem compared to directly translating brain signals to images.
Therefore, the modalities involved in our method are: (i) voxel-level fMRI signals,
(ii) observed images that trigger the brain signals, and (iii) textual description of the
images. To further address data scarcity, we leverage an aligned vision-language
latent space pre-trained on massive datasets. Instead of training models from
scratch to find a latent space shared by the three modalities, we encode fMRI
signals into this pre-aligned latent space. Then, conditioned on embeddings in this
space, we reconstruct images with a generative model. The reconstructed images
from our pipeline balance both naturalness and fidelity: they are photo-realistic
and capture the ground truth image contents well.

1

Introduction

In an effort to understand visual encoding and decoding processes, researchers in recent years have
curated multiple datasets recording fMRI signals while the subjects are viewing natural images
[3, 8, 34, 41]. In particular, the Natural Scenes Dataset (NSD [3]) was built to meet the needs of
data-hungry deep learning models, sampling at an unprecedented scale compared to all prior works
while having the highest resolution and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). In addition, all the images used
in NSD are sampled from MS-COCO [22], which has far richer contextual information and more
detailed annotations compared to datasets that are commonly used in other fMRI studies (e.g., Celeb
A face dataset [23], ImageNet [10], self-curated symbols, grayscale datasets). This dataset, therefore,
offers the opportunity to explore the decoding of complex images that are closer to real-life scenes.
Human visual decoding can be categorized into stimuli category classification [1], stimuli identification [38], and reconstruction. We focus on stimuli reconstruction in this study. Different from
previous efforts in reconstructing images from fMRI [6, 11, 12, 24, 32, 34, 35], we approach the
problem with one more modality, that of text. The benefits of adding the text modality are threefold:
first, the brain is naturally multimodal. Research [7, 13, 25] indicates that the brain is not only capable
of learning multisensory representations, but a larger portion of the cortex is engaged in multisensory
processing: for example, both visual and tactile recognition of objects activate the same part of the
object-responsive cortex [26]. Visual-linguistic pathways along the border of the occipital lobe [27]
also bring a more intertwined view of the brain’s representation of these two modalities. Second,
multimodal deep models tend to explain the brain better (having higher representation correlations)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

