Geometry-aware Two-scale PIFu Representation
for Human Reconstruction
Zheng Dong1 Ke Xu2 Ziheng Duan1 Hujun Bao1 Weiwei Xu∗1 Rynson W.H. Lau2
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

2

City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Although PIFu-based 3D human reconstruction methods are popular, the quality of
recovered details is still unsatisfactory. In a sparse (e.g., 3 RGBD sensors) capture
setting, the depth noise is typically amplified in the PIFu representation, resulting in
flat facial surfaces and geometry-fallible bodies. In this paper, we propose a novel
geometry-aware two-scale PIFu for 3D human reconstruction from sparse, noisy
inputs. Our key idea is to exploit the complementary properties of depth denoising
and 3D reconstruction, for learning a two-scale PIFu representation to reconstruct
high-frequency facial details and consistent bodies separately. To this end, we first
formulate depth denoising and 3D reconstruction as a multi-task learning problem. The depth denoising process enriches the local geometry information of the
reconstruction features, while the reconstruction process enhances depth denoising
with global topology information. We then propose to learn the two-scale PIFu
representation using two MLPs based on the denoised depth and geometry-aware
features. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
reconstructing facial details and bodies of different poses and its superiority over
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Three-dimensional human reconstruction, which aims to obtain a dense surface geometry from singleview or multi-view human images, is a fundamental topic in computer vision and computer graphics.
While reconstructing high-fidelity 3D human models is possible using commercial multi-view/stereo
software under the customized studio setting [14, 58, 81, 29, 85], it is highly desirable to lift the
studio setting constraint, which may be inaccessible to most users. Low-cost RGBD sensors have
recently become popular in 3D human reconstruction, and tracking-based methods are developed
to fuse the depth data from RGBD sensors for reconstruction [66]. During fusion, the estimation
of non-rigid human body deformation is essential to improve the reconstruction quality [65, 101].
However, it is technically challenging to ensure the stability of the depth fusion algorithm, due to
occlusions and severe noise in the depth data.
Recently, learning-based 3D human reconstruction methods have significantly simplified the capture
setting. The parametric human model [60, 69, 67] is introduced to reduce the modeling difficulties from complex poses. After training on images-to-model pairs, methods [46, 105] may even
reconstruct 3D human shapes from single images. However, these methods typically only obtain
minimally clothed human bodies. As detail requirements increase, the focus of learning-based
human reconstruction methods has been shifted to the implicit representation, e.g., pixel-aligned
implicit function (PIFu) [73, 74, 40]. PIFu-based methods [73] can reconstruct human bodies with
different types of details (e.g., hair and clothing) without utilizing predefined templates. However,
they often produce topology errors in the reconstructed human models, especially in the regions
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

