Don’t Roll the Dice, Ask Twice: The Two-Query
Distortion of Matching Problems and Beyond

Georgios Amanatidis
University of Essex
georgios.amanatidis@essex.ac.uk
Aris Filos-Ratsikas
University of Edinburgh
Aris.Filos-Ratsikas@ed.ac.uk

Georgios Birmpas
Sapienza University of Rome
gebirbas@gmail.com
Alexandros A. Voudouris
University of Essex
alexandros.voudouris@essex.ac.uk

Abstract
In most social choice settings, the participating agents express their preferences
over the different alternatives in the form of linear orderings. While this clearly
simplifies preference elicitation, it inevitably leads to poor performance with respect
to optimizing a cardinal objective, such as the social welfare, since the values of
the agents remain virtually unknown. This loss in performance because of lack of
information is measured by the notion of distortion. A recent array of works put
forward the agenda of designing mechanisms that learn the values of the agents for
a small number of alternatives via queries, and use this limited extra information
to make better-informed decisions, thus improving distortion. Following this
agenda, in this work we focus on a class of combinatorial problems that includes
most well-known matching problems and several of their generalizations, such
as One-Sided Matching, Two-Sided Matching, General Graph Matching, and kConstrained Resource Allocation. We design two-query mechanisms that achieve
the best-possible worst-case distortion in terms of social welfare, and outperform
the best-possible expected distortion achieved by randomized ordinal mechanisms.

1

Introduction

The notion of distortion in social choice settings was defined to capture the loss in aggregate
objectives due to the lack of precise information about the preferences of the participants [Procaccia
and Rosenschein, 2006]. More concretely, the distortion was originally defined as a measure of the
deterioration of the total happiness of the agents when access is given only to the (ordinal) preference
rankings of the agents, rather than to the complete numerical (cardinal) information about their
preferences. This research agenda has successfully been applied to a plethora of different settings,
giving rise to a rich and vibrant line of work in major venues at the intersection of computer science
and economics. For a comprehensive overview, see the survey of Anshelevich et al. [2021].
Out of all of these scenarios, some of the most fundamental are matching problems, in which agents
are matched to items or other agents, aiming to maximize the social welfare of the matching (the total
value of the agents). An example is the classic One-Sided Matching setting [Hylland and Zeckhauser,
1979], where the goal is to match n items to n agents based on the preferences of the agents over
the items. For this setting, Filos-Ratsikas et al. [2014] showed that the best achievable distortion is

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

