BLOX: Macro Neural Architecture Search Benchmark
and Algorithms

Thomas Chau1* , Łukasz Dudziak1* , Hongkai Wen1,3
Nicholas D. Lane1,2 , Mohamed S. Abdelfattah4
1

2

Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
University of Cambridge, UK 3 University of Warwick, UK
4
Cornell University, USA
*

Indicates equal contributions

{thomas.chau, l.dudziak, hongkai.wen, nic.lane}@samsung.com
mohamed@cornell.edu

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) has been successfully used to design numerous
high-performance neural networks. However, NAS is typically compute-intensive,
so most existing approaches restrict the search to decide the operations and topological structure of a single block only, then the same block is stacked repeatedly
to form an end-to-end model. Although such an approach reduces the size of
search space, recent studies show that a macro search space, which allows blocks
in a model to be different, can lead to better performance. To provide a systematic study of the performance of NAS algorithms on a macro search space, we
release Blox – a benchmark that consists of 91k unique models trained on the
CIFAR-100 dataset. The dataset also includes runtime measurements of all the
models on a diverse set of hardware platforms. We perform extensive experiments to compare existing algorithms that are well studied on cell-based search
spaces, with the emerging blockwise approaches that aim to make NAS scalable to
much larger macro search spaces. The Blox benchmark and code are available at
https://github.com/SamsungLabs/blox.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network (DNN) performance is closely related to its architecture topology and hyperparameters as demonstrated through the progression of image classification CNNs in recent years:
AlexNet [1], Inception [2], MobileNets [3] and EfficientNets [4, 5]. Increasingly, automated methods
are used to design DNN architectures to avoid intuition-based manual design. The field of neural
architecture search (NAS) continues to offer a large number of methods including sample-based
NAS [6, 7], differentiable NAS [8], training-free NAS [9] and blockwise NAS [10, 11, 12]. Within
this realm of NAS for DNN design there are two important design problems which are still mostly
manual. First, how do we design the NAS search space, which defines the set of DNN architectures
from which a NAS algorithm can select. Second, how do we select or design a suitable search method
for a given NAS search space. In this work, we attempt to address both problems through a focused
analysis of macro NAS algorithms within a new NAS search space called Blox.
NAS search spaces. A well-defined search space is crucial for NAS. However, the literature has
mostly focused on cell-based designs in which the NAS algorithm only searches for operations and
connections of a cell that is repeatedly stacked within a predefined skeleton [8, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18].
These approaches prohibit layer diversity which can help to achieve both high accuracy and low
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

