Make an Omelette with Breaking Eggs:
Zero-Shot Learning for Novel Attribute Synthesis

Yu-Hsuan Li∗
National Chiao Tung University
evali890227@gmail.com
Ching-Chun Huang
National Chiao Tung University
chingchun@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Tzu-Yin Chao∗
National Chiao Tung University
chaotzuyin@nctu.edu.tw

Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Wei-Chen Chiu
National Chiao Tung University
walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract
Most of the existing algorithms for zero-shot classification problems typically
rely on the attribute-based semantic relations among categories to realize the
classification of novel categories without observing any of their instances. However,
training the zero-shot classification models still requires attribute labeling for each
class (or even instance) in the training dataset, which is also expensive. To this
end, in this paper, we bring up a new problem scenario: “Can we derive zero-shot
learning for novel attribute detectors/classifiers and use them to automatically
annotate the dataset for labeling efficiency?”. Basically, given only a small set of
detectors that are learned to recognize some manually annotated attributes (i.e., the
seen attributes), we aim to synthesize the detectors of novel attributes in a zero-shot
learning manner. Our proposed method, Zero-Shot Learning for Attributes (ZSLA),
which is the first of its kind to the best of our knowledge, tackles this new research
problem by applying the set operations to first decompose the seen attributes into
their basic attributes and then recombine these basic attributes into the novel ones.
Extensive experiments are conducted to verify the capacity of our synthesized
detectors for accurately capturing the semantics of the novel attributes and show
their superior performance in terms of detection and localization compared to
other baseline approaches. Moreover, we demonstrate the application of automatic
annotation using our synthesized detectors on Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011
dataset. Various generalized zero-shot classification algorithms trained upon the
dataset re-annotated by ZSLA shows comparable performance with those trained
with the manual ground-truth annotations. Please refer to our project page for
source code: https://yuhsuanli.github.io/ZSLA/

1

Introduction

Zero-shot learning (ZSL) algorithms for classification aim to recognize novel categories without
observing any of their instances during model training; thus, the cost of collecting training samples for
the novel categories can be eliminated. Typically, the core challenge behind zero-shot classification
lies in associating novel categories with the seen ones during training. Various existing approaches
leverage different auxiliary semantic information to construct such associations across categories,
thus being able to generalize the learned models for classifying novel categories [17, 1, 32, 16, 3, 37]
or synthesize the training samples for each novel category [39, 40, 33, 43, 26]. Among different
types of auxiliary semantic information adopted for ZSL, defining a group of attributes shared among
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

