Emergent Communication:
Generalization and Overfitting in Lewis Games

Mathieu Rita
INRIA, Paris
mathieu.rita@inria.fr
Olivier Pietquin
Google Research, Brain Team
pietquin@google.com

Paul Michel∗ Jean-Bastien Grill
DeepMind
[corentint,paulmiche,jbgrill]@deepmind.com
Corentin Tallec

Emmanuel Dupoux
EHESS,ENS-PSL,CNRS,INRIA
Meta AI Research
emmanuel.dupoux@gmail.com

Florian Strub
DeepMind
fstrub@deepmind.com

Abstract
Lewis signaling games are a class of simple communication games for simulating
the emergence of language. In these games, two agents must agree on a communication protocol in order to solve a cooperative task. Previous work has shown
that agents trained to play this game with reinforcement learning tend to develop
languages that display undesirable properties from a linguistic point of view (lack
of generalization, lack of compositionality, etc). In this paper, we aim to provide
better understanding of this phenomenon by analytically studying the learning
problem in Lewis games. As a core contribution, we demonstrate that the standard
objective in Lewis games can be decomposed in two components: a co-adaptation
loss and an information loss. This decomposition enables us to surface two potential sources of overfitting, which we show may undermine the emergence of a
structured communication protocol. In particular, when we control for overfitting
on the co-adaptation loss, we recover desired properties in the emergent languages:
they are more compositional and generalize better.

1

Introduction

Understanding the dynamics of language evolution has been a challenging if not controversial research
topic in the language sciences [32, 13]. Given that the very first human language cannot be unearthed
from fossils [5], computational models have been designed to simulate the emergence of a structured
language within a controlled environment. In this line of work, Lewis signaling games [55] are among
the most widespread playground environments to model language emergence: they are inherently
simple, yet they exhibit a rich set of communication behaviors [17, 70]. Therefore, understanding
Lewis games dynamics may shed light on the prerequisites of language emergence.
In their original form, Lewis signaling games involve two agents: a speaker and a listener. The speaker
observes a random state from its environment, e.g. an image, and sends a signal to the listener. The
listener then undertakes an action based on this signal. Finally, both agents are equally rewarded based
on the outcome of the listener’s action. The resolution of this cooperative two-player game requires
the emergence of a shared protocol between the agents [55, 17]. One way to model the emergence of
such protocol is to give the agents the capacity to learn. The agents, and therefore, the communication
protocol, are shaped by a sequence of trials and errors over multiple games [81, 44, 75, 70]. This
learning-centric approach allows for a fine analysis of the language emergence dynamics [70, 36]. It
∗

This work was performed when Paul Michel was affiliated with Ecole Normale Supérieure PSL.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

