Egocentric Video-Language Pretraining

Kevin Qinghong Lin1 , Alex Jinpeng Wang1 , Mattia Soldan3 , Michael Wray2 ,
Rui Yan1 , Eric Zhongcong Xu1 , Difei Gao1 , Rongcheng Tu4 ,
Wenzhe Zhao4 , Weijie Kong4 , Chengfei Cai4 , Hongfa Wang4 ,
Dima Damen2 , Bernard Ghanem3 , Wei Liu4 , and Mike Zheng Shou1B
1

3

Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 University of Bristol
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 4 Tencent Data Platform

Abstract
Video-Language Pretraining (VLP), which aims to learn transferable representation
to advance a wide range of video-text downstream tasks, has recently received
increasing attention. Best performing works rely on large-scale, 3rd-person videotext datasets, such as HowTo100M. In this work, we exploit the recently released
Ego4D dataset to pioneer Egocentric VLP along three directions. (i) We create
EgoClip, a 1st-person video-text pretraining dataset comprising 3.8M clip-text
pairs well-chosen from Ego4D, covering a large variety of human daily activities.
(ii) We propose a novel pretraining objective, dubbed EgoNCE, which adapts
video-text contrastive learning to the egocentric domain by mining egocentricaware positive and negative samples. (iii) We introduce EgoMCQ, a development
benchmark that is close to EgoClip and hence can support effective validation and
fast exploration of our design decisions in EgoClip and EgoNCE. Furthermore,
we demonstrate strong performance on five egocentric downstream tasks across
three datasets: video-text retrieval on EPIC-KITCHENS-100; action recognition
on Charades-Ego; natural language query, moment query, and object state change
classification on Ego4D challenge benchmarks. The dataset and code are available
at https://github.com/showlab/EgoVLP.

1

Introduction

With the recent interest boom in computer vision and natural language processing, Video-Language
Pretraining (VLP) has prevailed, which aims to learn strong and transferable video-language representation for powering a broad spectrum of video-text downstream tasks, such as video-text
retrieval [1, 2, 3], video question answering [4, 5, 6], and video captioning [7, 8, 9]. The success of
VLP mainly stems from the availability of large-scale open-world video-text datasets [10], which subsume a large number of videos sourced from the Web (e.g., YouTube) and pair videos with associated
textual information. For instance, HowTo100M [10] collects 134K hours of instructional videos accompanied by noisy narrations yielded from Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR). WebVid-2M [3]
scrapes 2.5M descriptive videos with well-formed long captions.
Despite reaching an impressive data scale, videos in those existing video-text pretraining datasets
are often of 3rd-person views and may have been edited before posting on the Web. Yet, there is a
noticeable domain gap between the existing video-text pretraining datasets and 1st-person view videos
such as those videos captured by wearable cameras or smart glasses. Egocentric video has received
increasing interests from the academia (e.g., activity recognition [11], activity anticipation [12], and
video summarization [13]) and industry (various applications in robotics and augmented reality).
B: Corresponding Author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

