Private Set Generation with Discriminative
Information
Dingfan Chen Raouf Kerkouche Mario Fritz
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{dingfan.chen, raouf.kerkouche, fritz}@cispa.de

Abstract
Differentially private data generation techniques have become a promising solution
to the data privacy challenge –– it enables sharing of data while complying with
rigorous privacy guarantees, which is essential for scientific progress in sensitive
domains. Unfortunately, restricted by the inherent complexity of modeling highdimensional distributions, existing private generative models are struggling with
the utility of synthetic samples. In contrast to existing works that aim at fitting
the complete data distribution, we directly optimize for a small set of samples
that are representative of the distribution under the supervision of discriminative
information from downstream tasks, which is generally an easier task and more
suitable for private training. Our work provides an alternative view for differentially
private generation of high-dimensional data and introduces a simple yet effective
method that greatly improves the sample utility of state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Data sharing is vital for the growth of machine learning applications in numerous domains. However,
in many application scenarios, data sharing is prohibited due to the private nature of data (e.g., individual data stored on mobile devices, medical treatments, and banking records) and the corresponding
stringent regulations, which greatly hinders technological progress. Differentially private (DP) data
publishing [8, 9, 11] provides a compelling solution to such challenge, where only a sanitized form
of the data is publicly released. Such sanitized synthetic data can be leveraged as if it were the
real data, analyzed with established toolchains, and can be shared openly to the public, facilitating
technological advance and reproducible research in sensitive domains.
Yet, generation of high-dimensional data with DP guarantees is highly challenging and traditional
DP algorithms designed for capturing low-dimensional statistical characteristics are not applicable
to this task [28, 13, 4, 35]). Instead, inspired by the great successes of deep generative models in
learning high-dimensional representations, recent works [5, 6, 40, 41, 2, 12] adopt deep generative
neural networks as the underlying generation backbone and incorporate the privacy constraints into
the training procedure, such that any privacy leakage upon disclosing the data generator is bounded.
However, these methods have common shortcomings: (i) deep generative models are known to be datademanding [16], which becomes even harder to train when considering the privacy constraints [6, 5];
(ii) they do not guarantee any optimal solution for the downstream task (e.g. classification). In
fact, existing models are still struggling to generate sanitized data that is useful for downstream
data analysis tasks. For example, when training a convolutional neural network (ConvNet) classifier
on the private generated data, the highest test accuracy reported in literature is < 85% for MNIST
dataset with (ε, δ) = (10, 10−5 ) [5], which lags far behind the discriminative baseline (> 98% with
(ε, δ) = (1.2, 10−5 ) [32]) and makes private generative models less appealing for many practical
scenarios with data analysis as the end goal.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

