Temporal Latent Bottleneck: Synthesis of Fast and
Slow Processing Mechanisms in Sequence Learning

Aniket Didolkar 1 , Kshitij Gupta 1 , Anirudh Goyal 1 , Nitesh B. Gundavarapu 5
Alex Lamb 2 , Nan Rosemary Ke 3 , Yoshua Bengio 1,4

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks have a strong inductive bias towards learning temporally compressed representations, as the entire history of a sequence is represented
by a single vector. By contrast, Transformers have little inductive bias towards
learning temporally compressed representations, as they allow for attention over
all previously computed elements in a sequence. Having a more compressed representation of a sequence may be beneficial for generalization, as a high-level
representation may be more easily re-used and re-purposed and will contain fewer
irrelevant details. At the same time, excessive compression of representations
comes at the cost of expressiveness. We propose a solution which divides computation into two streams. A slow stream that is recurrent in nature aims to learn a
specialized and compressed representation, by forcing chunks of K time steps into
a single representation which is divided into multiple vectors. At the same time,
a fast stream is parameterized as a Transformer to process chunks consisting of
K time-steps conditioned on the information in the slow-stream. In the proposed
approach we hope to gain the expressiveness of the Transformer, while encouraging better compression and structuring of representations in the slow stream. We
show the benefits of the proposed method in terms of improved sample efficiency
and generalization performance as compared to various competitive baselines for
visual perception and sequential decision making tasks.

1

Introduction

The interplay between fast and slow mechanisms for information processing and perception has been
studied in both cognitive science and machine learning [5, 35]. In the brain, short-term and long-term
memory have developed in a specialized way. Short-term memory is allowed to change very quickly
to react to immediate sensory inputs and perception. It also tends towards high capacity storage of
all pieces of information which may be relevant for future reasoning [42, 3, 4]. By contrast, longterm memory changes slowly [45, 41], is highly selective and involves repeated consolidation. It
contains a set of memories that summarize the entire past, only storing details about observations
which are most relevant [28, 6].
Deep Learning has seen a variety of architectures for processing sequential data [36, 57, 18]. For
example. recurrent neural networks compress information about a sequence into a single hidden
state. Transformers get rid of the recurrent state by dynamically capturing information between
positions using multi-head dot product attention [61]. Transformers have become the dominant
architecture across a wide range of domains including vision [25], natural language [24, 54, 11,
69, 20, 55], and reinforcement learning [13, 40]. They have eclipsed recurrent neural networks
[36, 57, 18] in almost all sequence processing domains due to their high representational capacity
and scalability. Despite their wide applicability, it is well known that Transformers are very data
01
Mila, University of Montreal, 2 Microsoft Research, New York, NY, 3 Google Deepmind, 4 CIFAR
Fellow, 5 Google Research, Corresponding authors: adidolkar123@gmail.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

