Power and limitations of single-qubit
native quantum neural networks

Zhan Yu

Hongshun Yao

Mujin Li

Xin Wang∗
Institute for Quantum Computing, Baidu Research, Beijing 100193, China†

Abstract
Quantum neural networks (QNNs) have emerged as a leading strategy to establish
applications in machine learning, chemistry, and optimization. While the applications of QNN have been widely investigated, its theoretical foundation remains less
understood. In this paper, we formulate a theoretical framework for the expressive
ability of data re-uploading quantum neural networks that consist of interleaved encoding circuit blocks and trainable circuit blocks. First, we prove that single-qubit
quantum neural networks can approximate any univariate function by mapping the
model to a partial Fourier series. We in particular establish the exact correlations
between the parameters of the trainable gates and the Fourier coefficients, resolving
an open problem on the universal approximation property of QNN. Second, we
discuss the limitations of single-qubit native QNNs on approximating multivariate
functions by analyzing the frequency spectrum and the flexibility of Fourier coefficients. We further demonstrate the expressivity and limitations of single-qubit
native QNNs via numerical experiments. We believe these results would improve
our understanding of QNNs and provide a helpful guideline for designing powerful
QNNs for machine learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Quantum computing is a technology that exploits the laws of quantum mechanics to solve complicated
problems much faster than classical computers. It has been applied in areas such as breaking
cryptographic systems [1], searching databases [2], and quantum simulation [3, 4], in which it
gives a quantum speedup over the best known classical algorithms. With the fast development
of quantum hardware, recent results [5–7] have shown quantum advantages in specific tasks. An
emerging direction is to investigate if quantum computing can offer quantum advantages in artificial
intelligence, giving rise to an interdisciplinary area called quantum machine learning [8].
A leading strategy to quantum machine learning uses quantum neural networks (QNNs), which are
quantum analogs of artificial neural networks (NNs). Much progress has been made in applications of
QNN in various topics [9–11], including quantum autoencoder [12, 13], supervised learning [14–17],
dynamic learning [18–20], quantum chemistry [21], and quantum metrology [22–24]. Similar to the
field of machine learning, a crucial challenge of quantum machine learning is to design powerful and
efficient QNN models for quantum learning tasks, which requires a theoretical understanding of how
structural properties of QNN may affect its expressive power.
The expressive power of a QNN model can be characterized by the function classes that it can
approximate. Recently, the universal approximation property (UAP) of QNN models has been
∗
†

Corresponding author. wangxin73@baidu.com
Z. Y. and H. Y. contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

