Fast Vision Transformers with HiLo Attention
Zizheng Pan

Jianfei Cai

Bohan Zhuang†

Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University, Australia

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have triggered the most recent and significant breakthroughs in computer vision. Their efficient designs are mostly guided by the
indirect metric of computational complexity, i.e., FLOPs, which however has a
clear gap with the direct metric such as throughput. Thus, we propose to use
the direct speed evaluation on the target platform as the design principle for efficient ViTs. Particularly, we introduce LITv2, a simple and effective ViT which
performs favourably against the existing state-of-the-art methods across a spectrum of different model sizes with faster speed. At the core of LITv2 is a novel
self-attention mechanism, which we dub HiLo. HiLo is inspired by the insight
that high frequencies in an image capture local fine details and low frequencies
focus on global structures, whereas a multi-head self-attention layer neglects the
characteristic of different frequencies. Therefore, we propose to disentangle the
high/low frequency patterns in an attention layer by separating the heads into two
groups, where one group encodes high frequencies via self-attention within each
local window, and another group encodes low frequencies by performing global
attention between the average-pooled low-frequency keys and values from each
window and each query position in the input feature map. Benefiting from the
efficient design for both groups, we show that HiLo is superior to the existing
attention mechanisms by comprehensively benchmarking FLOPs, speed and memory consumption on GPUs and CPUs. For example, HiLo is 1.4× faster than
spatial reduction attention and 1.6× faster than local window attention on CPUs.
Powered by HiLo, LITv2 serves as a strong backbone for mainstream vision tasks
including image classification, dense detection and segmentation. Code is available
at https://github.com/ziplab/LITv2.

1

Introduction

Real-world applications usually require a model to have an optimal speed and accuracy trade-off
under limited computational budget, such as UAV and autonomous driving. This motivates substantial
works toward efficient vision Transformer (ViT) design, such as PVT [51], Swin [32] and Focal
Transformer [60], among others. To measure the computational complexity, a widely adopted metric
in recent ViT design is the number of float-point operations, i.e., FLOPs. However, FLOPs is an
indirect metric, which can not directly reflect the real speed on the target platform. For example,
Focal-Tiny is much slower than Swin-Ti on GPUs although their FLOPs are comparable.
In general, the discrepancy between the indirect metric (FLOPs) and the direct metric (speed) in
recent ViTs can be attributed to two main reasons. First, although self-attention is efficient on
low-resolution feature maps, the quadratic complexity in both memory and time makes it much
slower on high-resolution images due to intensive memory access cost [34], where fetching data from
off-chip DRAM can be speed-consuming. Second, some efficient attention mechanisms in ViTs have
low theoretical complexity guarantee but are actually slow on GPUs due to particular operations that
†

Corresponding author. E-mail: bohan.zhuang@monash.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

