Is one annotation enough?
A data-centric image classification benchmark for noisy and ambiguous label estimation

Lars Schmarje1∗ Vasco Grossmann1 Claudius Zelenka1 Sabine Dippel2 Rainer Kiko3
Mariusz Oszust4 Matti Pastell6 Jenny Stracke5 Anna Valros7 Nina Volkmann7
Reinhard Koch1
1
2
MIP, Kiel University
ITT, Friedrich-Loefﬂer-Institut 3 LOV, Sorbonne Université
4
Rzeszow University of Technology 5 ITW, University Bonn 6 University of Helsinki
7
Luke, Natural Resources Institute Finland 8 WING, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover

Abstract
High-quality data is necessary for modern machine learning. However, the acquisition of such data is difﬁcult due to noisy and ambiguous annotations of humans.
The aggregation of such annotations to determine the label of an image leads to a
lower data quality. We propose a data-centric image classiﬁcation benchmark with
ten real-world datasets and multiple annotations per image to allow researchers to
investigate and quantify the impact of such data quality issues. With the benchmark
we can study the impact of annotation costs and (semi-)supervised methods on the
data quality for image classiﬁcation by applying a novel methodology to a range
of different algorithms and diverse datasets. Our benchmark uses a two-phase
approach via a data label improvement method in the ﬁrst phase and a ﬁxed evaluation model in the second phase. Thereby, we give a measure for the relation
between the input labeling effort and the performance of (semi-)supervised algorithms to enable a deeper insight into how labels should be created for effective
model training. Across thousands of experiments, we show that one annotation
is not enough and that the inclusion of multiple annotations allows for a better
approximation of the real underlying class distribution. We identify that hard labels
can not capture the ambiguity of the data and this might lead to the common issue
of overconﬁdent models. Based on the presented datasets, benchmarked methods,
and analysis, we create multiple research opportunities for the future directed at
the improvement of label noise estimation approaches, data annotation schemes,
realistic (semi-)supervised learning, or more reliable image collection. 2

1

Introduction

High-quality data is the fuel of modern machine learning and almost all models improve with higher
quality data [8, 80, 50]. Therefore, such data are a key component for developing future techniques.
The acquisition of a large amount of data is considered particularly challenging due to the participation
of humans in the process. Their mistakes or subjective interpretations of annotation tasks can lead to
noisy or ambiguous labels, respectively [54, 16, 61, 28, 52, 9, 18, 29]. Consequently, the labels suffer
from heteroscedastic aleatoric uncertainty which means that the data contains inherent noise, which
is class- or even sample-dependent and negatively affects the quality [14].
In Figure 1, we present the impact of this uncertainty on the class "cat" in the CIFAR-10 dataset [32].
While all images have the same ground truth label in CIFAR-10, humans created agreeing annotations
∗

Corresponding Author, las@informatik.uni-kiel.de
The source code is available at https://github.com/Emprime/dcic.
The datasets are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7152309.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

