Knowledge Distillation:
Bad Models Can Be Good Role Models
Gal Kaplun
Harvard University & Mobileye
galkaplun@g.harvard.edu

Eran Malach
Hebrew University & Mobileye
eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il

Preetum Nakkiran
University of California San Diego
preetum@ucsd.edu

Shai Shalev-Shwartz
Hebrew University & Mobileye
shais@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Large neural networks trained in the overparameterized regime are able to fit noise
to zero train error. Recent work of Nakkiran and Bansal [20] has empirically
observed that such networks behave as “conditional samplers” from the noisy
distribution. That is, they replicate the noise in the train data to unseen examples.
We give a theoretical framework for studying this conditional sampling behavior in
the context of learning theory. We relate the notion of such samplers to knowledge
distillation, where a student network imitates the outputs of a teacher on unlabeled
data. We show that samplers, while being bad classifiers, can be good teachers.
Concretely, we prove that distillation from samplers is guaranteed to produce a
student which approximates the Bayes optimal classifier. Finally, we show that
some common learning algorithms (e.g., Nearest-Neighbours and Kernel Machines)
can often generate samplers when applied in the overparameterized regime.

1

Introduction

Recently, the field of supervised learning has witnessed the success of overparameterized methods:
models, such as deep neural networks, which are large enough to fit their train sets but still achieve
good test performance. A core theoretical concern is to understand why such models are able to fit
even noisy training data without catastrophically overfitting [31] despite no explicit regularization.
The seminal work of Bartlett et al. [2] proposed the theoretical framework of benign overfitting to
capture this empirical behavior. Briefly, benign overfitting studies statistically consistent methods—
where models approach the Bayes optimal classifier, even in presence of noise.
However, recent empirical work shows that when training deep neural networks on noisy data,
overfitting is neither catastrophic nor benign [20]. Specifically, they propose that overfitting leads
not to a good classifier, but to a good conditional sampler. For example, suppose we train a model
on a set of images sampled from some distribution D, where 20% of the images of cats are wrongly
labeled as dogs. We now train an overparameterized network to fit samples from D. Note that for
⇤
the distribution D, the Bayes-optimal classifier, namely fD
(x) := argmaxy PD (y|x), returns the
“correct” class of every image. We can hope that if overfitting is truly “benign” in the sense of [2],
⇤
the overparameterized model will be close to this optimal fD
. However, this is not what occurs
in practice: as [20] point out, the trained model f reproduces noise in the training set at test time,
labeling up to 20% of the cats in the test data as dogs. In a sense, the trained model f behaves as a
conditional sample: f (x) ⇠ PD (y|x) (see the leftmost confusion matrix in Figure 1).
The above example indicates that thinking about classifiers in the overparameterized regime as
approximating the Bayes optimal predictor might be misleading. Therefore, it is essential to develop
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

