You Can’t Count on Luck:
Why Decision Transformers and RvS
Fail in Stochastic Environments
Keiran Paster
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
keirp@cs.toronto.edu

Sheila A. McIlraith & Jimmy Ba
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{sheila, jba}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Recently, methods such as Decision Transformer [1] that reduce reinforcement
learning to a prediction task and solve it via supervised learning (RvS) [2] have
become popular due to their simplicity, robustness to hyperparameters, and strong
overall performance on offline RL tasks. However, simply conditioning a probabilistic model on a desired return and taking the predicted action can fail dramatically
in stochastic environments since trajectories that result in a return may have only
achieved that return due to luck. In this work, we describe the limitations of
RvS approaches in stochastic environments and propose a solution. Rather than
simply conditioning on the return of a single trajectory as is standard practice, our
proposed method, ESPER, learns to cluster trajectories and conditions on average
cluster returns, which are independent from environment stochasticity. Doing so
allows ESPER to achieve strong alignment between target return and expected
performance in real environments. We demonstrate this in several challenging
stochastic offline-RL tasks including the challenging puzzle game 2048, and Connect Four playing against a stochastic opponent. In all tested domains, ESPER
achieves significantly better alignment between the target return and achieved
return than simply conditioning on returns. ESPER also achieves higher maximum
performance than even value-based baselines.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) [3, 1, 4, 5] is a promising approach to train agents without
requiring online experience in an environment, which is desirable when online experience is expensive
or when offline experience is abundant. A recent trend in offline RL has been to use simple approaches
that do RL via Supervised Learning (RvS) (e.g., [1, 2, 6–8]) rather than typical value-based approaches.
RvS algorithms such as Decision Transformer [1] train a model to predict an action based on the
current state and an outcome such as a desired future return. These agents ask the question “if I
assume the desired outcome will happen, in my experience what action do I typically take next.” These
methods are popular due to their simplicity, strong performance on offline benchmark tasks [1, 2],
and similarity to large generative models (e.g., [9–12]) that continue to show stronger performance
on more tasks when training larger models on more data.
However, as we will show, methods that condition on outcomes such as return can make incorrect
decisions in stochastic environments regardless of scale or the amount of data they are trained
on. This is because implicitly these methods assume that actions that end up achieving a particular
goal are optimal for achieving that goal. This assumption is not true in stochastic environments,
where it is possible that the actions taken in the trajectory were actually sub-optimal and that the
outcome was only achieved due to lucky environment transitions. For example, consider the gambling
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

