Causal Inference with Non-IID Data using Linear
Graphical Models

Chi Zhang
Department of CS
UCLA
California, USA, 90095
zccc@cs.ucla.edu

Karthika Mohan
Department of EECS
Oregon State University
Oregon, USA, 97331
mohank@oregonstate.edu

Judea Pearl
Department of CS
UCLA
California, USA, 90095
judea@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Traditional causal inference techniques assume data are independent and identically
distributed (IID) and thus ignores interactions among units. However, a unit’s
treatment may affect another unit’s outcome (interference), a unit’s treatment may
be correlated with another unit’s outcome, or a unit’s treatment and outcome may
be spuriously correlated through another unit. To capture such nuances, we model
the data generating process using causal graphs and conduct a systematic analysis
of the bias caused by different types of interactions when computing causal effects.
We derive theorems to detect and quantify the interaction bias, and derive conditions
under which it is safe to ignore interactions. Put differently, we present conditions
under which causal effects can be computed with negligible bias by assuming that
samples are IID. Furthermore, we develop a method to eliminate bias in cases
where blindly assuming IID is expected to yield a significantly biased estimate.
Finally, we test the coverage and performance of our methods through simulations.

1

Introduction

Motivating Example Suppose we are interested in studying the effectiveness of Covid-19 vaccines.
Specifically, we are interested in the causal effect of vaccine doses, V , on the severity of sickness S.
A naive method would be building a causal model on V , S, and other related factors, and estimating
the causal effect of V on S using available data. However, this method may result in biased estimation
primarily because traditional causal inference techniques assume that attributes of all units in the
sample are independent and identically distributed (IID)[Rubin, 1978], which does not hold true in
the pandemic setting since units are not isolated from each other. We exemplify below few instances
of this problem that violate IID (Eyre et al. [2022]).
Case 1: The vaccination V of a unit i, (Vi ), decreases their viral load, Li , which in turn decreases
the transmission rate of the virus, and hence decreases the severity of sickness S of another unit j,
(Sj ), who comes into contact with i. Vi causally affects Sj .
Case 2: Vi is affected by the area A that i lives in, and a contact j who lives in vaccine deprived
areas and areas with a higher incidence of Covid-19 infection is more likely to get sick. Vi and Sj
are confounded.
Case 3: Si , determines whether or not i is quarantined and thus affects whether i transmits the disease
to another unit j. Si causally affects Sj .
Such interactions between units plague both observational and experimental studies. If the latter is
performed in a controlled environment where subjects are isolated from each other, the results would
not be valid for the target environment, where subjects affect each other, and vice versa.
Modeling Interactions A line of existing work that analyzes interactions between units is interference
[Cox, 1958]. Interference is the phenomenon in which treatment of unit i (Vi ) causally affects the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

