Fixed-Distance Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Hadi Mohasel Afshar
CSIRO’s Data61
Eveleigh, NSW 2015, Australia
Hadi.Afshar@data61.csiro.au

Sally Cripps
CSIRO’s Data61 & The University of Sydney
Eveleigh, NSW 2015, Australia
Sally.Cripps@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
We propose a variation of the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo sampling (HMC) where
the equations of motion are simulated for a fixed traversed distance rather than
the conventional fixed simulation time. This new mechanism tends to generate
proposals that have higher target probability values. The momentum distribution
that is naturally joint with our Fixed-Distance HMC (FDHMC), and keeps the proposal acceptance probability close to 1, is not Gaussian and generates momentums
that have a higher expected magnitude. This translates into a reduced correlation
between the successive MCMC states and according to our experimental results,
leads to an improvement in terms of the effective sample size per gradient when
compared to the baseline HMC and No-U-Turn (NUTS) samplers.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is an inference mechanism that approximates a target probability distribution by a sequence of states (a.k.a. samples or draws) (Chib and Greenberg, 1995).
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Duane et al., 1987; Neal, 2011) is an MCMC algorithm where the
current state is considered as a particle (usually a unit mass) to which a randomly drawn momentum
vector is assigned. The state is also associated with a potential energy that is proportional to its
negative log target probability density. The next state is proposed via evolving the current state
according to a simulation of the equations of motion (using leapfrog integration) for a fixed time
duration. If the simulation is accurate, the probability of accepting the proposal as the next state in
the Markov chain will be close to one. This property makes HMC a powerful sampling tool where
the proposal can be quite distant from the current state while being accepted with a high probability,
leading to a comparatively rapid exploration of the target distribution. In this work we further improve
on HMC by highlighting two of its limitations and resolving them.
Limitation 1. Along the trajectory that is traversed during any fixed-time simulation of the equations
of motion, it is more likely that a state with low target probability is proposed: In HMC, the state is
guided by the gradient information of the target density to move towards regions of high probability
(i.e. low potential engery). However, it moves through these regions with a high velocity and thus
oscillates around them, spending more time in the surrounding low-probability regions (i.e. hills on
the potential energy) where it moves with low velocity. As such, it is more likely that the state is in a
low-probability region when the simulation time is over. This bias is counter intuitive.
What makes the overall sampling process unbiased (in the sense that the MCMC chain converges to
the target distribution) relies on the HMC’s momentum distribution: Note that a state that has a lowmagnitude momentum cannot move to a low-probability region (since at some level, its kinetic energy
will be zero, the direction of the momentum vector will be reversed and the state will be pulled back)
but a state with low-magnitude momentum can always move from a low-probability region to a highprobability region as its kinetic energy will only be increased. Therefore, if the momentum distribution
is concentrated around 0, there is a strong bias towards high-probability regions. Conversely, if the
momentum distribution favours large magnitudes, the bias is less pronounced. The exact distribution
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

