ALIFE: Adaptive Logit Regularizer and Feature
Replay for Incremental Semantic Segmentation

Youngmin Oh
Donghyeon Baek
Bumsub Ham∗
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/ALIFE

Abstract
We address the problem of incremental semantic segmentation (ISS) recognizing
novel object/stuff categories continually without forgetting previous ones that have
been learned. The catastrophic forgetting problem is particularly severe in ISS,
since pixel-level ground-truth labels are available only for the novel categories
at training time. To address the problem, regularization-based methods exploit
probability calibration techniques to learn semantic information from unlabeled
pixels. While such techniques are effective, there is still a lack of theoretical
understanding of them. Replay-based methods propose to memorize a small set
of images for previous categories. They achieve state-of-the-art performance at
the cost of large memory footprint. We propose in this paper a novel ISS method,
dubbed ALIFE, that provides a better compromise between accuracy and efficiency.
To this end, we first show an in-depth analysis on the calibration techniques to
better understand the effects on ISS. Based on this, we then introduce an adaptive
logit regularizer (ALI) that enables our model to better learn new categories,
while retaining knowledge for previous ones. We also present a feature replay
scheme that memorizes features, instead of images directly, in order to reduce
memory requirements significantly. Since a feature extractor is changed continually,
memorized features should also be updated at every incremental stage. To handle
this, we introduce category-specific rotation matrices updating the features for
each category separately. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach with
extensive experiments on standard ISS benchmarks, and show that our method
achieves a better trade-off in terms of accuracy and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Humans are capable of learning new concepts continually, while preserving or even improving
previously acquired knowledge. Artificial neural networks are, however, prone to forget the knowledge
they have learned if being trained with samples for new object/scene categories alone. The reason
for this problem, so-called catastrophic forgetting [11, 27], is that parameters of neural networks
change abruptly to handle new categories without accessing training samples for previous categories.
A straightforward way to alleviate the problem is to re-train a model with training examples for entire
categories observed so far, which is however computationally demanding.
Incremental learning is an alternative approach to learning new categories continuously without
re-training on the entire dataset. While many methods have been proposed for incremental classification [4, 21, 23, 25, 33, 36], a few attempts explore incremental semantic segmentation (ISS), where
training images for new categories are partially labeled to reduce the cost for manual annotation. That
is, pixels for new categories are labeled only, while remaining ones are marked as unknown. The
unknown regions should be considered separately, since they could contain previous categories along
with ones that would be seen in the future.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

