Knowledge-Aware Bayesian Deep Topic Model

Dongsheng Wang, Yishi Xu, Miaoge Li, Zhibin Duan, Chaojie Wang, Bo Chen∗
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shanxi 710071, China
{wds,xuyishi,limiaoge,zhibinduan}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
xd_silly@163.com, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a Bayesian generative model for incorporating prior domain knowledge
into hierarchical topic modeling. Although embedded topic models (ETMs) and its
variants have gained promising performance in text analysis, they mainly focus on
mining word co-occurrence patterns, ignoring potentially easy-to-obtain prior topic
hierarchies that could help enhance topic coherence. While several knowledgebased topic models have recently been proposed, they are either only applicable
to shallow hierarchies or sensitive to the quality of the provided prior knowledge.
To this end, we develop a novel deep ETM that jointly models the documents
and the given prior knowledge by embedding the words and topics into the same
space. Guided by the provided domain knowledge, the proposed model tends
to discover topic hierarchies that are organized into interpretable taxonomies.
Moreover, with a technique for adapting a given graph, our extended version allows
the structure of the prior knowledge to be fine-tuned to match the target corpus.
Extensive experiments show that our proposed model efficiently integrates the
prior knowledge and improves both hierarchical topic discovery and document
representation.

1

Introduction

Topic models (TMs) such as latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) have enjoyed success in text mining
and analysis in an unsupervised manner [4]. Typically, the goal of TMs is to infer per-document topic
proportions and a set of latent topics from the target corpus using word co-occurrences within each
document. The extracted topics are widely used in various machine learning tasks [20, 19, 33, 39].
However, the objective function of most TMs is to maximize the likelihood of the observed data,
which causes an over-concentration on high-frequency words. Moreover, the infrequent words might
be assigned to irrelevant topics due to the lack of side information. Those two drawbacks could lead
to human-unfriendly topics that fail to make sense to end users in practice. This issue is further
exacerbated in hierarchical cases where a large number of topics and their relevance need to be
modeled [27, 12].
In many cases, users with prior domain knowledge are concerned with a specific topic structure, as
shown in Fig. 1. Such a topic hierarchy provides semantic common sense among topics and words,
which can guide high-quality topic discovery. Therefore, several researches have attempted to exploit
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

