Communication-Efficient Topologies for Decentralized
Learning with O(1) Consensus Rate

Zhuoqing Song1∗, Weijian Li2∗ , Kexin Jin3∗ , Lei Shi1,7 , Ming Yan4,5 , Wotao Yin2 , Kun Yuan2,6
1
Fudan University 2 Alibaba DAMO Academy 3 Princeton University
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 5 Michigan State University
6
Peking University 7 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
zqsong19@fudan.edu.cn, weijian.li@alibaba-inc.com, kexinj@math.princeton.edu
yanming@cuhk.edu.cn, leishi@fudan.edu.cn
wotao.yin@alibaba-inc.com, kun.yuan@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Decentralized optimization is an emerging paradigm in distributed learning in
which agents achieve network-wide solutions by peer-to-peer communication without the central server. Since communication tends to be slower than computation,
when each agent communicates with only a few neighboring agents per iteration,
they can complete iterations faster than with more agents or a central server. However, the total number of iterations to reach a network-wide solution is affected
by the speed at which the agents’ information is “mixed” by communication. We
found that popular communication topologies either have large maximum degrees
(such as stars and complete graphs) or are ineffective at mixing information (such
as rings and grids). To address this problem, we propose a new family of topologies,
EquiTopo, which has an (almost) constant degree and a network-size-independent
consensus rate that is used to measure the mixing efficiency.
In the proposed family, EquiStatic has a degree of Θ(ln(n)), where n is the network
size, and a series of time-dependent one-peer topologies, EquiDyn, has a constant
degree of 1. We generate EquiDyn through a certain random sampling procedure.
Both of them achieve an n-independent consensus rate. We apply them to decentralized SGD and decentralized gradient tracking and obtain faster communication and
better convergence, theoretically and empirically. Our code is implemented through
BlueFog and available at https://github.com/kexinjinnn/EquiTopo.

1

Introduction

Modern optimization and machine learning typically involve tremendous data samples and model
parameters. The scale of these problems calls for efficient distributed algorithms across multiple
computing nodes. Traditional distributed approaches usually follow a centralized setup, where each
node needs to communicate with a (virtually) central server. This communication pattern incurs
significant communication overheads and long latency.
Decentralized learning is an emerging paradigm to save communications in large-scale optimization
and learning. In decentralized learning, all computing nodes are connected with some network
topology (e.g., ring, grid, hypercube, etc.) in which each node averages/communicates locally with
its immediate neighbors. This decentralized setup allows each node to communicate with fewer
neighbors and hence has a much lower overhead in per-iteration communication. However, local
averaging is less effective in “mixing” information, making decentralized algorithms converge slower
∗

Equal Contribution. Corresponding Author: Kun Yuan

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

