Adapting to Online Label Shift with
Provable Guarantees

1

Yong Bai1∗ , Yu-Jie Zhang2,1∗ , Peng Zhao1 , Masashi Sugiyama3,2 , Zhi-Hua Zhou1†
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
The standard supervised learning paradigm works effectively when training data
shares the same distribution as the upcoming testing samples. However, this
stationary assumption is often violated in real-world applications, especially when
testing data appear in an online fashion. In this paper, we formulate and investigate
the problem of online label shift (OLaS): the learner trains an initial model from
the labeled offline data and then deploys it to an unlabeled online environment
where the underlying label distribution changes over time but the label-conditional
density does not. The non-stationarity nature and the lack of supervision make
the problem challenging to be tackled. To address the difficulty, we construct a
new unbiased risk estimator that utilizes the unlabeled data, which exhibits many
benign properties albeit with potential non-convexity. Building upon that, we
propose novel online ensemble algorithms to deal with the non-stationarity of the
environments. Our approach enjoys optimal dynamic regret, indicating that the
performance is competitive with a clairvoyant who knows the online environments
in hindsight and then chooses the best decision for each round. The obtained
dynamic regret bound scales with the intensity and pattern of label distribution
shift, hence exhibiting the adaptivity in the OLaS problem. Extensive experiments
are conducted to validate the effectiveness and support our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

One of the fundamental challenges for modern machine learning is the distribution shift [1, 2, 3, 4].
The learned model’s testing performance would significantly drop when the distribution is different
from the initial training distribution. More severely, in many real-world applications, testing data
often come in an online fashion after deploying the trained model such that the underlying distribution
might continuously change over time. Hence, it is necessary to develop learning methods to handle
distribution shift in online and open environments [5]. Another practical concern is the label scarcity
issue in real tasks, particularly those tasks emerging in online scenarios. For example, in the species
monitoring task [6, 7], a learned model is deployed to detect species of wild animals. The data consist
of received signals from sensors and hence are naturally in the streaming form. The data distribution
of upcoming animals will change due to the variety of species across different geographic locations
and seasons, and moreover, it is hard to gather the labels of streaming data in time.
Motivated by the above real demand, this paper is concerned with the following problem: how to
design an algorithm that can adapt to non-stationary environments with a few labeled data or even
unlabeled data observed at every time? In addition to getting empirical performance gain, the overall
method is desired to have clear and strong theoretical guarantees. The problem is generally hard due
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Zhi-Hua Zhou <zhouzh@lamda.nju.edu.cn>

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

