Rashomon Capacity: A Metric for
Predictive Multiplicity in Classification

Hsiang Hsu and Flavio P. Calmon
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
hsianghsu@g.harard.edu, flavio@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Predictive multiplicity occurs when classification models with statistically indistinguishable performances assign conflicting predictions to individual samples. When
used for decision-making in applications of consequence (e.g., lending, education,
criminal justice), models developed without regard for predictive multiplicity may
result in unjustified and arbitrary decisions for specific individuals. We introduce a
new metric, called Rashomon Capacity, to measure predictive multiplicity in probabilistic classification. Prior metrics for predictive multiplicity focus on classifiers
that output thresholded (i.e., 0-1) predicted classes. In contrast, Rashomon Capacity
applies to probabilistic classifiers, capturing more nuanced score variations for individual samples. We provide a rigorous derivation for Rashomon Capacity, argue
its intuitive appeal, and demonstrate how to estimate it in practice. We show that
Rashomon Capacity yields principled strategies for disclosing conflicting models
to stakeholders. Our numerical experiments illustrate how Rashomon Capacity
captures predictive multiplicity in various datasets and learning models, including
neural networks. The tools introduced in this paper can help data scientists measure
and report predictive multiplicity prior to model deployment.

1

Introduction

Rashomon effect, introduced by Breiman [1], describes the phenomenon where a multitude of distinct
predictive models achieve similar training or test loss. Breiman reported observing the Rashomon
effect in several model classes, including linear regression, decision trees, and small neural networks.
In a foresighted experiment, Breiman noted that, when retraining a neural network 100 times on
three-dimensional data with different random initializations, he “found 32 distinct minima, each of
which gave a different picture, and having about equal test set error” [1, Section 8]. The set of
almost-equally performing models for a given learning problem is called the Rashomon set [2, 3].
We focus on a facet of the Rashomon effect in classification problems called predictive multiplicity.
Predictive multiplicity occurs when competing models in the Rashomon set assign conflicting
predictions to individual samples [4]. Fig. 1 presents an updated version of Breiman’s neural network
experiment and illustrates predictive multiplicity in three classification tasks with different data
domains and neural network architectures. Here, models that achieve statistically-indistinguishable
performance on a test set assign wildly different predictions to an input sample. If predictive
multiplicity is not accounted for, the output for this sample may ultimately depend on arbitrary
choices made during training (e.g., parameter initialization).
Predictive multiplicity captures the potential individual-level harm introduced by an arbitrary choice
of a single model in the Rashomon set. When such a model is used to support automated decisionmaking in sectors dominated by a few companies or Government—labeled Algorithmic Leviathans
in [5, Section 3]—predictive multiplicity can lead to unjustified and systemic exclusion of individuals
from critical opportunities. For example, an algorithm used for lending may deny a loan to a specific
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

