In Differential Privacy, There is Truth:
On Vote Leakage in Ensemble Private Learning
Jiaqi Wanga b , Roei Schusterb , Ilia Shumailovb c , David Liea , Nicolas Papernota b
a

University of Toronto
b
Vector Institute
c
University of Oxford

Abstract
When learning from sensitive data, care must be taken to ensure that training algorithms address privacy concerns. The canonical Private Aggregation of Teacher
Ensembles, or PATE, computes output labels by aggregating the predictions of a
(possibly distributed) collection of teacher models via a voting mechanism. The
mechanism adds noise to attain a differential privacy guarantee with respect to
the teachers’ training data. In this work, we observe that this use of noise, which
makes PATE predictions stochastic, enables new forms of leakage of sensitive information. For a given input, our adversary exploits this stochasticity to extract
high-fidelity histograms of the votes submitted by the underlying teachers. From
these histograms, the adversary can learn sensitive attributes of the input such as
race, gender, or age. Although this attack does not directly violate the differential
privacy guarantee, it clearly violates privacy norms and expectations, and would
not be possible at all without the noise inserted to obtain differential privacy. In
fact, counter-intuitively, the attack becomes easier as we add more noise to provide stronger differential privacy. We hope this encourages future work to consider
privacy holistically rather than treat differential privacy as a panacea.

1

Introduction

The canonical Private Aggregation of Teacher Ensembles, PATE, is a model-agnostic approach to
obtaining differential privacy guarantees for the training data of ML models [1], [2], that is widely
applied [3], [4] and adapted [5]–[7] due to its comparatively favorable trade-off between differential
privacy, utility, and ease of decentralization [6]. In PATE, one considers an ensemble of independently trained teacher models. To generate a prediction, PATE first collects the predictions of these
teachers to form a histogram of votes. It then adds Gaussian noise to the histogram and only reveals
the label achieving plurality. This label can be used directly as a prediction, or to supervise the
training of a student model—in a form of knowledge transfer. Because PATE only reveals the label
receiving the most votes, it comes with guarantees of differential privacy, i.e., the noisy voting mechanism allows us to bound how much information from the training data is potentially exposed [8].
But PATE does not explicitly protect from leakage of a key element in its inference procedure: the
histogram of votes submitted by teachers. While the histogram is used internally and not directly
exposed to clients, a careful examination of PATE reveals that information about the histogram leaks
to clients via query answers.
The histogram can contain highly sensitive information, not the least of which is membership in
minority groups which, if revealed, can be used to discriminate against individuals. We demonstrate
this by showing how an attacker, using the vote histogram of a PATE ensemble trained to predict
an individual’s income, can infer wholly different attributes such as their level of education, even
when the attacker’s instance does not contain any information related to education-level. Why is this
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

