Learning Manifold Dimensions with Conditional
Variational Autoencoders
Yijia Zheng1∗ Tong He2 Yixuan Qiu3 David Wipf2
1
Department of Statistics, Purdue University
2
Amazon Web Services
3
School of Statistics and Management, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
zheng709@purdue.edu, {htong, daviwipf}@amazon.com, qiuyixuan@sufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Although the variational autoencoder (VAE) and its conditional extension (CVAE)
are capable of state-of-the-art results across multiple domains, their precise behavior
is still not fully understood, particularly in the context of data (like images) that
lie on or near a low-dimensional manifold. For example, while prior work has
suggested that the globally optimal VAE solution can learn the correct manifold
dimension, a necessary (but not sufficient) condition for producing samples from
the true data distribution, this has never been rigorously proven. Moreover, it
remains unclear how such considerations would change when various types of
conditioning variables are introduced, or when the data support is extended to a
union of manifolds (e.g., as is likely the case for MNIST digits and related). In
this work, we address these points by first proving that VAE global minima are
indeed capable of recovering the correct manifold dimension. We then extend
this result to more general CVAEs, demonstrating practical scenarios whereby the
conditioning variables allow the model to adaptively learn manifolds of varying
dimension across samples. Our analyses, which have practical implications for
various CVAE design choices, are also supported by numerical results on both
synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Variational autoencoders (VAE) [6, 14] and conditional variants (CVAE) [17] are powerful generative
models that produce competitive results in various domains such as image synthesis [5, 13, 21],
natural language processing [16], time-series forecasting [9, 19], and trajectory prediction [8]. As
a representative example, when equipped with an appropriate deep architecture, VAE models have
recently achieved state-of-the-art performance generating large-scale images [11]. And yet despite
this success, there remain VAE/CVAE behaviors in certain regimes of interest where we lack a precise
understanding or a supporting theoretical foundation.
In particular, when the data lie on or near a low-dimensional manifold, as occurs with real-world
images [12], it is meaningful to have a model that learns the manifold dimension correctly. The
latter can provide insight into core properties of the data and be viewed as a necessary, albeit not
sufficient, condition for producing samples from the true distribution. Although it has been suggested
in prior work [3, 4] that a VAE model can learn the correct manifold dimension when globally
optimized, this has only been formally established under the assumption that the decoder is linear
or affine [2]. And the potential ability to learn the correct manifold dimension becomes even more
nuanced when conditioning variables are introduced. In this regard, a set of discrete conditions (e.g.,
MNIST image digit labels) may correspond with different “slices” through the data space, with each
∗

Work completed during internship at the AWS Shanghai AI Labs.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

