Modeling Human Exploration Through
Resource-Rational Reinforcement Learning

Marcel Binz
MPI for Biological Cybernetics
Tübingen, Germany
marcel.binz@tue.mpg.de

Eric Schulz
MPI for Biological Cybernetics
Tübingen, Germany
eric.schulz@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Equipping artificial agents with useful exploration mechanisms remains a challenge
to this day. Humans, on the other hand, seem to manage the trade-off between
exploration and exploitation effortlessly. In the present article, we put forward the
hypothesis that they accomplish this by making optimal use of limited computational resources. We study this hypothesis by meta-learning reinforcement learning
algorithms that sacrifice performance for a shorter description length (defined as the
number of bits required to implement the given algorithm). The emerging class of
models captures human exploration behavior better than previously considered approaches, such as Boltzmann exploration, upper confidence bound algorithms, and
Thompson sampling. We additionally demonstrate that changing the description
length in our class of models produces the intended effects: reducing description
length captures the behavior of brain-lesioned patients while increasing it mirrors
cognitive development during adolescence.

1

Introduction

Knowing how to efficiently balance between exploring unfamiliar parts of an environment and
exploiting currently available knowledge is an essential ingredient of any intelligent organism. In
theory, it is possible to obtain a Bayes-optimal solution to this exploration-exploitation dilemma
by solving an augmented problem known as a Bayes-adaptive Markov decision process (BAMDP,
Duff, 2003). However, BAMDPs are intractable to solve in general and analytical solutions are only
available for a few special cases [Gittins, 1979]. The intractability of this optimal solution prompted
researchers to develop a body of heuristic strategies [Auer et al., 2002, Kaufmann et al., 2012, Russo
et al., 2017, Russo and Van Roy, 2014]. Most of these heuristics can be divided into two broad
categories: directed and random exploration strategies [Wilson et al., 2014, Schulz and Gershman,
2019]. Directed exploration strategies provide bonus rewards that encourage the agent to visit parts of
the environment that ought to be explored, whereas random exploration strategies inject some form
of stochasticity into the policy.
Having access to a vast amount of existing exploration strategies leads to the question: which of them
should we use when building artificial agents? To answer this question, we may take inspiration from
how people approach the exploration-exploitation dilemma. Human exploration has been studied
extensively in the multi-armed bandit setting [Mehlhorn et al., 2015, Wilson et al., 2021, Brändle et al.,
2021]. Prior work indicates that people substantially deviate from the Bayes-optimal strategy even for
the simplest bandit problems [Steyvers et al., 2009, Zhang and Angela, 2013, Binz and Endres, 2019].
They, however, use uncertainty estimates to intelligently guide their choices through a combination of
both directed and random exploration [Wilson et al., 2014, Gershman, 2018]. The question of when
and why individuals rely on a particular exploration strategy has been under-explored so far.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

