Fairness without Demographics through
Knowledge Distillation

Junyi Chai, Taeuk Jang, Xiaoqian Wang∗
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
{chai28,jang141,joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Most of existing work on fairness assumes available demographic information in
the training set. In practice, due to legal or privacy concerns, when demographic
information is not available in the training set, it is crucial to find alternative
objectives to ensure fairness. Existing work on fairness without demographics
follows Rawlsian Max-Min fairness objectives. However, such constraints could be
too strict to improve group fairness, and could lead to a great decrease in accuracy.
In light of these limitations, in this paper, we propose to solve the problem from a
new perspective, i.e., through knowledge distillation. Our method uses soft label
from an overfitted teacher model as an alternative, and we show from preliminary
experiments that soft labelling is beneficial for improving fairness. We analyze
theoretically the fairness of our method, and we show that our method can be treated
as an error-based reweighing. Experimental results on three datasets show that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives, with notable improvements in
group fairness and with relatively small decrease in accuracy.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has been widely adopted in real-world scenarios that has great social influence, and
fairness in automatic decision-making systems has become an arising concern. It has been shown that
without proper intervention, models can be biased against certain demographic groups (Hardt et al.,
2016; Chouldechova, 2017; Ntoutsi et al., 2020). Due to distributional disparities across different
demographic groups, simply removing sensitive attributes during training does not improve fairness.
Therefore, research on fair classification has received extensive attention, and different methods have
been proposed to improve fairness (Roh et al., 2020a; Choi et al., 2020). These methods usually
focus on specified fairness notions, and most of these works assume access to predefined sensitive
information during training.
In practice, however, due to legal or regulatory concerns, it is often infeasible to collect sensitive
information, which greatly limits the usage of conventional methods on fairness. Besides, in many
real-world applications, we expect the decision-making systems to be fair w.r.t. multiple sensitive
attributes. For example, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) requests creditors to achieve
fairness, without requesting or collecting information about an applicant’s race, color, religion,
national origin, or sex. As most works on fairness assumes only one predefined sensitive attribute, due
to difference in distributional disparities across different sensitive attributes, improving fairness under
one sensitive attribute does not always imply fairness under another sensitive attribute. Therefore, it
is crucial to study the problem of fairness without demographics.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

