Training Scale-Invariant Neural Networks on the
Sphere Can Happen in Three Regimes

Maxim Kodryan1∗, Ekaterina Lobacheva1∗, Maksim Nakhodnov2∗, Dmitry Vetrov1,2
1
HSE University 2 AIRI
Moscow, Russia
mkodryan@hse.ru, elobacheva@hse.ru, nakhodnov@2a2i.org, dvetrov@hse.ru

Abstract
A fundamental property of deep learning normalization techniques, such as batch
normalization, is making the pre-normalization parameters scale invariant. The
intrinsic domain of such parameters is the unit sphere, and therefore their gradient
optimization dynamics can be represented via spherical optimization with varying
effective learning rate (ELR), which was studied previously. However, the varying
ELR may obscure certain characteristics of the intrinsic loss landscape structure. In
this work, we investigate the properties of training scale-invariant neural networks
directly on the sphere using a fixed ELR. We discover three regimes of such training
depending on the ELR value: convergence, chaotic equilibrium, and divergence.
We study these regimes in detail both on a theoretical examination of a toy example
and on a thorough empirical analysis of real scale-invariant deep learning models.
Each regime has unique features and reflects specific properties of the intrinsic
loss landscape, some of which have strong parallels with previous research on
both regular and scale-invariant neural networks training. Finally, we demonstrate
how the discovered regimes are reflected in conventional training of normalized
networks and how they can be leveraged to achieve better optima.

1

Introduction

Most modern neural network architectures contain some type of normalization layers, such as Batch
Normalization (BN) [10] or Layer Normalization [2]. Normalization makes networks partially scaleinvariant (SI), i.e., multiplication of their parameters preceding the normalization layers by a positive
scalar does not change the model’s output. In general, the training dynamics of model parameters can
be viewed from two perspectives: the direction dynamics, i.e., the dynamics of the projection of the
parameters onto the unit sphere, and the norm dynamics. For SI neural networks, the former seems
to be more important since the direction alone determines the output of the scale-invariant function.
However, the latter influences the optimization by changing the effective learning rate (ELR), i.e., the
learning rate (LR) a scale-invariant model would have if it were optimized on the unit sphere.
Many works have studied the effect of scale invariance on training dynamics through the prism of
norm or, equivalently, ELR dynamics [33, 9, 1, 38, 24, 26, 29, 35, 27]. They discovered that during
standard training with weight decay the ELR can change in a non-trivial way and lead to different
optimization dynamics: periodic behavior [27], destabilization [22, 24], or stabilization on some
sphere [26, 35]. However, considering only the ELR dynamics is not enough for a comprehensive
study of the specifics of training normalized neural networks. In particular, the impact of the varying
ELR on training may obscure certain important properties of SI neural networks’ intrinsic domain,
i.e., the unit sphere, thus narrowing our intuition about the loss landscape structure. Therefore, in this
work, we are focused on the direction dynamics. To eliminate the influence of the changing norm on
∗

First three authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

