Does GNN Pretraining Help Molecular
Representation?

Ruoxi Sun
Google Cloud AI Research
ruoxis@google.com

Hanjun Dai
Google Research, Brain Team
hadai@google.com

Adams Wei Yu
Google Research, Brain Team
adamsyuwei@google.com

Abstract
Extracting informative representations of molecules using Graph neural networks
(GNNs) is crucial in AI-driven drug discovery. Recently, the graph research
community has been trying to replicate the success of self-supervised pretraining
in natural language processing, with several successes claimed. However, we find
the benefit brought by self-supervised pretraining on small molecular data can
be negligible in many cases. We conduct thorough ablation studies on the key
components of GNN pretraining, including pretraining objectives, data splitting
methods, input features, pretraining dataset scales, and GNN architectures, to see
how they affect the accuracy of the downstream tasks. Our first important finding
is, self-supervised graph pretraining do not always have statistically significant
advantages over non-pretraining methods in many settings. Secondly, although
noticeable improvement can be observed with additional supervised pretraining,
the improvement may diminish with richer features or more balanced data splits.
Thirdly, hyper-parameters could have larger impacts on accuracy of downstream
tasks than the choice of pretraining tasks, especially when the scales of downstream
tasks are small. Finally, we provide our conjectures where the complexity of
some pretraining methods on small molecules might be insufficient, followed by
empirical evidences on different pretraining datasets.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) , due to their effectiveness, have been adopted to model a wide range
of structured data, such as social networks, road graphs, citation networks, etc. Molecule modeling is
one of these important applications, where it serves as the foundation of biomedicine and nurturing
techniques like novel drug discovery. However, labeling biomedical data are usually time-consuming
and expensive and thus task-specific labels are extremely inadequate. This poses a big challenge to
the field. Recently, inspired by the remarkable success of self-supervised pretraining from natural
language processing [6, 2, 28] and computer vision domains [11, 5], researchers start trying to apply
the pretrain-finetune paradigm to molecule modeling with GNN, hoping to boost the performance of
various molecular tasks by pretraining the model on the enormous unlabeled data. For instance, many
methods have been proposed [32, 29], where significant performance improvements are claimed by
pretraining on large scale datasets [12, 22, 35–37]. Despite of the promising results, we find that
reproducing some of these outstanding gains via graph pretraining can be non-trivial, and sometimes
the improvement largely relies on the experimental setup and the extensive hyper-parameter tuning of
downstream tasks, rather than the design of pretraining objectives. These observations motivate us to
rethink the effectiveness of graph pretraining with unsupervised or self-supervised objectives, and
investigate what factors would influence the effectiveness of self-supervised graph pretraining.
In this paper, we perform systematic studies to assess the performance of popular graph pretraining
objectives on different types of datasets, and exploit various confounding components in experimental
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

