Improved Coresets for Euclidean k-Means

Vincent Cohen-Addad
Google Research

Kasper Green Larsen
Aarhus University

Chris Schwiegelshohn
Aarhus University

David Saulpic
University of Vienna

Omar Ali Sheikh-Omar
Aarhus University

Abstract
Given a set of n points in d dimensions, the Euclidean k-means (resp. Euclidean kmedian) problem consists of finding k centers such that the sum of squared distances
(resp. sum of distances) from every point to its closest center is minimized. The
arguably most popular way of dealing with this problem in the big data setting
is to first compress the data by computing a weighted subset known as a coreset
and then run any algorithm on this subset. The guarantee of the coreset is that for
any candidate solution, the ratio between coreset cost and the cost of the original
instance is less than a (1 ± ε) factor. The current state of the art coreset size is
Õ(min(k 2 · ε−2 , k · ε−4 )) for Euclidean k-means and Õ(min(k 2 · ε−2 , k · ε−3 )) for
Euclidean k-median. The best known lower bound for both problems is Ω(kε−2 ).
In this paper, we improve these bounds to Õ(min(k 3/2 ·ε−2 , k ·ε−4 )) for Euclidean
k-means and Õ(min(k 4/3 · ε−2 , k · ε−4 )) for Euclidean k-median. In particular,
ours is the first provable bound that breaks through the k 2 barrier while retaining
an optimal dependency on ε.

1

Introduction

Coresets have become a staple in the design of algorithms for large data sets. In the most general
setting, a coreset compresses the data set in such a way that for any set of previously specified
candidate queries, the cost of evaluating the query and the cost of the coreset are similar, up to an
arbitrary small distortion.
A popular subject in coreset literature is the Euclidean k-means problem. Here, we are given n
points P in d dimensions and our task is to find a set ofqk points C called centers minimizing
P
Pd
2
cost(P, C) := p∈P minc∈C ∥p − c∥2 , where ∥p − c∥ =
i=1 (pi − ci ) denotes the Euclidean
distance. In this case, a coreset is a weighted subset of the input such that difference between the
cost for any set of k centers C on the coreset and the cost on the original point set P is at most
ε · cost(P, C). Since its initial study by Har-Peled and Mazumdar [2004], the Euclidean k-means
problem has received arguably the most attention out of any coreset problem. The current state of the
art by Cohen-Addad et al. [2022] yields coresets of size Õ(kε−2 min(k, ε−2 )), where Õ(x) hides
multiplicative factors that are polylogarithmic in x. Unfortunately, there is still a gap towards the best
known lower bound of Ω(kε−2 ) by Cohen-Addad et al. [2022].
We thus have the option of obtaining either an optimal dependency on k, at the cost of a suboptimal
dependency on ε−1 , or an optimal dependency on ε−1 , at the cost of a suboptimal dependency on
k. While these bounds suggest that the lower bound is the correct answer, things are not as clear on
closer inspection. Quadratic dependencies on k become necessary for many forms of analysis and so
far, it is unknown how to avoid this loss while retaining an optimal dependency on the remaining

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

