Efficient Risk-Averse Reinforcement Learning

Ido Greenberg
Technion
gido@campus.technion.ac.il
Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
Google Research
ghavamza@google.com

Yinlam Chow
Google Research
yinlamchow@google.com
Shie Mannor
Technion, Nvidia Research
shie@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
In risk-averse reinforcement learning (RL), the goal is to optimize some risk measure of the returns. A risk measure often focuses on the worst returns out of the
agent’s experience. As a result, standard methods for risk-averse RL often ignore
high-return strategies. We prove that under certain conditions this inevitably leads
to a local-optimum barrier, and propose a mechanism we call soft risk to bypass
it. We also devise a novel cross entropy module for sampling, which (1) preserves
risk aversion despite the soft risk; (2) independently improves sample efficiency.
By separating the risk aversion of the sampler and the optimizer, we can sample
episodes with poor conditions, yet optimize with respect to successful strategies.
We combine these two concepts in CeSoR – Cross-entropy Soft-Risk optimization
algorithm – which can be applied on top of any risk-averse policy gradient (PG)
method. We demonstrate improved risk aversion in maze navigation, autonomous
driving, and resource allocation benchmarks, including in scenarios where standard risk-averse PG completely fails. Our results and CeSoR implementation are
available on Github. The stand-alone cross entropy module is available on PyPI.

1

Introduction

Risk-averse reinforcement learning (RL) is important for high-stake applications, such as driving, robotic surgery, and finance [Vittori et al., 2020]. In contrast to risk-neutral RL, it optimizes
a risk measure of the return random variable, rather than its expectation. A popular risk measure is the Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR), defined as CVaRα (R) = E [R | R ≤ qα (R)], where
qα (R) = inf{x | FR (x) ≥ α} is the α-quantile of the random variable R and FR is its CDF. Intuitively, CVaR measures the expected return below a specific quantile α, also termed the risk level.
CVaR optimization is widely researched in the RL community, e.g., using adjusted policy gradient
approaches (CVaR-PG) [Tamar et al., 2015b, Hiraoka et al., 2019]. In addition, CVaR is a coherent
risk measure, and its optimization is equivalent to a robust optimization problem [Chow et al., 2015].
Since risk-averse RL aims to avoid the hazardous parts of the environment (e.g., dangerous areas
in navigation), CVaR-PG algorithms typically sample a batch of N trajectories (episodes), and then
optimize w.r.t. the mean of the αN trajectories with worst returns [Tamar et al., 2015b, Rajeswaran
et al., 2017]. This approach suffers from two major drawbacks: (i) 1 − α of the batch is wasted and
excluded from the optimization (where often 0.01 ≤ α ≤ 0.05), leading to sample inefficiency; (ii)
focusing on the worst episodes inherently overlooks good agent strategies corresponding to high
returns – a phenomenon we refer to as the blindness to success.
An illustrative example – the Guarded Maze: Consider the Guarded Maze benchmark (visualized
in Figure 1d). The goal is to reach the target zone (a constant location marked in green), resulting in
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

