Deep Surrogate Assisted Generation of Environments

Varun Bhatt∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
vsbhatt@usc.edu

Bryon Tjanaka∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
tjanaka@usc.edu

Matthew C. Fontaine∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
mfontain@usc.edu

Stefanos Nikolaidis
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
nikolaid@usc.edu

Abstract
Recent progress in reinforcement learning (RL) has started producing generally
capable agents that can solve a distribution of complex environments. These agents
are typically tested on fixed, human-authored environments. On the other hand,
quality diversity (QD) optimization has been proven to be an effective component of
environment generation algorithms, which can generate collections of high-quality
environments that are diverse in the resulting agent behaviors. However, these
algorithms require potentially expensive simulations of agents on newly generated
environments. We propose Deep Surrogate Assisted Generation of Environments
(DSAGE), a sample-efficient QD environment generation algorithm that maintains
a deep surrogate model for predicting agent behaviors in new environments. Results
in two benchmark domains show that DSAGE significantly outperforms existing
QD environment generation algorithms in discovering collections of environments
that elicit diverse behaviors of a state-of-the-art RL agent and a planning agent.
Our source code and videos are available at https://dsagepaper.github.io/

1

Introduction

We present an efficient method of automatically generating a collection of environments that elicit
diverse agent behaviors. As a motivating example, consider deploying a robot agent at scale in a
variety of home environments. The robot should generalize by performing robustly not only in test
homes, but in any end user’s home. To validate agent generalization, the test environments should
have good coverage for the robot agent. However, obtaining such coverage may be difficult, as the
generated environments would depend on the application domain, e.g. kitchen or living room, and on
the specific agent we want to test, since different agents exhibit different behaviors.
To enable generalization of autonomous agents to new environments with differing levels of complexity, previous work on open-ended learning [1, 2] has integrated the environment generation and the
agent training processes. The interplay between the two processes acts as a natural curriculum for the
agents to learn robust skills that generalize to new, unseen environments [3–5]. The performance of
these agents has been evaluated either in environments from the training distribution [1, 2, 5] or in
suites of manually authored environments [3, 6, 4].
As a step towards testing generalizable agents, there has been increasing interest in competitions [7, 8]
that require agents to generalize to new game layouts. Despite the recent progress of deep learning
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

