Scalable Infomin Learning

1

Yanzhi Chen1 , Weihao Sun2 , Yingzhen Li3 , Adrian Weller1,4
University of Cambridge, 2 Rutgers University, 3 Imperial College London, 4 Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
The task of infomin learning aims to learn a representation with high utility while
being uninformative about a specified target, with the latter achieved by minimising the mutual information between the representation and the target. It has broad
applications, ranging from training fair prediction models against protected attributes, to unsupervised learning with disentangled representations. Recent works
on infomin learning mainly use adversarial training, which involves training a
neural network to estimate mutual information or its proxy and thus is slow and
difficult to optimise. Drawing on recent advances in slicing techniques, we propose a new infomin learning approach, which uses a novel proxy metric to mutual
information. We further derive an accurate and analytically computable approximation to this proxy metric, thereby removing the need of constructing neural
network-based mutual information estimators. Experiments on algorithmic fairness, disentangled representation learning and domain adaptation verify that our
method can effectively remove unwanted information with limited time budget.

1

Introduction

Learning representations that are uninformative about some target but still useful for downstream
applications is an important task in machine learning with many applications in areas including
algorithmic fairness [1, 2, 3, 4], disentangled representation learning [5, 6, 7, 8], information bottleneck [9, 10], and invariant representation learning [11, 12, 13, 14].
A popular method for the above task is adversarial training [1, 3, 4, 7, 15, 2, 11], where two neural
networks, namely the encoder and the adversary, are trained jointly to compete with each other.
The encoder’s goal is to learn a representation with high utility but contains no information about
the target. The adversary, on the contrary, tries to recover the information about the target from the
learned representation as much as possible. This leads to a minmax game similar to that in generative
adversarial networks [16]. Adversarial training is effective with a strong adversary, however, it
is often challenging to train the adversary thoroughly in practice, due to time constraints and/or
optimisation difficulties [17, 18]. In fact, recent studies have revealed that adversarial approaches
may not faithfully produce an infomin representation in some cases [19, 20, 18, 21, 22]. This
motivates us to seek a good, adversarial training-free alternative for scalable infomin learning.
In this work, we propose a new method for infomin learning which is almost as powerful as using
a strong adversary but is highly scalable. Our method is inspired by recent advances in information
theory which proposes to estimate mutual information in the sliced space [23]. We highlight the
following contributions:
• We show that for infomin learning, an accurate estimate of mutual information (or its bound) is
unnecessary: testing and optimising statistical independence in some sliced spaces is sufficient;
• We develop an analytical approximation to such sliced independence test, along with a scalable
algorithm for infomin learning based on this approximation. No adversarial training is required.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

