Benchmarking and Analyzing 3D Human Pose and
Shape Estimation Beyond Algorithms
Hui En Pang1,2 , Zhongang Cai1,2 , Lei Yang2 , Tianwei Zhang1 , Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research
{huien001, tianwei.zhang, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
{caizhongang, yanglei}@sensetime.com

Abstract
3D human pose and shape estimation (a.k.a. “human mesh recovery”) has achieved
substantial progress. Researchers mainly focus on the development of novel algorithms, while less attention has been paid to other critical factors involved. This
could lead to less optimal baselines, hindering the fair and faithful evaluations of
newly designed methodologies. To address this problem, this work presents the first
comprehensive benchmarking study from three under-explored perspectives beyond
algorithms. 1) Datasets. An analysis on 31 datasets reveals the distinct impacts
of data samples: datasets featuring critical attributes (i.e. diverse poses, shapes,
camera characteristics, backbone features) are more effective. Strategical selection and combination of high-quality datasets can yield a significant boost to the
model performance. 2) Backbones. Experiments with 10 backbones, ranging from
CNNs to transformers, show the knowledge learnt from a proximity task is readily
transferable to human mesh recovery. 3) Training strategies. Proper augmentation
techniques and loss designs are crucial. With the above findings, we achieve a
PA-MPJPE of 47.3 mm on the 3DPW test set with a relatively simple model.
More importantly, we provide strong baselines for fair comparisons of algorithms,
and recommendations for building effective training configurations in the future.
Codebase is available at https://github.com/smplbody/hmr-benchmarks.

1

Introduction

3D human pose and shape estimation (a.k.a. “human mesh recovery”1 ) has attracted a lot of interest
due to its vast applications in robotics, computer graphics, AR/VR, etc. Common approaches take
monocular RGB images [33, 30, 35, 59] or videos [32, 31, 48] as input to regress the parameters of a
human body model. One of the most popular human parametric models is SMPL [47]. Over the years,
a substantial amount of novel algorithms have been proposed [36, 18, 35, 24, 8, 54, 29, 37, 12, 34, 33],
which significantly improve the recovery accuracy.
Despite the advances in mesh recovery algorithms, prior works rarely systematically investigated other
fundamental factors that are also crucial to the model performance. (1) Different selections of datasets
and their contributions yield distinct model performance. This is especially prominent in human
mesh recovery as datasets containing different label modalities (2D keypoints, 3D keypoints, mask,
SMPL parameters) are usually combined for training. (2) The mesh recovery model is commonly
learnt from a pretrained backbone. The quality of the backbone (e.g., network architecture, weight
initialization) is a primary determinant of the downstream task. (3) The performance of the mesh
recovery model is also highly sensitive to the training strategies, including data augmentation and
training loss design. It is still unclear how these factors can affect the model performance and what
are the optimal training configurations to obtain good mesh recovery models.
1

The two terms are used interchangeably in this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

