Effects of Safety State Augmentation on
Safe Exploration

Aivar Sootla
Byju’s Lab
aivar.sootla@gmail.com

Alexander I. Cowen-Rivers
Technische Universität Darmstadt
mc rivers@icloud.com

Jun Wang
University College London
jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Haitham Bou Ammar
Huawei R&D
haitham.ammar@huawei.com

Abstract
Safe exploration is a challenging and important problem in model-free reinforcement learning (RL). Often the safety cost is sparse and unknown, which unavoidably
leads to constraint violations — a phenomenon ideally to be avoided in safetycritical applications. We tackle this problem by augmenting the state-space with a
safety state, which is nonnegative if and only if the constraint is satisfied. The value
of this state also serves as a distance toward constraint violation, while its initial
value indicates the available safety budget. This idea allows us to derive policies
for scheduling the safety budget during training. We call our approach Simmer
(Safe policy IMproveMEnt for RL) to reflect the careful nature of these schedules.
We apply this idea to two safe RL problems: RL with constraints imposed on an
average cost, and RL with constraints imposed on a cost with probability one. Our
experiments suggest that “simmering” a safe algorithm can improve safety during
training for both settings. We further show that Simmer can stabilize training and
improve the performance of safe RL with average constraints.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a framework for sequential decision-making that makes minimal
prior assumptions about the environment where the agent has to act or make the decisions [45]. The
policy for taking actions is learned through interactions with the environment over time. RL has seen
recent successes in playing video games with a computer [32], board games with a human [41] and
is on a path toward real-life applications such as video compression [46], and plasma control [20].
There are still, however, some unsolved challenges for a successful deployment of RL such as
efficient learning of constrained or safe Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) [4]. The constraints
are typically modeled by a discounted sum of nonnegative costs that have to be smaller than some
pre-defined value we call the safety budget.
Exploration is a crucial component of RL and is still an active area of research [25, 40, 34]. In the
context of safe RL, while exploring, we do not want to incur the safety cost and constraint violations,
making exploration a harder task. We can distinguish two main research directions for minimizing
constraint violation in safe RL: a model-based approach (which includes partially and fully known environments) and a model-free approach. In the model-free case, which we focus on, the agent would almost certainly visit unsafe regions to learn the safe policy, and therefore it is next to impossible to avoid
constraint violations completely. The general goal, in this case, is to minimize the number of violations
during training. For example, [10] use a conservative safety critic and rejection sampling to choose
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

