Symmetry-induced Disentanglement on Graphs

Giangiacomo Mercatali∗
University of Manchester

André Freitas
Idiap Research Institute
University of Manchester

Vikas Garg
YaiYai Ltd and Aalto University
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Learning disentangled representations is important for unraveling the underlying
complex interactions between latent generative factors. Disentanglement has been
formalized using a symmetry-centric notion for unstructured spaces, however,
graphs have eluded a similarly rigorous treatment. We fill this gap with a new
notion of conditional symmetry for disentanglement, and leverage tools from Lie
algebras to encode graph properties into subgroups using suitable adaptations of
generative models such as Variational Autoencoders. Unlike existing works on
disentanglement, the proposed models segregate the latent space into uncoupled
and entangled parts. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets suggest that these
models can learn effective disengaged representations, and improve performance
on downstream tasks such as few-shot classification and molecular generation.

1

Introduction

Disentanglement represents a fundamental desideratum in learning with limited supervision because
it captures information about the salient (or explanatory) factors of variation in the data, and isolates
information about each specific factor in only a few dimensions, thus unraveling the interactions
underlying complex data [2, 59]. Disentangled representations have often been deemed responsible
for providing neural models with the ability to improve performance on real-world downstream
tasks [2, 20, 36, 58, 59]. Empirically, they have been shown to enable, or facilitate, critical properties
such as sample efficiency [21] and generalization [32, 42, 69].
An interesting perspective on disentanglement has been recently proposed by Higgins et al. [20].
Specifically, they advocate viewing disentanglement as decomposition of the latent space of embeddings into subspaces, each of which can be transformed independently under the action of a
single subgroup specific to the subspace, without affecting others. These subgroups arise, in turn,
from the decomposition of a symmetry group. This formalism bestows several benefits, e.g., it
(a) aligns with the idea that auxiliary information can be exploited for imposing a structure on the
latent space [25, 40], and (b) leads to a rigorous theoretical framework for analyzing disentangled
models [64, 70], e.g., those based on Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [27, 50].
While symmetry groups provide a suitable tool both for formalizing [20] and learning [57, 64, 70]
disentangled representations in unstructured domains, these techniques have not been investigated
in the context of more general and complex data such as graphs. Furthermore, most works on
disentanglement for graphs [1, 16, 31, 35, 38, 65] are not designed for generative settings, and the
existing deep generative models (DGMs) for graph disentanglement such as [10, 17, 56] do not
consider group symmetries. Note that differently from other definitions of disentanglement [2, 9, 11],
leveraging group symmetries for disentanglement may unravel fundamental connections across
several approaches based on graph neural networks (GNNs), i.e., the state-of-the-art models for
embedding graphs [3, 5, 8, 13, 15, 39, 63].
∗

first-name.last-name@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

