Mind the Gap: Understanding the Modality Gap in
Multi-modal Contrastive Representation Learning
Weixin Liang⇤
Stanford University
wxliang@stanford.edu

Yuhui Zhang ⇤
Stanford University
yuhuiz@stanford.edu

Serena Yeung
Stanford University
syyeung@stanford.edu

Yongchan Kwon ⇤
Columbia University
yk3012@columbia.edu

James Zou
Stanford University
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
We present modality gap, an intriguing geometric phenomenon of the representation
space of multi-modal models. Specifically, we show that different data modalities
(e.g. images and text) are embedded at arm’s length in their shared representation
in multi-modal models such as CLIP. Our systematic analysis demonstrates that
this gap is caused by a combination of model initialization and contrastive learning
optimization. In model initialization, we show empirically and theoretically that
the representation of a common deep neural network is restricted to a narrow cone.
As a consequence, in a multi-modal model with two encoders, the representations
of the two modalities are clearly apart when the model is initialized. During
optimization, contrastive learning keeps the different modalities separated by a
certain distance, which is influenced by the temperature parameter in the loss
function. Our experiments further demonstrate that varying the modality gap
distance has a significant impact in improving the model’s downstream zeroshot classification performance and fairness. Our code and data are available at
https://modalitygap.readthedocs.io/

1

Introduction

Multi-modal models map inputs from different data modalities (e.g. image and text) into a shared
representation space (Figure 1 (a)). It has garnered tremendous interest and excitement as a framework
for data integration. As a prominent example pre-trained on a web-scale collection of images and
natural language, OpenAI’s CLIP model [39], has learned diverse visual concepts that can readily be
transferred to downstream tasks through prompting: one can perform “zero-shot” visual classification
by simply providing the names of the visual categories to be recognized.
In this work, we present the modality gap phenomenon: As shown in Figure 1 (b), CLIP’s image
embeddings and text embeddings are located in two completely separate regions of the embedding
space. We find this phenomenon consistently across various multi-modal models, covering texts,
natural images [39], videos [50], medical images [53], and amino-acid sequences [11]. Interestingly,
this phenomenon still holds even when we embed using multi-modal models with random weights
(Figure 1 (c)). While it might seem reasonable to attribute the gap to differences in data distributions
or to the different encoder architectures, we showed that these factors are not the fundamental cause.
This paper provides a three-part explanation for the modality gap phenomenon. (1) The general
inductive bias of deep neural architecture creates a cone effect: The effective embedding space is
⇤

These three authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

