When are Offline Two-Player Zero-Sum Markov
Games Solvable?
Qiwen Cui
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Engineering
University of Washington
qwcui@cs.washington.edu

Simon S. Du
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Engineering
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We study what dataset assumption permits solving offline two-player zero-sum
Markov games. In stark contrast to the offline single-agent Markov decision process, we show that the single strategy concentration assumption is insufficient
for learning the Nash equilibrium (NE) strategy in offline two-player zero-sum
Markov games. On the other hand, we propose a new assumption named unilateral concentration and design a pessimism-type algorithm that is provably efficient
under this assumption. In addition, we show that the unilateral concentration assumption is necessary for learning an NE strategy. Furthermore, our algorithm
can achieve minimax sample complexity without any modification for two widely
studied settings: dataset with uniform concentration assumption and turn-based
Markov games. Our work serves as an important initial step towards understanding offline multi-agent reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Promising empirical advances have been achieved in reinforcement learning (RL), including mastering the game of Go [Silver et al., 2016], Poker [Brown et al., 2017], real-time strategy games
[Vinyals et al., 2019] and robotic control [Kober et al., 2013]. Notably, many of these successes
lie in the domain of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). MARL is about multiple agents
interacting in a shared environment, and each of them aims to maximize its own long-term reward.
During the learning process, each agent not only needs to identify the environment dynamic but also
needs to compete/cooperate with other agents. One important subarea of MARL is offline MARL. In
many practical scenarios, we only have access to the offline data or it is too expensive to frequently
change the policy [Zhang et al., 2021a]. While there are plenty of empirical works on offline MARL
[Pan et al., 2021, Jiang and Lu, 2021], the theoretical understanding is still very limited. In this
work, we take an initial step towards understanding when offline MARL is provably solvable.
We consider two-player zero-sum Markov games, where two players simultaneously select actions
over multiple time steps in a Markovian environment and the first player aims to maximize the total
reward while the second player aims to minimize it. In the offline setting, we have access to a fixed
dataset collected by a (possibly unknown) exploration policy and the target is to find a (near-)Nash
equilibrium (NE) strategy of the underlying two-player zero-sum Markov game.
One of the main difficulties in offline RL is distribution shift, i.e., the dataset distribution is different
from the distribution induced by the optimal policy. It is important to understand what is the minimal
dataset distribution assumption that permits offline RL. For single-agent offline RL, it is shown
that the pessimism principle allows policy optimization with single policy concentration, i.e. the
dataset only covers the optimal policy [Jin et al., 2021b, Zanette et al., 2021, Yin and Wang, 2021,
Rashidinejad et al., 2021]. This assumption is necessary as it is impossible to learn the optimal
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

