VF-PS: How to Select Important Participants in
Vertical Federated Learning, Efficiently and Securely?

Jiawei Jiang1,2,3 Lukas Burkhalter2 Fangcheng Fu4∗ Bolin Ding5
Bo Du1 Anwar Hithnawi2 Bo Li6 Ce Zhang2
1
School of Computer Science, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
2
ETH Zürich 3 OceanBase, Ant Group 4 Peking University 5 Alibaba Group
6
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
{jiawei.jiang, dubo}@whu.edu.cn
{lukas.burkhalter, anwar.hithnawi, ce.zhang}@inf.ethz.ch
ccchengff@pku.edu.cn bolin.ding@alibaba-inc.com lbo@illinois.edu

Abstract
Vertical Federated Learning (VFL), that trains federated models over vertically
partitioned data, has emerged as an important learning paradigm. However, existing
VFL methods are facing two challenges: (1) scalability when # participants grows
to even modest scale and (2) diminishing return w.r.t. # participants: not all
participants are equally important and many will not introduce quality improvement
in a large consortium. Inspired by these two challenges, in this paper, we ask: How
can we select l out of m participants, where l ≪ m, that are most important?
We call this problem Vertically Federated Participant Selection, and model it with
a principled mutual information-based view. Our first technical contribution is VFMINE—a Vertically Federated Mutual INformation Estimator—that uses one of
the most celebrated algorithms in database theory—Fagin’s algorithm as a building
block. Our second contribution is to further optimize VF-MINE to enable VF-PS,
a group testing-based participant selection framework. We empirically show that
vertically federated participation selection can be orders of magnitude faster than
training a full-fledged VFL model, while being able to identify the most important
subset of participants that often lead to a VFL model of similar quality.

1

Introduction

The quality of machine learning models heavily relies on the quality and volume of available data.
As our understanding of machine learning shifts towards such a data-centric view, mechanisms of
making data available to machine learning have attracted intensive interests [1, 2]. Towards this goal,
Federated Learning [3–5] is an emerging research area that focuses on training a single ML model
using all data available in a federated “data consortium” in a secure and privacy-preserving way.
Vertical Federated Learning. In this paper, we focus on a specific federated learning scenario:
Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) [5]. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), the VFL setting involves a
data consortium that consists of m participants P = {P1 , ..., Pm }. Each participant holds a disjoint
subset of features associated with the same entity (e.g., different hospitals holding medical records
of the same patient but for different types of diseases). The goal of vertical federated learning is to
train a single ML model over the joint feature space, in a secure and privacy-preserving way, without
communicating their data to each other [6–10].
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

