Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
via Gentle Teaching Assistant
Ying Jin1
1

Jiaqi Wang2

Dahua Lin1,2

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{jy021,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, wjqdev@gmail.com

Abstract
Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation aims at training the segmentation model
with limited labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data. To effectively leverage the unlabeled data, pseudo labeling, along with the teacher-student framework,
is widely adopted in semi-supervised semantic segmentation. Though proved to
be effective, this paradigm suffers from incorrect pseudo labels which inevitably
exist and are taken as auxiliary training data. To alleviate the negative impact
of incorrect pseudo labels, we delve into the current Semi-Supervised Semantic
Segmentation frameworks. We argue that the unlabeled data with pseudo labels
can facilitate the learning of representative features in the feature extractor, but
it is unreliable to supervise the mask predictor. Motivated by this consideration,
we propose a novel framework, Gentle Teaching Assistant (GTA-Seg) to disentangle the effects of pseudo labels on feature extractor and mask predictor of the
student model. Specifically, in addition to the original teacher-student framework,
our method introduces a teaching assistant network which directly learns from
pseudo labels generated by the teacher network. The gentle teaching assistant
(GTA) is coined gentle since it only transfers the beneficial feature representation
knowledge in the feature extractor to the student model in an Exponential Moving
Average (EMA) manner, protecting the student model from the negative influences
caused by unreliable pseudo labels in the mask predictor. The student model is
also supervised by reliable labeled data to train an accurate mask predictor, further
facilitating feature representation. Extensive experiment results on benchmark
datasets validate that our method shows competitive performance against previous
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/Jin-Ying/GTA-Seg.

1

Introduction

The rapid development in deep learning has brought significant advances to semantic segmentation [29,
5, 52] which is one of the most fundamental tasks in computer vision. Existing methods often heavily
rely on numerous pixel-wise annotated data, which is labor-exhausting and expensive. Towards
this burden, great interests have been aroused in Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation, which
attempts to train a semantic segmentation model with limited labeled data and a large amount of
unlabeled data.
The key challenge in semi-supervised learning is to effectively leverage the abundant unlabeled data.
One widely adopted strategy is pseudo labeling [27]. As shown in Figure 1, the model assigns pseudo
labels to unlabeled data based on the model predictions on-the-fly. These data with pseudo labels
will be taken as auxiliary supervision during training to boost performance. To further facilitate
Corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

