Discovering and Overcoming Limitations of
Noise-engineered Data-free Knowledge Distillation

Piyush Raikwar∗
ABV-IIITM, Gwalior, India
imt_2017062@iiitm.ac.in

Deepak Mishra
IIT Jodhpur, India
dmishra@iitj.ac.in

Abstract
Distillation in neural networks using only the samples randomly drawn from a
Gaussian distribution is possibly the most straightforward solution one can think of
for the complex problem of knowledge transfer from one network (teacher) to the
other (student). If successfully done, it can eliminate the requirement of teacher’s
training data for knowledge distillation and avoid often arising privacy concerns in
sensitive applications such as healthcare. There have been some recent attempts
at Gaussian noise-based data-free knowledge distillation, however, none of them
offer a consistent or reliable solution. We identify the shift in the distribution of
hidden layer activation as the key limiting factor, which occurs when Gaussian
noise is fed to the teacher network instead of the accustomed training data. We
propose a simple solution to mitigate this shift and show that for vision tasks, such
as classification, it is possible to achieve a performance close to the teacher by just
using the samples randomly drawn from a Gaussian distribution. We validate our
approach on CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHN, and Food101 datasets. We further show
that in situations of sparsely available original data for distillation, the proposed
Gaussian noise-based knowledge distillation method can outperform the distillation
using the available data with a large margin. Our work lays the foundation for
further research in the direction of noise-engineered knowledge distillation using
random samples.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are an excellent choice for various real-world computer vision tasks. However,
their high computational and space complexity becomes a bottleneck when it comes to deployment
on resource-constrained devices. To address this issue, the idea of Knowledge Distillation (KD),
proposed by [1], has recently gained significant attention. It enables the transfer of knowledge from a
large neural network to a comparatively smaller one. The lightweight small neural network, often
referred to as student, gains the information learned by the over-parameterized large model, referred
to as teacher, and delivers a similar or sometimes even better performance [2].
Traditionally, in KD, original data is passed through the accurate teacher model to collect soft
labels, and subsequently, these soft labels are used to supervise the student [3]. However, in certain
applications such as medical, it often becomes impossible to release the original data due to security
concerns, sensitive information, or storage restrictions. In contrast, a trained model (teacher) usually
does not hold a specific record or specific piece of information thus, no certainty or validity of the
information extracted through a neural network can be guaranteed, thereby making them safer for
public release. However, these models certainly contain information in the parameterized form for
performing the downstream tasks, such as classification or object detection.
∗

Work done during an internship at IIT Jodhpur. Presently at CERN, Geneva, CH (piyush.raikwar@cern.ch)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

