Vision Transformers provably learn spatial structure

Samy Jelassi
Princeton University
sjelassi@princeton.edu

Michael E. Sander
ENS, CNRS
michael.sander@ens.fr

Yuanzhi Li
Carnegie Mellon University
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved comparable or superior performance
than Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) in computer vision. This empirical
breakthrough is even more remarkable since, in contrast to CNNs, ViTs do not
embed any visual inductive bias of spatial locality. Yet, recent works have shown
that while minimizing their training loss, ViTs specifically learn spatially localized
patterns. This raises a central question: how do ViTs learn these patterns by
solely minimizing their training loss using gradient-based methods from random
initialization? In this paper, we provide some theoretical justification of this
phenomenon. We propose a spatially structured dataset and a simplified ViT model.
In this model, the attention matrix solely depends on the positional encodings.
We call this mechanism the positional attention mechanism. On the theoretical
side, we consider a binary classification task and show that while the learning
problem admits multiple solutions that generalize, our model implicitly learns the
spatial structure of the dataset while generalizing: we call this phenomenon patch
association. We prove that patch association helps to sample-efficiently transfer to
downstream datasets that share the same structure as the pre-training one but differ
in the features. Lastly, we empirically verify that a ViT with positional attention
performs similarly to the original one on CIFAR-10/100, SVHN and ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Transformers are deep learning models built on self-attention [65], and in the past several years
they have increasingly formed the backbone for state-of-the-art models in domains ranging from
Natural Language Processing (NLP) [65, 23] to computer vision [24], reinforcement learning [13, 38],
program synthesis [5] and symbolic tasks [44]. Beyond their remarkable performance, several works
reported the ability of transformers to simultaneously minimize their training loss and learn inductive
biases tailored to specific datasets e.g. in computer vision [55], in NLP [10, 67] or in mathematical
reasoning [73]. In this paper, we focus on computer vision where convolutions are considered to be
an adequate and biologically plausible inductive bias since they capture local spatial information [27]
by imposing a sparse local connectivity pattern. This seems intuitively reasonable: nearby pixels
encode the presence of small scale features, whose patterns in turn determine more abstract features
at longer and longer length scales. Several seminal works [17, 24, 55] empirically show that although
randomly initialized, the positional encodings in Vision transformers (ViTs) [24] actually learn this
local connectivity: closer patches have more similar positional encodings, as shown in Figure 1a.
A priori, learning such spatial structure is surprising. Indeed, in contrast to convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), ViTs are not built with the inductive bias of local connectivity and weight sharing.
They start by replacing an image by a collection of D patches pX1 , . . . , XD q P RdˆD , each of
dimension d. While each Xi represents (an embedding of) a spatially localized portion of the original
image, the relative positions of the patches Xi in the image are disregarded. Instead, relative spatial
information is supplied through image-independent positional encodings P “ pp1 , . . . , pD q P RdˆD .
Unlike CNNs, each layer of a ViT then learns, via trainable self-attention, a non-local set of filters
that non-linearly depend on both the values of all patches Xj and their positional encodings pj .
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

