LION: Latent Point Diffusion Models
for 3D Shape Generation

Xiaohui Zeng1,2,3,∗
Zan Gojcic1
1

Arash Vahdat1

Or Litany1
NVIDIA

2

Francis Williams1

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

University of Toronto

3

Karsten Kreis1

Vector Institute

{xzeng,avahdat,fwilliams,zgojcic,olitany,sfidler,kkreis}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models (DDMs) have shown promising results in 3D point
cloud synthesis. To advance 3D DDMs and make them useful for digital artists, we
require (i) high generation quality, (ii) flexibility for manipulation and applications
such as conditional synthesis and shape interpolation, and (iii) the ability to output
smooth surfaces or meshes. To this end, we introduce the hierarchical Latent Point
Diffusion Model (LION) for 3D shape generation. LION is set up as a variational
autoencoder (VAE) with a hierarchical latent space that combines a global shape
latent representation with a point-structured latent space. For generation, we train
two hierarchical DDMs in these latent spaces. The hierarchical VAE approach
boosts performance compared to DDMs that operate on point clouds directly,
while the point-structured latents are still ideally suited for DDM-based modeling.
Experimentally, LION achieves state-of-the-art generation performance on multiple
ShapeNet benchmarks. Furthermore, our VAE framework allows us to easily use
LION for different relevant tasks: LION excels at multimodal shape denoising and
voxel-conditioned synthesis, and it can be adapted for text- and image-driven 3D
generation. We also demonstrate shape autoencoding and latent shape interpolation,
and we augment LION with modern surface reconstruction techniques to generate
smooth 3D meshes. We hope that LION provides a powerful tool for artists
working with 3D shapes due to its high-quality generation, flexibility, and surface
reconstruction. Project page and code: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/LION.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of 3D shapes has extensive applications in 3D content creation and has become
an active area of research [1–52]. However, to be useful as a tool for digital artists, generative models
of 3D shapes have to fulfill several criteria: (i) Generated shapes need to be realistic and of highquality without artifacts. (ii) The model should enable flexible and interactive use and refinement: For
example, a user may want to refine a generated shape and synthesize versions with varying details.
Or an artist may provide a coarse or noisy input shape, thereby guiding the model to produce multiple
realistic high-quality outputs. Similarly, a user may want to interpolate different shapes. (iii) The
model should output smooth meshes, which are the standard representation in most graphics software.
Existing 3D generative models build on various frameworks, including generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1–23], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [24–30], normalizing flows [31–34], autoregressive models [35–38], and more [39–44]. Most recently, denoising diffusion models (DDMs)
∗

Work done during internship at NVIDIA.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

