Variational inference via Wasserstein gradient flows

Marc Lambert
DGA, INRIA,
Ecole Normale Supérieure,
PSL Research University
marc.lambert@inria.fr

Sinho Chewi
MIT
schewi@mit.edu

Silvère Bonnabel
MINES Paris PSL,
Université de la Nouvelle-Calédonie
silvere.bonnabel@minesparis.psl.eu

Francis Bach
INRIA,
Ecole Normale Supérieure,
PSL Research University
francis.bach@inria.fr
Philippe Rigollet
MIT
rigollet@math.mit.edu

Abstract
Along with Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, variational inference (VI)
has emerged as a central computational approach to large-scale Bayesian inference.
Rather than sampling from the true posterior π, VI aims at producing a simple but
effective approximation π̂ to π for which summary statistics are easy to compute.
However, unlike the well-studied MCMC methodology, algorithmic guarantees for
VI are still relatively less well-understood. In this work, we propose principled
methods for VI, in which π̂ is taken to be a Gaussian or a mixture of Gaussians,
which rest upon the theory of gradient flows on the Bures–Wasserstein space of
Gaussian measures. Akin to MCMC, it comes with strong theoretical guarantees
when π is log-concave.

1

Introduction

This work brings together three active research areas: variational inference, variational Kalman
filtering, and gradient flows on the Wasserstein space.
Variational inference. The development of large-scale Bayesian methods has fueled the need for
fast and scalable methods to approximate complex distributions. More specifically, Bayesian methodology typically generates a high-dimensional posterior distribution π ∝ exp(−V ) that is known
only up to normalizing constants, making the computation even of simple summary statistics such as
the mean and covariance a major computational hurdle. To overcome this limitation, two distinct
computational approaches are largely favored. The first approach consists of Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods that rely on carefully constructed Markov chains which (approximately)
converge to π. For example, the Langevin diffusion
√
dXt = −∇V (Xt ) dt + 2 dBt ,
(1)
where (Bt )t≥0 denotes standard Brownian motion on Rd , admits π as a stationary distribution.
Crucially, the Langevin diffusion can be discretized and implemented without knowledge of the
normalizing constant of π, leading to practical algorithms for Bayesian inference. Recent theoretical
efforts have produced sharp non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for algorithms based on the
Langevin diffusion (or variants thereof), with many results known when π is strongly log-concave or
satisfies isoperimetric assumptions [see, e.g., Durmus et al., 2019, Shen and Lee, 2019, Vempala and
Wibisono, 2019, Chen et al., 2020, Dalalyan and Riou-Durand, 2020, Chewi et al., 2021, Lee et al.,
2021, Ma et al., 2021, Wu et al., 2022].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

