Online Agnostic Multiclass Boosting
Vinod Raman
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
vkraman@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48018
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
Boosting is a fundamental approach in machine learning that enjoys both strong
theoretical and practical guarantees. At a high-level, boosting algorithms cleverly
aggregate weak learners to generate predictions with arbitrarily high accuracy. In
this way, boosting algorithms convert weak learners into strong ones. Recently,
Brukhim et al. [6] extended boosting to the online agnostic binary classification
setting. A key ingredient in their approach is a clean and simple reduction to
online convex optimization, one that efficiently converts an arbitrary online convex
optimizer to an agnostic online booster. In this work, we extend this reduction to
multiclass problems and give the first boosting algorithm for online agnostic mutliclass classification. Our reduction also enables the construction of algorithms for
statistical agnostic, online realizable, and statistical realizable multiclass boosting.

1

Introduction

Boosting is a fundamental technique in machine learning that cleverly aggregates the predictions of
weak learners to produce a strong learner. Originally studied in the batch (realizable) PAC learning setting for binary classification, boosting has now been extended to a wide variety of settings, including
multiclass classification, online learning, and agnostic learning. Recently, Brukhim et al. [6] extended
boosting to online agnostic binary classification, marking the completion of boosting algorithms for
all four regimes of statistical/online and agnostic/realizable binary classification. However, less can
be said about multiclass classification, where boosting algorithms are only well studied under the
assumption of realizability. Designing online agnostic multiclass boosting algorithms is important for
several reasons. First, realizability is a very strong assumption in real-life: it requires the existence
of an expert that perfectly labels the data. Second, the vast majority of classification tasks require
more than two labels, a prominent example being image classification. Lastly, modern machine
learning tasks often require sequential processing of data, making the design and development of
online algorithms increasingly relevant. In this work we fill this gap in literature by studying online
agnostic boosting for multiclass problems.
1.1

Main Results

We give the first weak learning conditions and algorithms for online agnostic multiclass boosting. A
key idea of our algorithms is a reduction from boosting to online convex optimization (OCO), an
idea borrowed from Brukhim et al. [6]. As a consequence of this reduction, we are also able to give
algorithms for the three other settings of statistical agnostic, online realizable, and statistical realizable
multiclass boosting. Finally, we give empirical results showcasing that our OCO-based boosting
algorithms are fast and competitive with existing state-of-the-art multiclass boosting algorithms.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

