Random Normalization Aggregation for
Adversarial Defense
Minjing Dong1 , Xinghao Chen2 , Yunhe Wang2 , Chang Xu1∗
1
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
mdon0736@uni.sydney.edu.au, xinghao.chen@huawei.com,
yunhe.wang@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
The vulnerability of deep neural networks has been widely found in various models
as well as tasks where slight perturbations on the inputs could lead to incorrect
predictions. These perturbed inputs are known as adversarial examples and one of
the intriguing properties of them is Adversarial Transfersability, i.e. the capability
of adversarial examples to fool other models. Traditionally, this transferability
is always regarded as a critical threat to the defense against adversarial attacks,
however, we argue that the network robustness can be significantly boosted by
utilizing adversarial transferability from a new perspective. In this work, we first
discuss the influence of different popular normalization layers on the adversarial
transferability, and then provide both empirical evidence and theoretical analysis
to shed light on the relationship between normalization types and transferability.
Based on our theoretical analysis, we propose a simple yet effective module named
Random Normalization Aggregation (RNA) which replaces the batch normalization
layers in the networks and aggregates different selected normalization types to
form a huge random space. Specifically, a random path is sampled during each
inference procedure so that the network itself can be treated as an ensemble of a
wide range of different models. Since the entire random space is designed with
low adversarial transferability, it is difficult to perform effective attacks even when
the network parameters are accessible. We conduct extensive experiments on
various models and datasets, and demonstrate the strong superiority of proposed
algorithm. The PyTorch code is available at https://github.com/UniSerj/
Random-Norm-Aggregation and the MindSpore code is available at https:
//gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/RNA.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive performance in various tasks [1, 2, 3].
However, it is well known that DNNs are susceptible to maliciously generated adversarial examples
[4, 5]. Through imperceptible perturbations on the model inputs during inference stage, the model is
misled to wrong predictions at a high rate. Since then, a wide range of attack techniques have been
proposed under different settings and show strong attack capability. For example, attackers have full
access to the model architecture and parameters, which forms white-box attacks [5, 6], and attackers
have limited query access to the model, which forms black-box attacks [7, 8]. Since the high attack
success rates of these techniques reveal the high risk of DNNs, defenses against adversarial examples
have received increasing attention and adversarial robustness becomes one of the key criteria.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

