A Kernelised Stein Statistic for Assessing
Implicit Generative Models

Wenkai Xu
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
wenkai.xu@stats.ox.ac.uk

Gesine Reinert
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
and Alan Turing Institute
reinert@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Synthetic data generation has become a key ingredient for training machine learning
procedures, addressing tasks such as data augmentation, analysing privacy-sensitive
data, or visualising representative samples. Assessing the quality of such synthetic
data generators hence has to be addressed. As (deep) generative models for synthetic data often do not admit explicit probability distributions, classical statistical
procedures for assessing model goodness-of-fit may not be applicable. In this
paper, we propose a principled procedure to assess the quality of a synthetic data
generator. The procedure is a kernelised Stein discrepancy (KSD)-type test which
is based on a non-parametric Stein operator for the synthetic data generator of
interest. This operator is estimated from samples which are obtained from the
synthetic data generator and hence can be applied even when the model is only
implicit. In contrast to classical testing, the sample size from the synthetic data
generator can be as large as desired, while the size of the observed data which the
generator aims to emulate is fixed. Experimental results on synthetic distributions
and trained generative models on synthetic and real datasets illustrate that the
method shows improved power performance compared to existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Synthetic data capturing main features of the original dataset are of particular interest for machine
learning methods. The use of original dataset for machine learning tasks can be problematic or even
prohibitive in certain scenarios, e.g. under authority regularisation on privacy-sensitive information,
training models on small-sample dataset, or calibrating models with imbalanced groups. High quality
synthetic data generation procedures surpass some of these challenges by creating de-identified data
to preserve privacy and to augment small or imbalanced datasets. Training deep generative models
has been widely studied in recent years [Kingma and Welling, 2013, Radford et al., 2015, Song
and Kingma, 2021] and methods such as those based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[Goodfellow et al., 2014] provide powerful approaches that learn to generate synthetic data which
resemble the original data distributions. However, these deep generative models usually do not
provide theoretical guarantees on the goodness-of-fit to the original data [Creswell et al., 2018].
To the best of our knowledge, existing mainstream developments for deep generative models [Song
and Ermon, 2020, Li et al., 2017] do not provide a systematic approach to assess the quality of the
synthetic samples. Instead, heuristic methods are applied; e.g. for image data, the quality of samples
are generally decided via visual comparisons. The study of the training quality has been relying
largely on the specific choice of training loss, which does not directly translate into a measure of
sample quality; in the case of the log-likelihood see for example Theis et al. [2015]. Common quality
assessment measures for implicit generative models, on images for example, include Inception Scores
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

