GLIF: A Unified Gated Leaky Integrate-and-Fire
Neuron for Spiking Neural Networks

Xingting Yao1,2 , Fanrong Li1,2 , Zitao Mo1 , Jian Cheng1,3∗
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{yaoxingting2020, lifanrong2017, mozitao2017, jian.cheng}@ia.ac.cn,

Abstract
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have been studied over decades to incorporate their biological plausibility and leverage their promising energy efficiency.
Throughout existing SNNs, the leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) model is commonly
adopted to formulate the spiking neuron and evolves into numerous variants with
different biological features. However, most LIF-based neurons support only single
biological feature in different neuronal behaviors, limiting their expressiveness
and neuronal dynamic diversity. In this paper, we propose GLIF, a unified spiking
neuron, to fuse different bio-features in different neuronal behaviors, enlarging
the representation space of spiking neurons. In GLIF, gating factors, which are
exploited to determine the proportion of the fused bio-features, are learnable during
training. Combining all learnable membrane-related parameters, our method can
make spiking neurons different and constantly changing, thus increasing the heterogeneity and adaptivity of spiking neurons. Extensive experiments on a variety of
datasets demonstrate that our method obtains superior performance compared with
other SNNs by simply changing their neuronal formulations to GLIF. In particular,
we train a spiking ResNet-19 with GLIF and achieve 77.35% top-1 accuracy with
six time steps on CIFAR-100, which has advanced the state-of-the-art. Codes are
available at https://github.com/Ikarosy/Gated-LIF.

1

Introduction

Spiking neural network (SNN) is considered the third generation of the neural network, and the
bionic modeling of its activation unit is called the spiking neuron, which brings about the spike-based
communication between layers [1, 2]. Due to the high sparsity and multiplication-free operation
in information processing, such spike-based communication can improve energy efficiency [3, 4].
Moreover, spiking neuron can effectively capture temporal information and has good performance in
processing neuromorphic data [5] and anti-noise [6]. Together with artificial neural network (ANN)
colleagues, SNN further shows great potential for general intelligence [7]. Thus, SNN has aroused
heated research interests recently.
The commonly used spiking neuron in different SNNs [6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] is the leaky integrateand-fire (LIF) model, named vanilla LIF. As the name suggests, it can implement three different
neuronal behaviors: membrane potential leakage, integration accumulation, and spike initiation. To
better model neurons, prior works [13, 14, 15, 16, 17] have improved the vanilla LIF from the above
three aspects, and proposed many LIF variants with different biological features. For all these vanilla
and variant LIF models (referred to as simplex LIF), any of the three neuronal behaviors supports
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

