Society of Agents: Regret Bounds of Concurrent
Thompson Sampling
Yan Chen1⇤ Perry Dong2⇤ Qinxun Bai3 Maria Dimakopoulou4 Wei Xu3 Zhengyuan Zhou5,6†
5
Arena Technologies 1 Duke 3 Horizon Robotics 6 NYU Stern 4 Spotify 2 UC Berkeley
yan.chen@duke.edu perrydong@berkeley.edu
{qinxun.bai, wei.xu}@horizon.ai mdimakopoulou@spotify.com
zzhou@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
We consider the concurrent reinforcement learning problem where n agents simultaneously learn to make decisions in the same environment by sharing experience
with each other. Existing works in this emerging area have empirically demonstrated that Thompson sampling (TS) based algorithms provide a particularly
attractive alternative for inducing cooperation, because each agent can independently sample a belief environment (and compute a corresponding optimal policy)
from the joint posterior computed by aggregating all agents’ data , which induces
diversity in exploration among agents while benefiting shared experience from
all agents. However, theoretical guarantees in this area remain under-explored; in
particular, no regret bound is known on TS based concurrent RL algorithms.
In this paper, we fill in this gap by considering two settings. In the first, we study
the simple finite-horizon episodic RL setting, where TS is naturally adapted into
the concurrent setup by having each agent sample from the
qcurrent joint posterior
at the beginning of each episode. We establish a Õ(HS AT
n ) per-agent regret
bound, where H is the horizon of the episode, S is the number of states, A is the
number of actions, T is the number of episodes and n is the number of agents. In
the second setting, we consider the infinite-horizon RL problem, where a policy
is measured by its long-run average reward. Here, despite not having natural
episodic breakpoints, we show that by a doubling-horizon schedule, we can adapt
TS to the
p infinite-horizon concurrent learning setting to achieve a regret bound of
Õ(DS AT n), where D is the standard notion of diameter of the underlying MDP
and T is the number of timesteps. Note that in both settings, the per-agent regret
decreases at an optimal rate of ⇥( p1n ), which manifests the power of cooperation
in concurrent RL.

1

Introduction

In concurrent reinforcement learning [26], many agents interact with (different instances of) the same
environment simultaneously and share data with each other in order to jointly learn an optimal policy
for the environment. This learning scenario has important applications for large-scale automated
sequential decision making systems. For instance, in recommendation systems [1]) (e.g. movie
recommendation, personalized ads recommendation, personalized news/content recommendation), a
company often has a large number of servers – sometimes located in different geographical regions –
that serve the entire population of the customer base. As such, an incoming customer is randomly
routed to a server (i.e. an agent), which learns to make recommendation decisions in conjunction with
*
†

Equal contributions.
Correspondence to Zhengyuan Zhou (z@arena-ai.com).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

