Knowledge Distillation from A Stronger Teacher
Tao Huang1,2

Shan You1∗ Fei Wang3 Chen Qian1 Chang Xu2
1
SenseTime Research
2
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
3
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Unlike existing knowledge distillation methods focus on the baseline settings,
where the teacher models and training strategies are not that strong and competing
as state-of-the-art approaches, this paper presents a method dubbed DIST to distill
better from a stronger teacher. We empirically find that the discrepancy of predictions between the student and a stronger teacher may tend to be fairly severer. As a
result, the exact match of predictions in KL divergence would disturb the training
and make existing methods perform poorly. In this paper, we show that simply
preserving the relations between the predictions of teacher and student would
suffice, and propose a correlation-based loss to capture the intrinsic inter-class
relations from the teacher explicitly. Besides, considering that different instances
have different semantic similarities to each class, we also extend this relational
match to the intra-class level. Our method is simple yet practical, and extensive
experiments demonstrate that it adapts well to various architectures, model sizes
and training strategies, and can achieve state-of-the-art performance consistently
on image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation tasks. Code is
available at: https://github.com/hunto/DIST_KD.

1

Introduction

The advent of automatic feature engineering fuels deep neural networks to achieve remarkable
success in a plethora of computer vision tasks, such as image classification [17, 19, 38, 48, 53], object
detection [2, 23], and semantic segmentation [5, 54]. In the path of pursuing better performance,
current deep learning models generally grow deeper and wider [13, 45]. However, such heavy models
are clumsy to deploy in practice due to the limitations of computational and memory resources.
For an efficient model with competitive performance to those larger models, knowledge distillation
(KD) [16] has been proposed to boost the performance of the efficient model (student) by distilling
the knowledge of a larger model (teacher) during training.
The essence of knowledge distillation relies on how to formulate and transfer the knowledge from
teacher to student. The most intuitive yet effective approach is to match the probabilistic prediction
(response) scores between the teacher and student via Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence [16]. In this
way, the student can be guided with more informative signals during training, and is thus expected to
have more promising performance than that being trained stand-alone. Besides this vanilla prediction
match, other works [11, 14, 34, 41] also investigate the knowledge within intermediate representations
to further boost the distillation performance, but this usually induces additional training cost as a
consequence. For example, OFD [14] proposes to distill the information via multiple intermediate
layers, but requires additional convolutions for feature alignments; CRD [41] introduces a contrastive
loss to transfer pair-wise relationships, but it needs to hold a memory bank for all 128-d features of
ImageNet images, and produces additional 260M FLOPs of computation cost.
∗

Correspondence to: Shan You <youshan@sensetime.com>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

