Learning Multi-resolution Functional Maps with
Spectral Attention for Robust Shape Matching

Lei Li
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
lli@lix.polytechnique.fr

Nicolas Donati
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
nicolas.donati@polytechnique.edu

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel non-rigid shape matching framework based
on multi-resolution functional maps with spectral attention. Existing functional
map learning methods all rely on the critical choice of the spectral resolution
hyperparameter, which can severely affect the overall accuracy or lead to overfitting,
if not chosen carefully. In this paper, we show that spectral resolution tuning can
be alleviated by introducing spectral attention. Our framework is applicable in
both supervised and unsupervised settings, and we show that it is possible to train
the network so that it can adapt the spectral resolution, depending on the given
shape input. More specifically, we propose to compute multi-resolution functional
maps that characterize correspondence across a range of spectral resolutions, and
introduce a spectral attention network that helps to combine this representation into
a single coherent final correspondence. Our approach is not only accurate with nearisometric input, for which a high spectral resolution is typically preferred, but also
robust and able to produce reasonable matching even in the presence of significant
non-isometric distortion, which poses great challenges to existing methods. We
demonstrate the superior performance of our approach through experiments on a
suite of challenging near-isometric and non-isometric shape matching benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Shape matching is a critical task in 3D shape analysis and has been paramount to a broad spectrum of
downstream applications, including registration, deformation, and texture transfer [1, 2], to name
a few. The algorithmic challenge of robust shape matching primarily lies in the fact that shapes
may undergo significant variations, such as arbitrary non-rigid deformations. Earlier works to tackle
non-rigid shape correspondence conventionally build upon hand-crafted features and pipelines [3],
while with the advent of deep learning, the research focus has largely shifted to data-driven and
learning-based approaches for improved matching robustness and accuracy [4].
To learn for non-rigid shape matching, a growing body of literature [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] advocates the
use of spectral techniques, in particular, the functional map representation [13], which compactly
encodes correspondences as small-sized matrices using a reduced spectral basis. A number of
advances have been made to the functional map-based networks in terms of probe feature learning [5,
14], differentiable map regularization [5], supervised [7] and unsupervised learning [9, 8, 15], among
many others. Despite this progress, existing works nearly always learn functional maps in a single
spectral resolution (the number of basis functions used), which is often set empirically. However,
the functional map resolution plays a crucial role in the non-rigid shape matching performance,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

