HyperTree Proof Search for Neural Theorem Proving

Guillaume Lample∗ †

Marie-Anne Lachaux∗†

Amaury Hayat§

Gabriel Ebner‡

Thibaut Lavril∗†

Aurélien Rodriguez†

Xavier Martinet∗†
Timothée Lacroix∗†

Abstract
We propose an online training procedure for a transformer-based automated theorem prover. Our approach leverages a new search algorithm, HyperTree Proof
Search (HTPS), that learns from previous proof searches through online training,
allowing it to generalize to domains far from the training distribution. We report
detailed ablations of our pipeline’s main components by studying performance on
three environments of increasing complexity. In particular, we show that with HTPS
alone, a model trained on annotated proofs manages to prove 65.4% of a held-out
set of Metamath theorems, significantly outperforming the previous state of the art
of 56.5% by GPT-f. Online training on these unproved theorems increases accuracy
to 82.6%. With a similar computational budget, we improve the state of the art on
the Lean-based miniF2F-curriculum dataset from 31% to 42% proving accuracy.

1

Introduction

Over the course of history, the complexity of mathematical proofs has increased dramatically. The
nineteenth century saw the emergence of proofs so involved that they could only be verified by
a handful of specialists. This limited peer review process inevitably led to invalid proofs, with
mistakes sometimes remaining undiscovered for years (e.g. the erroneous proof of the Four Colour
Conjecture [1]). Some mathematicians argue that the frontier of mathematics has reached such a level
of complexity that the traditional review process is no longer sufficient, envisioning a future where
articles are submitted with formal proofs so that the correctness can be delegated to a computer [2].
Unfortunately, very few mathematicians have adopted formal systems in their work, and as of today,
only a fraction of existing mathematics has been formalized. Several obstacles have hindered the
widespread adoption of formal systems. First, formalized mathematics are quite dissimilar from
traditional mathematics, rather closer to source code written in a programming language, which
makes formal systems difficult to use, especially for newcomers. Second, formalizing an existing
proof still involves significant effort and expertise (the formalization of the Kepler conjecture took
over 20 person years to complete [3]) and even seemingly simple statements sometimes remain
frustratingly challenging to formalize.
To write a formal proof, mathematicians typically work with Interactive Theorem Provers (ITPs).
The most popular ITPs provide high-level “tactics” that can be applied on an input theorem (e.g. the
initial goal) to generate a set of subgoals, with the guarantee that proving all subgoals will result in a
proof of the initial goal (reaching an empty set means the tactic solves the goal). An example of a
proof in Lean [4], an interactive theorem prover, is given in Figure 1 and the corresponding proof
hypertree3 is illustrated in Figure 5 of the Appendix.
∗

Equal contribution. Corresponding authors: {glample,malachaux,tlacroix}@fb.com
Meta AI Research ‡ Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam § CERMICS École des Ponts ParisTech
3
A hypergraph is a graph where an edge leads to a set of nodes that is potentially empty in our set-up. A
hypertree, in this work, is a hypergraph without cycles. Formal definitions can be found in Appendix C.1
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

