PAC Prediction Sets for Meta-Learning
Sangdon Park
School of Cybersecurity and Privacy
Georgia Institute of Technology
sangdon@gatech.edu

Edgar Dobriban
Dept. of Statistics & Data Science
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu

Insup Lee
Dept. of Computer & Info. Science
PRECISE Center
University of Pennsylvania
lee@cis.upenn.edu

Osbert Bastani
Dept. of Computer & Info. Science
PRECISE Center
University of Pennsylvania
obastani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification is a key component of machine learning models targeted
at safety-critical systems such as in healthcare or autonomous vehicles. We study
this problem in the context of meta learning, where the goal is to quickly adapt a
predictor to new tasks. In particular, we propose a novel algorithm to construct PAC
prediction sets, which capture uncertainty via sets of labels, that can be adapted
to new tasks with only a few training examples. These prediction sets satisfy an
extension of the typical PAC guarantee to the meta learning setting; in particular,
the PAC guarantee holds with high probability over future tasks. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach on four datasets across three application domains:
mini-ImageNet and CIFAR10-C in the visual domain, FewRel in the language
domain, and the CDC Heart Dataset in the medical domain. In particular, our
prediction sets satisfy the PAC guarantee while having smaller size compared to
other baselines that also satisfy this guarantee.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty quantification is a key component for safety-critical systems such as healthcare and
robotics, since it enables agents to account for risk when making decisions. Prediction sets are a
promising approach, since they provide theoretical guarantees when the training and test data are
i.i.d. [1, 2, 3, 4]; there have been extensions to handle covariate shift [5, 6, 7] and online learning [8].
We consider the meta learning setting, where the goal is to adapt an existing predictor to new tasks
using just a few training examples [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Most approaches follow two steps: meta
learning (i.e., learn a predictor for fast adaptation) and adaptation (i.e., adapt this predictor to the new
task). While there has been work on prediction sets in this setting [14], a key shortcoming is that
their guarantees do not address some important needs in meta learning; in particular, they do not hold
with high probability over future tasks. For instance, in autonomous driving, the future tasks might
be new regions, and correctness guarantees ought to hold for each region; in healthcare, future tasks
might be new patient cohort, and correctness guarantees ought to hold for each cohort.
We propose an algorithm for constructing probably approximately correct (PAC) prediction sets for
the meta learning setting. As an example, consider learning an image classifier for self-driving cars
as our use case (Figure 1). Labeled images for image classifier learning are collected, with different
regions representing different but related tasks (e.g., New York, Pennsylvania, and California). The
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

