Model Preserving Compression for Neural Networks
Jerry Chee⇤
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
jerrychee@cs.cornell.edu
Anil Damle
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
damle@cornell.edu

Megan Flynn (née Renz)⇤
Department of Physics
Cornell University
mr2268@cornell.edu
Christopher De Sa
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
After training complex deep learning models, a common task is to compress the
model to reduce compute and storage demands. When compressing, it is desirable
to preserve the original model’s per-example decisions (e.g., to go beyond top-1
accuracy or preserve robustness), maintain the network’s structure, automatically
determine per-layer compression levels, and eliminate the need for fine tuning. No
existing compression methods simultaneously satisfy these criteria—we introduce
a principled approach that does by leveraging interpolative decompositions. Our
approach simultaneously selects and eliminates channels (analogously, neurons),
then constructs an interpolation matrix that propagates a correction into the next
layer, preserving the network’s structure. Consequently, our method achieves
good performance even without fine tuning and admits theoretical analysis. Our
theoretical generalization bound for a one layer network lends itself naturally to a
heuristic that allows our method to automatically choose per-layer sizes for deep
networks. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach with strong empirical
performance on a variety of tasks, models, and datasets—from simple one-hiddenlayer networks to deep networks on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

There has recently been a significant theoretical and empirical effort to understand the necessity
of over-parameterization for deep learning models and to develop algorithmic techniques that can
effectively compress (or prune) them while retaining performance. This work is largely driven by
results that show over-parameterization may aid in training via stochastic algorithms, but that the
solutions found are often highly redundant [21, 22, 42, 54] and therefore can be compressed. Typically
the focus has been on reducing parameter counts or FLOPs while maintaining accuracy—a task that
often necessitates significant fine tuning of compressed models. However, we argue that further
criteria are warranted to enable the adoption of compression methods amongst practitioners: (1)
preserving the model’s per-example decisions ensures the preservation of more fine-grain properties,
e.g. fairness [4, 14, 17, 24, 61] or adversarial robustness [9, 10, 16, 18, 68]; (2) compressing networks
while retaining their computational structure ensures compatibility with the rest of the machine
learning pipeline; and (3) automatically determining per-layer sizing and minimizing the need for
fine tuning alleviates key challenges when using compression methods in practice.
⇤

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

