Mining Unseen Classes via Regional Objectness:
A Simple Baseline for Incremental Segmentation

Zekang Zhang1∗, Guangyu Gao1†,

Zhiyuan Fang1 ,

Jianbo Jiao2 ,

Yunchao Wei3,4

1

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
3
WEI Lab, Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network
zkzhang1998@outlook.com

Abstract
Incremental or continual learning has been extensively studied for image classification tasks to alleviate catastrophic forgetting, a phenomenon that earlier learned
knowledge is forgotten when learning new concepts. For class incremental semantic segmentation, such a phenomenon often becomes much worse due to the
background shift, i.e., some concepts learned at previous stages are assigned to
the background class at the current training stage, therefore, significantly reducing the performance of these old concepts. To address this issue, we propose
a simple yet effective method in this paper, named Mining unseen Classes via
Regional Objectness for Segmentation (MicroSeg). Our MicroSeg is based on
the assumption that background regions with strong objectness possibly belong to
those concepts in the historical or future stages. Therefore, to avoid forgetting old
knowledge at the current training stage, our MicroSeg first splits the given image
into hundreds of segment proposals with a proposal generator. Those segment proposals with strong objectness from the background are then clustered and assigned
newly-defined labels during the optimization. In this way, the distribution characterizes of old concepts in the feature space could be better perceived, relieving
the catastrophic forgetting caused by the background shift accordingly. Extensive
experiments on Pascal VOC and ADE20K datasets show competitive results with
state-of-the-art, well validating the effectiveness of the proposed MicroSeg. Code
is available at https://github.com/zkzhang98/MicroSeg.

1

Introduction

Deep learning based methods have made significant achievements on various recognition tasks, while
assuming the data distribution to be fixed or stable and the training samples are independently and
identically distributed [18]. However, in practical scenarios, the data always presents a continuous
stream without a stable distribution. Under these scenarios, the old knowledge will be easily interfered
with or even totally forgotten by continuously acquiring new knowledge, which is generally considered
to be catastrophic forgetting [3, 24, 28]. To tackle this problem, many approaches were proposed to
incrementally learn new concepts over time but without forgetting old knowledge, especially for the
classification task, i.e., Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) [17, 19].
Meanwhile, Class-Incremental Semantic Segmentation (CISS), aiming to predict a pixel-wise mask
for an image in CIL scenarios, is crucial for applications like autonomous driving and robotics.
∗
†

Work done during an internship at WEI Lab of Beijing Jiaotong University.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

