A Conditional Randomization Test for Sparse Logistic
Regression in High-Dimension

Binh T. Nguyen
LTCI, Télecom Paris, IP Paris
tuanbinhs@gmail.com

Bertrand Thirion
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, Palaiseau 91120, France
bertrand.thirion@inria.fr

Sylvain Arlot
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Inria, Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France
sylvain.arlot@universite-paris-saclay.fr

Abstract
Identifying the relevant variables for a classification model with correct confidence
levels is a central but difficult task in high-dimension. Despite the core role
of sparse logistic regression in statistics and machine learning, it still lacks a
good solution for accurate inference in the regime where the number of features
p is as large as or larger than the number of samples n. Here we tackle this
problem by improving the Conditional Randomization Test (CRT). The original
CRT algorithm shows promise as a way to output p-values while making few
assumptions on the distribution of the test statistics. As it comes with a prohibitive
computational cost even in mildly high-dimensional problems, faster solutions
based on distillation have been proposed. Yet, they rely on unrealistic hypotheses
and result in low-power solutions. To improve this, we propose CRT-logit, an
algorithm that combines a variable-distillation step and a decorrelation step that
takes into account the geometry of the ℓ1 -penalized logistic regression problem. We
provide a theoretical analysis of this procedure, and demonstrate its effectiveness
on simulations, along with experiments on large-scale brain-imaging and genomics
datasets.

1

Introduction

Logistic regression is one of the most popular tools in modern applications of statistics and machine
learning, partly due to its relative algorithmic simplicity. The method belongs to the class of
generalized linear models that handle discrete outcomes, i.e. classification problems. Here, we focus
on the binary classification problem, where one observation of the responses y ∈ {0, 1} and the data
vectors x ∈ Rp follows the relationship:
1
P(y = 1 | x) = g(xT β 0 ) =
,
(1)
1 + exp(−xT β 0 )
where g(x) = 1/(1 + exp(−x)) is the sigmoid function, and β 0 the vector of true regression
coefficients. In the classical setting, in which the number of samples n is greater than the number of
features p, an estimate β̂ of the true signals β 0 can be obtained using maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE). The asymptotic behaviour and derivation of the test statistic, confidence intervals and p-values
of the MLE have been well studied, e.g. in [13]. The availability of p-values for the test statistics
makes it possible to rely on multiple hypothesis testing, where one wants to test which variables
have a non-zero effect on the outcome, conditioned on the remaining variables. Unfortunately, this
line of analysis cannot be applied to the high-dimensional regime, where p is larger than n, as
argued in [25, 32, 34]. These works show that in the regime limn,p→∞ n/p = κ, the MLE estimator
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

