SKFlow: Learning Optical Flow with Super Kernels

Shangkun Sun 1

Yuanqi Chen 1

Yu Zhu 2

Guodong Guo 2,3

Ge Li 1

1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research 3 West Virginia University

Abstract
Optical flow estimation is a classical yet challenging task in computer vision. One
of the essential factors in accurately predicting optical flow is to alleviate occlusions
between frames. However, it is still a thorny problem for current top-performing
optical flow estimation methods due to insufficient local evidence to model occluded areas. In this paper, we propose the Super Kernel Flow Network (SKFlow),
a CNN architecture to ameliorate the impacts of occlusions on optical flow estimation. SKFlow benefits from the super kernels which bring enlarged receptive
fields to complement the absent matching information and recover the occluded
motions. We present efficient super kernel designs by utilizing conical connections and hybrid depth-wise convolutions. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of SKFlow on multiple benchmarks, especially in the occluded
areas. Without pre-trained backbones on ImageNet and with a modest increase
in computation, SKFlow achieves compelling performance and ranks 1st among
currently published methods on the Sintel benchmark. On the challenging Sintel
clean and final passes (test), SKFlow surpasses the best-published result in the
unmatched areas (7.96 and 12.50) by 9.09% and 7.92%. The code is available at
https://github.com/littlespray/SKFlow.

1

Introduction

Optical flow is the task of modeling per-pixel motion across a pair of frames with various downstream applications, e.g., pedestrian re-identification, video segmentation, scene reconstruction, etc.
Nowadays, optical flow estimation still faces tough challenges such as occlusions and motion blurs,
etc. Among those challenges, occlusion is considered one of the most difficult problems which are
still under-explored. Notably, the term occlusion in optical flow estimation can be extended to a
broader definition [16]: regions where pixels appear in the current frame while disappearing in the
next frame. Occlusions pose apparent difficulties in predicting optical flow since it directly violates
the brightness constancy constraint [10], where the intensities of pixels are regarded as the same
between consecutive frames. Therefore, the correspondence matching of occluded areas between
frames could be extremely hard.
One of the potential solutions is to utilize the neighboring pixels to recover motions of the occluded
regions, such as learning the neighboring relationship by CNNs [31, 32, 36], or interpolating the
hidden motions via smoothness terms in Markov Random Fields [4]. However, both convolution
and interpolation are restricted to the local information within the small operation window, which
only focuses on learning the local evidence. As occlusions get worse, the local evidence would
be insufficient to recover the hidden motion and thus severely degrade the performance. Recent
works [16, 42] propose to model long-range dependencies between local descriptors via non-local
methods to make up for the missing local evidence. These methods alleviate the issue to some
extent but still tend to fail since the representative capabilities of local descriptors have been largely
weakened when facing severe occlusions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

