Language Models with Image Descriptors are Strong
Few-Shot Video-Language Learners
∗

∗

†

Zhenhailong Wang1 , Manling Li1 , Ruochen Xu2 , Luowei Zhou2 ,
Jie Lei3 , Xudong Lin4 , Shuohang Wang2 , Ziyi Yang2 , Chenguang Zhu2 ,
Derek Hoiem1 , Shih-Fu Chang4 , Mohit Bansal3 , Heng Ji1
1
UIUC 2 MSR 3 UNC 4 Columbia University
{wangz3,hengji}@illinois.edu

Abstract
The goal of this work is to build flexible video-language models that can generalize
to various video-to-text tasks from few examples. Existing few-shot video-language
learners focus exclusively on the encoder, resulting in the absence of a video-totext decoder to handle generative tasks. Video captioners have been pretrained
on large-scale video-language datasets, but they rely heavily on finetuning and
lack the ability to generate text for unseen tasks in a few-shot setting. We propose
VidIL, a few-shot Video-language Learner via Image and Language models,
which demonstrates strong performance on few-shot video-to-text tasks without the
necessity of pretraining or finetuning on any video datasets. We use image-language
models to translate the video content into frame captions, object, attribute, and
event phrases, and compose them into a temporal-aware template. We then instruct
a language model, with a prompt containing a few in-context examples, to generate
a target output from the composed content. The flexibility of prompting allows
the model to capture any form of text input, such as automatic speech recognition
(ASR) transcripts. Our experiments demonstrate the power of language models in
understanding videos on a wide variety of video-language tasks, including video
captioning, video question answering, video caption retrieval, and video future
event prediction. Especially, on video future event prediction, our few-shot model
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art supervised models trained on large-scale
video datasets. Code and processed data are publicly available for research purposes
at https://github.com/MikeWangWZHL/VidIL.

1

Introduction

One major gap between artificial intelligence and human intelligence lies in their abilities to generalize
and perform well on new tasks with limited annotations. Recent advances in large-scale pre-trained
generative language models [45, 6, 71, 24] have shown promising few-shot capabilities [72, 43, 63] in
understanding natural language. However, few-shot video-language understanding is still in its infancy.
A particular limitation of most recent video-language frameworks [28, 21, 61, 68, 67, 25, 64, 34] is
that they are encoder-only, which means they do not have the ability to generate text from videos for
purposes such as captioning [62, 57], question answering [60], and future prediction [23]. Meanwhile,
unified video-language models [36, 49] that are capable of language decoding still rely heavily
on finetuning using a large number of manually annotated video-text pairs, therefore cannot adapt
quickly to unseen tasks. Few-shot video-to-text decoding is challenging because the natural language
supervision for learning video-language representation is typically based on subtitles and automatic
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Currently at Google Brain.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

