Self-explaining deep models with logic rule reasoning

Seungeon Lee∗
KAIST School of Computing
IBS Data Science Group
archon159@kaist.ac.kr

Xiting Wang†
Social Computing Group
Microsoft Research Asia
xitwan@microsoft.com

Sungwon Han∗
KAIST School of Computing
IBS Data Science Group
lion4151@kaist.ac.kr

Xiaoyuan Yi
Social Computing Group
Microsoft Research Asia
xiaoyuanyi@microsoft.com

Xing Xie
Social Computing Group
Microsoft Research Asia
xing.xie@microsoft.com

Meeyoung Cha†
IBS Data Science Group
KAIST School of Computing
mcha@ibs.re.kr

Abstract
We present SELOR, a framework for integrating self-explaining capabilities into a
given deep model to achieve both high prediction performance and human precision.
By “human precision”, we refer to the degree to which humans agree with the
reasons models provide for their predictions. Human precision affects user trust and
allows users to collaborate closely with the model. We demonstrate that logic rule
explanations naturally satisfy human precision with the expressive power required
for good predictive performance. We then illustrate how to enable a deep model
to predict and explain with logic rules. Our method does not require predefined
logic rule sets or human annotations and can be learned efficiently and easily with
widely-used deep learning modules in a differentiable way. Extensive experiments
show that our method gives explanations closer to human decision logic than other
methods while maintaining the performance of deep learning models.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has shown high predictive accuracy in a wide range of tasks, but its inner working
mechanisms are obscured by complex model designs. This raises important questions about whether a
deep model is ethical, trustworthy, or capable of performing as intended under various conditions [1].
Many approaches have been proposed to help humans assess and comprehend model decisions.
Recent work on explainability has primarily focused on providing post-hoc explanations for
black-box models that have already been trained [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Post-hoc methods do
not change the model and hence preserve the predictive performance while providing the additional
benefit of explainability. These methods have achieved considerable success in providing valuable
insights for model understanding, but there are also known challenges such as computational cost [11]
and trust issues [12]. For example, many popular post-hoc methods test the complex black-box model
thousands of times to obtain a complete and faithful understanding of the model around a single instance [1, 13, 14]. Subroutines such as full optimization or reverse propagation are generally required,
introducing approximations or heuristic assumptions that may lead to misinterpretation [14, 15].
Because there is no guarantee that explanations are always faithful to the model [12], there exists
a “general uneasiness” among practitioners about using and trusting post-hoc explanations [16]. Selfexplaining models naturally solve these issues, making them an ideal choice when interpretability
∗
†

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia
Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

