How Mask Matters: Towards Theoretical
Understandings of Masked Autoencoders

Qi Zhang1*
Yifei Wang 2∗
Yisen Wang1,3†
1
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE),
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Masked Autoencoders (MAE) based on a reconstruction task have risen to be
a promising paradigm for self-supervised learning (SSL) and achieve state-ofthe-art performance across different benchmark datasets. However, despite its
impressive empirical success, there is still limited theoretical understanding of
it. In this paper, we propose a theoretical understanding of how masking matters
for MAE to learn meaningful features. We establish a close connection between
MAE and contrastive learning, which shows that MAE implicit aligns the maskinduced positive pairs. Built upon this connection, we develop the first downstream
guarantees for MAE methods, and analyze the effect of mask ratio. Besides, as
a result of the implicit alignment, we also point out the dimensional collapse
issue of MAE, and propose a Uniformity-enhanced MAE (U-MAE) loss that can
effectively address this issue and bring significant improvements on real-world
datasets, including CIFAR-10, ImageNet-100, and ImageNet-1K. Code is available
at https://github.com/zhangq327/U-MAE.

1

Introduction

Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) has been proposed as a promising paradigm for learning
data representations without access to labels. Beside the popular contrastive learning methods
[4, 14, 12, 27], recently there has been a renaissance of reconstruction-based autoencoders for SSL,
for example, MAE [15], BEiT [1], iBOT [32], and SimMIM [29], which demonstrate state-of-theart performance on various downstream tasks. Taking MAE as an example, it learns to reconstruct the
masked patches from the unmasked context with an encoder-decoder architecture, from which we can
see that there are two main components in MAE: masking and autoencoders. While for autoencoders,
its canonical one, even equipped with expressive neural networks, is still less competitive than modern
SSL methods [4], which indicates that autoencoders may not be the key factor for the success of
MAE. Then for masking, MAE needs a very large mask ratio, e.g., 75% patches of the input image
are masked out. Such a large mask ratio will lead to the loss of most image contents that are hardly
recoverable from the rest. Further considering that MAE deliberately chooses a weak decoder with a
shadow architecture, we believe that reconstruction might not be the ultimate goal of MAE in the
learning process. Then, some natural questions are raised here:
What is the role of masking in MAE? How does it affect the downstream performance?
To answer these questions, firstly, we build a close connection between MAE and contrastive learning.
In particular, we find that masking could produce implicit positive pairs while MAE’s reconstruction
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

