How Sampling Impacts the Robustness of Stochastic
Neural Networks
Sina Däubener and Asja Fischer
Department of Computer Science
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
{sina.daeubener, asja.fischer}@rub.de

Abstract
Stochastic neural networks (SNNs) are random functions whose predictions are
gained by averaging over multiple realizations. Consequently, a gradient-based
adversarial example is calculated based on one set of samples and its classification
on another set. In this paper, we derive a sufficient condition for such a stochastic prediction to be robust against a given sample-based attack. This allows us
to identify the factors that lead to an increased robustness of SNNs and gives
theoretical explanations for: (i) the well known observation, that increasing the
amount of samples drawn for the estimation of adversarial examples increases
the attack’s strength, (ii) why increasing the number of samples during an attack
can not fully reduce the effect of stochasticity, (iii) why the sample size during
inference does not influence the robustness, and (iv) why a higher gradient variance
and a shorter expected value of the gradient relates to a higher robustness. Our
theoretical findings give a unified view on the mechanisms underlying previously
proposed approaches for increasing attack strengths or model robustness and are
verified by an extensive empirical analysis.

1

Introduction

Since the discovery of adversarial examples [Biggio et al., 2013, Szegedy et al., 2014], a significant
amount of research was dedicated to hinder attacks [e.g. Madry et al., 2018, Papernot et al., 2016,
Zhang et al., 2019], to enhance attack strategies [e.g. Athalye et al., 2018, Akhtar and Mian, 2018,
Carlini and Wagner, 2017, Uesato et al., 2018] or to derive ways to certify model robustness [e.g.
Cohen et al., 2019, Lécuyer et al., 2019]. Robustness guarantees often specify an ϵ-ball around input
points in which perturbations do not lead to a label change [Hein and Andriushchenko, 2017, Croce
and Hein, 2020]. The maximal possible radius of such an ϵ-ball corresponds to the distance of the
input point to the nearest decision boundary, which on the other hand is equal to the length of the
smallest perturbation vector that leads to a misclassification (c.f. figure 1a)). Such a robustness
analysis assumes that the decision boundaries are fixed and that the attacker is able to estimate (at least
approximately) this minimal perturbation vector, which is a reasonable assumption for deterministic
networks but usually does not hold for stochastic neural networks (SNNs).
Stochastic neural networks, and stochastic classifiers more generally, are random functions and
predictions are given by the expected value of the random function for the given input. In practice,
this expectation is usually not tractable and hence it is approximated by averaging over multiple
realizations of the random function. This approximation leads to the challenging setting where
predictions, decision boundaries, and gradients become random variables themselves. Hence, under
an adversarial attack, the decision boundaries used for calculating the adversarial example and those
used when predicting the label of the resulting adversarial example differ. This means that the attacker
can not estimate the optimal perturbation direction i.e., the direction to the closest decision boundary
of the network that will be sampled during inference c.f. figure 1 b), c).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

