Spatial Pruned Sparse Convolution for Efficient 3D
Object Detection

Jianhui Liu1∗ Yukang Chen2∗ Xiaoqing Ye3 Zhuotao Tian2 Xiao Tan3 Xiaojuan Qi1†
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Baidu

Abstract
3D scenes are dominated by a large number of background points, which is redundant for the detection task that mainly needs to focus on foreground objects.
In this paper, we analyze major components of existing sparse 3D CNNs and
find that 3D CNNs ignore the redundancy of data and further amplify it in the
down-sampling process, which brings a huge amount of extra and unnecessary
computational overhead. Inspired by this, we propose a new convolution operator
named spatial pruned sparse convolution (SPS-Conv), which includes two variants,
spatial pruned submanifold sparse convolution (SPSS-Conv) and spatial pruned
regular sparse convolution (SPRS-Conv), both of which are based on the idea of
dynamically determining crucial areas for redundancy reduction. We validate that
the magnitude can serve as important cues to determine crucial areas which get rid
of the extra computations of learning-based methods. The proposed modules can
easily be incorporated into existing sparse 3D CNNs without extra architectural
modifications. Extensive experiments on the KITTI, Waymo and nuScenes datasets
demonstrate that our method can achieve more than 50% reduction in GFLOPs
without compromising the performance. Code and models are available at this link.

1

Introduction

3D object detection has always been a research field of great interest due to its wide applications in
autonomous driving, virtual reality, and robotics. However, compared with the 2D detection task,
LiDAR-based 3D detection is more challenging due to the inherent characteristics of LiDAR points
such as disorders, irregularity, and non-uniformity. Recently, voxel-based methods [23, 10, 2, 37, 31,
18] with deep 3D sparse convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become one of the major research
streams to tackle 3D object detection problem due to its effectiveness and simplicity. Nevertheless,
the improved accuracy is often accompanied by increased computational costs [30, 36, 3], limiting
its applicability in practical systems. This motivates us to investigate potential redundancies in the
detection model that can be safely avoided to improve efficiency without sacrificing accuracy.
When delving into the task of 3D detection, we found that 3D data itself has high redundancy as
shown in Fig. 1(a). Notably, compared with background points in each stage of the sparse CNN, the
proportion of foreground points in the entire scene is extremely low (around 5%), which shows that
less-informative background points occupy the major areas of a scene. However, the existing 3D
sparse CNNs are applied uniformly to the whole scene, causing a considerable amount of computation
on the background areas, which might be potentially redundant. Intuitively, if such areas can be
identified and selectively skipped, the computational costs have the potential to be dramatically
reduced without deteriorating the performance.
Besides the redundancy of the data, the model design itself also brings redundancy. To avoid
aggressive down-sampling, 3D sparse CNNs adopt a dilation-like design when applied to perform
∗

Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

