AutoMS: Automatic Model Selection for Novelty
Detection with Error Rate Control

1

Yifan Zhang1∗ Haiyan Jiang2,3† Haojie Ren4† Changliang Zou1 Dejing Dou3
School of Statistics and Data Sciences, LPMC, KLMDASR and LEBPS, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
Machine Learning Department, MBZUAI, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
Baidu Research, Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
4
School of Mathematical Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
yfzhang_stat@mail.nankai.edu.cn, haiyan.jiang@mbzuai.ac.ae
haojieren@sjtu.edu.cn, zoucl@nankai.edu.cn, doudejing@baidu.com

Abstract
Given an unsupervised novelty detection task on a new dataset, how can we automatically select a “best” detection model while simultaneously controlling the
error rate of the best model? For novelty detection analysis, numerous detectors
have been proposed to detect outliers on a new unseen dataset based on a score
function trained on available clean data. However, due to the absence of labeled
anomalous data for model evaluation and comparison, there is a lack of systematic
approaches that are able to select the “best” model/detector (i.e., the algorithm as
well as its hyperparameters) and achieve certain error rate control simultaneously.
In this paper, we introduce a unified data-driven procedure to address this issue.
The key idea is to maximize the number of detected outliers while controlling
the false discovery rate (FDR) with the help of Jackknife prediction. We establish non-asymptotic bounds for the false discovery proportions and show that the
proposed procedure yields valid FDR control under some mild conditions. Numerical experiments on both synthetic and real data validate the theoretical results
and demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed AutoMS method. The code is
available at: https://github.com/ZhangYifan1996/AutoMS.

1

Introduction

With the development of big data, novelty detection has become critical for many machine learning
applications, such as network intrusion detection [1], fraud detection in finance [2, 3], event detection
in the earth sciences [4], and so on. For these applications, there are a very large number of “normal”
instances (i.e., inlier) but a lack of “abnormal” data (i.e., novelty, or outlier), because collecting
abnormal data is much more expensive or difficult than collecting normal data [5]. This leads us to
a situation where the available historical dataset contains only normal observations, and the basic
goal is to detect outliers on a new unseen test dataset. Novelty detection has achieved remarkable
success in many application domains with numerous methods/algorithms being developed in machine
learning literature [6–8], however, two problems need to be addressed in the current novelty detection
models, (1) lack of error rate control in detection algorithms, and (2) ad-hoc model selection of
algorithms/hyperparameters.
The most common way to solve the novelty detection problem is to use a detection algorithm to learn
a plausible score function that assigns a score to each point in the test dataset. Generally, data with
large scores are more likely to be detected as outliers. A decision threshold is given to determine
∗
†

Y. Zhang did this work during her internship at Baidu Research.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

