Generative Visual Prompt: Unifying Distributional
Control of Pre-Trained Generative Models
Chen Henry Wu, Saman Motamed, Shaunak Srivastava, Fernando De la Torre
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
{chenwu2,ftorre}@cs.cmu.edu, {saman.moatamed,shaunak1999}@gmail.com

Abstract
Generative models (e.g., GANs, diffusion models) learn the underlying data distribution in an unsupervised manner. However, many applications of interest require
sampling from a particular region of the output space or sampling evenly over a
range of characteristics. For efficient sampling in these scenarios, we propose Generative Visual Prompt (PromptGen), a framework for distributional control over
pre-trained generative models by incorporating knowledge of other off-the-shelf
models. PromptGen defines control as energy-based models (EBMs) and samples
images in a feed-forward manner by approximating the EBM with invertible neural
networks, avoiding optimization at inference. Our experiments demonstrate how
PromptGen can efficiently sample from several unconditional generative models
(e.g., StyleGAN2, StyleNeRF, diffusion autoencoder, NVAE) in a controlled or/and
de-biased manner using various off-the-shelf models: (1) with the CLIP model as
control, PromptGen can sample images guided by text, (2) with image classifiers
as control, PromptGen can de-bias generative models across a set of attributes or
attribute combinations, and (3) with inverse graphics models as control, PromptGen
can sample images of the same identity in different poses. (4) Finally, PromptGen
reveals that the CLIP model shows a “reporting bias” when used as control, and
PromptGen can further de-bias this controlled distribution in an iterative manner.1

1

Introduction

Generative models learn the underlying high-dimensional data distribution and have achieved promising performance on image synthesis [4, 75, 36, 21]. Though being well praised, they still face two
main limitations. First, since generative models are typically trained in an unsupervised way, they
lack controllability, meaning that it is unclear how to sample from a specific region of the space.
Second, generative models are prone to inherit the imbalance and bias of training data [60, 31]. For
instance, StyleGAN2 is more likely to produce images of white individuals, see Figure 1(e). Previous
works have studied these challenges separately, and typical methods include editing of “style” codes
[23, 68, 31] and explicit conditions [43, 69]. However, these methods are either model-dependent
(i.e., requiring a well-structured style space) or label-intensive (i.e., requiring all training samples to
be labeled for explicit conditions), limiting their generality and practical use.
To address the above challenges, this paper advocates a unified formulation, distributional control
of generative models, which enables controllability by incorporating the knowledge of off-the-shelf
models (e.g., CLIP [58], classifiers, or inverse graphics models [16]). Based on this unified view, we
propose to learn distributions in the latent space of a pre-trained generative model while keeping the
pre-trained weights fixed. Given its conceptual similarity to prompting [42, 85, 86, 30, 22], we term
our framework as Generative Visual Prompt (PromptGen). PromptGen requires no training data,
and the only supervision comes from off-the-shelf models that help define the control. Specifically,
1

The code is available at https://github.com/ChenWu98/Generative-Visual-Prompt.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

