Online Allocation and Learning in the Presence of
Strategic Agents
Steven Yin
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
sy2737@columbia.edu
Shipra Agrawal
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
sa3305@columbia.edu
Assaf Zeevi
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
assaf@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of allocating T sequentially arriving items among n homogeneous agents under the constraint that each agent must receive a pre-specified
fraction of all items, with the objective of maximizing the agents’ total valuation
of items allocated to them. The agents’ valuations for the item in each round are
assumed to be i.i.d. but their distribution is a priori unknown to the central planner.
Therefore, the central planner needs to implicitly learn these distributions from
the observed values in order to pick a good allocation policy. However, an added
challenge here is that the agents are strategic with incentives to misreport their
valuations in order to receive better allocations. This sets our work apart both from
the online auction design settings which typically assume known valuation distributions and/or involve payments, and from the online learning settings that do not
consider strategic agents. To that end, our main contribution is an online learning
based allocation mechanism that is approximately Bayesian incentive compatible,
and when all agents are truthful, guarantees a sublinear regret for individual agents’
utility compared to that under the optimal offline allocation policy.

1

Introduction

A classic sequential resource allocation problem is to allocate T sequentially arriving items to n
agents, where each agent must receive a predetermined fraction of the items. The goal is to maximize
social welfare, i.e., the agents’ total valuation of the items allocated to them. This problem is nontrivial even when the agents’ valuations are stochastic and i.i.d. with a known distribution, the main
difficulty being that the allocations must be performed in real-time; specifically, an item must be
allocated to an agent in the current round without knowledge of their future valuations.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

