ELIAS: End-to-End Learning to Index and Search in
Large Output Spaces

Nilesh Gupta
UT Austin
nilesh@cs.utexas.edu

Patrick H. Chen
UCLA
patrickchen@g.ucla.edu

Cho-Jui, Hsieh
UCLA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Hsiang-Fu, Yu ∗
Amazon
rofu.yu@gmail.com

Inderjit S. Dhillon
UT Austin & Google
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Extreme multi-label classification (XMC) is a popular framework for solving many
real-world problems that require accurate prediction from a very large number
of potential output choices. A popular approach for dealing with the large label
space is to arrange the labels into a shallow tree-based index and then learn an
ML model to efficiently search this index via beam search. Existing methods
initialize the tree index by clustering the label space into a few mutually exclusive
clusters based on pre-defined features and keep it fixed throughout the training
procedure. This approach results in a sub-optimal indexing structure over the label
space and limits the search performance to the quality of choices made during the
initialization of the index. In this paper, we propose a novel method ELIAS which
relaxes the tree-based index to a specialized weighted graph-based index which is
learned end-to-end with the final task objective. More specifically, ELIAS models
the discrete cluster-to-label assignments in the existing tree-based index as soft
learnable parameters that are learned jointly with the rest of the ML model. ELIAS
achieves state-of-the-art performance on several large-scale extreme classification
benchmarks with millions of labels. In particular, ELIAS can be up to 2.5% better
at precision@1 and up to 4% better at recall@100 than existing XMC methods.
A PyTorch implementation of ELIAS along with other resources is available at
https://github.com/nilesh2797/ELIAS.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems require making accurate predictions from a large number of potential
output choices. For example, search advertising aims to find the most relevant ads to a given search
query from a large corpus of ads [26, 14], open-domain question answering requires finding the
right answers to a given question from a large collection of text documents [8, 29], and product
recommendation requires recommending similar or related products from a large product catalog,
based on past searches and interactions by users. eXtreme Multi-label Classification (XMC) is a
popular framework for solving such problems [4], which formulates these problems as a multi-label
classification task with very large number of labels; here each output choice is treated as a separate
label. A label ℓ is often parameterized by its one-versus-all classifier vector wℓ and the relevance
between label ℓ and input x is formulated as wℓT ϕ(x), where ϕ is an encoding function which maps
an input x to its vector representation.
∗

This work does not relate to Hsiang-Fu’s position at Amazon

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

