First Hitting Diffusion Models for Generating
Manifold, Graph and Categorical Data
Mao Ye,⇤ Lemeng Wu, Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
We propose a family of First Hitting Diffusion Models (FHDM), deep generative
models that generate data with a diffusion process that terminates at a random
first hitting time. This yields an extension of the standard fixed-time diffusion
models that terminate at a pre-specified deterministic time. Although standard
diffusion models are designed for continuous unconstrained data, FHDM is naturally designed to learn distributions on continuous as well as a range of discrete
and structure domains. Moreover, FHDM enables instance-dependent terminate
time and accelerates the diffusion process to sample higher quality data with fewer
diffusion steps. Technically, we train FHDM by maximum likelihood estimation on
diffusion trajectories augmented from observed data with conditional first hitting
processes (i.e., bridge) derived based on Doob’s h-transform, deviating from the
commonly used time-reversal mechanism. We apply FHDM to generate data in
various domains such as point cloud (general continuous distribution), climate and
geographical events on earth (continuous distribution on the sphere), unweighted
graphs (distribution of binary matrices), and segmentation maps of 2D images
(high-dimensional categorical distribution). We observe considerable improvement
compared with the state-of-the-art approaches in both quality and speed.

1

Introduction

Diffusion processes have become a powerful tool in various areas of machine learning (ML) and
statistics. Traditionally, Langevin dynamics and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo have been foundations
for learning and sampling from graphical models and energy-based models. Recently, denoising
diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) [18] and score matching with Langevin dynamics (SMLD)
with its variants [41–43] have achieved the state-of-the-art results on data generation [13, 9, 30, 19].
Standard diffusion processes used in ML can be classified into two categories: 1) infinite (or mixing)
time diffusion processes such as Langevin dynamics, which requires the process to run sufficiently
long to converge to the invariant distribution, whose property is leveraged for the purpose of learning
and inference; and 2) fixed time diffusion processes such as DDPM, SMLD, and Schrodinger bridges
[11], which are designed to output the desirable results at a pre-fixed time. Although fixed-time
diffusion has been show to surpass infinite time diffusion on both speed and quality, it still yield slow
speed for modern applications due to the need of a pre-specified time and the incapability to adapt
the time based on the difficulty of instances and problems. Moreover, standard diffusion models are
naturally designed on Rd , and can not work for discrete and structured data without special cares.
In this work, we study and explore a different first hitting time diffusion model that terminates at
the first time as it hits a given domain, and leverages the distribution of the exit location (known as
exit distribution, or harmonic measure [31]) as a tool for learning and inference. We provide the
⇤

Corresponding author. Email: maoye21@utexas.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

