Fair and Optimal Decision Trees:
A Dynamic Programming Approach

Jacobus G.M. van der Linden
Mathijs M. de Weerdt
Emir Demirović
Delft University of Technology, Department of Computer Science
{J.G.M.vanderLinden, M.M.deWeerdt, E.Demirovic}@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Interpretable and fair machine learning models are required for many applications,
such as credit assessment and in criminal justice. Decision trees offer this interpretability, especially when they are small. Optimal decision trees are of particular
interest because they offer the best performance possible for a given size. However,
state-of-the-art algorithms for fair and optimal decision trees have scalability issues,
often requiring several hours to find such trees even for small datasets. Previous
research has shown that dynamic programming (DP) performs well for optimizing
decision trees because it can exploit the tree structure. However, adding a global
fairness constraint to a DP approach is not straightforward, because the global
constraint violates the condition that subproblems should be independent. We
show how such a constraint can be incorporated by introducing upper and lower
bounds on final fairness values for partial solutions of subproblems, which enables
early comparison and pruning. Our results show that our model can find fair and
optimal trees several orders of magnitude faster than previous methods, and now
also for larger datasets that were previously beyond reach. Moreover, we show that
with this substantial improvement our method can find the full Pareto front in the
trade-off between accuracy and fairness.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) is used in more domains that involve discrimination-sensitive decisions,
demand for fair, interpretable and accurate models increases. ML, for example, is used in criminal
justice [8], credit assessment [28], and housing appointments [7], each of which requires fair decisions.
Simply removing the discrimination-sensitive attribute from the dataset does not necessarily result in
less discrimination [33]. Instead, fairness is obtained by adding a constraint on the classifier: often
either an individual or a group fairness constraint (see [10, 20] for a comparison of the two). The
focus in this paper is on group fairness. With group fairness, a binary classifier is considered fair if
the probability of receiving the positive outcome is the same for all protected groups. This fairness
metric is formulated as a global constraint over the full dataset.
To increase confidence and prevent errors in these sensitive-decision domains, it also important that
the ML models are interpretable [39]. Decision trees offer inherent interpretability and do not carry
some of the risks of post-hoc attempts at explaining black-box models [36]. This is especially the
case when decision trees are small [34]. On average, optimal decision trees, i.e., trees that for a given
size provably maximize an objective such as accuracy, provide better out-of-sample performance than
trees generated by heuristics when comparing trees of equal size [9, 15]. Therefore small optimal
decision trees are ideal when searching for accurate and interpretable models.
There are several approaches for finding fair and optimal decision trees [2, 3, 25, 40], all of which
use mixed integer programming (MIP). However, none of these models scale well. If fairness is not
considered, small optimal decision trees can be found efficiently by using dynamic programming (DP)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

