Revisiting Sparse Convolutional Model for Visual
Recognition

Xili Dai1∗ Mingyang Li2 * Pengyuan Zhai3 Shengbang Tong4 Xingjian Gao4
Shao-Lun Huang2 Zhihui Zhu5 Chong You4 Yi Ma2,4
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute (TBSI), Tsinghua University
3
Harvard University 4 University of California, Berkeley 5 Ohio State University

Abstract
Despite strong empirical performance for image classification, deep neural networks are often regarded as “black boxes” and they are difficult to interpret. On
the other hand, sparse convolutional models, which assume that a signal can
be expressed by a linear combination of a few elements from a convolutional
dictionary, are powerful tools for analyzing natural images with good theoretical interpretability and biological plausibility. However, such principled models have not
demonstrated competitive performance when compared with empirically designed
deep networks. This paper revisits the sparse convolutional modeling for image
classification and bridges the gap between good empirical performance (of deep
learning) and good interpretability (of sparse convolutional models). Our method
uses differentiable optimization layers that are defined from convolutional sparse
coding as drop-in replacements of standard convolutional layers in conventional
deep neural networks. We show that such models have equally strong empirical
performance on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets when compared to
conventional neural networks. By leveraging stable recovery property of sparse
modeling, we further show that such models can be much more robust to input
corruptions as well as adversarial perturbations in testing through a simple proper
trade-off between sparse regularization and data reconstruction terms. Source code
can be found at https://github.com/Delay-Xili/SDNet.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has been a dominant approach for image classification and has
significantly advanced the performance over previous shallow models. Despite the phenomenal
empirical success, it has been increasingly realized as well as criticized that deep convolutional
networks (ConvNets) are “black boxes” for which we are yet to develop clear understanding [1]. The
layer operations such as convolution, nonlinearity and normalization are geared towards minimizing
an end-to-end training loss and do not have much data-specific meaning. As such, the functionality
of each intermediate layer in a trained ConvNets is mostly unclear and the feature maps that they
produce are hard to interpret. The lack of interpretability also contributes to the notorious difficulty
in enhancing such learning systems for practical data which are usually corrupted by various forms
of perturbation.
This paper presents a visual recognition framework by introducing layers that have explicit data
modeling to tackle shortcomings of current deep learning systems. We work under the assumption
that the layer input can be represented by a few atoms from a dictionary shared by all data points. This
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

