Information-Theoretic GAN Compression with
Variational Energy-based Model

Minsoo Kang1

Hyewon Yoo2

Eunhee Kang3

Sehwan Ki3

Hyong-Euk Lee3

Bohyung Han1,2

1

ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
{kminsoo, yoohyewony, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr
{eunhee.kang, sh1004.ki, hyongeuk.lee}@samsung.com
3

Abstract
We propose an information-theoretic knowledge distillation approach for the compression of generative adversarial networks, which aims to maximize the mutual
information between teacher and student networks via a variational optimization
based on an energy-based model. Because the direct computation of the mutual
information in continuous domains is intractable, our approach alternatively optimizes the student network by maximizing the variational lower bound of the
mutual information. To achieve a tight lower bound, we introduce an energy-based
model relying on a deep neural network to represent a flexible variational distribution that deals with high-dimensional images and consider spatial dependencies
between pixels, effectively. Since the proposed method is a generic optimization
algorithm, it can be conveniently incorporated into arbitrary generative adversarial
networks and even dense prediction networks, e.g., image enhancement models.
We demonstrate that the proposed algorithm achieves outstanding performance in
model compression of generative adversarial networks consistently when combined
with several existing models.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1] have accomplished impressive achievements on various
computer vision tasks including image synthesis [2–5], image-to-image translation [6–9], video prediction [10–12], and many others. However, despite the outstanding performance, their applicability
to resource-hungry systems, e.g., edge or mobile devices, is limited due to high computational costs.
To deal with this issue, GAN compression, a task reducing the size of generator networks, has recently
drawn the attention of many machine learning researchers.
The straightforward way to compress generators is to directly employ traditional network compression
techniques such as low-rank approximation [13–15], network quantization [16–19], pruning [20–
25], and knowledge distillation [26–30]. However, the compression of generative models typically
involves a higher-dimensional output space and requires matching the output distributions between
the original and compressed models instead of the output instances given by the two models. Hence,
as reported in [31–33], the synthesized images obtained from the compressed generators via the
channel pruning [34, 23, 24] are often suboptimal—producing images with artifacts and suffering
from image quality degradation, which implies that a naïve application of the methods designed for
discriminative models with low dimensional output spaces is not effective for GAN compressions.
Existing approaches for compressing GANs [31, 35, 32, 36–38, 33, 39] often utilize knowledge
distillation and manage to achieve competitive accuracy of student models. Specifically, these methods
transfer the knowledge of a teacher network to a student model via intermediate representations,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

