Structured Recognition for
Generative Models with Explaining Away

1

Changmin Yu1,2 Hugo Soulat2 Neil Burgess1 Maneesh Sahani2
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience; 2 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit;
UCL, London, United Kingdom
{changmin.yu.19; hugo.soulat.19; n.burgess}@ucl.ac.uk;
maneesh@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
A key goal of unsupervised learning is to go beyond density estimation and sample
generation to reveal the structure inherent within observed data. Such structure
can be expressed in the pattern of interactions between explanatory latent variables captured through a probabilistic graphical model. Although the learning of
structured graphical models has a long history, much recent work in unsupervised
modelling has instead emphasised flexible deep-network-based generation, either
transforming independent latent generators to model complex data or assuming that
distinct observed variables are derived from different latent nodes. Here, we extend
amortised variational inference to incorporate structured factors over multiple variables, able to capture the observation-induced posterior dependence between latents
that results from “explaining away” and thus allow complex observations to depend
on multiple nodes of a structured graph. We show that appropriately parametrised
factors can be combined efficiently with variational message passing in rich graphical structures. We instantiate the framework in nonlinear Gaussian Process Factor
Analysis, evaluating the structured recognition framework using synthetic data
from known generative processes. We fit the GPFA model to high-dimensional
neural spike data from the hippocampus of freely moving rodents, where the model
successfully identifies latent signals that correlate with behavioural covariates.

1

Introduction

A central challenge of unsupervised learning is to identify and model patterns of statistical dependence
in high-dimensional data. One approach to this challenge exploits latent-variable generative models,
which capture the statistical structure of data through the modelled influence of the latent variables on
observations, and through interactions between the latents themselves. Recent developments in deep
learning have enabled deep generative models (DGM), with remarkable success in density estimation
and high-fidelity image or text generation [1–5]. However, much of the DGM development has
emphasised the expressiveness and accuracy of the latent-to-observation generative process, with the
latents themselves often assumed independent a priori.
Variational learning requires inferring or approximating the posterior distribution of the latents
conditioned on observations [6]. In a variational autoencoder [VAE; 1, 2], inference for a DGM is
amortised by training a recognition network to return parameters of the variational posterior. The
structured variational autoencoder [SVAE; 7] connects the DGM framework with richer models that
include structured prior dependence amongst the latent variables. In an SVAE the structured latent
prior is combined with a DGM link between each latent and a corresponding observation. Variational
inference is amortised using recognition networks that return parameters of a factor associated with
each link, which are combined with the structured prior to obtain the full posterior. However, in
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

