Efficient Methods for Non-stationary Online Learning

Peng Zhao, Yan-Feng Xie, Lijun Zhang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{zhaop, xieyf, zhanglj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Non-stationary online learning has drawn much attention in recent years. In particular, dynamic regret and adaptive regret are proposed as two principled performance
measures for online convex optimization in non-stationary environments. To optimize them, a two-layer online ensemble is usually deployed due to the inherent
uncertainty of the non-stationarity, in which a group of base-learners are maintained
and a meta-algorithm is employed to track the best one on the fly. However, the
two-layer structure raises the concern about the computational complexity — those
methods typically maintain O(log T ) base-learners simultaneously for a T -round
online game and thus perform multiple projections onto the feasible domain per
round, which becomes the computational bottleneck when the domain is complicated. In this paper, we present efficient methods for optimizing dynamic regret and
adaptive regret, which reduce the number of projections per round from O(log T )
to 1. Moreover, our obtained algorithms require only one gradient query and one
function evaluation at each round. Our technique hinges on the reduction mechanism developed in parameter-free online learning and requires non-trivial twists on
non-stationary online methods. Empirical studies verify our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Classic online learning minimizes the static regret, which benchmarks the online learner’s performance against the best fixed decision in hindsight. In many real-world online applications, however,
the environments are non-stationary [Zhou, 2022] and static regret becomes less attractive since it
would be unrealistic to assume the existence of a single decision behaved satisfactorily over time.
To address the limitation, in recent years, researchers have studied more strengthened performance
measures to facilitate online algorithms with the capability of handling non-stationarity. In particular,
dynamic regret [Zinkevich, 2003; Zhang et al., 2018a] and adaptive regret [Hazan and Seshadhri,
2009; Daniely et al., 2015] are proposed as two principled metrics to guide the algorithm design.
We focus on the online convex optimization (OCO) setting [Hazan, 2016]. OCO can be deemed as
a game between the learner and the environments. At each round t ∈ [T ], the learner submits her
decision xt ∈ X from a convex feasible domain X ⊆ Rd and simultaneously environments choose a
convex function ft : X 7→ R, and subsequently the learner suffers an instantaneous loss ft (xt ).
1.1

Dynamic Regret and Adaptive Regret

Dynamic regret is proposed by Zinkevich [2003] to compare the online learner’s performance against
a sequence of any feasible comparators u1 , . . . , uT ∈ X . Formally, it is defined as
D-R EGT (u1 , . . . , uT ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) −

T
X

ft (ut ).

t=1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(1)

