Dataset Distillation via Factorization
Songhua Liu

Kai Wang Xingyi Yang Jingwen Ye Xinchao Wang
National University of Singapore
{songhua.liu,e0823044,xyang}@u.nus.edu, {jingweny,xinchao}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we study dataset distillation (DD), from a novel perspective and
introduce a dataset factorization approach, termed HaBa, which is a plug-andplay strategy portable to any existing DD baseline. Unlike conventional DD
approaches that aim to produce distilled and representative samples, HaBa explores
decomposing a dataset into two components: data Hallucination networks and
Bases, where the latter is fed into the former to reconstruct image samples. The
flexible combinations between bases and hallucination networks, therefore, equip
the distilled data with exponential informativeness gain, which largely increase
the representation capability of distilled datasets. To furthermore increase the
data efficiency of compression results, we further introduce a pair of adversarial
contrastive constraints on the resultant hallucination networks and bases, which
increase the diversity of generated images and inject more discriminant information
into the factorization. Extensive comparisons and experiments demonstrate that
our method can yield significant improvement on downstream classification tasks
compared with previous state of the arts, while reducing the total number of
compressed parameters by up to 65%. Moreover, distilled datasets by our approach
also achieve ~10% higher accuracy than baseline methods in cross-architecture
generalization. Our code is available here.

1

Introduction

The success of deep models on a variety of vision tasks, such as image classification [23, 9, 34],
object detection [33, 32], and semantic segmentation [39, 49, 25], is largely attributed to the huge
amount of data used for training and various pre-trained models [50]. However, the sheer amount
of data introduces significant obstacles for storage, transmission, and data pre-processing. Besides,
publishing raw data inevitably brings about privacy or copyright issue in practice [40, 8]. To alleviate
these problems, Wang et al. [47] pioneer the research of dataset distillation (DD), to distill a large
dataset into a synthetic one with only a limited number of samples, so that the training efforts
with the distilled dataset for downstream models on the original dataset can be largely reduced,
which facilitates a series of applications like continual learning [37, 36, 48, 27] and black-box
optimization [6]. Due the significant practical value of DD, many endeavours have been made on this
area [55, 53, 54, 46, 21, 5, 56] to design novel supervision signals to train the synthetic datasets and
to further improve their performances.
Nevertheless, there is a potential drawback in conventional settings of DD: it largely treats each
synthetic sample independently and ignores the inter coherence and relationship between different
instances. As such, the information embraced by each sample, despite distilled, is by nature limited.
Using the synthetic samples for training downstream models, therefore, inevitably leads to the loss of
dataset information. Moreover, the few distilled samples are incompatible with the enormous number
of parameters in a deep model and may yield the risk of overfitting.
To verify these potential issues, we conduct a pre-experiment on CIFAR10 dataset with 10 synthetic
images per class, using MTT [5], the current SOTA solution on DD, as the baseline. In addition
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

