The Stability-Efficiency Dilemma: Investigating
Sequence Length Warmup for Training GPT Models

Conglong Li
Microsoft
conglong.li@microsoft.com

Minjia Zhang
Microsoft
minjiaz@microsoft.com

Yuxiong He
Microsoft
yuxhe@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent works have demonstrated great success in pre-training large-scale autoregressive language models (e.g., GPT-3) on massive GPUs. To reduce the wall-clock
training time, a common practice is to increase the batch size and learning rate.
However, such practice is often brittle and leads to a so-called stability-efficiency
dilemma: increasing the batch sizes and learning rates leads to better training
efficiency but can also result in training instability, leading to poor generalization
accuracy or failed runs. To better understand this phenomenon, we conduct an
in-depth analysis on large-scale pre-training experiments replicating the GPT-2
model with public dataset. We find that there is a strong correlation between
training instability and extreme values of gradient variance. We further identify that
samples with long sequence lengths contribute to these extreme gradient variance
values, especially at the beginning of the training, indicating that long sequence
length can be a main source of training instability.
Based on the analysis, we present a simple yet effective Sequence Length Warmup
method that aims to solve the training stability-efficiency dilemma by avoiding
extreme gradient variance values. Moreover, we present a lightweight tuning
strategy that allows us to tune our method with just a small portion of the expensive
full training. Experiments replicating GPT-2 models (117M and 1.5B) show that
our approach enables stable training with 8x larger batch size and 4x larger learning
rate, whereas the baseline approach struggles with training instability. To achieve
the same or better zero-shot evaluation results, our method reduces the required
number of training tokens and wall clock time by up to 2.2x and 3.7x, respectively.
Experiments replicating GPT-3 model (125M) show that our approach enables
stable training with 8x larger batch size and 40x larger learning rate, and retains
99% of the zero-shot accuracy on 11 tasks using 10x less data and 17x less time
compared to the original GPT-3 training recipe, while the baseline diverges under
the same settings and only retain 95% of accuracy under lower learning rate.

1

Introduction

Large-scale Transformer-based language models have achieved great success in many natural language processing tasks [46, 11]. Among them, large-scale autoregressive models, such as GPT-3 [6],
have attracted lots of attention due to their superior performance on zero-shot generalization, i.e., they
can perform a wide range of tasks that they are not explicitly trained on. However, pre-training GPT
models raises huge challenges on training efficiency and less-discussed training instability issues.
On the efficiency side, as the model size continues to grow from a few hundreds of millions (e.g.,
GPT [31]), to billion-scale parameters (1.5B GPT-2 [33]), and to more recent hundreds of billions
of parameters (175B GPT-3 [6]), the training cost also increases exponentially: it requires 9.2 days
This paper was previously titled “Curriculum Learning: A Regularization Method for Efficient and Stable
Billion-Scale GPT Model Pre-Training” in an early arxiv preprint version[22].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

