Look Around and Refer: 2D Synthetic Semantics
Knowledge Distillation for 3D Visual Grounding

Eslam Mohamed Bakr, Yasmeen Alsaedy, Mohamed Elhoseiny
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
{eslam.abdelrahman, yasmeen.alsaedi, mohamed.elhoseiny}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
The 3D visual grounding task has been explored with visual and language streams
comprehending referential language to identify target objects in 3D scenes. However, most existing methods devote the visual stream to capturing the 3D visual
clues using off-the-shelf point clouds encoders. The main question we address in
this paper is “can we consolidate the 3D visual stream by 2D clues synthesized
from point clouds and efficiently utilize them in training and testing?”. The main
idea is to assist the 3D encoder by incorporating rich 2D object representations
without requiring extra 2D inputs. To this end, we leverage 2D clues, synthetically
generated from 3D point clouds, and empirically show their aptitude to boost the
quality of the learned visual representations. We validate our approach through
comprehensive experiments on Nr3D, Sr3D, and ScanRefer datasets and show
consistent performance gains compared to existing methods. Our proposed module,
dubbed as Look Around and Refer (LAR), significantly outperforms the state-ofthe-art 3D visual grounding techniques on three benchmarks, i.e., Nr3D, Sr3D, and
ScanRefer. The code is available at https://eslambakr.github.io/LAR.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Visiolinguistic modeling has attracted much attention
over the past decade due to impact on various areas,
including visual question answering [3, 36], 3D scene
captioning [7], image-text matching [26, 44], visual
relation detection [25], and scene graph generation
[42]. Consequently, understanding natural language
utterances and grounding them to real-world scenarios is attractive due to their importance in many real
applications, such as robot navigation and interaction
in indoor environment [22] [40].
Visual Grounding (VG) has been explored in recent
years in the context of 2D [16, 30, 46, 55, 57], extending object detection to a more complex task. However, for real robots to intelligently ground a given
utterance on a natural scene in a challenging environment like a crowded indoor or outdoor scene, 3D representations are needed to understand the surrounding
environment better. Therefore, 3D visual grounding
task have been proposed by ReferIt3D [2] and ScanRefer [5]. The ReferIt3D [2] introduces two datasets
containing natural and synthetic language utterances,

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed approach,
where we aim to localize a referred object given an
input utterance and 3D scene. Our novel approach
generates 2D synthetic images for each object in
the scene by placing virtual cameras surrounding
the object. This novel approach enables us to leverage the rich 2D semantics representation without
needing authentic extra 2D images not to limit potential application scenarios.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

