Hierarchical Normalization for Robust Monocular
Depth Estimation

Chi Zhang1 ,
1
1

Wei Yin2 ,

Tecent PCG, China

Zhibin Wang1 ,
2

Gang Yu1∗,

DJI Technology, China

3

Bin Fu1 ,

Chunhua Shen3

Zhejiang University, China

{johnczhang, brianfu, skicyyu}@tencent.com; 2 yvanwy@outlook.com; 3 Chunhua@icloud.com

Abstract
In this paper, we address monocular depth estimation with deep neural networks.
To enable training of deep monocular estimation models with various sources
of datasets, state-of-the-art methods adopt image-level normalization strategies
to generate affine-invariant depth representations. However, learning with the
image-level normalization mainly emphasizes the relations of pixel representations
with the global statistic in the images, such as the structure of the scene, while
the fine-grained depth difference may be overlooked. In this paper, we propose
a novel multi-scale depth normalization method that hierarchically normalizes
the depth representations based on spatial information and depth distributions.
Compared with previous normalization strategies applied only at the holistic image
level, the proposed hierarchical normalization can effectively preserve the finegrained details and improve accuracy. We present two strategies that define the
hierarchical normalization contexts in the depth domain and the spatial domain,
respectively. Our extensive experiments show that the proposed normalization
strategy remarkably outperforms previous normalization methods, and we set new
state-of-the-art on five zero-shot transfer benchmark datasets.
SSI

SSI

SSI

Ours

Ours

Ours
SSI

Ours

Figure 1: We propose a hierarchical depth normalization strategy to improve the training of monocular depth
estimation models. Compared with the previous normalization strategy SSI [24], our design effectively improves
the details and smoothness of predictions. We visualize the predictions of close regions with heat maps to
observe details.

1

Introduction

Data-driven deep learning based monocular depth estimation has gained wide interest in recent years,
due to its low requirements of sensing devices and impressive progress. Among various learning
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

