Graph Convolution Network based Recommender
Systems: Learning Guarantee and Item Mixture
Powered Strategy

Leyan Deng† , Defu Lian †§∗ , Chenwang Wu† , Enhong Chen†§
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
§
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{dleyan, wcw1996}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liandefu, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn
†

Abstract
Inspired by their powerful representation ability on graph-structured data, Graph
Convolution Networks (GCNs) have been widely applied to recommender systems,
and have shown superior performance. Despite their empirical success, there is
a lack of theoretical explorations such as generalization properties. In this paper,
we take a first step towards establishing a generalization guarantee for GCN-based
recommendation models under inductive and transductive learning. We mainly
investigate the roles of graph normalization and non-linear activation, providing
some theoretical understanding, and construct extensive experiments to further
verify these findings empirically. Furthermore, based on the proven generalization
bound and the challenge of existing models in discrete data learning, we propose
Item Mixture (IMix) to enhance recommendation. It models discrete spaces in a
continuous manner by mixing the embeddings of positive-negative item pairs, and
its effectiveness can be strictly guaranteed from empirical and theoretical aspects.

1

Introduction

With the explosive growth of online information, Internet users rely on recommender systems to
alleviate such information overload [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. In order to take full advantage of the rich graph
structure with high-hop neighbors in recommender systems, recent studies have begun to apply Graph
Convolution Networks (GCNs) [7] to recommender systems. As expected, GCN-based models have
emerged as one of the most attractive approaches to recommender systems due to their powerful
graph representation abilities. However, these works only demonstrate the effectiveness of GCNs
empirically and do not provide theoretical guarantees.
GCN-based Recommendation. [8] was the first to introduce GCN into recommender systems.
Specifically, GCN in their approach was applied to the user-user and item-item graphs to learn
auxiliary information, respectively. GC-MC [9] proposed to apply GCN to the user-item interaction
graph to learn the relations between users and items. SpectralCF [10] directly discovered all possible
connectivity between users and items from the spectral domain of the user-item graph. However,
SpectralCF fails to capture the information in high order. NGCF [11] further proposed employing
the element-wise product between users and embeddings to augment the item features that users
care about and the user features that items are selected by. Some works [11, 12, 13, 14, 15]
observed that removing the non-linear activation not only simplifies the update operation, but also
retains or enhances the recommendation performance. LightGCN [12] further removed the feature
transformation to simplify the design of GCN. However, these changes only depend on the empirical
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

