Leveraging The Hints: Adaptive
Bidding in Repeated First-Price Auctions

Wei Zhang1 Yanjun Han2∗ Zhengyuan Zhou3,4∗ Aaron Flores5 Tsachy Weissman6
MIT EECS 2 MIT IDSS 3 Arena Technologies 4 NYU Stern 5 Yahoo! Research 6 Stanford EE
{w_zhang, yjhan}@mit.edu z@arena-ai.com aaron.flores@yahooinc.com tsachy@stanford.edu
1

Abstract
With the advent and increasing consolidation of e-commerce, digital advertising
has very recently replaced traditional advertising as the main marketing force in the
economy. In the past four years, a particularly important development in the digital
advertising industry is the shift from second-price auctions to first-price auctions for
online display ads. This shift immediately motivated the intellectually challenging
question of how to bid in first-price auctions, because unlike in second-price
auctions, bidding one’s private value truthfully is no longer optimal. Following a
series of recent works in this area, we consider a differentiated setup: we do not
make any assumption about other bidders’ maximum bid (i.e. it can be adversarial
over time), and instead assume that we have access to a hint that serves as a
prediction of other bidders’ maximum bid, where the prediction is learned through
some blackbox machine learning model. We consider two types of hints: a single
point-prediction, and a hint interval (representing a type of confidence region into
which others’ maximum bid falls). We establish minimax near-optimal regret
bounds for both cases and highlight the quantitatively different behavior between
them. We also provide improved regret bounds when the others’ maximum bid
exhibits the further structure of sparsity. Finally, we complement the theoretical
results with demonstrations using real bidding data.

1

Introduction

As e-commerce proliferates across the industries, digital advertising has become the predominant
marketing force in the economy: in 2019, businesses in the US alone [Wag19] have spent more than
129 billion dollars on digital advertising, surpassing for the first time the combined amount spent
via traditional advertising channels by 20 billion dollars. Since then, this number has been growing
and continues to outpace traditional advertising spending [Wag19]. Within digital advertising, the
key step that generates such revenue for digital advertising is online ads auctions. In the past,
second-price auctions, as a result of its truthful nature, have been the standard format for online
ads auctions [LR00, Kle04, LRBPR07]. However, the industry has recently witnessed a shift from
second-price auctions to first-price auctions in display ads auctions, which currently account for 54%
of the digital advertising market* share [DRS19].
This industry-wide shift to first-price auctions has occurred for several reasons, including larger
revenue (the exchange charges a percentage of the winning bid) [Ben18a] and no last-look advantage
*

Correspondence to Yanjun Han (yjhan@mit.edu) and Zhengyuan Zhou (z@arena-ai.com).
Search auctions dominate the remaining market, which are still conducted using second-price (or generalize
second-price) auctions.
*

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

