Streaming Radiance Fields for 3D Video Synthesis

Lingzhi Li
Alibaba Group
llz273714@alibaba-inc.com
Zhongshu Wang
Alibaba Group
zhongshu.wzs@alibaba-inc.com

Zhen Shen
Alibaba Group
zackary.sz@alibaba-inc.com
Li Shen
Alibaba Group
lshen.lsh@gmail.com

Ping Tan
Alibaba Group
pingtan@sfu.ca

Abstract
We present an explicit-grid based method for efficiently reconstructing streaming
radiance fields for novel view synthesis of real world dynamic scenes. Instead of
training a single model that combines all the frames, we formulate the dynamic
modeling problem with an incremental learning paradigm in which per-frame
model difference is trained to complement the adaption of a base model on the
current frame. By exploiting the simple yet effective tuning strategy with narrow
bands, the proposed method realizes a feasible framework for handling video
sequences on-the-fly with high training efficiency. The storage overhead induced
by using explicit grid representations can be significantly reduced through the use
of model difference based compression. We also introduce an efficient strategy to
further accelerate model optimization for each frame. Experiments on challenging
video sequences demonstrate that our approach is capable of achieving a training
speed of 15 seconds per-frame with competitive rendering quality, which attains
1000× speedup over the state-of-the-art implicit methods.

1

Introduction

3D video synthesis aims to realize free-viewpoint photo-realistic rendering for dynamic scenes, which
are typically recorded via a set of cameras (with known poses) from multiple views. The topic has
attracted much research effort because of its potential value in a wide range of applications in VR/AR.
Traditional techniques by estimating surfaces [1], multi-sphere images [2] or depth [3, 4] via
multi-view stereo [5, 6] are usually used for modeling and representing dynamic scenes. However,
arbitrary geometry and complex appearance exhibiting in real-world scenarios pose challenges for
leveraging a general methodology to pursue high-performance modeling.
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) [7, 8] have recently emerged as a new methodology for effectively
reconstructing and rendering static scenes via neural networks. These methods learn a continuous
mapping between 3D points (given view directions) and their corresponding radiance colors and
opacity, to realize high-fidelity rendering results through the use of volumetric rendering techniques
[9]. However, they often suffer from costly training and inference due to a tremendous amount
of computations through neural networks. When extending the implicit formulation to a dynamic
scene [10], time steps are embedded as additional input for training models across frames and
achieving time-dependent rendering. Compared to training on static scenes, training overhead
increases significantly with respect to sequence length, e.g., costing about 56 GPU days for training
300 frames, that would be prohibitive when handling long sequences. More importantly, such learning
paradigm is restricted to offline modeling, thus unable to tackle online scenarios.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

