Does Self-supervised Learning Really Improve
Reinforcement Learning from Pixels?

Xiang Li1

Jinghuan Shang1
Srijan Das1,2
Michael S. Ryoo1
Department of Computer Science
1
Stony Brook University, 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte
1
{xiangli8, jishang, mryoo}@cs.stonybrook.edu, 2 sdas24@uncc.edu

Abstract
We investigate whether self-supervised learning (SSL) can improve online reinforcement learning (RL) from pixels. We extend the contrastive reinforcement
learning framework (e.g., CURL) that jointly optimizes SSL and RL losses and conduct an extensive amount of experiments with various self-supervised losses. Our
observations suggest that the existing SSL framework for RL fails to bring meaningful improvement over the baselines only taking advantage of image augmentation
when the same amount of data and augmentation is used. We further perform
evolutionary searches to find the optimal combination of multiple self-supervised
losses for RL, but find that even such a loss combination fails to meaningfully
outperform the methods that only utilize carefully designed image augmentations.
After evaluating these approaches together in multiple different environments including a real-world robot environment, we confirm that no single self-supervised
loss or image augmentation method can dominate all environments and that the
current framework for joint optimization of SSL and RL is limited. Finally, we
conduct the ablation study on multiple factors and demonstrate the properties of
representations learned with different approaches.

1

Introduction

Learning to act from image observations is crucial in many real-world applications. One popular
approach is online reinforcement learning (RL), which requires no human demonstration or expert
trajectories. Since all training samples are collected by the agent during policy learning in online RL,
the collected data often has strong correlations and high variance, challenging the policy learning.
Meanwhile, the cost of interacting with environments requires the RL algorithms to have higher
sample efficiency. Compared to RL using state-based features, pixel-based RL continuously takes
images as inputs, which usually come with a much higher dimensionality than numerical states. Such
properties pose serious challenges to image representation learning in RL.
Several recent works studied such challenges from various directions, including: (1) Inspired by
the great success of self-supervised learning (SSL) with images and videos (e.g., [7, 8, 10, 12, 16,
17, 19, 23, 34, 35, 40, 43, 55, 57, 58, 64, 73]), some RL methods [1, 45, 49, 62, 66, 71, 84, 90]
take advantage of self-supervised learning. This is typically done by applying both self-supervised
loss and reinforcement learning loss in one batch. In this paper, we dub such joint optimization of
the self-supervised loss and the RL loss as the joint learning framework. (2) On the other hand,
many papers [31, 46, 51, 61, 63, 78, 83, 85] investigate how online RL can take advantage of image
augmentations. Among them, RAD [46] and DrQ [83, 85] show significant improvements by applying
relatively simple image augmentations to observations of RL agents.
Our objective is to study how well a single or combination of self-supervised losses and augmentations
work under the current joint learning framework and to empirically identify their impact on RL
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

