Differentiable Analog Quantum Computing for
Optimization and Control

Jiaqi Leng†1,3
1

Yuxiang Peng†1,2 Yi-Ling Qiao†2,4

Ming C. Lin2,4

Xiaodi Wu1,2

Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
3
Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland
4
Center for Machine Learning, University of Maryland
†
Equal Contribution

Abstract
We formulate the first differentiable analog quantum computing framework with
specific parameterization design at the analog signal (pulse) level to better exploit
near-term quantum devices via variational methods. We further propose a scalable
approach to estimate the gradients of quantum dynamics using a forward pass
with Monte Carlo sampling, which leads to a quantum stochastic gradient descent
algorithm for scalable gradient-based training in our framework. Applying our
framework to quantum optimization and control, we observe a significant advantage
of differentiable analog quantum computing against SOTAs based on parameterized
digital quantum circuits by orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Quantum computing has promised unprecedented improvement in our computational ability to tackle
classically intractable problems. Despite of the rapid development of quantum hardware [2, 66], nearterm quantum computers are still likely to have very restricted hardware resources, where the limited
number of “qubits” and non-negligible machine noises would impede the implementation of largescale quantum algorithms. Recent research results in both computer science [60] and physics [43]
suggest a promising approach of designing resource-efficient Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum
(NISQ) [51] applications by breaking quantum circuit abstractions and directly designing applications
at the pulse-level control of quantum machines.1 The benefits of this analog-oriented approach have
been witnessed in the history of classical analog computing that predates digital computing due to
relaxed hardware requirement and plays an important role in domain applications such as simulation.
One leading algorithmic paradigm on NISQ computers is the Variational Quantum Algorithm
(VQA) with a few prominent examples like the Variational Quantum Eignensolver (VQE) [50],
quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) [20], and more in [4]. Specifically, VQA
uses parametrized quantum models to characterize loss functions, in particular those from quantum
physics, which are potentially intractable for classical computing [26]. These parameters will
then be optimized, usually through gradient-based approaches, to minimize the given loss function.
Conventionally, parameterized quantum models are typically quantum circuits where each gate is
parameterized by classical variables. Moreover, auto-differentiation techniques have been recently
developed (e.g., [47, 59, 67]) for a scalable quantum gradient calculation on parameterized quantum
circuits. We henceforth refer this existing framework as differentiable digital quantum computing.
Although parameterized quantum circuits are designed for NISQ applications, implementing (digital)
quantum circuits still incurs non-negligible overheads, which significantly restricts the size of
1

Pulse-level control is available on IBMQ computers.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

