Optimal Transport-based Identity Matching
for Identity-invariant Facial Expression Recognition

Daeha Kim
Inha University
kdhht5022@gmail.com

Byung Cheol Song
Inha University
bcsong@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
Identity-invariant facial expression recognition (FER) has been one of the challenging computer vision tasks. Since conventional FER schemes do not explicitly
address the inter-identity variation of facial expressions, their neural network models still operate depending on facial identity. This paper proposes to quantify the
inter-identity variation by utilizing pairs of similar expressions explored through
a specific matching process. We formulate the identity matching process as an
Optimal Transport (OT) problem. Specifically, to find pairs of similar expressions
from different identities, we define the inter-feature similarity as a transportation
cost. Then, optimal identity matching to find the optimal flow with minimum transportation cost is performed by Sinkhorn-Knopp iteration. The proposed matching
method is not only easy to plug in to other models, but also requires only acceptable computational overhead. Extensive simulations prove that the proposed FER
method improves the PCC/CCC performance by up to 10% or more compared to
the runner-up on wild datasets. The source code and software demo are available at
https://github.com/kdhht2334/ELIM_FER.

1

Introduction

For sophisticated human-computer interaction (HCI), facial expression recognition (FER) must be able to accurately predict the emotions of people with different personalities or expressive styles. On the other hand, to express the type and intensity of emotions in detail, VA FER,
which annotates facial expressions in a continuous domain
based on two axes of Valence (V) and Arousal (A), is attracting attention [36]. Here, valence and arousal indicate
the positive/negative of emotions and the degree of activation, respectively. Recently, many techniques for analyzing
complex or fine-grained expressions have been developed
to improve the regression or prediction performance of
VA FER [16, 27, 17]. However, it is still challenging to Figure 1: Conceptual illustration of
properly learn facial expressions that differ from person ELIM. ELIM utilizes identity pairs that
to person due to heterogeneity in identity (ID) attributes are advantageous for FER learning.
such as age, gender, and culture.
Thus, so-called ID-aware FER is receiving a lot of attention nowadays. For example, [22, 2] learned
emotional factors inherent in strong facial expression samples through adversarial learning, and
generated ID samples favorable to FER through GAN [14]. However, it is observed that conventional
models have difficulty learning the unique properties of facial expressions inherent in each ID, and
above all, they are still dependent on the ID change.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

