On the symmetries of the synchronization problem in
Cryo-EM: Multi-Frequency Vector Diffusion Maps
on the Projective Plane
Gabriele Cesa
Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam⇤
AMLab, University of Amsterdam
gcesa@qti.qualcomm.com

Arash Behboodi
Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam⇤
behboodi@qti.qualcomm.com

Taco Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam⇤
tacos@qti.qualcomm.com

Max Welling
AMLab, University of Amsterdam
welling.max@gmail.com

Abstract
Cryo-Electron Microscopy (Cryo-EM) is an important imaging method which
allows high-resolution reconstruction of the 3D structures of biomolecules. It
produces highly noisy 2D images by projecting a molecule’s 3D density from
random viewing directions. Because the projection directions are unknown, estimating the images’ poses is necessary to perform the reconstruction. We focus on
this task and study it under the group synchronization framework: if the relative
poses of pairs of images can be approximated from the data, an estimation of the
images’ poses is given by the assignment which is most consistent with the relative
ones. In particular, by studying the symmetries of cryo-EM, we show that relative poses in the group O(2) provide sufficient constraints to identify the images’
poses, up to the molecule’s chirality. With this in mind, we improve the existing
multi-frequency vector diffusion maps (MFVDM) method: by using O(2) relative
poses, our method not only predicts the similarity between the images’ viewing
directions but also recovers their poses. Hence, we can leverage all input images in
a 3D reconstruction algorithm by initializing the poses with our estimation rather
than just clustering and averaging the input images. We validate the recovery
capabilities and robustness of our method on randomly generated synchronization
graphs and a synthetic cryo-EM dataset.

1

Introduction

Cryo-Electron Microscopy (Cryo-EM) revolutionized the field of structural biology, enabling the
reconstruction of protein structures at unprecedented resolutions. Indeed, the 2017 Nobel Prize in
Chemistry was awarded to three scientists for their pioneering works on it [1]. In single-particle
cryo-EM, a purified solution containing the molecule of interest is frozen on a thin film and then
bombarded with electrons to obtain a 2D tomographic (integral) projection of it. The resulting image
contains the projection of each copy of the molecule in the solution; in a particle picking phase,
these projections are cropped to obtain a dataset of 2D images. Since each copy in the solution is
randomly rotated in 3D, each image is a projection of the molecule’s density in a random unknown
pose. Moreover, the produced images are characterized by very low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) [2],
⇤

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

