Hyperbolic Embedding Inference for
Structured Multi-Label Prediction
Bo Xiong⇤
University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany

Michael Cochez
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Discovery Lab, Elsevier
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Mojtaba Nayyeri
University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany

Steffen Staab
University of Stuttgart
University of Southampton
Stuttgart, Germany

Abstract
We consider a structured multi-label prediction problem where the labels are organized under implication and mutual exclusion constraints. A major concern is to
produce predictions that are logically consistent with these constraints. To do so, we
formulate this problem as an embedding inference problem where the constraints
are imposed onto the embeddings of labels by geometric construction. Particularly, we consider a hyperbolic Poincaré ball model in which we encode labels as
Poincaré hyperplanes that work as linear decision boundaries. The hyperplanes are
interpreted as convex regions such that the logical relationships (implication and
exclusion) are geometrically encoded using insideness and disjointedness of these
regions, respectively. We show theoretical groundings of the method for preserving
logical relationships in the embedding space. Extensive experiments on 12 datasets
show 1) significant improvements in mean average precision; 2) lower number of
constraint violations; 3) an order of magnitude fewer dimensions than baselines.

1

Introduction

Structured multi-label prediction is a task aiming to associate every object with multiple labels that are
semantically constrained in a structured manner (e.g., by implication and exclusion constraints). This
task is of growing importance in many applications such as image annotation [1, 2], text categorization
[3, 4] and functional genomics [5, 6]. One of the central concerns of the task is to produce predictions
that are logically consistent with the constraints of the labels. For example, a protein must be labeled
to have the function nucleic acid binding if it is already labeled to have the function RNA binding
(i.e., implication) and must not have the function drug binding (i.e., mutual exclusion).
Various works have been proposed to improve the prediction consistency [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. One line
of work called label embedding aims to represent labels as low-dimensional vectors [12, 13]. A key
disadvantage of the vector-based representations is that they only capture weak forms of correlation
or “similarity’ between labels, but do not strongly enforce the logical relationships. Another line
of work [7, 9, 14, 8] imposes these logical constraints directly to the losses of neural networks.
However, they do not explicitly learn the representations of labels and typically require a complete
label taxonomy, which is not always available in and scalable to real-world settings [11].
⇤

Correspondence to bo.xiong@ipvs.uni-stuttgart.de

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

