Neural Shape Deformation Priors

Jiapeng Tang1
1
3

Lev Markhasin2

Bi Wang2

Justus Thies3

Matthias Nießner1

Technical University of Munich 2 Sony Europe RDC Stuttgart
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Figure 1: Neural shape deformation priors allow for intuitive shape manipulation of existing source
meshes. A user can create novel shapes by dragging handles (red circles) defined on the region of
interest (red regions) to desired locations (blue circles).

Abstract
We present Neural Shape Deformation Priors, a novel method for shape manipulation that predicts mesh deformations of non-rigid objects from user-provided
handle movements. State-of-the-art methods cast this problem as an optimization
task, where the input source mesh is iteratively deformed to minimize an objective
function according to hand-crafted regularizers such as ARAP [1]. In this work,
we learn the deformation behavior based on the underlying geometric properties of
a shape, while leveraging a large-scale dataset containing a diverse set of non-rigid
deformations. Specifically, given a source mesh and desired target locations of
handles that describe the partial surface deformation, we predict a continuous
deformation field that is defined in 3D space to describe the space deformation.
To this end, we introduce transformer-based deformation networks that represent
a shape deformation as a composition of local surface deformations. It learns a
set of local latent codes anchored in 3D space, from which we can learn a set of
continuous deformation functions for local surfaces. Our method can be applied to
challenging deformations and generalizes well to unseen deformations. We validate
our approach in experiments using the DeformingThing4D dataset, and compare to
both classic optimization-based and recent neural network-based methods.

1

Introduction

Editing and deforming 3D shapes is a key component in animation creation and computer aided
design pipelines. Given as little user input as possible, the goal is to create new deformed instances
of the original 3D shape which look natural and behave like real objects or animals. The user input is
assumed to be very sparse, such as vertex handles that can be dragged around. For example, users
can animate a 3D model of an animal by dragging its feet forward. This problem is severely ill-posed
and typically under-constrained, as there are many possible deformations that can be matched with
the provided partial surface deformations of handles, especially for large surface deformations. Thus,
strong priors encoding deformation regularity are necessary to tackle this problem. Physics and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

