Attracting and Dispersing: A Simple Approach for
Source-free Domain Adaptation

Shiqi Yang1 , Yaxing Wang2∗, Kai Wang1 , Shangling Jui3 , Joost van de Weijer1
1
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
2
Nankai University, Tianjin, China
3
Huawei Kirin Solution, Shanghai, China
{syang,kwang,joost}@cvc.uab.es,
yaxing@nankai.edu.cn, jui.shangling@huawei.com

Abstract
We propose a simple but effective source-free domain adaptation (SFDA) method.
Treating SFDA as an unsupervised clustering problem and following the intuition
that local neighbors in feature space should have more similar predictions than
other features, we propose to optimize an objective of prediction consistency. This
objective encourages local neighborhood features in feature space to have similar
predictions while features farther away in feature space have dissimilar predictions,
leading to efficient feature clustering and cluster assignment simultaneously. For
efficient training, we seek to optimize an upper-bound of the objective resulting
in two simple terms. Furthermore, we relate popular existing methods in domain
adaptation, source-free domain adaptation and contrastive learning via the perspective of discriminability and diversity. The experimental results prove the superiority
of our method, and our method can be adopted as a simple but strong baseline for
future research in SFDA. Our method can be also adapted to source-free open-set
and partial-set DA which further shows the generalization ability of our method.
Code is available in https://github.com/Albert0147/AaD_SFDA.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning methods which are based on training with huge amounts of labeled data are
advancing almost all fields of computer vision. However, the learned models typically perform
decently on test data which have a similar distribution with the training set. Significant performance
degradation will occur if directly applying those models to a new domain different from the training
set, where the data distribution (such as variation of background, styles or camera parameter) is
considerably different. This kind of distribution shift is formally denoted as domain/distribution
shift. It limits the generalization of the model to unseen domains which is important in real-world
applications. There are several research fields trying to tackle this problem. One of them is Domain
Adaptation (DA), which aims to reduce the domain shift between the labeled source domain and
unlabeled target domain. Typical works [12, 38] resort to learn domain-invariant features, thus
improving generalization ability of the model between different domains. And in the past few years,
the main research line of domain adaptation is either trying to minimize the distribution discrepancy
between two domains [32, 33, 35], or deploying adversarial training on features to learn domain
invariant representation [52, 68, 4, 36]. Some methods also tackle domain shift from the view of
semi-supervised learning [67, 27] or clustering [7, 50, 5].
Many recent methods [24, 29, 64, 66, 55, 15, 61] focus on source-free domain adaptation (SFDA),
where source data are unavailable during target adaptation, due to data privacy and intellectual
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

