Logical Activation Functions: Logit-space equivalents
of Probabilistic Boolean Operators

Scott C. Lowe1,2,∗ , Robert Earle1,2 , Jason d’Eon1,2 , Thomas Trappenberg1 , Sageev Oore1,2

1

∗

2

Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, Nova Scotia
Canada

Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Toronto, Ontario
Canada

Correspondence: scottclowe@gmail.com

Abstract
The choice of activation functions and their motivation is a long-standing issue
within the neural network community. Neuronal representations within artificial
neural networks are commonly understood as logits, representing the log-odds
score of presence of features within the stimulus. We derive logit-space operators
equivalent to probabilistic Boolean logic-gates AND, OR, and XNOR for independent probabilities. Such theories are important to formalize more complex
dendritic operations in real neurons, and these operations can be used as activation
functions within a neural network, introducing probabilistic Boolean-logic as the
core operation of the neural network. Since these functions involve taking multiple
exponents and logarithms, they are computationally expensive and not well suited
to be directly used within neural networks. Consequently, we construct efficient
approximations named ANDAIL (the AND operator Approximate for Independent
Logits), ORAIL , and XNORAIL , which utilize only comparison and addition operations, have well-behaved gradients, and can be deployed as activation functions in
neural networks. Like MaxOut, ANDAIL and ORAIL are generalizations of ReLU
to two-dimensions. While our primary aim is to formalize dendritic computations within a logit-space probabilistic-Boolean framework, we deploy these new
activation functions, both in isolation and in conjunction to demonstrate their effectiveness on a variety of tasks including tabular classification, image classification,
transfer learning, abstract reasoning, and compositional zero-shot learning.

1

Introduction

Non-linear activation functions are essential in artificial neural networks (ANNs) to form higher-order
representations, since otherwise the network would be degeneratively equivalent to a single linear
layer. Most activation functions represent a simple non-linearity despite evidence of much more
complex non-linear integration and computations in dendrites (Hentschel et al., 2004; London &
Häusser, 2005; Payeur et al., 2019). For example, Gidon et al. (2020) recently demonstrated that a
single biological neuron can compute the XOR of its inputs, a property long known to be lacking
from artificial neurons (Minsky & Papert, 1969). While simple activation functions work in ANNs
in the sense that more complex operations can be formed from the combination of several layers
of neurons, understanding the function and impact of advanced dendritic operations in networks is
important. In this work, we add some of this behaviour to neural activations, corresponding to shifting
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

