Class-Aware Adversarial Transformers
for Medical Image Segmentation

Chenyu You1

Ruihan Zhao2

Ufuk Topcu2
1

Yale University

Fenglin Liu3

Siyuan Dong1

Lawrence Staib1
2

UT Austin

Sandeep Chinchali2

James S. Duncan1
3

University of Oxford

Abstract
Transformers have made remarkable progress towards modeling long-range dependencies within the medical image analysis domain. However, current transformerbased models suffer from several disadvantages: (1) existing methods fail to capture
the important features of the images due to the naive tokenization scheme; (2) the
models suffer from information loss because they only consider single-scale feature
representations; and (3) the segmentation label maps generated by the models
are not accurate enough without considering rich semantic contexts and anatomical textures. In this work, we present CASTformer, a novel type of adversarial
transformers, for 2D medical image segmentation. First, we take advantage of the
pyramid structure to construct multi-scale representations and handle multi-scale
variations. We then design a novel class-aware transformer module to better learn
the discriminative regions of objects with semantic structures. Lastly, we utilize an
adversarial training strategy that boosts segmentation accuracy and correspondingly
allows a transformer-based discriminator to capture high-level semantically correlated contents and low-level anatomical features. Our experiments demonstrate that
CASTformer dramatically outperforms previous state-of-the-art transformer-based
approaches on three benchmarks, obtaining 2.54%-5.88% absolute improvements
in Dice over previous models. Further qualitative experiments provide a more
detailed picture of the model’s inner workings, shed light on the challenges in
improved transparency, and demonstrate that transfer learning can greatly improve
performance and reduce the size of medical image datasets in training, making
CASTformer a strong starting point for downstream medical image analysis tasks.

1

Introduction

Accurate and consistent measurements of anatomical features and functional information on medical
images can greatly assist radiologists in making accurate and reliable diagnoses, treatment planning,
and post-treatment evaluation [1]. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been the de-facto
standard for medical image analysis tasks. However, such methods fail in explicitly modeling
long-range dependencies due to the intrinsic locality and weight sharing of the receptive fields
in convolution operations. Such a deficiency in context modeling at multiple scales often yields
sub-optimal segmentation capability in capturing rich anatomical features of variable shapes and
scales (e.g., tumor regions with different structures and sizes) [2, 3]. Moreover, using transformers
has been shown to be more promising in computer vision [4–9] for utilizing long-range dependencies
than other, traditional CNN-based methods. In parallel, transformers with powerful global relation
modeling abilities have become the standard starting point for training on a wide range of downstream
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

