Instance-optimal PAC Algorithms for Contextual
Bandits
Zhaoqi Li
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
zli9@uw.edu

Lillian Ratliff
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Washington
ratliffl@uw.edu

Houssam Nassif
Amazon
houssamn@amazon.com

Kevin Jamieson
Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
jamieson@cs.washington.edu
Lalit Jain
Foster School of Business
University of Washington
lalitj@uw.edu

Abstract
In the stochastic contextual bandit setting, regret-minimizing algorithms have
been extensively researched, but their instance-minimizing best-arm identification
counterparts remain seldom studied. In this work, we focus on the stochastic bandit
problem in the (✏, )-PAC setting: given a policy class ⇧ the goal of the learner
is to return a policy ⇡ 2 ⇧ whose expected reward is within ✏ of the optimal
policy with probability greater than 1
. We characterize the first instancedependent PAC sample complexity of contextual bandits through a quantity ⇢⇧ ,
and provide matching upper and lower bounds in terms of ⇢⇧ for the agnostic and
linear contextual best-arm identification settings. We show that no algorithm can be
simultaneously minimax-optimal for regret minimization and instance-dependent
PAC for best-arm identification. Our main result is a new instance-optimal and
computationally efficient algorithm that relies on a polynomial number of calls to
an argmax oracle.

1

Introduction

We consider the stochastic contextual bandit problem in the PAC setting. Fix a distribution ⌫ over a
potentially countable1 set of contexts C. The action space is A, and for computational tractability,
we assume |A| is finite. We have a set of policies ⇧ of interest where each policy ⇡ 2 ⇧ is a map
from contexts to an action space ⇡ : C ! A. The reward function is r : C ⇥ A ! R. At each
time t = 1, 2, . . . a context ct ⇠ ⌫ arrives, the learner chooses an action at 2 A, and receives
reward rt := rt (ct , at ) 2 R with E[rt |ct , at ] = r(ct , at ) 2 R. The value of a policy V (⇡) is the
expected reward from playing action ⇡(c) in context c: V (⇡) = Ec⇠⌫ [r(c, ⇡(c))]. Given a collection
of policies ⇧, the objective is to identify the optimal policy ⇡⇤ := arg max⇡2⇧ V (⇡), with high
probability. Formally, for any ✏ > 0 and 2 (0, 1), we seek to characterize the sample complexity of
1
Assuming the set of contexts is countable versus uncountable is for presentation purposes only, since it
allow us the notational convenience of letting ⌫c denote the probability of context c arriving.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

