Sampling without Replacement Leads to Faster Rates
in Finite-Sum Minimax Optimization

Aniket Das ∗
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
aniketd@iitk.ac.in

Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Michael Muehlebach
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
michaelm@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
We analyze the convergence rates of stochastic gradient algorithms for smooth
finite-sum minimax optimization and show that, for many such algorithms, sampling the data points without replacement leads to faster convergence compared to
sampling with replacement. For the smooth and strongly convex-strongly concave
setting, we consider gradient descent ascent and the proximal point method, and
present a unified analysis of two popular without-replacement sampling strategies,
namely Random Reshuffling (RR), which shuffles the data every epoch, and Single
Shuffling or Shuffle Once (SO), which shuffles only at the beginning. We obtain
tight convergence rates for RR and SO and demonstrate that these strategies lead to
faster convergence than uniform sampling. Moving beyond convexity, we obtain
similar results for smooth nonconvex-nonconcave objectives satisfying a two-sided
Polyak-Łojasiewicz inequality. Finally, we demonstrate that our techniques are
general enough to analyze the effect of data-ordering attacks, where an adversary
manipulates the order in which data points are supplied to the optimizer. Our
analysis also recovers tight rates for the incremental gradient method, where the
data points are not shuffled at all.

1

Introduction

The approximate solution of large-scale optimization problems using first-order stochastic gradient
methods constitutes one of the foundations of classical machine learning. However, emerging
problems in machine learning go beyond pattern recognition and involve real-world decision making,
where learning algorithms interact with unknown or even adversarial environments or are deployed
in multi-agent settings. Decision making in such environments often involves solving a minimax
optimization problem of the form minx maxy F (x, y), whose analysis has been a focus of research
in mathematics, economics, and theoretical computer science [38, 13, 10]. Recent examples of its
applications in machine learning include adversarial learning [32, 52, 6], reinforcement learning [30,
58, 11, 42], imitation learning [14, 8, 24], and generative adversarial networks [18, 2]. InPmost of these
n
applications, the objective F (x, y) has a finite-sum structure, i.e., F (x, y) = 1/n i=1 fi (x, y)
where n denotes the size of the dataset and each component function fi denotes the objective
associated with the ith data point. The resultant problem is known as finite-sum minimax optimization:
∗

Currently at Google Research. Contact: ketd@google.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

