Optimal Query Complexities for Dynamic Trace
Estimation
David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Fred Zhang
UC Berkeley
z0@berkeley.edu

Qiuyi (Richard) Zhang
Google Brain
qiuyiz@google.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of minimizing the number of matrix-vector queries
needed for accurate trace estimation in the dynamic setting where our underlying matrix is changing slowly, such as during an optimization process. Specifically, for any m matrices A1 , ..., Am with consecutive differences bounded in
Schatten-1 norm by ↵, we provide a novel binary tree summation procedure that
simultaneously estimates all m traces uppto " error with failure probability with
an optimal query complexity of e
O(m↵ log(1/ )/" + m log(1/ )), improving
the dependence on both ↵ and from Dharangutte and Musco (NeurIPS, 2021).
Our procedure works without additional norm bounds on Ai and can be generalized to ap
bound for the p-th Schatten norm for p 2 [1, 2], giving a complexity
e
of O(m↵( log(1/ )/")p + m log(1/ )). By using novel reductions to communication complexity and information-theoretic analyses of Gaussian matrices, we
provide matching lower bounds for static and dynamic trace estimation in all relevant parameters, including the failure probability. Our lower bounds (1) give the
first tight bounds for Hutchinson’s estimator in the matrix-vector product model
with Frobenius norm error even in the static setting, and (2) are the first unconditional lower bounds for dynamic trace estimation, resolving open questions of
prior work.

1

Introduction

Implicit matrix trace estimation is ubiquitous in numerical linear algebra and arises naturally in a
wide range of applications, see, e.g., [25]. In this problem, we are given an oracle which gives us
matrix-vector products Ax1 , Ax2 , · · · , Axm for an unknown n ⇥ n square matrix A and queries
x1 , . . . , xm of our choice, that may be chosen adaptively. In typical applications, one cannot afford
to compute the diagonal entries of A explicitly, due to A being implicitly represented and computational constraints. The goal is to efficiently estimate Tr A using only matrix-vector products.
In machine learning and data science, applications of trace estimation include training Gaussian
Processes [8, 11], triangle counting [1], computing the Estrada Index [10, 9], and studying optimization landscapes of deep neural networks from Hessian matrices [12, 26]. In these applications,
it is common that A is represented implicitly due to its large memory footprint. For example, while
it is possible to compute Hessian-vector products via Pearlmutter’s trick [20], it is prohibitive to
compute or store the Hessian matrix H, see, e.g., [12].
Moreover, A may be a matrix function f of another matrix B in some applications. Since computing
f (B) is expensive, it is desirable to apply implicit trace estimation. For example, during the training
of Gaussian Processes, the marginal log-likelihood contains a heavy-computation term, i.e., the log
of the determinant of the covariance matrix, log(det(K)), where K 2 Rn⇥n and n is the number
of data points. The canonical way of computing log(det(K)) is via a Cholesky factorization on
K, which takes O(n3 ) time. Instead, implicit trace estimation methods provide fast algorithms for
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

