Training Spiking Neural Networks with Event-driven
Backpropagation

Yaoyu Zhu1 , Zhaofei Yu1,2∗, Wei Fang1 , Xiaodong Xie1 , Tiejun Huang1 , Timothée Masquelier3
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Centre de Recherche Cerveau et Cognition (CERCO), UMR5549 CNRS - Univ. Toulouse 3,
Toulouse, France

Abstract
Spiking Neural networks (SNNs) represent and transmit information by spatiotemporal spike patterns, which bring two major advantages: biological plausibility
and suitability for ultralow-power neuromorphic implementation. Despite this, the
binary firing characteristic makes training SNNs more challenging. To learn the
parameters of deep SNNs in an event-driven fashion as in inference of SNNs, backpropagation with respect to spike timing is proposed. Although this event-driven
learning has the advantages of lower computational cost and memory occupation,
the accuracy is far below the recurrent neural network-like learning approaches. In
this paper, we first analyze the commonly used temporal backpropagation training approach and prove that the sum of gradients remains unchanged between
fully-connected and convolutional layers. Secondly, we show that the max pooling
layer meets the above invariance rule, while the average pooling layer does not,
which will suffer the gradient vanishing problem but can be revised to meet the
requirement. Thirdly, we point out the reverse gradient problem for time-based
gradients and propose a backward kernel that can solve this problem and keep
the property of the invariable sum of gradients. The experimental results show
that the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR10
among time-based training methods. Also, this is the first time that the time-based
backpropagation approach successfully trains SNN on the CIFAR100 dataset. Our
code is available at https://github.com/zhuyaoyu/SNN-event-driven-learning.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the principles of brain computing, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are considered
as the third generation of neural networks [1, 2]. SNNs are developed to work in power-critical
scenarios, such as edge computing. When run on dedicated neuromorphic chips, they can accomplish
the tasks [3, 4, 5] with ultra-low power consumption [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In contrast, the last
generation of neural networks – Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) [13], generally require a large
amount of computation resource (e.g., GPUs). This advantage of SNNs on power consumption
largely relies on efficient event-based computations [14, 15]. Another advantage of SNNs originates
from their biological reality (compared to ANNs). The similarity between SNNs and biological brains
provides an excellent opportunity to study how the brain computes at the neuronal circuit level [16].
Compared with artificial neural networks, developing supervised learning algorithms for spiking
neural networks requires more effort. The main challenge for training SNNs comes from the binary
nature of spikes and the non-differentiability of the membrane potential at spike time. This difficulty
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

