A contrastive rule for meta-learning

Nicolas Zucchet∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
nzucchet@inf.ethz.ch

Simon Schug∗
Institute of Neuroinformatics
University of Zürich & ETH Zürich
sschug@ethz.ch

Johannes von Oswald∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
voswaldj@ethz.ch

Dominic Zhao
Institute of Neuroinformatics
University of Zürich & ETH Zürich
dozhao@ethz.ch

João Sacramento
Institute of Neuroinformatics
University of Zürich & ETH Zürich
rjoao@ethz.ch

Abstract
Humans and other animals are capable of improving their learning performance as
they solve related tasks from a given problem domain, to the point of being able to
learn from extremely limited data. While synaptic plasticity is generically thought
to underlie learning in the brain, the precise neural and synaptic mechanisms by
which learning processes improve through experience are not well understood.
Here, we present a general-purpose, biologically-plausible meta-learning rule
which estimates gradients with respect to the parameters of an underlying learning
algorithm by simply running it twice. Our rule may be understood as a generalization of contrastive Hebbian learning to meta-learning and notably, it neither
requires computing second derivatives nor going backwards in time, two characteristic features of previous gradient-based methods that are hard to conceive in
physical neural circuits. We demonstrate the generality of our rule by applying it
to two distinct models: a complex synapse with internal states which consolidate
task-shared information, and a dual-system architecture in which a primary network
is rapidly modulated by another one to learn the specifics of each task. For both
models, our meta-learning rule matches or outperforms reference algorithms on a
wide range of benchmark problems, while only using information presumed to be
locally available at neurons and synapses. We corroborate these findings with a
theoretical analysis of the gradient estimation error incurred by our rule.1

1

Introduction

The seminal study of Harlow [1] established that humans and non-human primates can become better
at learning when presented with a series of learning tasks which share a certain common structure.
To achieve this, the brain must extract and encode whichever aspects are common within a problem
domain, in such a way that future learning performance is improved. This capacity, which we refer
to as meta-learning, confers great evolutionary advantage to an organism over another that must
∗
1

Equal contribution; arbitrary ordering.
Code available at https://github.com/smonsays/contrastive-meta-learning

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

