Temporally Disentangled Representation Learning
Weiran Yao
CMU
weiran@cmu.edu

Guangyi Chen
CMU & MBZUAI
guangyichen1994@gmail.com

Kun Zhang
CMU & MBZUAI
kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Recently in the field of unsupervised representation learning, strong identifiability
results for disentanglement of causally-related latent variables have been established by exploiting certain side information, such as class labels, in addition to
independence. However, most existing work is constrained by functional form
assumptions such as independent sources or further with linear transitions, and
distribution assumptions such as stationary, exponential family distribution. It is
unknown whether the underlying latent variables and their causal relations are
identifiable if they have arbitrary, nonparametric causal influences in between. In
this work, we establish the identifiability theories of nonparametric latent causal
processes from their nonlinear mixtures under fixed temporal causal influences
and analyze how distribution changes can further benefit the disentanglement. We
propose TDRL, a principled framework to recover time-delayed latent causal variables and identify their relations from measured sequential data under stationary
environments and under different distribution shifts. Specifically, the framework
can factorize unknown distribution shifts into transition distribution changes under
fixed and time-varying latent causal relations, and under observation changes in observation. Through experiments, we show that time-delayed latent causal influences
are reliably identified and that our approach considerably outperforms existing
baselines that do not correctly exploit this modular representation of changes. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/weirayao/tdrl.

1

Introduction

Causal reasoning for time-series data is a fundamental task in numerous fields [1, 2, 3]. Most existing
work focuses on estimating the temporal causal relations among observed variables. However, in
many real-world scenarios, the observed signals (e.g., image pixels in videos) do not have direct
causal edges, but are generated by latent temporal processes or confounders that are causally related.
Inspired by these scenarios, this work aims to uncover causally-related latent processes and their
relations from observed temporal variables. Estimating latent causal structure from observations,
which we assume are unknown (but invertible) nonlinear mixtures of the latent processes, is very
challenging. It has been found in [4, 5] that without exploiting an appropriate class of assumptions in
estimation, the latent variables are not identifiable in the most general case. As a result, one cannot
make causal claims on the recovered relations in the latent space.
Recently, in the field of unsupervised representation learning, strong identifiability results of the
latent variables have been established [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] by using certain side information in nonlinear
Independent Component Analysis (ICA), such as class labels, in addition to independence. For
time-series data, history information is widely used as the side information for the identifiability
of latent processes. To establish identifiability, the existing approaches enforce different sets of
functional and distributional form assumptions as constraints in estimation; for example, (1) PCL
[7], GCL [8], HM-NLICA [11] and SlowVAE [12] assume mutually-independent sources in the
data generating process. However, this assumption may severely distort the identifiability if the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

