A Unified Analysis of Federated Learning with
Arbitrary Client Participation

Shiqiang Wang
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
wangshiq@us.ibm.com

Mingyue Ji
Department of ECE, University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
mingyue.ji@utah.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) faces challenges of intermittent client availability and
computation/communication efficiency. As a result, only a small subset of clients
can participate in FL at a given time. It is important to understand how partial client
participation affects convergence, but most existing works have either considered
idealized participation patterns or obtained results with non-zero optimality error
for generic patterns. In this paper, we provide a unified convergence analysis for FL
with arbitrary client participation. We first introduce a generalized version of federated averaging (FedAvg) that amplifies parameter updates at an interval of multiple
FL rounds. Then, we present a novel analysis that captures the effect of client
participation in a single term. By analyzing this term, we obtain convergence upper
bounds for a wide range of participation patterns, including both non-stochastic
and stochastic cases, which match either the lower bound of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) or the state-of-the-art results in specific settings. We also discuss
various insights, recommendations, and experimental results.

1

Introduction

We consider a federated learning (FL) problem with N clients [17, 20, 38]. Our goal is to minimize:
PN
(1)
f (x) := N1 n=1 Fn (x),
where x ∈ Rm is an m-dimensional model parameter. The local objective Fn (x) of each client n is
usually defined as Fn (x) := Eξn ∼Dn [ℓn (x, ξn )], where Dn is the distribution of client n’s local data,
which cannot be observed globally because the data remains private, and ℓn (x, ξ) is the per-sample
loss function for parameter x and input data ξ. The objective (1) can be extended to a weighted
average, but we do not write out the weights and consider them as part of ℓn (x, ξ) and Fn (x). A
canonical way of solving (1) is to use federated averaging (FedAvg) [24], which is a form of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) that operates in multiple rounds, where each round includes multiple local
update steps followed by communication between clients and a server to synchronize the updates.

Partial Participation. A major challenge in FL is that clients only intermittently participate in the
collaborative training process [3]. The reason is twofold. First, FL applications usually have a large
pool of clients. It is impractical to have all clients participating in all FL rounds, because it would
require computation and communication that can consume a large amount of energy and also lead to
network congestion. Second, clients may become unavailable from time to time. For example, if the
client devices are smartphones, they may be willing to participate in FL only when they are charging
(usually at night), to avoid draining the battery in outdoor environments where no charger is available.
Open Problem. The convergence of FL algorithms with realistic client participation patterns
has not been fully understood. Most existing works on partial participation have only considered
idealized scenarios, such as those where clients are randomly selected according to a given probability
distribution that is independent across rounds [4, 8, 9, 18, 21, 22, 36]. They cannot incorporate cases
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

