ProtoVAE: A Trustworthy Self-Explainable
Prototypical Variational Model

Srishti Gautam1 , Ahcene Boubekki1 , Stine Hansen1 , Suaiba Amina Salahuddin1
Robert Jenssen1 , Marina MC Höhne2,1 , Michael Kampffmeyer1
1
UiT The Arctic University of Norway
2
Technical University of Berlin

Abstract
The need for interpretable models has fostered the development of self-explainable
classifiers. Prior approaches are either based on multi-stage optimization schemes,
impacting the predictive performance of the model, or produce explanations that
are not transparent, trustworthy or do not capture the diversity of the data. To
address these shortcomings, we propose ProtoVAE, a variational autoencoderbased framework that learns class-specific prototypes in an end-to-end manner
and enforces trustworthiness and diversity by regularizing the representation space
and introducing an orthonormality constraint. Finally, the model is designed to
be transparent by directly incorporating the prototypes into the decision process.
Extensive comparisons with previous self-explainable approaches demonstrate the
superiority of ProtoVAE, highlighting its ability to generate trustworthy and diverse
explanations, while not degrading predictive performance.

1

Introduction

Despite the substantial performance of deep learning models in solving various automated real-world
problems, lack of transparency still remains a crucial point of concern. The black-box nature of these
high-accuracy achieving models is a roadblock in critical domains such as healthcare [1, 2], law [3], or
autonomous driving [4]. This has led to the emergence of the field of explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) which aims to justify or explain a model’s prediction in order to increase trustworthiness,
fairness, and safeness in the application of the complex models henceforward.
Consequently, two lines of research have emerged within XAI. On the one hand, there are general
methodologies explaining a posteriori black-box models, so-called post-hoc explanation methods
[5, 6, 7]. While on the other hand, there are models developed to provide explanations along with
their predictions [8, 9, 10]. The latter class of models, also known as self-explainable models
(SEMs), are the focus of this work. Recently, many methods have been developed for quantifying
post-hoc explanations [11]. However, there is still a lack of a concise definition of what SEMs should
encompass, thus a lack of comparability of recent methods [12].
Methodologically, a large number of SEMs follow the approach of concept learning, analogous to
prototype or basis feature learning, where a set of class representative features are learned [8, 9]. In
this paper we gauge SEMs through the prism of three properties. First and foremost, the prototypes
should be visualizable in the input space, and these transparent concepts should directly be employed
by a glass-box classification model. Many of the existing approaches try to imitate prototype
transparency by using nearest training samples to visualize the prototypes [8, 13], while some flatly
use training images as prototypes preventing an end-to-end optimization and limiting the flexibility
of the model [9, 14]. Secondly, the prototypes should exhibit both inter-class and intra-class diversity.
Methods failing to ensure this property [9] are prone to prototype collapse into a single point which
necessarily undermines their performance. Finally, SEMs should perform comparable to their black36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

