Bridging the Gap between Object and Image-level
Representations for Open-Vocabulary Detection

Hanoona Rasheed1,* , Muhammad Maaz1,* , Muhammad Uzair Khattak1 ,
Salman Khan1,2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE
2
Australian National University, Australia 3 Linköping University, Sweden

Abstract
Existing open-vocabulary object detectors typically enlarge their vocabulary sizes
by leveraging different forms of weak supervision. This helps generalize to
novel objects at inference. Two popular forms of weak-supervision used in openvocabulary detection (OVD) include pretrained CLIP model and image-level supervision. We note that both these modes of supervision are not optimally aligned for
the detection task: CLIP is trained with image-text pairs and lacks precise localization of objects while the image-level supervision has been used with heuristics that
do not accurately specify local object regions. In this work, we propose to address
this problem by performing object-centric alignment of the language embeddings
from the CLIP model. Furthermore, we visually ground the objects with only imagelevel supervision using a pseudo-labeling process that provides high-quality object
proposals and helps expand the vocabulary during training. We establish a bridge
between the above two object-alignment strategies via a novel weight transfer function that aggregates their complimentary strengths. In essence, the proposed model
seeks to minimize the gap between object and image-centric representations in the
OVD setting. On the COCO benchmark, our proposed approach achieves 36.6 AP50
on novel classes, an absolute 8.2 gain over the previous best performance. For LVIS,
we surpass the state-of-the-art ViLD model by 5.0 mask AP for rare categories and
3.4 overall. Code: https://github.com/hanoonaR/object-centric-ovd.

1

Introduction

Open-vocabulary detection (OVD) aims to generalize beyond the limited number of base classes
labeled during the training phase. The goal is to detect novel classes defined by an unbounded
(open) vocabulary at inference. Owing to the challenging nature of the OVD task, different forms of
weak-supervision for novel categories are typically used, e.g., extra image-caption pairs to enlarge
the vocabulary [1], image-level labels on classification datasets [2] and pretrained open-vocabulary
classification models like CLIP [3]. The use of weak-supervision to enlarge the vocabulary is intuitive
as the cost of annotating large-category detection datasets is monumental while the image-text/label
pairs are readily available via large classification datasets [4] or internet sources [3, 5].
One of the major challenges with enlarging vocabulary via image-level supervision (ILS) or pretrained
models learned using ILS is the inherent mis-match between region and image-level cues. For instance,
pretrained CLIP embeddings used in the existing OVD models [6, 2] do not perform well in locating
object regions [7] since the CLIP model is trained with full scale images. Similarly, weak supervision
on images using caption descriptions or image-level labels does not convey the precise object-centric
information. For label grounding in images, the recent literature explores expensive pretraining with
auxiliary objectives [1] or use heuristics such as, the max-score or max-size boxes [2].
*

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

