Efficient Non-Parametric Optimizer Search for
Diverse Tasks
Ruochen Wang1 , Yuanhao Xiong1 , Minhao Cheng2 , Cho-Jui Hsieh1
1

Department of Computer Science, UCLA,

ruocwang@ucla.edu

minhaocheng@ust.hk

2

HKUST

{chohsieh, yhxiong}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Efficient and automated design of optimizers plays a crucial role in full-stack
AutoML systems. However, prior methods in optimizer search are often limited by
their scalability, generalization, or sample efficiency. With the goal of democratizing research and application of optimizer search, we present the first efficient,
scalable and generalizable framework that can directly search on the tasks of interest. We first observe that optimizer updates are fundamentally mathematical
expressions applied to the gradient. Inspired by the innate tree structure of the underlying math expressions, we re-arrange the space of optimizers into a super-tree,
where each path encodes an optimizer. This way, optimizer search can be naturally
formulated as a path-finding problem, allowing a variety of well-established tree
traversal methods to be used as the search algorithm. We adopt an adaptation
of the Monte Carlo method to tree search, equipped with rejection sampling and
equivalent-form detection that leverage the characteristics of optimizer update
rules to further boost the sample efficiency. We provide a diverse set of tasks to
benchmark our algorithm and demonstrate that, with only 128 evaluations, the
proposed framework can discover optimizers that surpass both human-designed
counterparts and prior optimizer search methods. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/ruocwang/enos.

1

Introductions

Motivated by a vision of democratizing machine learning, the central objective for automated machine
learning (AutoML), such as automated architecture [22, 26, 29, 40, 55, 60, 62, 65] / optimizer
[10, 12, 15, 17, 59, 68] / loss [36] / augmentation search [37, 39], lies in reducing the need for expert
design on a diverse set of tasks. To achieve this goal, it is critical for AutoML systems to exhibit a
high level of efficiency, so that they can be directly applied to a variety of tasks without consuming
a humongous amount of computing resources. A widely successful example of such an effort is
DARTS [40] in Neural Architecture Search (NAS), which reduces the search cost from thousands of
GPU days of early RL-based algorithms to a single digit, enabling direct application of NAS systems
to a wide range of tasks [32, 33, 38, 44, 50].
Inspired by the success of efficient NAS methods, we turn our attention to another important but
much less studied area of AutoML - Automated optimizer search, where an efficient, scalable
and generalizable framework is still absent. Optimizer search aims to automatically design
a suitable update function that takes gradients as inputs and produces update directions for the
optimizee’s parameters. Pioneering work in this area, coined Learning to Optimize (L2O), adopts
a data-driven approach by replacing human-designed update rules with a learnable parametric
function [10, 12, 17, 59]. However, parametric optimizers are fundamentally not scalable to large
models or datasets, as inferring its parameters typically requires expensive meta-learning steps such
as backpropagating through gradient descent [10, 15, 68]. Moreover, the learned optimizer often
generalizes poorly to even minor variants of its training task (Figure 3) [10, 68]. Poor scalability and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

