Learning Energy Networks
with Generalized Fenchel-Young Losses

Mathieu Blondel, Felipe Llinares-López,
Robert Dadashi, Léonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist
Google Research, Brain team
{mblondel,fllinares,dadashi,hussenot,mfgeist}@google.com

Abstract
Energy-based models, a.k.a. energy networks, perform inference by optimizing
an energy function, typically parametrized by a neural network. This allows
one to capture potentially complex relationships between inputs and outputs. To
learn the parameters of the energy function, the solution to that optimization
problem is typically fed into a loss function. The key challenge for training energy
networks lies in computing loss gradients, as this typically requires argmin/argmax
differentiation. In this paper, building upon a generalized notion of conjugate
function, which replaces the usual bilinear pairing with a general energy function,
we propose generalized Fenchel-Young losses, a natural loss construction for
learning energy networks. Our losses enjoy many desirable properties and their
gradients can be computed efficiently without argmin/argmax differentiation. We
also prove the calibration of their excess risk in the case of linear-concave energies.
We demonstrate our losses on multilabel classification and imitation learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Training a neural network usually involves finding its parameters by minimizing a loss function,
which captures how well the network fits the data. A typical example is the multiclass logistic loss
(a.k.a. cross-entropy loss) from logistic regression, which is the canonical loss associated with the
softmax output layer and the categorical distribution. If we replace the softmax with another output
layer, what loss function should we use instead? In generalized linear models [52, 48], which include
logistic regression and Poisson regression as special cases, the negative log-likelihood gives a loss
function associated with a link function, generalizing the softmax to other members of the exponential
family [8]. More generally, Fenchel-Young losses [18] provide a generic way to construct a canonical
convex loss function if the associated output layer can be written in a certain argmax form. Besides
the aforementioned generalized linear models, models that fall in this family include sparsemax
[47], the structured perceptron [27] and conditional random fields [43, 69]. However, the theory of
Fenchel-Young losses is currently limited to argmax output layers that use a bilinear pairing.
To increase expressivity, energy-based models [44], a.k.a. energy networks, perform inference
by optimizing an energy function, typically parametrized by a neural network. This leads to an
inner optimization problem, which can capture potentially complex relationships between inputs and
outputs. A similar approach is taken in SPENs (Structured Prediction Energy Networks) [11, 13],
in which a continuous relaxation of the inner optimization problem is used, amenable to projected
gradient descent or mirror descent. In input-convex neural networks [4], energy functions are
restricted to be convex, so as to make the inner optimization problem easy to solve optimally. To
learn the parameters of the energy function, the solution of the inner optimization problem is typically
fed into a loss function, leading to an outer optimization problem. In order to solve that problem by
stochastic gradient descent, the main challenge lies in computing the loss gradients. Indeed, when
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

