Semantic uncertainty intervals for disentangled latent
spaces
Swami Sankaranarayanan1 , Anastasios N. Angelopoulos2 ,
Stephen Bates2 , Yaniv Romano3 , and Phillip Isola1
1

MIT
University of California, Berkeley
3
Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
2

Abstract
Meaningful uncertainty quantification in computer vision requires reasoning about
semantic information—say, the hair color of the person in a photo or the location of
a car on the street. To this end, recent breakthroughs in generative modeling allow
us to represent semantic information in disentangled latent spaces, but providing
uncertainties on the semantic latent variables has remained challenging. In this
work, we provide principled uncertainty intervals that are guaranteed to contain the
true semantic factors for any underlying generative model. The method does the
following: (1) it uses quantile regression to output a heuristic uncertainty interval
for each element in the latent space (2) calibrates these uncertainties such that
they contain the true value of the latent for a new, unseen input. The endpoints of
these calibrated intervals can then be propagated through the generator to produce
interpretable uncertainty visualizations for each semantic factor. This technique
reliably communicates semantically meaningful, principled, and instance-adaptive
uncertainty in inverse problems like image super-resolution and image completion.
Code and demos can be found on our project page.

1

Introduction

When making decisions with visual data, such as automated vehicle navigation with blurry images,
uncertainty quantification is critical. The relevant uncertainty pertains to a low-dimensional set
of semantic properties, such as the locations of objects. However, there is a wide class of imagevalued estimation problems—from super-resolution to inpainting—for which there does not currently
exist a method of producing semantically meaningful uncertainties. As an example, imagine doing
uncertainty quantification for medical image reconstruction from, say, a fast but undersampled MRI
scan. In such a setting, pixelwise intervals [16, 40, 5] are not very useful. We need uncertainty on the
underlying semantics—e.g., whether there is a tumor, and if so, of what size and shape.
We make progress on this problem by bringing techniques from quantile regression and distributionfree uncertainty quantification together with a disentangled latent space learned by a generative
adversarial network (GAN). We call the coordinates of this latent space semantic factors, as each
controls one meaningful aspect of the image, like age or hair color. We do not require these semantic
factors to be statistically independent. Our method takes a corrupted image input and predicts each
semantic factor along with an uncertainty interval that is guaranteed to contain the true semantic
factor. When the model is unsure, the intervals are large, and vice-versa. By propagating these
intervals through the GAN coordinate-wise, we can visualize uncertainty directly in image-space
without resorting to per-pixel intervals—see Figure 1. The result of our procedure is a rich form of
uncertainty quantification directly on the estimates of semantic properties of the image.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

