Collaborative Learning of Discrete Distributions under
Heterogeneity and Communication Constraints
Xinmeng Huang ∗ , Donghwan Lee ∗
Graduate Group in Applied Mathematics and Computational Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
{xinmengh, dh7401}@sas.upenn.edu
Edgar Dobriban
Department of Statistics and Data Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu

Hamed Hassani
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
In modern machine learning, users often have to collaborate to learn distributions
that generate the data. Communication can be a significant bottleneck. Prior
work has studied homogeneous users—i.e., whose data follow the same discrete
distribution—and has provided optimal communication-efficient methods. However, these methods rely heavily on homogeneity, and are less applicable in the
common case when users’ discrete distributions are heterogeneous. Here we
consider a natural and tractable model of heterogeneity, where users’ discrete
distributions only vary sparsely, on a small number of entries. We propose a novel
two-stage method named SHIFT: First, the users collaborate by communicating
with the server to learn a central distribution; relying on methods from robust
statistics. Then, the learned central distribution is fine-tuned to estimate the individual distributions of users. We show that our method is minimax optimal in our
model of heterogeneity and under communication constraints. Further, we provide
experimental results using both synthetic data and n-gram frequency estimation in
the text domain, which corroborate its efficiency.

1

Introduction

Research on learning from data distributed over multiple computational units (machines, users,
devices) has grown in recent years, as data is commonly generated by multiple users, such as smart
devices and wireless sensors. While many works focus on learning predictive models with distributed
data, learning the data distribution itself is also increasingly popular [56, 3, 14, 15, 60]. In various
applications, it is often required to reconstruct the data distribution from scattered measurements.
Examples include sensor networks and P2P (Peer2Peer) systems, load balancing and query processing
(see, e.g., [41, 61, 46] and references therein). In these scenarios, communication costs and bandwidth
are often bottlenecks on the performance of learning algorithms [22, 5, 29, 17]. The bottlenecks
become even more severe in federated analytics [31], where many users coordinate with a server to
learn central models, while communication via the wireless links is typically expensive and operates
at low rates.
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

