Tensor Wheel Decomposition and Its Tensor
Completion Application

Zhong-Cheng Wu1 , Ting-Zhu Huang∗,1 , Liang-Jian Deng∗,1 , Hong-Xia Dou2 , Deyu Meng3,4
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
School of Science, Xihua University
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu)
wuzhch97@163.com, tingzhuhuang@126.com, liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn
hongxia.dou@mail.xhu.edu.cn, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, tensor network (TN) decompositions have gained prominence in computer vision and contributed promising results to high-order data recovery tasks.
However, current TN models are rather being developed towards more intricate
structures to pursue incremental improvements, which instead leads to a dramatic
increase in rank numbers, thus encountering laborious hyper-parameter selection,
especially for higher-order cases. In this paper, we propose a novel TN decomposition, dubbed tensor wheel (TW) decomposition, in which a high-order tensor
is represented by a set of latent factors mapped into a specific wheel topology.
Such decomposition is constructed starting from analyzing the graph structure,
aiming to more accurately characterize the complex interactions inside objectives
while maintaining a lower hyper-parameter scale, theoretically alleviating the above
deficiencies. Furthermore, to investigate the potentiality of TW decomposition, we
provide its one numerical application, i.e., tensor completion (TC), yet develop
an efficient proximal alternating minimization-based solving algorithm with guaranteed convergence. Experimental results elaborate that the proposed method is
significantly superior to other tensor decomposition-based state-of-the-art methods
on synthetic and real-world data, implying the merits of TW decomposition. The
code is available at: https:// github.com/ zhongchengwu/ code_TWDec.

1

Introduction

Tensors, as a higher-order generalization of matrices, can naturally preserve the complex interactions
inside high-order tensor data, e.g., multispectral images (MSIs), color videos (CVs), and hyperspectral
videos (HSVs). Tensor decompositions refer to the approximation of high-order tensor data by using
latent factors, which can be considered as the principal components or features, leading to the reduced
storage cost and computational complexity in large-scale and intractable tensor data analysis. Previously, different tensor decompositions have been proposed and widely applied in various fields, e.g.,
signal processing [6, 7, 19], machine learning [25, 29, 1], and medical imaging [31]. Among them,
tensor singular value decomposition (t-SVD) [16], especially CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) [13]
and Tucker [26] decompositions, are the most classical and widely investigated [17, 34].
More recently, tensor network (TN) decompositions [27, 9, 14, 11] have consecutively been involved
in computational mathematics and numerical analysis, and exhibit superior properties, such as super
compressing and efficient computing [24, 15]. Particularly, some of TN models have been introduced
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

