Revisiting Neural Scaling Laws
in Language and Vision

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin
Google Research, Brain Team
Zürich, Switzerland
ibomohsin@google.com

Behnam Neyshabur
Google Research, Blueshift Team
Mountain View, United States
neyshabur@google.com

Xiaohua Zhai
Google Research, Brain Team
Zürich, Switzerland
xzhai@google.com

Abstract
The remarkable progress in deep learning in recent years is largely driven by
improvements in scale, where bigger models are trained on larger datasets for
longer schedules. To predict the benefit of scale empirically, we argue for a more
rigorous methodology based on the extrapolation loss, instead of reporting the bestfitting (interpolating) parameters. We then present a recipe for estimating scaling
law parameters reliably from learning curves. We demonstrate that it extrapolates
more accurately than previous methods in a wide range of architecture families
across several domains, including image classification, neural machine translation
(NMT) and language modeling, in addition to tasks from the BIG-Bench evaluation
benchmark. Finally, we release a benchmark dataset comprising of 90 evaluation
tasks to facilitate research in this domain.

1

Introduction

Scale has led to innovative research in both the vision domain [10, 14, 26, 35, 40] and the natural
language processing (NLP) [8, 12] domain. Recent work has found that scaling up the data size [34],
the model size [26, 35], the training schedule [5, 39] or all of them together [8, 40] often lead to
improved performance. More importantly, scaling up the data size and the model size together can
better utilize the compute resources. Scaling laws have been properly studied in several works,
e.g. [3, 18–20, 23], and it has been found that the performance f (x) (e.g. excess loss) often follows a
power law f (x) ∼ βxc for some β > 0 and c < 0 as one varies a dimension of interest x, such as
the data or the model size.
While theoretical arguments alone seldom predict scaling law parameters in modern neural architectures [2, 21, 32], it has been observed that the benefit of scale could be predicted empirically
[3, 4, 9, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23, 28, 30, 31]. The general approach is to acquire a learning curve, i.e. a
collection of samples (x, f (x)), where x is a dimension of interest such as the training data size while
f (x) is a measure of performance, such as the validation loss. After that, parameters are estimated,
e.g. by computing the best-fitting values of β and c in the model f (x) = βxc . Given the estimated
scaling law parameters, one can then extrapolate by predicting f (x) for large values of x.
Such learning curve extrapolation has found many applications, of which four seem to be more
prominent. First, it offers a tool for understanding deep neural networks; e.g. how the architecture
and data distribution impact scaling behaviors [1–3, 18, 20, 23, 30, 32]. Second, it has been used
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

