Nearly Optimal Algorithms for Linear Contextual
Bandits with Adversarial Corruptions

Jiafan He
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
jiafanhe19@ucla.edu

Dongruo Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Tong Zhang
Google Research & HKUST
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the linear contextual bandit problem in the presence of adversarial
corruption, where the reward at each round is corrupted by an adversary, and
the corruption level (i.e., the sum of corruption magnitudes over the horizon) is
C ≥ 0. The best-known algorithms in this setting are limited in that they either
are computationally inefficient or require a strong assumption on the corruption,
or their regret is at least C times worse than the regret without corruption. In this
paper, to overcome these limitations, we propose a new algorithm based on the
principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty. At the core of our algorithm is a
weighted ridge regression where the weight of each chosen action depends on its
confidence up to some threshold. We show that for both known C and unknown
C cases, our algorithm with proper choice of hyperparameter achieves a regret
that nearly matches the lower bounds. Thus, our algorithm is nearly optimal up to
logarithmic factors for both cases. Notably, our algorithm achieves the near-optimal
regret for both corrupted and uncorrupted cases (C = 0) simultaneously.

1

Introduction

We study linear contextual bandits with adversarial corruptions. At each round, the agent observes
a decision set provided by the environment, and selects an action from the decision set. Then an
adversary corrupts the reward of the action selected by the agent. The agent then receives the
corrupted reward of the selected action and proceeds until K rounds. The agent’s goal is to minimize
the regret Regret(K), which is the difference between the optimal accumulated reward and the
selected accumulated reward. This problem can be regarded as a combination of the two classical
bandit problems, stochastic bandits and adversarial bandits (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2018). In
practice, the contextual bandits with adversarial corruptions can describe many popular decisionmaking problems such as pay-per-click advertisements with click fraud (Lykouris et al., 2018) and
recommendation system with malicious users (Deshpande and Montanari, 2012).
Lykouris et al. (2018) first studied the multi-armed bandit with adversarial corruptions. Specifically,
let C denote the corruption level which is the sum of the corruption magnitudes at each round.
Lykouris et al. (2018) proposed an algorithm with a regret that is C times worse than the regret
without corruption. Later, Gupta et al. (2019a) proposed an improved algorithm whose regret consists
of two terms: a corruption-independent term that matches the optimal regret for multi-armed bandit
without corruption, and a corruption-dependent term that is linear in C and independent of K, i.e.,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

