Joint Learning of 2D-3D
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation

Hyeokjun Kweon
KAIST
0327june@kaist.ac.kr

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST
kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The aim of weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) is to learn semantic
segmentation without using dense annotations. WSSS has been intensively studied
for 2D images and 3D point clouds. However, the existing WSSS studies have focused on a single domain, i.e. 2D or 3D, even when multi-domain data is available.
In this paper, we propose a novel joint 2D-3D WSSS framework taking advantage
of WSSS in different domains, using classification labels only. Via projection,
we leverage the 2D class activation map as self-supervision to enhance the 3D
semantic perception. Conversely, we exploit the similarity matrix of point cloud
features for training the image classifier to achieve more precise 2D segmentation.
In both directions, we devise a confidence-based scoring method to reduce the
effect of inaccurate self-supervision. With extensive quantitative and qualitative
experiments, we verify that the proposed joint WSSS framework effectively transfers the benefit of each domain to the other domain, and the resulting semantic
segmentation performance is remarkably improved in both 2D and 3D domains.
On the ScanNetV2 benchmark, our framework significantly outperforms the prior
WSSS approaches, suggesting a new research direction for WSSS.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem in the field of computer vision. Recently, learningbased semantic segmentation methods have achieved remarkable performance. However, they usually
rely on strong supervision such as pixel-wise (2D) or point-wise (3D) dense semantic labels. Since
dense labels are time-consuming and labor-intensive to annotate, the labeling process has remained
the main obstacle to applying semantic segmentation to real problems. Weakly supervised semantic
segmentation (WSSS) has flourished to learn semantic segmentation by using inexpensive weak
labels (e.g. bounding boxes or class labels).
WSSS using class labels has been widely studied in the 2D domain (image) and has recently also been
scaled into the 3D domain (point cloud). For acquiring pixel- or point-wise class predictions without
any spatial supervision, the existing 2D and 3D WSSS studies have employed Class Activation Maps
(CAM) [35] extracted from a classifier. Since CAM usually localizes the discriminative regions of
each class (which be used as cues for classification by classifier), one can acquire pseudo-labels for
semantic segmentation from the CAM. While the studies have shown promising results, they focus
on using the data of a single domain and place less emphasis on the information of other domains
that might have complementary properties.
Fig. 1 visualizes the complementary advantages of 2D and 3D WSSS. With rich and dense features
from a CNN-based architecture, 2D WSSS succeeds in the semantic perception of images. However,
the 2D CAM is usually not sharp at the object boundary and the segmentation result tends to be
imprecise as shown in (b3). On the other hand, 3D WSSS is advantageous in terms of segmentation,
since the input point cloud contains the 3D geometry of the scene. However, due to the severe class
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

