Early Stage Convergence and Global Convergence of
Training Mildly Parameterized Neural Networks
Mingze Wang
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, 100081, P.R. China
mingzewang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Chao Ma
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
chaoma@stanford.edu

Abstract
The convergence of GD and SGD when training mildly parameterized neural
networks starting from random initialization is studied. For a broad range of
models and loss functions, including the most commonly used square loss and
cross entropy loss, we prove an “early stage convergence” result. We show that the
loss is decreased by a significant amount in the early stage of the training, and this
decrease is fast. Furthurmore, for exponential type loss functions, and under some
assumptions on the training data, we show global convergence of GD. Instead of
relying on extreme over-parameterization, our study is based on a microscopic
analysis of the activation patterns for the neurons, which helps us derive more
powerful lower bounds for the gradient. The results on activation patterns, which
we call “neuron partition”, help build intuitions for understanding the behavior of
neural networks’ training dynamics, and may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

As deep learning shows its capability in various fields of applications, extensive researches are done to
theoretically understand and explain its great success. Among the topics covered by these theoretical
studies, the optimization of deep neural networks is one of the most crucial one, especially given
the fact that simple optimization algorithms such as Gradient Descent (GD) and Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) can easily achieve zero training loss (Zhang et al., 2017), although the loss landscape
of training neural networks is highly non-convex (Li et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2020). Existing works
attempting to answer the surprising convergence ability usually work in settings that do not align well
with realistic practices. For example, the notable Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory (Jacot et al.,
2018; Du et al., 2018; 2019; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019b; Zou et al., 2018) shows the global convergence
of SGD in highly over-parameterized regime, in which the loss landscape is approximated by a
quadratic function. In practice, though, the loss landscape is indeed highly non-convex with spurious
local minima and saddle points (Safran and Shamir, 2018; Safran et al., 2021), and the dynamics of
neurons show nonlinear behaviors (Ma et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, fast decreasing of the loss value always happens when the network trained is not highly
over-parameterized, at least in the early stage of training. It is common that the loss experiences
a drastic decreasing at the beginning of the training. In many cases, this decrease of loss even
continues until the loss achieves zero, i.e. the optimization algorithm fully converges. In this
paper, we study the early stage or full convergence of GD and SGD when under-parameterized or
mildly over-parameterized models are trained. Specifically, we answer the following two theoretical
questions:
When we train practical-size neural networks by GD or SGD,
1. Does the fast convergence in the early stage of the training provably exist? If so, how
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

