Smoothed Embeddings for Certified Few-Shot
Learning
Mikhail Pautov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

Olesya Kuznetsova⇤
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

Nurislam Tursynbek
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Aleksandr Petiushko
Moscow State University, Nuro, Inc.

Ivan Oseledets
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, AIRI

Abstract
Randomized smoothing is considered to be the state-of-the-art provable defense
against adversarial perturbations. However, it heavily exploits the fact that classifiers map input objects to class probabilities and do not focus on the ones that
learn a metric space in which classification is performed by computing distances to
embeddings of class prototypes. In this work, we extend randomized smoothing
to few-shot learning models that map inputs to normalized embeddings. We provide analysis of the Lipschitz continuity of such models and derive a robustness
certificate against `2 -bounded perturbations that may be useful in few-shot learning scenarios. Our theoretical results are confirmed by experiments on different
datasets.

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning is a setting in which a classification model is evaluated on the classes not seen
during the training phase. Nowadays quite a few few-shot learning approaches based on neural
networks are known. Unfortunately, neural network-based classifiers are intimately vulnerable to
adversarial perturbations [41, 10] – accurately crafted small modifications of the input that may
significantly alter the model’s prediction. This vulnerability poses a restriction on the deployment of
such approaches in safety-critical scenarios, so the research interest in the field of attacks on neural
networks has been great in recent years.
Several works studied this phenomena in different practical applications – image classification
[2, 34, 33, 40], object detection [17, 26, 48, 50], face recognition [18, 5, 54], semantic segmentation
[7, 12, 50]. These studies show that it is easy to force a model to behave in the desired way by
applying an imperceptible change to its input. As a result, defenses, both empirical [4, 55, 14] and
provable [51, 21, 3, 47, 52, 15, 46, 35], were proposed recently. Although empirical ones can be (and
often are) broken by more powerful attacks, the provable ones are of a big interest since they make it
possible to provide guarantees of the correctness of the work of a model under certain assumptions,
and, thus, possibly broaden the scope of tasks which may be trusted to the neural networks.
Randomized smoothing [21, 3, 25] is the state-of-the-art approach used for constructing classification
models provably robust against small-norm additive adversarial perturbations. This approach is
scalable to large datasets and can be applied to any classifier since it does not use any assumptions
⇤

The code for this paper is available at https://github.com/koava36/certrob-fewshot.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

