CalFAT: Calibrated Federated Adversarial Training
with Label Skewness
Chen Chen∗
Zhejiang University

Yuchen Liu
Zhejiang University

Xingjun Ma
Fudan University

Lingjuan Lyu†
Sony AI

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that, like traditional machine learning, federated learning (FL) is also vulnerable to adversarial attacks. To improve the adversarial
robustness of FL, federated adversarial training (FAT) methods have been proposed
to apply adversarial training locally before global aggregation. Although these
methods demonstrate promising results on independent identically distributed (IID)
data, they suffer from training instability on non-IID data with label skewness,
resulting in degraded natural accuracy. This tends to hinder the application of FAT
in real-world applications where the label distribution across the clients is often
skewed. In this paper, we study the problem of FAT under label skewness, and
reveal one root cause of the training instability and natural accuracy degradation
issues: skewed labels lead to non-identical class probabilities and heterogeneous
local models. We then propose a Calibrated FAT (CalFAT) approach to tackle the
instability issue by calibrating the logits adaptively to balance the classes. We
show both theoretically and empirically that the optimization of CalFAT leads to
homogeneous local models across the clients and better convergence points.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a privacy-aware learning paradigm that allows multiple participants
(clients) to collaboratively train a global model without sharing their private data [23, 28, 43, 29].
In FL, each client follows the conventional machine learning procedure to train a local model on its
own data and periodically uploads the local model updates to a central server for global aggregation.
However, recent studies have shown that, like conventional machine learning, FL is also vulnerable
to well-crafted adversarial examples [20, 47, 9, 45], i.e., at inference time, attackers can add small,
human-perceptible adversarial perturbations to the test examples to fool the global model with high
success rates. This raises security and reliability concerns on the implementation of FL in real-world
scenarios where such a vulnerability could cause heavy losses [38]. For example, for cross-silo
FL in the biomedical domain, a vulnerable global model may cause misdiagnosis, wrong medical
treatments, or even the loss of lives. Similarly, in financial-based cross-silo FL, the lack of adversarial
robustness may lead to huge financial losses. It is thus imperative to develop a robust FL method that
can train adversarially robust global models resistant to different types of adversarial attacks.
In conventional machine learning, adversarial training (AT) has been shown to be one of the most
effective defenses against adversarial attacks [22, 40, 4]. Since the local training in FL is the
same as conventional machine learning, recent works [47, 9, 45] proposed to perform local AT to
∗
†

Work done during internship at Sony AI.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

