Disentangling the Predictive Variance of
Deep Ensembles through the Neural Tangent Kernel

Seijin Kobayashi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
seijink@ethz.ch

Pau Vilimelis Aceituno
Institute of Neuroinformatics
University of Zürich & ETH Zürich
pau@ini.ethz.ch

Johannes von Oswald
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
voswaldj@ethz.ch

Abstract
Identifying unfamiliar inputs, also known as out-of-distribution (OOD) detection,
is a crucial property of any decision making process. A simple and empirically validated technique is based on deep ensembles where the variance of predictions over
different neural networks acts as a substitute for input uncertainty. Nevertheless, a
theoretical understanding of the inductive biases leading to the performance of deep
ensemble’s uncertainty estimation is missing. To improve our description of their
behavior, we study deep ensembles with large layer widths operating in simplified
linear training regimes, in which the functions trained with gradient descent can
be described by the neural tangent kernel. We identify two sources of noise, each
inducing a distinct inductive bias in the predictive variance at initialization. We
further show theoretically and empirically that both noise sources affect the predictive variance of non-linear deep ensembles in toy models and realistic settings
after training. Finally, we propose practical ways to eliminate part of these noise
sources leading to significant changes and improved OOD detection in trained deep
ensembles.

1

Introduction

Modern artificial intelligence uses intricate deep neural networks to process data, make predictions
and take actions. One of the crucial steps toward allowing these agents to act in the real world is to
incorporate a reliable mechanism for estimating uncertainty – in particular when human lives are
at risk [1, 2]. Although the ongoing success of deep learning is remarkable, the increasing data,
model and training algorithm complexity make a thorough understanding of their inner workings
increasingly difficult. This applies when trying to understand when and why a system is certain or
uncertain about a given output and is therefore the topic of numerous publications [3–10].
Principled mechanisms for uncertainty quantification would rely on Bayesian inference with an
appropriate prior. This has led to the development of (approximate) Bayesian inference methods
for deep neural networks [11–15]. Simply aggregating an ensemble of models [16] and using the
disagreement of their predictions as a substitute for uncertainty has gained popularity. However, the
theoretical justification of deep ensembles remains a matter of debate, see Wilson and Izmailov [17].
Although a link between Bayesian inference and deep ensembles can be obtained, see [18, 19], an
understanding of the widely adopted standard deep ensemble and it’s predictive distribution is still
missing [20, 21]. Note that even for principled Bayesian approaches there is no valid theoretical or
practical OOD guarantee without a proper definition of out-of-distribution data [22].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

