Optimal Comparator Adaptive Online Learning with
Switching Cost

Zhiyu Zhang
Boston University
zhiyuz@bu.edu

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
ashok@cutkosky.com

Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis
Boston University
yannisp@bu.edu

Abstract
Practical online learning tasks are often naturally defined on unconstrained domains, where optimal algorithms for general convex losses are characterized by the
notion of comparator adaptivity. In this paper, we design such algorithms in the
presence of switching cost – the latter penalizes the typical optimism in adaptive
algorithms, leading to a delicate design trade-off. Based on a novel dual space
scaling strategy discovered by a continuous-time analysis, we propose a simple
algorithm that improves the existing comparator adaptive regret bound [ZCP22a]
to the optimal rate. The obtained benefits are further extended to the expert setting,
and the practicality of the proposed algorithm is demonstrated through a sequential
investment task.1

1

Introduction

Online learning [CBL06, Haz16, Ora19] is a powerful framework for modeling sequential decision
making tasks, such as neural network training, financial investment and robotic control. In each round,
an agent picks a prediction xt in a convex domain X , receives a convex and Lipschitz loss function lt
that depends on x1 , . . . , xt , and suffers the loss lt (xt ). The goal is to ensure that in any environment,
the cumulative loss of the agent is never much worse than that of any fixed decision u ∈ X . That is,
PT
one aims to upper-bound the regret t=1 [lt (xt ) − lt (u)], for all time horizon T ∈ N+ , comparator
u ∈ X and loss sequence l1 , . . . , lT .
PT
If there exists a best fixed decision u∗ = maxx t=1 lt (x) in hindsight, then the regret with respect
to any u ∈ X is dominated by the regret with respect to u∗ . In the context of training machine
learning models, u∗ corresponds to the model parameter that minimizes the training error. Hence,
intuitively, the regret bound characterizes how fast the algorithm finds u∗ through training.
Most classical online learning algorithms are minimax in nature, only tuned to optimize the worst-case
regret. For example, if the domain X is bounded, then the maximum distance between the best fixed
decision u∗ and the initialization x1 of the algorithm is the diameter D of X . Only considering this
√
worst case, it suffices√
to use Online Gradient Descent (OGD) [Zin03] with learning rate ηt ∝ D/ t.
The result is a O(D T ) regret bound that holds uniformly for all comparators u ∈ X . Such a
minimax reasoning is prevalent, but limited in two substantial ways.
1. It requires a bounded domain. Many practical problems are naturally unconstrained, making such
arguments inapplicable.
2. Practical
√ applications are usually not the worst case, which means that the minimax bound
O(D T ) is typically loose. Think about the situation where we have a prior guess of u∗ , from
either domain knowledge or pre-training. Using this prior as the initial prediction x1 , we should
1

Future versions available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.06846.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

