Truly Deterministic Policy Optimization
Ehsan Saleh1 , Saba Ghaffari1 , Timothy Bretl1,2 , Matthew West3
1
Department of Computer Science
2
Department of Aerospace Engineering
3
Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
ehsans2,sabag2,tbretl,mwest@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present a policy gradient method that avoids exploratory noise
injection and performs policy search over the deterministic landscape, with the
goal of improving learning with long horizons and non-local rewards. By avoiding
noise injection all sources of estimation variance can be eliminated in systems with
deterministic dynamics (up to the initial state distribution). Since deterministic
policy regularization is impossible using traditional non-metric measures such
as the KL divergence, we derive a Wasserstein-based quadratic model for our
purposes. We state conditions on the system model under which it is possible to
establish a monotonic policy improvement guarantee, propose a surrogate function
for policy gradient estimation, and show that it is possible to compute exact advantage estimates if both the state transition model and the policy are deterministic.
Finally, we describe two novel robotic control environments—one with non-local
rewards in the frequency domain and the other with a long horizon (8000 timesteps)—for which our policy gradient method (TDPO) significantly outperforms
existing methods (PPO, TRPO, DDPG, and TD3). Our implementation with all
the experimental settings and a video of the physical hardware test is available at
https://github.com/ehsansaleh/tdpo.
Policy Gradient (PG) methods can be broadly characterized by three defining elements: the policy
gradient estimator, the regularization measures, and the exploration profile. For gradient estimation,
episodic [58], importance-sampling-based [50], and deterministic [54] gradients are some of the most
common estimation oracles. As for regularization measures, either an Euclidean distance within the
parameter space [58, 54, 35], or dimensionally consistent non-metric measures [50, 25, 52, 26, 59]
have been frequently adapted. Common exploration profiles include Gaussian [50] and stochastic
processes [35]. These elements form the basis of many model-free and stochastic policy optimization
methods successfully capable of learning high-dimensional policy parameters.
Both stochastic and deterministic policy search can be useful in applications. A stochastic policy
has the effect of smoothing or filtering the policy landscape, which is desirable for optimization.
Searching through stochastic policies has enabled the effective control of challenging environments
under a general framework [50, 52]. The same method could either learn robotic movements or play
basic games (1) with minimal domain-specific knowledge, (2) regardless of function approximation
classes, and (3) with less human intervention (ignoring reward engineering and hyper-parameter
tuning) [13]. Using stochasticity for exploration, although it imposes approximations and variance,
has provided a robust way to actively search for higher rewards. Despite many successes, there are
practical environments which remain challenging for current policy gradient methods. For example,
non-local rewards (e.g., those defined in the frequency domain), long time horizons, and naturallyresonant environments all occur in realistic robotic systems [34, 38, 47] but can present issues for
policy gradient search.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

