Singular Value Fine-tuning: Few-shot Segmentation
requires Few-parameters Fine-tuning

Yanpeng Sun1∗, Qiang Chen2∗ , Xiangyu He3∗ , Jian Wang2 , Haocheng Feng2
Junyu Han2 , Errui Ding2 , Jian Cheng3 , Zechao Li1†, Jingdong Wang2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Baidu VIS
3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Freezing the pre-trained backbone has become a standard paradigm to avoid overfitting in few-shot segmentation. In this paper, we rethink the paradigm and
explore a new regime: fine-tuning a small part of parameters in the backbone. We
present a solution to overcome the overfitting problem, leading to better model
generalization on learning novel classes. Our method decomposes backbone parameters into three successive matrices via the Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD), then only fine-tunes the singular values and keeps others frozen. The
above design allows the model to adjust feature representations on novel classes
while maintaining semantic clues within the pre-trained backbone. We evaluate
our Singular Value Fine-tuning (SVF) approach on various few-shot segmentation methods with different backbones. We achieve state-of-the-art results on
both Pascal-5i and COCO-20i across 1-shot and 5-shot settings. Hopefully, this
simple baseline will encourage researchers to rethink the role of backbone finetuning in few-shot settings. The source code and models will be available at
https://github.com/syp2ysy/SVF.

1

Introduction

Benefiting from the large amounts of annotated data, deep learning has achieved noticeable improvements in the field of semantic segmentation [44, 17, 34]. In contrast, their performances
dramatically degrade when novel classes arrive or label data is insufficient. Thus, few-shot segmentation (FSS) [22, 49] was proposed to address these challengs. In FSS, one needs to segment novel
class objects in query images given only a few densely-annotated samples (i.e., support images and
support masks).3 Due to the extremely limited data in FSS, over-fitting has become a critical problem
that needs to be carefully handled.
One feasible solution is to restrict the model’s learning capacity so that it can not overfit the small
dataset. Most recent works [43, 47, 30, 33] follow this idea by freezing the pre-trained backbone.
Then, different feature fusion methods and prototypes are introduced to enhance the generalization
ability. Although this paradigm has achieved promising results, it is still suboptimal to directly adopt
parameters pre-trained on image classification to image segmentation. The semantic clues contained
in the pre-trained backbone can be irrelated to objects shown in support images, bringing unexpected
obstacles to segmenting novel class objects in FSS.
In this paper, we rethink the paradigm of freezing the pre-trained backbone and show that finetuning a small part of parameters in the backbone is free from overfitting, leading to better model
generalization in learning novel classes. Our method is illustrated in Figure 1(b). First, to find such a
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.
3
In this paper, we consider two settings of few-shot segmentation: 1-shot and 5-shot, which contain only one
and five support images and masks, respectively.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

