Approaching Quartic Convergence Rates
for Quasi-Stochastic Approximation
with Application to Gradient-Free Optimization
Caio Kalil Lauand
University of Florida
caio.kalillauand@ufl.edu

Sean Meyn
University of Florida
meyn@ece.ufl.edu

Abstract
Stochastic approximation is a foundation for many algorithms found in machine
learning and optimization. It is in general slow to converge: the mean square
error vanishes as O(n−1 ). A deterministic counterpart known as quasi-stochastic
approximation is a viable alternative in many applications, including gradient-free
optimization and reinforcement learning. It was assumed in prior research that
the optimal achievable convergence rate is O(n−2 ). It is shown in this paper that
through design it is possible to obtain far faster convergence, of order O(n−4+δ ),
with δ > 0 arbitrary. Two techniques are introduced for the first time to achieve
this rate of convergence. The theory is also specialized within the context of
gradient-free optimization, and tested on standard benchmarks. The main results
are based on a combination of novel application of results from number theory and
techniques adapted from stochastic approximation theory.

1

Introduction

Stochastic approximation (SA) was introduced in the seminal work of Robbins and Monro [38]. The
goal is to solve the root finding problem fs(θ∗ ) = 0, in which fs: Rd → Rd is of the form
fs(θ) := E[f (θ, ζ)]

(1)

where ζ is a random vector taking values in Rm . The basic algorithm is expressed as the d-dimensional
recursion,
θn+1 = θn + αn+1 f (θn , ζn+1 ) , n ≥ 0,
(2)
d

in which {αn } is the step-size sequence, and ζn+1 −→ ζ as n → ∞ (convergence in distribution).
SA theory has attracted a great deal of attention over the past twenty years, motivated in large part by
applications to reinforcement learning and optimization [49, 18, 32, 16, 7].
Convergence theory is couched in the ODE Method in which trajectories of (2) are compared
to solutions of the ODE ϑ̇ = fs(ϑ) (the mean flow). The major assumption required to ensure
convergence to θ∗ , for each initial condition θ0 ∈ Rd , is that the mean flow is globally asymptotically
stable—see [7] for minimal assumptions on the “noise sequence” ζ. Establishing sharp rates of
convergence is a far greater challenge. There is however a rich theory available to achieve the optimal
rate of convergence for the mean-square error (MSE), which is in general E[kθn − θ∗ k2 ] = O(n−1 ).

There are many applications for which the designer of the algorithm also designs the noise. Notable
examples include the introduction of exploration in reinforcement learning or gradient-free optimization. This motivates the use of quasi-stochastic approximation (QSA) in which the sequence ζ is
deterministic (e.g. mixtures of sinusoids or pseudo-random numbers). The idea was introduced in
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

