GStarX: Explaining Graph Neural Networks with
Structure-Aware Cooperative Games

Shichang Zhang1 Yozen Liu2 Neil Shah2 Yizhou Sun1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Snap Inc.
1
{shichang, yzsun}@cs.ucla.edu 2 {yliu2, nshah}@snap.com

Abstract
Explaining machine learning models is an important and increasingly popular
area of research interest. The Shapley value from game theory has been proposed
as a prime approach to compute feature importance towards model predictions
on images, text, tabular data, and recently graph neural networks (GNNs) on
graphs. In this work, we revisit the appropriateness of the Shapley value for
GNN explanation, where the task is to identify the most important subgraph and
constituent nodes for GNN predictions. We claim that the Shapley value is a
non-ideal choice for graph data because it is by definition not structure-aware. We
propose a Graph Structure-aware eXplanation (GStarX) method to leverage the
critical graph structure information to improve the explanation. Specifically, we
define a scoring function based on a new structure-aware value from cooperative
game theory proposed by Hamiache and Navarro (HN). When used to score node
importance, the HN value utilizes graph structures to attribute cooperation surplus
between neighbor nodes, resembling message passing in GNNs, so that node
importance scores reflect not only the node feature importance, but also the node
structural roles. We demonstrate that GStarX produces qualitatively more intuitive
explanations, and quantitatively improves explanation fidelity over strong baselines
on chemical graph property prediction and text graph sentiment classification.1

1

Introduction

Explainability is crucial for complex machine learning (ML) models in sensitive applications, helping
establish user trust and providing insights for potential model improvements. Many efforts focus
on explaining models on images, text, and tabular data. In contrast, the explainability of models on
graph data is yet underexplored. Since explainability can be especially critical for many graph tasks
like drug discovery, and interest in deep graph models is growing rapidly, further investigation of
graph explainability is warranted. In this work, we study graph ML explanation with graph neural
networks (GNNs) as the target models, given their popularity and widespread use for graph machine
learning tasks [42, 29, 38, 34, 33, 45].
In ML explainability, important features are identified, and the Shapley value [30] has been deemed as
a “fair” scoring function for computing feature importance. Originally from cooperative game theory,
many values, including the Shapley value, have been proposed for allocating a total payoff to players
in a game. When used for scoring the feature importance of a data instance, the model prediction is
treated as the total payoff and the features are considered as players. In particular, for an instance with
n features {x1 , . . . xn }, the Shapley value of its ith feature xi is computed via aggregating m(i, S),
which are the marginal contributions of xi to sets of other features xS ⊆ {x1 , . . . , xn } \ {xi }. Each
xS is called a coalition. Each m(i, S) is computed as the difference between model outputs for
1

Code available at https://github.com/ShichangZh/GStarX

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

