Bounded-Regret MPC via Perturbation Analysis:
Prediction Error, Constraints, and Nonlinearity
Yiheng Lin
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
yihengl@caltech.edu
Guannan Qu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
gqu@andrew.cmu.edu

Yang Hu
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
yanghu@g.harvard.edu

Tongxin Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
litongxin@cuhk.edu.cn

Adam Wierman
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study Model Predictive Control (MPC) and propose a general analysis pipeline
to bound its dynamic regret. The pipeline first requires deriving a perturbation
bound for a finite-time optimal control problem. Then, the perturbation bound is
used to bound the per-step error of MPC, which leads to a bound on the dynamic
regret. Thus, our pipeline reduces the study of MPC to the well-studied problem
of perturbation analysis, enabling the derivation of regret bounds of MPC under a
variety of settings. To demonstrate the power of our pipeline, we use it to generalize
existing regret bounds on MPC in linear time-varying (LTV) systems to incorporate
prediction errors on costs, dynamics, and disturbances. Further, our pipeline leads
to regret bounds on MPC in systems with nonlinear dynamics and constraints.

1

Introduction

Model Predictive Control (MPC) is an optimal control approach that solves a Finite-Time Optimal
Control Problem (FTOCP) using future predictions in a receding horizon manner [1]. It is a flexible
approach that is able to accommodate nonlinear and time-varying dynamics, state and actuation
constraints, and general cost functions [2–5]. As a result, it is broadly applied in a wide spectrum of
control problems, including robotics [6–10], autonomous vehicles [11–17], power systems [18–24],
process control [25–27], etc.
Despite the popularity of MPC, its theoretic analysis has been quite challenging. Early works along
this line focused on the stability and recursive feasibility of MPC [28–31]. More recently, there has
been tremendous interest in providing finite-time learning-theoretic performance guarantees for MPC,
such as regret and/or competitive ratio bounds [32, 33]. For example, progress has recently been
†

This work is supported by NSF Grants CNS-2146814, CPS-2136197, CNS-2106403, NGSDI-2105648,
EPCN-2154171, with additional support from Amazon AWS. Yiheng Lin was supported by Kortschak Scholars
program. Tongxin Li was supported by the start-up funding UDF01002773 of CUHK-Shenzhen.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

