Transformers meet Stochastic Block Models:
Attention with Data-Adaptive Sparsity and Cost

Sungjun Cho1 Seonwoo Min1 Jinwoo Kim2
Moontae Lee1,3 Honglak Lee1 Seunghoon Hong2,1
1
LG AI Research 2 KAIST 3 University of Illinois Chicago

Abstract
To overcome the quadratic cost of self-attention, recent works have proposed
various sparse attention modules, most of which fall under one of two groups:
1) sparse attention under a hand-crafted patterns and 2) full attention followed
by a sparse variant of softmax such as α-entmax. Unfortunately, the first group
lacks adaptability to data while the second still requires quadratic cost in training. In this work, we propose SBM-Transformer, a model that resolves both
problems by endowing each attention head with a mixed-membership Stochastic
Block Model (SBM). Then, each attention head data-adaptively samples a bipartite graph, the adjacency of which is used as an attention mask for each input.
During backpropagation, a straight-through estimator is used to flow gradients
beyond the discrete sampling step and adjust the probabilities of sampled edges
based on the predictive loss. The forward and backward cost are thus linear to
the number of edges, which each attention head can also choose flexibly based
on the input. By assessing the distribution of graphs, we theoretically show that
SBM-Transformer is a universal approximator for arbitrary sequence-to-sequence
functions in expectation. Empirical evaluations under the LRA and GLUE benchmarks demonstrate that our model outperforms previous efficient variants as well
as the original Transformer with full attention. Our implementation can be found
in https://github.com/sc782/SBM-Transformer.

1

Introduction

The Transformer [38] architecture has been the go-to method for encoding sequential data, due to its
superior performance in various tasks such as machine translation [28], image classification [14], and
protein language modeling [32]. Its key strength stems from the multi-head attention module, where
a so-called attention score matrix computes how contextually important one token is to another for all
possible token pairs. Each Transformer layer simultaneously pools the token representations based
on the attention scores, eventually returning contextualized features without sequentially traversing
through the input sequence as its recurrent neural network-based predecessors [16].
A well-known drawback of the original Transformer is its high computational cost in time and memory
that increases quadratically with sequence length. This is due to the full pairwise computation of
attention scores, which prohibits applying it in tasks involving long-range dependencies such as
document summarization [17] or high-resolution image processing [48]. Many works have thus
focused on developing more efficient alternatives by exploiting fixed or learnable attention sparsity
patterns [8, 46, 20, 12], low-rank approximations [40, 43], or kernelized attention modules [19, 9].
Even though the efficient alternatives hold theoretical expressibility guarantees [45], they are far
from sufficient, still failing to convince practitioners to replace the original Transformer. We believe
this is mostly due to their lack of adaptability. They apply the same modifications to unanimously
sparsify all the attention modules across layers, without considering the tasks at hand. Such strategy
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

