Nonlinear Sufficient Dimension Reduction with a
Stochastic Neural Network
Yan Sun
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
sun748@purdue.edu

Siqi Liang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
liang257@purdue.edu

Faming Liang∗
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
fmliang@purdue.edu

Abstract
Sufficient dimension reduction is a powerful tool to extract core information hidden in the high-dimensional data and has potentially many important applications
in machine learning tasks. However, the existing nonlinear sufficient dimension
reduction methods often lack the scalability necessary for dealing with large-scale
data. We propose a new type of stochastic neural network under a rigorous probabilistic framework and show that it can be used for sufficient dimension reduction
for large-scale data. The proposed stochastic neural network is trained using an
adaptive stochastic gradient Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm, whose convergence is rigorously studied in the paper as well. Through extensive experiments
on real-world classification and regression problems, we show that the proposed
method compares favorably with the existing state-of-the-art sufficient dimension
reduction methods and is computationally more efficient for large-scale data.

1

Introduction

or equivalently Y

X|Z,

(1)

|=

P (Y |X) = P (Y |Z),

|=

As a supervised method, sufficient dimension reduction (SDR) aims to project the data onto a lower
dimensional space so that the output is conditionally independent of the input features given the
projected features. Mathematically, the problem of SDR can be described as follows. Let Y ∈ Rd be
the response variables, and let X = (X1 , . . . , Xp )T ∈ Rp be the explanatory variables of dimension
p. The goal of SDR is to find a lower-dimensional representation Z ∈ Rq , as a function of X for
some q < p, such that
where denotes conditional independence. Intuitively, the definition (1) implies that Z has extracted
all the information contained in X for predicting Y . In the literature, SDR has been developed under
both linear and nonlinear settings.

Y

|=

Under the linear setting, SDR is to find a few linear combinations of X that are sufficient to describe
the conditional distribution of Y given X, i.e., finding a projection matrix B ∈ Rp×q such that
X B T X.

(2)

A more general definition for linear SDR based on σ-field can be found in [7]. Towards this goal, a
variety of inverse regression methods have been proposed, see e.g., sliced inverse regression (SIR)
∗

To whom the correspondence should be addressed: Faming Liang.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

