Density-driven Regularization for Out-of-distribution
Detection
Wenjian Huang∗ 1 , Hao Wang∗ 1 , Jiahao Xia2 , Chengyan Wang3 , Jianguo Zhang4,5†
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney
3
Human Phenome Institute, Fudan University
4
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems and
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
5
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
huangwj@sustech.edu.cn, 11812301@mail.sustech.edu.cn
jiahao.xia@student.uts.edu.au, wangcy@fudan.edu.cn, zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples is essential for reliably deploying
deep learning classifiers in open-world applications. However, existing detectors
relying on discriminative probability suffer from the overconfident posterior estimate for OOD data. Other reported approaches either impose strong unproven
parametric assumptions to estimate OOD sample density or develop empirical
detectors lacking clear theoretical motivations. To address these issues, we propose
a theoretical probabilistic framework for OOD detection in deep classification networks, in which two regularization constraints are constructed to reliably calibrate
and estimate sample density to identify OOD. Specifically, the density consistency
regularization enforces the agreement between analytical and empirical densities of
observable low-dimensional categorical labels. The contrastive distribution regularization separates the densities between in distribution (ID) and distribution-deviated
samples. A simple and robust implementation algorithm is also provided, which can
be used for any pre-trained neural network classifiers. To the best of our knowledge,
we have conducted the most extensive evaluations and comparisons on computer
vision benchmarks. The results show that our method significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art detectors, and even achieves comparable or better performance than
methods utilizing additional large-scale outlier exposure datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have achieved impressive accuracy on many classification tasks when evaluated in a
static and closed environment, where the test samples are sampled from the same distribution as the
training data. However, when deployed in real-world applications, deep learning (DL) models often
encounter anomalous samples different from the training data. Detecting such unexplored samples
is referred to as out-of-distribution (OOD) detection [1–13], which is crucial for reliable decision
making, especially in safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving, medical diagnosis and
secure authentication[1, 3, 8, 9]. This topic is particularly important for deep classifiers because it
has been well documented that it can be easily fooled by OOD samples to produce high confidence
predictions [14, 15, 7, 8, 11, 9, 16, 4]. In recent years, most reported and favored strategies for
DL-based OOD detection are to design the detectors by inspecting the distribution of high-level
features extracted by the relevant target task network. The studies are briefly reviewed below.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

