Asymptotics of smoothed Wasserstein distances
in the small noise regime

Yunzi Ding1 Jonathan Niles-Weed2
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, NYU
2
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and the Center for Data Science, NYU
yunziding@gmail.com
jnw@cims.nyu.edu
1

Abstract
We study the behavior of the Wasserstein-2 distance between discrete measures
µ and ν in Rd when both measures are smoothed by small amounts of Gaussian
noise. This procedure, known as Gaussian-smoothed optimal transport, has recently attracted attention as a statistically attractive alternative to the unregularized
Wasserstein distance. We give precise bounds on the approximation properties of
this proposal in the small noise regime, and establish the existence of a phase
transition: we show that, if the optimal transport plan from µ to ν is unique and a
perfect matching, there exists a critical threshold such that the difference between
W2 (µ, ν) and the Gaussian-smoothed OT distance W2 (µ ∗ Nσ , ν ∗ Nσ ) scales
like exp(−c/σ 2 ) for σ below the threshold, and scales like σ above it. These
results establish that for σ sufficiently small, the smoothed Wasserstein distance
approximates the unregularized distance exponentially well.

1

Introduction: optimal transport

Optimal Transport (OT) has seen a recent surge of applications in machine learning, in areas such as
generative modeling [2, 16], image processing [13, 27, 31], and domain adaptation [7, 8]. A natural
statistical question raised by these applications is to estimate the OT distances with samples. These
distances, known as the Wasserstein distances, are defined by
Z
kx − ykp dπ(x, y) ,
Wpp (µ, ν) = inf
π∈Π(µ,ν)

where Π(µ, ν) denotes the set of joint measures with marginals µ and ν, known as transport plans.
It is well known that plug-in estimators for this quantity, obtained by replacing µ and ν with empirical measures consisting of i.i.d. samples, have performance in high dimensions, with rates of
convergence typically of order n−2/d [3, 11, 12, 15, 22] when d > 2p. Moreover, minimax lower
bounds show that this curse of dimensionality is unavoidable in general [25, 32].
The existence of the curse of dimensionality for OT has led to a series of proposals to obtain
better rates of convergence by imposing additional structural assumptions—such as latent lowdimensionality [25] or smoothness [24, 33]—or by replacing Wp by a better-behaved surrogate,
such as an entropy-regularized version with much better statistical and computational properties [1, 9, 17, 23, 28].
A particularly intriguing option, developed by [18], consists in smoothing the Wasserstein distance
by adding Gaussian noise. The following result shows the statistical benefits of this approach.
Proposition 1.1 ([21]). For d > 1 and σ > 0, denote by Nσ the centered Gaussian measure on Rd
with covariance σ 2 Id . For any compactly supported probability measure µ in Rd , let x1 , x2 , . . . , xn
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

