Action-modulated midbrain dopamine activity arises
from distributed control policies
Jack Lindsey
Department of Neuroscience
Columbia University
New York, NY
jackwlindsey@gmail.com

Ashok Litwin-Kumar
Department of Neuroscience
Columbia University
New York, NY
a.litwin-kumar@columbia.edu

Abstract
Animal behavior is driven by multiple brain regions working in parallel with distinct control policies. We present a biologically plausible model of off-policy
reinforcement learning in the basal ganglia, which enables learning in such an
architecture. The model accounts for action-related modulation of dopamine activity that is not captured by previous models that implement on-policy algorithms.
In particular, the model predicts that dopamine activity signals a combination of
reward prediction error (as in classic models) and “action surprise," a measure of
how unexpected an action is relative to the basal ganglia’s current policy. In the
presence of the action surprise term, the model implements an approximate form
of Q-learning. On benchmark navigation and reaching tasks, we show empirically
that this model is capable of learning from data driven completely or in part by
other policies (e.g. from other brain regions). By contrast, models without the
action surprise term suffer in the presence of additional policies, and are incapable
of learning at all from behavior that is completely externally driven. The model provides a computational account for numerous experimental findings about dopamine
activity that cannot be explained by classic models of reinforcement learning in the
basal ganglia. These include differing levels of action surprise signals in dorsal and
ventral striatum, decreasing amounts of movement-modulated dopamine activity
with practice, and representations of action initiation and kinematics in dopamine
activity. It also provides further predictions that can be tested with recordings of
striatal dopamine activity. 1

1

Introduction

An extensive body of work has sought to account for the function of the basal ganglia using the
computational framework of reinforcement learning (RL), in particular RL algorithms for action
selection and value learning [30, 44, 29, 58]. Striatal neurons within the basal ganglia integrate
diverse inputs, including projections from across the cerebral cortex. The activity of these neurons, in
particular neurons in the dorsal striatum, plays a key role in action selection [46]. On the other hand,
neurons in the ventral striatum have been shown to encode the learned value of stimuli [10, 43, 45].
The phasic activity of midbrain dopamine neurons projecting to the striatum gates plasticity at corticostriatal synapses [63, 9, 11] and may therefore modulate the learning of actions and values. Indeed,
in many RL algorithms, the learning of state-to-action mappings (“policies”) and value estimates is
modulated by a scalar factor known as the “advantage” or “reward prediction error” (RPE), which
measures deviations in attained reward from expectations based on learned value estimates. Numerous
experiments have shown that striatal dopamine activity encodes an RPE-like signal [50, 43, 26].
1

Code for our experiments is provided at https://github.com/jlindsey15/ActionDopamineDistributedControl

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

