Pay attention to your loss: understanding
misconceptions about 1-Lipschitz neural networks

Louis Béthune, †
IRIT, Université Paul-Sabatier
Toulouse, France
Franck Mamalet
IRT Saint-Exupéry
Toulouse, France

Thibaut Boissin, †
IRT Saint-Exupéry
Toulouse, France

Corentin Friedrich
IRT Saint-Exupéry
Toulouse, France

Mathieu Serrurier
IRIT, Université Paul-Sabatier
Toulouse, France
Alberto González-Sanz
IMT, Université Paul-Sabatier
Toulouse, France

Abstract
Lipschitz constrained networks have gathered considerable attention in the deep
learning community, with usages ranging from Wasserstein distance estimation
to the training of certifiably robust classifiers. However they remain commonly
considered as less accurate, and their properties in learning are still not fully
understood. In this paper we clarify the matter: when it comes to classification
1-Lipschitz neural networks enjoy several advantages over their unconstrained
counterpart. First, we show that these networks are as accurate as classical ones,
and can fit arbitrarily difficult boundaries. Then, relying on a robustness metric that
reflects operational needs we characterize the most robust classifier: the WGAN
discriminator. Next, we show that 1-Lipschitz neural networks generalize well
under milder assumptions. Finally, we show that hyper-parameters of the loss
are crucial for controlling the accuracy-robustness trade-off. We conclude that
they exhibit appealing properties to pave the way toward provably accurate, and
provably robust neural networks.

1

Introduction

1-Lipschitz neural networks have drawn great attention in the last decade, with motivation ranging
from adversarial robustness to Wasserstein distance computation. In the following, we denote by
LipNet1 the class of 1-Lipschitz neural networks, by AllNet the class of neural networks without
constraints on their Lipschitz constant, i.e conventional neural networks.
Roughly speaking, the Lipschitz constant of neural networks quantifies how much their outputs
can change when inputs are perturbed. When this constant is high, as it is often the case for
neural networks of AllNet , they become vulnerable to adversarial attacks (see [1, 2] and references
therein): a carefully chosen small noise added to the inputs, usually imperceptible, can change the
class prediction. One possible defense against adversarial attacks is to constrain the network to
be 1-Lipschitz (in LipNet1 ) [3], which provides provable robustness guarantees, together with an
improvement of generalization [4] and interpretability of the model [5]. LipNet1 networks are also
used to estimate Wasserstein distance, thanks to Kantorovich-Rubinstein duality in the seminal work
of WGAN [6].
Despite their competitiveness with networks of AllNet on medium scale problems [7, 8], they still
suffer from misconceptions. A belief commonly invoked against networks of LipNet1 is that they are
less expressive: “Lipschitz-based approaches suffer from some representational limitations that may
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

