Transcormer: Transformer for Sentence Scoring with
Sliding Language Modeling

Kaitao Song1, ∗, Yichong Leng2,∗ , Xu Tan1 , Yicheng Zou3 , Tao Qin1 , Dongsheng Li1
Microsoft Research Asia1 , University of Science and Technology of China2 , Fudan University3
{kaitaosong, xuta, taoqin, dongsli}@microsoft.com,
lyc123go@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yczou18@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Sentence scoring aims at measuring the likelihood score of a sentence and is
widely used in natural language processing scenarios, like reranking, which is to
select the best sentence from multiple candidates. Previous works on sentence
scoring mainly adopted either causal language modeling (CLM) like GPT or
masked language modeling (MLM) like BERT, which have some limitations: 1)
CLM only utilizes unidirectional information for the probability estimation of
a sentence without considering bidirectional context, which affects the scoring
quality; 2) MLM can only estimate the probability of partial tokens at a time and
thus requires multiple forward passes to estimate the probability of the whole
sentence, which incurs large computation and time cost. In this paper, we propose
Transcormer – a Transformer model with a novel sliding language modeling (SLM)
for sentence scoring. Specifically, our SLM adopts a triple-stream self-attention
mechanism to estimate the probability of all tokens in a sentence with bidirectional
context and only requires a single forward pass. SLM can avoid the limitations
of CLM (only unidirectional context) and MLM (multiple forward passes) and
inherit their advantages, and thus achieve high effectiveness and efficiency in
scoring. Experimental results on multiple tasks demonstrate that our method
achieves better performance than other language models. Our code and pre-trained
models will be released at: https://github.com/microsoft/CyBERTron-LM/
Transcormer.

1

Introduction

Sentence scoring is to measure the log-likelihood score of a sentence via language model, so that it
can be used to represent the relative likeliness of a sentence. Specifically, a good sentence should
have a relatively lower log-likelihood score, which means more linguistically acceptable for the
sentence [1]. Due to such nature, sentence scoring has been widely used in many natural language
processing (NLP) scenarios. For instance, it can be used to rerank candidates in neural machine
translation (NMT) or automatic speech recognition (ASR) tasks [2, 3] or evaluate sentences in
linguistic acceptability [4]. Therefore, how to design effective language models to calculate sentence
scores efficiently is very important.
Recently, neural network based language models (LM) [5, 6, 7, 8] have been considered as the most
widely used technique for sentence scoring, since they can produce density estimation of the whole
sentence by computing the probability of each token and summing up their values as the sentence
score. Specifically, causal language modeling (CLM) [9] and masked language modeling (MLM) [10]
are the most representative LMs. For a given sentence x = {x1 , · · · , x|x| }, where xi is the i-th
∗

The first two authors are equal contributions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

