Incentivizing Combinatorial Bandit Exploration
Xinyan Hu1 , Dung Daniel Ngo2 , Aleksandrs Slivkins3 , and Zhiwei Steven Wu4
1

University of California, Berkeley.⇤ Email: xinyanhu@berkeley.edu
2
University of Minnesota. Email: ngo00054@umn.edu
3
Microsoft Research NYC. Email: slivkins@microsoft.com
4
Carnegie Mellon University. Email: zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
Consider a bandit algorithm that recommends actions to self-interested users in
a recommendation system. The users are free to choose other actions and need
to be incentivized to follow the algorithm’s recommendations. While the users
prefer to exploit, the algorithm can incentivize them to explore by leveraging the
information collected from the previous users. All published work on this problem,
known as incentivized exploration, focuses on small, unstructured action sets and
mainly targets the case when the users’ beliefs are independent across actions.
However, realistic exploration problems often feature large, structured action sets
and highly correlated beliefs. We focus on a paradigmatic exploration problem with
structure: combinatorial semi-bandits. We prove that Thompson Sampling, when
applied to combinatorial semi-bandits, is incentive-compatible when initialized
with a sufficient number of samples of each arm (where this number is determined
in advance by the Bayesian prior). Moreover, we design incentive-compatible
algorithms for collecting the initial samples.

1

Introduction

We consider incentivized exploration: how to incentivize self-interested users to explore. A social
planner interacts with self-interested users (henceforth, agents) and can make recommendations, but
cannot enforce the agents to comply with these recommendations. The agents face uncertainty about
the available alternatives. The social planner would like the agents to trade off exploration for the
sake of acquiring new information and exploitation, making optimal near-term decisions based on the
current information. The agents, on the other hand, prefer to exploit. However, the algorithm can
incentivize them to explore by leveraging the information collected from the previous users. This
problem has been studied since Kremer et al. (2014), see Slivkins (2019, Ch. 11) for an overview.
The basic model of incentivized exploration is very stylized and can be extended along two “dimension”: more sophisticated economic models for agents’ behavior and incentives, and more complex
machine-learning models for actions’ structures and rewards. All published work has only dealt
with the former, whereas we pursue the latter. In particular, all published work focuses on small,
unstructured action sets. Moreover, the case of independent priors – when the users’ beliefs are
independent across actions – is emphasized as the main, paradigmatic special case when specific
performance guarantees are derived. However, realistic exploration problems often feature large sets
with some known structure that connects actions to one another. A major recurring theme in the vast
literature on multi-armed bandits is taking advantage of the available structure so as to enable the
algorithm to cope with the large number of actions.
⇤
Research done while X.Hu was an undergraduate student at Peking University and a (virtual) visiting student
at Carnegie Mellon University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

