Factored Adaptation for Non-stationary
Reinforcement Learning

Fan Feng1 , Biwei Huang2 , Kun Zhang2,3 , Sara Magliacane4,5
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Carnegie Mellon University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4
University of Amsterdam 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{ffeng1017,sara.magliacane}@gmail.com, biweih@andrew.cmu.edu, kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Dealing with non-stationarity in environments (e.g., in the transition dynamics) and
objectives (e.g., in the reward functions) is a challenging problem that is crucial
in real-world applications of reinforcement learning (RL). While most current
approaches model the changes as a single shared embedding vector, we leverage
insights from the recent causality literature to model non-stationarity in terms of
individual latent change factors, and causal graphs across different environments.
In particular, we propose Factored Adaptation for Non-Stationary RL (FANS-RL),
a factored adaption approach that learns jointly both the causal structure in terms of
a factored MDP, and a factored representation of the individual time-varying change
factors. We prove that under standard assumptions, we can completely recover the
causal graph representing the factored transition and reward function, as well as a
partial structure between the individual change factors and the state components.
Through our general framework, we can consider general non-stationary scenarios
with different function types and changing frequency, including changes across
episodes and within episodes. Experimental results demonstrate that FANS-RL
outperforms existing approaches in terms of return, compactness of the latent state
representation, and robustness to varying degrees of non-stationarity.

1

Introduction

Learning a stable policy under non-stationary environments is a long-standing challenge in Reinforcement learning (RL) [1, 2, 3]. While most RL approaches assume stationarity, in many real-world
applications of RL there can be changes in the dynamics or the reward function, both across different episodes and within each episode. Recently, several works adapted Meta-RL methods to
learn sequences of non-stationary tasks [4, 5]. However, the continuous MAML [6] adaptation for
non-stationary RL [4] does not explicitly model temporal changing components, while TRIO [5]
needs to meta-train the model on a set of non-stationary tasks. LILAC [7] and ZeUS [8] leverage
latent variable models to directly model the change factors in the environment in a shared embedding
space. In particular, they consider families of MDPs indexed by a single latent parameter. In this
paper, we argue that disentangling the changes as separate latent parameters and modeling the process
with a factored representation improves the efficiency of adapting to non-stationarity.
In particular, we leverage insights from the causality literature [9, 10] that model non-stationarity in
terms of individual latent change factors and causal graphs across different environments. We propose
Factored Adaptation for Non-Stationary RL (FANS-RL), a factored adaptation framework that jointly
learns the causal structure of the MDP and a factored representation of the individual change factors,
allowing for changes at discrete timepoints and continuously varying environments. While we provide
a specific architecture (FN-VAE), the theoretical framework of FANS-RL can be implemented with
different architectures and combined with various RL algorithms. We formalize our setting as a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

