In What Ways Are Deep Neural Networks Invariant
and How Should We Measure This?
Henry Kvinge1,2 , Tegan H. Emerson1,3,4 , Grayson Jorgenson1 ,
Scott Vasquez1 , Timothy Doster1 , Jesse D. Lew5
1
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Washington
3
Department of Mathematics, Colorado State University
4
Department of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Texas, El Paso
5
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
henry.kvinge@pnnl.gov

Abstract
It is often said that a deep learning model is “invariant” to some specific type of
transformation. However, what is meant by this statement strongly depends on
the context in which it is made. In this paper we explore the nature of invariance
and equivariance of deep learning models with the goal of better understanding
the ways in which they actually capture these concepts on a formal level. We
introduce a family of invariance and equivariance metrics that allows us to quantify
these properties in a way that disentangles them from other metrics such as loss or
accuracy. We use our metrics to better understand the two most popular methods
used to build invariance into networks: data augmentation and equivariant layers.
We draw a range of conclusions about invariance and equivariance in deep learning
models, ranging from whether initializing a model with pretrained weights has an
effect on a trained model’s invariance, to the extent to which invariance learned via
training can generalize to out-of-distribution data.

1

Introduction

The notions of invariance and equivariance have been guiding concepts across a diverse range of
scientific domains, from physics to psychology. In machine learning (ML) the concept of invariance
is frequently invoked to describe models whose output does not change when its input is transformed
in ways that are irrelevant to the task the model was designed for. For a dog or cat image classifier,
for example, it is desirable for the model to be reflection invariant so that the same prediction is made
whether or not the input image is reflected across its vertical axis. This type of invariance is useful in
this model because although an image generally changes when reflected, whether it contains a dog
or cat does not. Equivariance is used to describe models whose output changes in a manner that is
aligned with the way that input is transformed. For example, as an image is rotated, the position of
bounding boxes predicted by an object detector should also rotate (thus, the object detector should be
rotation equivariant).
While mathematicians have developed rigorous theory that can describe invariance and equivariance,
the amount of this that is actually used in the context of ML varies dramatically among different
works. Within computer vision, research on relatively simple image transformations (i.e., rotations
or translations) is often presented within a solid group-theoretic framework [6; 52; 9]. Other work
dealing with more complex types of transformations such as changes in image background have (by
necessity) needed to be more informal [51]. Furthermore, while model invariance and equivariance
are frequently a central component in a broad range of ML research, limited effort has been put
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

