Towards Video Text Visual Question Answering:
Benchmark and Baseline
Minyi Zhao1∗, Bingjia Li1∗, Jie Wang2 , Wanqing Li2 , Wenjing Zhou2 , Lan Zhang2
Shijie Xuyang1 , Zhihang Yu1 , Xinkun Yu1 , Guangze Li1 , Aobotao Dai1 , Shuigeng Zhou1†
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China
2
ByteDance, China
{zhaomy20, bjli20, abdai20, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn
{wangjie.bernard, liwanqing.0415, zhouwenjing.233, zhanglan.11}@bytedance.com
{shijiexuyang, gzlifd}@gmail.com {zhyu21, xkyu21}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
There are already some text-based visual question answering (TextVQA) benchmarks for developing machine’s ability to answer questions based on texts in
images in recent years. However, models developed on these benchmarks cannot
work effectively in many real-life scenarios (e.g. traffic monitoring, shopping ads
and e-learning videos) where temporal reasoning ability is required. To this end,
we propose a new task named Video Text Visual Question Answering (ViteVQA in
short) that aims at answering questions by spatiotemporally reasoning texts and
visual information in a given video. In particular, on the one hand, we build the first
ViteVQA benchmark dataset named M4-ViteVQA — the abbreviation of Multicategory Multi-frame Multi-resolution Multi-modal benchmark for ViteVQA,
which contains 7,620 video clips of 9 categories (i.e., shopping, traveling, driving,
vlog, sport, advertisement, movie, game and talking) and 3 kinds of resolutions
(i.e., 720p, 1080p and 1176×664), and 25,123 question-answer pairs. On the
other hand, we develop a baseline method named T5-ViteVQA for the ViteVQA
task. T5-ViteVQA consists of five transformers. It first extracts optical character
recognition (OCR) tokens, question features, and video representations via two
OCR transformers, one language transformer and one video-language transformer,
respectively. Then, a multimodal fusion transformer and an answer generation
module are applied to fuse multimodal information and generate the final prediction. Extensive experiments on M4-ViteVQA demonstrate the superiority of
T5-ViteVQA over the existing approaches of TextVQA and VQA tasks. The
ViteVQA benchmark is available in https://github.com/bytedance/VTVQA.

1

Introduction

Several datasets [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] have been built to facilitate the development of visual question
answering (VQA) [1] methods and systems, but none of them consider the high-level scene text
information that is ubiquitous in real-life scenarios and urgently needed for visually-impaired users [8].
Thus, researchers later proposed some text-based VQA (TextVQA) benchmarks [8, 9] to promote the
research on jointly understanding both visual information and scene texts in images.
Though existing TextVQA benchmarks have greatly advanced TextVQA techniques, all these benchmarks focus on single well-photographed images, which makes the developed TextVQA models
∗
†

This work was mainly done while the first two authors are interns in ByteDance with equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

