SHINE: SubHypergraph Inductive Neural nEtwork

Yuan Luo
Feinberg School of Medicine
Northwestern University
Chicago, IL 60611
yuan.luo@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Hypergraph neural networks can model multi-way connections among nodes of
the graphs, which are common in real-world applications such as genetic medicine.
In particular, genetic pathways or gene sets encode molecular functions driven
by multiple genes, naturally represented as hyperedges. Thus, hypergraph-guided
embedding can capture functional relations in learned representations. Existing
hypergraph neural network models often focus on node-level or graph-level inference. There is an unmet need in learning powerful representations of subgraphs
of hypergraphs in real-world applications. For example, a cancer patient can be
viewed as a subgraph of genes harboring mutations in the patient, while all the
genes are connected by hyperedges that correspond to pathways representing specific molecular functions. For accurate inductive subgraph prediction, we propose
SubHypergraph Inductive Neural nEtwork (SHINE). SHINE uses informative genetic pathways that encode molecular functions as hyperedges to connect genes as
nodes. SHINE jointly optimizes the objectives of end-to-end subgraph classification and hypergraph nodes’ similarity regularization. SHINE simultaneously learns
representations for both genes and pathways using strongly dual attention message
passing. The learned representations are aggregated via a subgraph attention layer
and used to train a multilayer perceptron for inductive subgraph inferencing. We
evaluated SHINE against a wide array of state-of-the-art (hyper)graph neural networks, XGBoost, NMF and polygenic risk score models, using large scale NGS
and curated datasets. SHINE outperformed all comparison models significantly,
and yielded interpretable disease models with functional insights.

1

Introduction

Hypergraph neural networks have recently emerged as a series of successful methods to model
multi-way connections that are beyond pairwise associations among nodes of the graphs. Multi-way
connections are common in many real-world applications and, in particular, genetic medicine. From
genetic medicine’s perspective, pathways or broadly speaking gene sets encode the relationship
among multiple genes that collectively correspond to a molecular function [1], which can be used in
machine learning models to account for disease mechanisms more intuitively and accurately than
individual genes [2]. Genetic pathways or gene sets encode functional relations among multiple genes
(see Appendix for detailed explanations), which can be naturally modeled as hyperedges connecting
all involved nodes (e.g., genes). Thus, hypergraph-guided embedding can capture functional relations
in learned representations.
Existing hypergraph neural network models often adopt the semi-supervised learning (SSL) paradigm
to assign labels to initially unlabeled nodes in a hypergraph [3–5]. Other methods have focused on
learning graph representations [6, 7]. Node-level and graph-level representations give either local
or overarching views of the graphs, i.e., at the two extremes of hypergraph topological structures.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

