arXiv:2210.01753v1 [cs.LG] 4 Oct 2022

HYPRO: A Hybridly Normalized Probabilistic Model
for Long-Horizon Prediction of Event Sequences

Siqiao Xue, Xiaoming Shi, James Y Zhang
Ant Group
569 Xixi Road
Hangzhou, China
siqiao.xsq@alibaba-inc.com
{peter.sxm,james.z}@antgroup.com

Hongyuan Mei
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
6045 S Kenwood Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
hongyuan@ttic.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the important yet under-investigated problem of making
long-horizon prediction of event sequences. Existing state-of-the-art models do
not perform well at this task due to their autoregressive structure. We propose
HYPRO, a hybridly normalized probabilistic model that naturally fits this task:
its first part is an autoregressive base model that learns to propose predictions;
its second part is an energy function that learns to reweight the proposals such
that more realistic predictions end up with higher probabilities. We also propose
efficient training and inference algorithms for this model. Experiments on multiple
real-world datasets demonstrate that our proposed HYPRO model can significantly
outperform previous models at making long-horizon predictions of future events.
We also conduct a range of ablation studies to investigate the effectiveness of each
component of our proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Long-horizon prediction of event sequences is essential in various real-world applied domains:
• Healthcare. Given a patient’s symptoms and treatments so far, we would be interested in predicting
their future health conditions over the next several months, including their prognosis and treatment.
• Commercial. Given an online consumer’s previous purchases and reviews, we may be interested in
predicting what they would buy over the next several weeks and plan our advertisement accordingly.
• Urban planning. Having monitored the traffic flow of a town for the past few days, we’d like to
predict its future traffic over the next few hours, which would be useful for congestion management.
• Similar scenarios arise in computer systems, finance, dialogue, music, etc.
Though being important, this task has been under-investigated: the previous work in this research
area has been mostly focused on the prediction of the next single event (e.g., its time and type).
In this paper, we show that previous state-of-the-art models suffer at making long-horizon predictions,
i.e., predicting the series of future events over a given time interval. That is because those models
are all autoregressive: predicting each future event is conditioned on all the previously predicted
events; an error can not be corrected after it is made and any error will be cascaded through all the
subsequent predictions. Problems of the same kind also exist in natural language processing tasks
such as generation and machine translation (Ranzato et al., 2016; Goyal, 2021).
In this paper, we propose a novel modeling framework that learns to make long-horizon prediction of
event sequences. Our main technical contributions include:
• A new model. The key component of our framework is HYPRO, a hybridly normalized neural
probabilistic model that combines an autoregressive base model with an energy function: the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

