Maximum-Likelihood Inverse Reinforcement Learning
with Finite-Time Guarantees
Siliang Zeng
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Minneapolis, MN, USA
zeng0176@umn.edu
Alfredo Garcia
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
alfredo.garcia@tamu.edu

Chenliang Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China
chenliangli@link.cuhk.edu.cn
Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Minneapolis, MN, USA
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) aims to recover the reward function and
the associated optimal policy that best fits observed sequences of states and
actions implemented by an expert. Many algorithms for IRL have an inherently
nested structure: the inner loop finds the optimal policy given parametrized
rewards while the outer loop updates the estimates towards optimizing a measure
of fit. For high dimensional environments such nested-loop structure entails
a significant computational burden. To reduce the computational burden of a
nested loop, novel methods such as SQIL [1] and IQ-Learn [2] emphasize policy
estimation at the expense of reward estimation accuracy. However, without
accurate estimated rewards, it is not possible to do counterfactual analysis such
as predicting the optimal policy under different environment dynamics and/or
learning new tasks. In this paper we develop a novel single-loop algorithm for
IRL that does not compromise reward estimation accuracy. In the proposed
algorithm, each policy improvement step is followed by a stochastic gradient
step for likelihood maximization. We show that the proposed algorithm provably
converges to a stationary solution with a finite-time guarantee. If the reward is
parameterized linearly, we show the identified solution corresponds to the solution
of the maximum entropy IRL problem. Finally, by using robotics control problems
in MuJoCo and their transfer settings, we show that the proposed algorithm achieves
superior performance compared with other IRL and imitation learning benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Given observed trajectories of states and actions implemented by an expert, we consider the problem
of estimating the reinforcement learning environment in which the expert was trained. This problem is
generally referred to as inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (see [3] for a recent survey). Assuming
the environment dynamics are known (or available online), the IRL problem consists of estimating
the reward function and the expert’s policy (optimizing such rewards) that best fits the data. While
there are limitations on the identifiability of rewards [4], the estimation of rewards based upon expert
trajectories enables important counterfactual analysis such as the estimation of optimal policies under
different environment dynamics and/or reinforcement learning of new tasks.
In the seminal work [5], the authors developed an IRL formulation, in which the model for the expert’s
behavior is the policy that maximizes entropy subject to a constraint requiring that the expected
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

