A Quantitative Geometric Approach to
Neural-Network Smoothness
Zi Wang
University of Wisconsin-Madison
zw@cs.wisc.edu

Gautam Prakriya
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
gautamprakriya@gmail.com

Somesh Jha
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jha@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Fast and precise Lipschitz constant estimation of neural networks is an important
task for deep learning. Researchers have recently found an intrinsic trade-off
between the accuracy and smoothness of neural networks, so training a network
with a loose Lipschitz constant estimation imposes a strong regularization, and can
hurt the model accuracy significantly. In this work, we provide a unified theoretical
framework, a quantitative geometric approach, to address the Lipschitz constant
estimation. By adopting this framework, we can immediately obtain several theoretical results, including the computational hardness of Lipschitz constant estimation
and its approximability. We implement the algorithms induced from this quantitative geometric approach, which are based on semidefinite programming (SDP).1
Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that they are more scalable and precise than
existing tools on Lipschitz constant estimation for ℓ∞ -perturbations. Furthermore,
we also show their intricate relations with other recent SDP-based techniques, both
theoretically and empirically. We believe that this unified quantitative geometric
perspective can bring new insights and theoretical tools to the investigation of
neural-network smoothness and robustness.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed the unprecedented success of deep learning in many machine learning
tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Mikolov et al., 2013). Despite the growing popularity of deep learning,
researchers have also found that neural networks are very vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Papernot et al., 2016). As a result, it is important to train
neural networks that are robust against those attacks (Madry et al., 2018). In recent years, the deep
learning community starts to focus on certifiably robust neural networks (Albarghouthi, 2021; Hein
and Andriushchenko, 2017; Katz et al., 2017; Cohen et al., 2019; Raghunathan et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2022; Leino et al., 2021). One way to achieve certified robustness is to estimate the smoothness
of neural networks, where the smoothness is measured by the Lipschitz constant of the neural network.
Recent works have found that to achieve both high accuracy and low Lipschitzness, the network has
to significantly increase the model capacity (Bubeck and Sellke, 2021). This implies that there is an
intrinsic tension between the accuracy and smoothness of neural networks.
Commonly considered adversarial attacks are the ℓ∞ and ℓ2 -perturbations in the input space. Leino
et al. (2021); Cohen et al. (2019) have successfully trained networks with low ℓ2 -Lipschitz constant,
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/z1w/GeoLIP.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

