Exploiting the Relationship Between Kendall’s Rank
Correlation and Cosine Similarity for Attribution
Protection
Fan Wang1,2
Adams Wai-Kin Kong1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, IGP, Nanyang Technological University
fan005@e.ntu.edu.sg adamskong@ntu.edu.sg

1

Abstract
Model attributions are important in deep neural networks as they aid practitioners
in understanding the models, but recent studies reveal that attributions can be
easily perturbed by adding imperceptible noise to the input. The non-differentiable
Kendall’s rank correlation is a key performance index for attribution protection. In
this paper, we first show that the expected Kendall’s rank correlation is positively
correlated to cosine similarity and then indicate that the direction of attribution is
the key to attribution robustness. Based on these findings, we explore the vector
space of attribution to explain the shortcomings of attribution defense methods
using ℓp norm and propose integrated gradient regularizer (IGR), which maximizes
the cosine similarity between natural and perturbed attributions. Our analysis
further exposes that IGR encourages neurons with the same activation states for
natural samples and the corresponding perturbed samples. Our experiments on
different models and datasets confirm our analysis on attribution protection and
demonstrate a decent improvement in adversarial robustness.

1

Introduction

Recently, the explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) has revived since deep neural networks (DNNs)
are applied to more security-sensitive tasks such as medical imaging [27], criminal justice [5] and
autonomous driving [20]. As one of the XAI tools, model attributions explain and measure the
relative impact of each feature on the final prediction. With more non-expert practitioners being
involved, it is more important for them to understand and reliably interpret the mechanism behind
the outputs. Besides, EU regulators also start to enforce General Data Protection Regulation for
more transparent interpretations on decision making based on AI [10]. Therefore, the trustworthy
attribution is becoming even more crucial.
Although numerous attribution methods have been proposed in recent studies [25, 26, 29, 35, 37], it
has been pointed out that they are vulnerable to attribution attacks. Different from standard adversarial
attacks [3, 9, 18, 22, 31] that focus on misleading classifiers to incorrect outputs, Ghorbani et al. [8]
shows that it is possible to generate visually indistinguishable images which are significantly different
on their attributions, but with the same predicted label. Dombrowski et al. [6] emphasizes on targeted
attack that manipulates the attributions to any predefined target attributions while keeping the model
outputs unchanged. There are also black-box attacks applied on text explanations [14]. Common
adversarial defense mechanisms such as adversarial training [21] and distillation [23] are not able to
tackle the attribution attacks; instead, researchers turn their focus on the attribution itself.
As the differences between natural and perturbed attributions are measured by Kendall’s rank
correlation [15], which reflects the ordinal importance among features, i.e., the proportion of order
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

