Neural Stochastic PDEs: Resolution-Invariant
Learning of Continuous Spatiotemporal Dynamics
Cristopher Salvi
Imperial College London &
The Alan Turing Institute
c.salvi@imperial.ac.uk

Maud Lemercier
University of Warwick
maud.lemercier@warwick.ac.uk

Andris Gerasimovičs
University of Bath
ag2616@bath.ac.uk

Abstract
Stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) are the mathematical tool of
choice for modelling spatiotemporal PDE-dynamics under the influence of randomness. Based on the notion of mild solution of an SPDE, we introduce a novel neural
architecture to learn solution operators of PDEs with (possibly stochastic) forcing
from partially observed data. The proposed Neural SPDE model provides an extension to two popular classes of physics-inspired architectures. On the one hand, it
extends Neural CDEs and variants – continuous-time analogues of RNNs – in that
it is capable of processing incoming sequential information arriving at arbitrary
spatial resolutions. On the other hand, it extends Neural Operators – generalizations
of neural networks to model mappings between spaces of functions – in that it can
parameterize solution operators of SPDEs depending simultaneously on the initial
condition and a realization of the driving noise. By performing operations in the
spectral domain, we show how a Neural SPDE can be evaluated in two ways, either
by calling an ODE solver (emulating a spectral Galerkin scheme), or by solving
a fixed point problem. Experiments on various semilinear SPDEs, including the
stochastic Navier-Stokes equations, demonstrate how the Neural SPDE model is
capable of learning complex spatiotemporal dynamics in a resolution-invariant way,
with better accuracy and lighter training data requirements compared to alternative
models, and up to 3 orders of magnitude faster than traditional solvers.

1

Introduction

Stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) are the mathematical formalism used to model many
physical, biological and economic systems subject to the influence of randomness, be it intrinsic
(e.g. quantifying uncertainty) or extrinsic (e.g. modelling environmental random perturbations).
Notable examples of SPDEs include the Kardar–Parisi–Zhang (KPZ) equation for modelling random
interface growth such as the propagation of a forest fire from a burnt region to an unburnt region [12],
the Ginzburg-Landau equation describing phase transitions of ferromagnets and superconductors
near critical temperature [34], or the stochastic Navier-Stokes equations modelling the dynamics of a
turbulent fluid flow under the presence of local random fluctuations [31]. For an introduction to the
theory of SPDEs see Hairer [11]; a comprehensive textbook is Holden et al. [15].
Classical numerical approaches for solving SPDEs include finite difference methods and spectral
Galerkin methods [27] among others. To ensure accuracy and stability of numerical solutions of
complex SPDEs, computations must be carried out at high resolution using fine discretization grids,
rendering the resulting schemes computationally intractable. This limitation motivates the study of
data-driven methods that can learn solutions to differential equations from partially observed data.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

