Off-Policy Evaluation for Episodic Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes under
Non-Parametric Models
Rui Miao
University of California, Irvine
rmiao2@uci.edu

Zhengling Qi∗
The George Washington University
qizhengling@gwu.edu

Xiaoke Zhang
The George Washington University
xkzhang@gwu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of off-policy evaluation (OPE) for episodic Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) with continuous states. Motivated
by the recently proposed proximal causal inference framework, we develop a
non-parametric identification result for estimating the policy value via a sequence
of so-called V-bridge functions with the help of time-dependent proxy variables.
We then develop a fitted-Q-evaluation-type algorithm to estimate V-bridge functions recursively, where a non-parametric instrumental variable (NPIV) problem is
solved at each step. By analyzing this challenging sequential NPIV problem, we
establish the finite-sample error bounds for estimating the V-bridge functions and
accordingly that for evaluating the policy value, in terms of the sample size, length
of horizon and so-called (local) measure of ill-posedness at each step. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first finite-sample error bound for OPE in POMDPs
under non-parametric models.

1

Introduction

In practical reinforcement learning (RL), a representation of the full state which makes the system
Markovian and therefore amenable to most existing RL algorithms is not known a priori. Decision
makers are often facing so-called partial observability of the state information, which significantly
hinders the task of RL. In general, agents have to maintain all historical information and establish
a belief system on the hidden state for optimal decision making. A partially observable Markov
decision process (POMDP) is often used to model the data generating process. See examples in
robotics [Rafferty et al., 2011], precision medicine [Tsoukalas et al., 2015], stochastic game [Hansen
et al., 2004] and many others. However, it is well known that learning optimal policies in POMDP is
computationally intractable [Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis, 1987]. The issue of partial observability
becomes more serious in the batch setting, where agents are not able to actively collect additional data
and further explore the environment. For example, standard off-policy evaluation (OPE) methods,
which aim to learn a policy value from the batch data generated from some behavior policy, would
fail to give a consistent estimate because of unobserved state variables.
Due to this practical concern, there is a recent line of research studying the OPE under the framework
of a confounded POMDP, where the behavior policy to generate the batch data is allowed to depend
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

