Bayesian Active Learning with Fully Bayesian
Gaussian Processes
Christoffer Riis
Francisco Antunes
Frederik Boe Hüttel
Carlos Lima Azevedo
Francisco Câmara Pereira
DTU Management
Machine Learning for Smart Mobility
{chrrii,franant,fbohy,climaz,camara}@dtu.dk

Abstract
The bias-variance trade-off is a well-known problem in machine learning that only
gets more pronounced the less available data there is. In active learning, where
labeled data is scarce or difficult to obtain, neglecting this trade-off can cause
inefficient and non-optimal querying, leading to unnecessary data labeling. In this
paper, we focus on active learning with Gaussian Processes (GPs). For the GP,
the bias-variance trade-off is made by optimization of the two hyperparameters:
the length scale and noise-term. Considering that the optimal mode of the joint
posterior of the hyperparameters is equivalent to the optimal bias-variance trade-off,
we approximate this joint posterior and utilize it to design two new acquisition
functions. The first is a Bayesian variant of Query-by-Committee (B-QBC), and
the second is an extension that explicitly minimizes the predictive variance through
a Query by Mixture of Gaussian Processes (QB-MGP) formulation. Across six simulators, we empirically show that B-QBC, on average, achieves the best marginal
likelihood, whereas QB-MGP achieves the best predictive performance. We show
that incorporating the bias-variance trade-off in the acquisition functions mitigates
unnecessary and expensive data labeling.

1

Introduction

Gaussian Processes (GPs) are well-known for their ability to deal with small to medium-size data sets
by balancing model complexity and regularization [Williams and Rasmussen, 2006]. Together with
their inherent ability to model uncertainties, this has made GPs the go-to models to use for Bayesian
optimization and metamodeling [Snoek et al., 2012, Gramacy, 2020]. For both cases, the data is often
scarce, making the modeling task a balance between complexity and regularization, i.e., preventing
severe overfitting while maintaining the ability to fit nonlinear functions. Likewise, the ability to
quantify the uncertainty often guides the acquisition functions of Bayesian optimization and active
learning schemes, which are inevitably required to build metamodels efficiently.
On the other hand, it is not flawless to use GPs in Bayesian optimization and active learning. In both
cases, the same GP is used in an iterative process firstly to predict the mean and variance of a new
data point and then secondly to use those estimates to guide the data acquisition. Since this is an
iterative process, poor predictions will lead to poor data acquisition, and vice versa. The problem
is less pronounced for larger data sets as predictions become increasingly accurate as more data
is available. However, in Bayesian optimization and active learning, where the data sets tend to
be relatively small, wrong predictions can result in misguidance, thus hindering performance and
efficiency. In this paper, we mitigate this problem by applying a fully Bayesian approach to the GPs
and formulating two new acquisition functions for active learning. Where a single GP trained with
a maximum likelihood estimate only represents one model hypothesis, a Fully Bayesian Gaussian
Process (FBGP) represents multiple model hypotheses at once. We will utilize this extra information
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

