Does Momentum Change the Implicit Regularization
on Separable Data?

Bohan Wang∗
University of Science & Technology of China
bhwangfy@gmail.com
Huishuai Zhang
Microsoft Research Asia
huzhang@microsoft.com
Wei Chen†
Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenwei2022@ict.ac.cn

Qi Meng†
Microsoft Research Asia
meq@microsoft.com

Ruoyu Sun
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
sunruoyu@cuhk.edu.cn
Zhi-Ming Ma
Chinese Academy of Sciences
mazm@amt.ac.cn

Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research Asia
tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract
The momentum acceleration technique is widely adopted in many optimization
algorithms. However, there is no theoretical answer on how the momentum affects
the generalization performance of the optimization algorithms. This paper studies
this problem by analyzing the implicit regularization of momentum-based optimization. We prove that on the linear classification problem with separable data and
exponential-tailed loss, gradient descent with momentum (GDM) converges to the
L2 max-margin solution, which is the same as vanilla gradient descent. That means
gradient descent with momentum acceleration still converges to a low-complexity
model, which guarantees their generalization. We then analyze the stochastic and
adaptive variants of GDM (i.e., SGDM and deterministic Adam) and show they
also converge to the L2 max-margin solution. Technically, the implicit regularization of SGDM is established based on a novel convergence analysis of SGDM
under a general noise condition called affine noise variance condition. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to derive SGDM’s convergence under such
an assumption. Numerical experiments are conducted to support our theoretical
results.

1

Introduction

It is widely believed that the optimizers have the implicit regularization in terms of selecting output
parameters among all the minima on the landscape [26, 17, 45]. Parallel to the analysis of coordinate
descent ([31, 40]), [34] shows that gradient descent would converge to the L2 max-margin solution
for the linear classification task with exponential-tailed loss, which mirrors its good generalization
property in practice. Since then, many efforts have been taken on analyzing the implicit regularization
of various local-search optimizers, including stochastic gradient descent [24], steepest descent [8],
AdaGrad [29] and optimizers for homogeneous neural networks [21, 14, 43].
However, though the momentum acceleration technique is widely adopted in the optimization
algorithms in both convex and non-convex learning tasks [37, 41, 38], the understanding of how
∗
†

The work was done when Bohan Wang was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding Authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

