Iterative Feature Matching: Toward Provable Domain
Generalization with Logarithmic Environments

Yining Chen
Stanford University
cynnjjs@stanford.edu

Elan Rosenfeld
Carnegie Mellon University
elan@cmu.edu

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Mark Sellke
Stanford University
msellke@stanford.edu

Andrej Risteski
Carnegie Mellon University
aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Domain generalization aims at performing well on unseen test environments with
data from a limited number of training environments. Despite a proliferation of
proposed algorithms for this task, assessing their performance both theoretically
and empirically is still very challenging. Distributional matching algorithms such
as (Conditional) Domain Adversarial Networks [12, 28] are popular and enjoy
empirical success, but they lack formal guarantees. Other approaches such as
Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) require a prohibitively large number of training
environments—linear in the dimension of the spurious feature space ds —even
on simple data models like the one proposed by Rosenfeld et al. [37]. Under a
variant of this model, we show that ERM and IRM can fail to find the optimal
invariant predictor with o(ds ) environments. We then present an iterative feature
matching algorithm that is guaranteed with high probability to find the optimal
invariant predictor after seeing only O(log ds ) environments. Our results provide
the first theoretical justification for distribution-matching algorithms widely used
in practice under a concrete nontrivial data model.

1

Introduction

Domain generalization aims at performing well on unseen environments using labeled data from a
limited number of training environments [8]. In contrast to transfer learning or domain adaptation,
domain generalization assumes that neither labeled nor unlabeled data from the test environments
is available at training time. In the empirical literature, invariance of a “signal” feature distribution
conditioned on the label, i.e. P (Φ(x) | y), is the underlying assumption in widely adopted algorithms
such as Correlation Alignment (CORAL) [43, 42], Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [13, 25], and
(Conditional) Domain Adversarial Networks [12, 28]. Distribution-matching algorithms regularize
the distribution of intermediate representations of examples from different environments to be closer
in some metric. They are among the top-performing methods for domain generalization benchmarks
like PACS [24], VLCS [11], and DomainNet [34], but they lack formal guarantees. Previous empirical
works usually characterize the performance of these algorithms using generalization bounds based
on divergence between domain distributions [7, 31], but those bounds are vacuous for the typical
benchmarks for domain generalization and thus cannot explain their success. For example, when
different environments have disjoint supports (as is the case in the above-mentioned benchmarks)
the H-divergence [7] is 1 even for the linear hypothesis class. To obtain useful guarantees, it is
necessary to study data models that encode structure reflective of settings of interest. Prior works
attempting to theoretically characterize the performance of feature matching algorithms emphasize
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

