On Learning Fairness and Accuracy on Multiple
Subgroups

Changjian Shui1,2,4,∗ Gezheng Xu3,∗ Qi Chen4 Jiaqi Li3
Charles X. Ling3 Tal Arbel1,2,5 Boyu Wang3 Christian Gagné2,4,5
1
2
Centre for Intelligent Machines, McGill University
Mila, Quebec AI Institute
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Western Ontario
4
5
Institute Intelligence and Data, Université Laval
CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
We propose an analysis in fair learning that preserves the utility of the data while
reducing prediction disparities under the criteria of group sufficiency. We focus on
the scenario where the data contains multiple or even many subgroups, each with
limited number of samples. As a result, we present a principled method for learning
a fair predictor for all subgroups via formulating it as a bilevel objective. In the
lower-level, the subgroup-specific predictors are learned through a small amount
of data and the fair predictor. In the upper-level, the fair predictor is updated to
be close to all subgroup specific predictors. We further prove that such a bilevel
objective can effectively control the group sufficiency and generalization error.
We evaluate the proposed framework on real-world datasets. Empirical evidence
suggests the consistently improved fair predictions, as well as the comparable
accuracy to the baselines.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has made rapid progress in sociotechnical systems such as automatic resume
screening, video surveillance, and credit scoring for loan applications. Simultaneously, it has been
observed that learning algorithms exhibited biased predictions on the subgroups of population [1, 2].
For example, the algorithm denies a loan application based on sensitive attributes such as gender,
race, or disability, which has heightened public concerns.
To this end, fair learning is recently highlighted to mitigate prediction disparities. The high-level
idea is quite straightforward: adding fair constraints during the training [3]. As a result, fair learning
principally gives rise to two desiderata. On the one hand, the fair predictor should be informative to
ensure accurate predictions for the data. On the other hand, the predictor is required to guarantee
fairness to avoid prediction disparities across subgroups. Therefore, it is crucial to understand the
possibilities and then design provable approaches for achieving both informative and fair learning.
Clearly, achieving both objectives depends on predefined fair notations. Consider demographic parity
[1] as the fair criteria, which necessitates the independence between the predictor’s output f (X) and
the sensitive attribute (or subgourp index) A. Thus, if the sensitive attribute A and the ground-truth
label Y are highly correlated, it is impossible to learn a both fair and informative predictor.
To avoid such intrinsic impossibilities, alternative fair notions have been developed. In this work,
we focus on the criteria of group sufficiency [1, 4], which ensures that the conditional expectation
of ground-truth label (E[Y |f (X), A]) is identical across different subgroups, given the predictor’s
output. Notably, the risk of violating group sufficiency has arisen in a number of real-world scenarios.
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

