Exploring the Limits of Domain-Adaptive Training for
Detoxifying Large-Scale Language Models
Boxin Wang∗ †1 , Wei Ping† 2 , Chaowei Xiao†2,3 , Peng Xu2 , Mostofa Patwary2 ,
Mohammad Shoeybi2 , Bo Li1 , Anima Anandkumar2,4 , and Bryan Catanzaro2
1

2

NVIDIA

3

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Arizona State University 4 California Institute of Technology

Abstract
Pre-trained language models (LMs) are shown to easily generate toxic language. In
this work, we systematically explore domain-adaptive training to reduce the toxicity
of language models. We conduct this study on three dimensions: training corpus,
model size, and parameter efficiency. For the training corpus, we demonstrate
that using self-generated datasets consistently outperforms the existing baselines
across various model sizes on both automatic and human evaluations, even when
it uses a 13 smaller training corpus. We then comprehensively study detoxifying
LMs with parameter sizes ranging from 126M up to 530B (3× larger than GPT3), a scale that has never been studied before. We find that i) large LMs have
similar toxicity levels as smaller ones given the same pre-training corpus, and
ii) large LMs require more endeavor to unlearn the toxic content seen at pretraining. We also explore parameter-efficient training methods for detoxification.
We demonstrate that adding and training adapter-only layers in LMs not only
saves a lot of parameters but also achieves a better trade-off between toxicity and
perplexity than whole model adaptation for large-scale models. Our code will be
available at: https://github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM/.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained language models (LMs) [1–6] have demonstrated substantial performance
gains on various NLP tasks, especially when scaling up the sizes of models. However, recent
studies [7, 8] show that generative LMs can generate toxic and biased language, which raises ethical
concerns for their safe deployment in real-world applications.
Previous methods on reducing the toxicity of LMs can be categorized as: decoding-time methods,
pre-training-based methods, and domain-adaptive training methods. Decoding-time methods [9–14]
manipulate the output distribution or input prompts at the inference stage without modifying the
original model parameters. These methods can be flexible, but they either resort to some simple
word filtering strategies [10], or increase the computational cost at the inference stage. For example,
PPLM [9] requires multiple iterations of backward propagation through the LM when generating
every token, which makes it prohibitively expensive to be deployed to production especially for
large-scale LMs. 3 In contrast, pre-training-based methods directly filter out the potentially toxic
∗

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
Correspondence to: Boxin Wang <boxinw2@illinois.edu>, Wei Ping <wping@nvidia.com>, Chaowei Xiao
<xiaocw@asu.edu>.
3
For example, the 530B Megatron-Turing NLG [6] requires 16 A100 80GB GPUs for autoregressive
generation, but 280 GPUs for backward propagation for memory reasons.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

