Proximal Learning With Opponent-Learning
Awareness
Stephen Zhao
University of Toronto and Vector Institute
stephen.zhao@mail.utoronto.ca

Chris Lu
FLAIR, University of Oxford
christopher.lu@exeter.ox.ac.uk

Roger Grosse
University of Toronto and Vector Institute
rgrosse@cs.toronto.edu

Jakob Foerster
FLAIR, University of Oxford
jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning With Opponent-Learning Awareness (LOLA) (Foerster et al. [2018a]) is a
multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm that typically learns reciprocity-based
cooperation in partially competitive environments. However, LOLA often fails
to learn such behaviour on more complex policy spaces parameterized by neural
networks, partly because the update rule is sensitive to the policy parameterization.
This problem is especially pronounced in the opponent modeling setting, where
the opponent’s policy is unknown and must be inferred from observations; in
such settings, LOLA is ill-specified because behaviourally equivalent opponent
policies can result in non-equivalent updates. To address this shortcoming, we
reinterpret LOLA as approximating a proximal operator, and then derive a new
algorithm, proximal LOLA (POLA), which uses the proximal formulation directly.
Unlike LOLA, the POLA updates are parameterization invariant, in the sense
that when the proximal objective has a unique optimum, behaviourally equivalent
policies result in behaviourally equivalent updates. We then present practical
approximations to the ideal POLA update, which we evaluate in several partially
competitive environments with function approximation and opponent modeling.
This empirically demonstrates that POLA achieves reciprocity-based cooperation
more reliably than LOLA.

1

Introduction

As autonomous learning agents become more integrated into society, it is increasingly important
to ensure these agents’ interactions produce socially beneficial outcomes, i.e. those with high total
reward. One step in this direction is ensuring agents are able to navigate social dilemmas [Dawes,
1980]. Foerster et al. [2018a] showed that simple applications of independent reinforcement learning
(RL) to social dilemmas usually result in suboptimal outcomes from a social welfare perspective. To
address this, they introduce Learning With Opponent-Learning Awareness (LOLA), which actively
shapes the learning step of other agents. LOLA with tabular policies learns tit-for-tat (TFT), i.e.
reciprocity-based cooperation, in the iterated prisoner’s dilemma (IPD), a 2-agent social dilemma.
However, for the same IPD setting, we show that LOLA with policies parameterized by neural
networks often converges to the Pareto suboptimal equilibrium of unconditional defection. This
shows that the learning outcome for LOLA is highly dependent on policy parameterization, one
factor that makes LOLA difficult to scale to higher dimensional settings. This problem is especially
pronounced in the opponent modeling setting, where the opponent’s policy is unknown and must be
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

