UniCLIP: Unified Framework for
Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training

Janghyeon Lee∗
LG AI Research
janghyeon.lee@lgresearch.ai
Hyounguk Shon†
KAIST
hyounguk.shon@kaist.ac.kr
Seung Hwan Kim
LG AI Research
sh.kim@lgresearch.ai

Jongsuk Kim∗†
KAIST
jskpop@kaist.ac.kr
Bumsoo Kim
LG AI Research
bumsoo.kim@lgresearch.ai

Honglak Lee
LG AI Research
honglak@lgresearch.ai

Junmo Kim
KAIST
junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Pre-training vision–language models with contrastive objectives has shown promising results that are both scalable to large uncurated datasets and transferable to
many downstream applications. Some following works have targeted to improve
data efficiency by adding self-supervision terms, but inter-domain (image–text)
contrastive loss and intra-domain (image–image) contrastive loss are defined on
individual spaces in those works, so many feasible combinations of supervision are
overlooked. To overcome this issue, we propose UniCLIP, a Unified framework
for Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training. UniCLIP integrates the contrastive
loss of both inter-domain pairs and intra-domain pairs into a single universal space.
The discrepancies that occur when integrating contrastive loss between different
domains are resolved by the three key components of UniCLIP: (1) augmentationaware feature embedding, (2) MP-NCE loss, and (3) domain dependent similarity
measure. UniCLIP outperforms previous vision–language pre-training methods
on various single- and multi-modality downstream tasks. In our experiments, we
show that each component that comprises UniCLIP contributes well to the final
performance.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep learning have shown significant progress in pre-training large-scale models
that transfer well to various downstream applications. Following the success of this paradigm in both
fields of computer vision and natural language processing, vision–language pre-training models [9, 20]
that learn image representations from natural language supervision have been proposed. In those
works, pre-training is done under a simple contrastive loss that makes the embedding of an image and
its matching text description (positive pair) more similar to each other than other arbitrary image–text
pairs (negative pairs).
Towards a more data-efficient pre-training objective, subsequent works [13, 16] introduced additional
self-supervision terms to the image–text contrastive loss, including self-supervision for augmented
∗
†

Equal contribution. Alphabetical order.
Work done during an internship at LG AI Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

