Extracting computational mechanisms from neural
data using low-rank RNNs
Adrian Valente⇤
École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University

Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University

Srdjan Ostojic
École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University

Abstract
An influential framework within systems neuroscience posits that neural computations can be understood in terms of low-dimensional dynamics in recurrent
circuits. A number of methods have thus been developed to extract latent dynamical
systems from neural recordings, but inferring models that are both predictive and
interpretable remains a difficult challenge. Here we propose a new method called
Low-rank Inference from Neural Trajectories (LINT), based on a class of low-rank
recurrent neural networks (lrRNNs) for which a link between connectivity and dynamics has been previously demonstrated. By fitting such networks to trajectories
of neural activity, LINT yields a mechanistic model of latent dynamics, as well as a
set of axes for dimensionality reduction and verifiable predictions for inactivations
of specific populations of neurons. Here, we first demonstrate the consistency of
our method and then apply it to two use cases: (i) we reverse-engineer “black-box”
vanilla RNNs trained to perform cognitive tasks, and (ii) we infer latent dynamics and neural contributions from electrophysiological recordings of nonhuman
primates performing a similar task.

1

Introduction

As large-scale neural recordings in behaving animals are becoming commonplace, a pressing question
is how computational principles can be extracted from the electrical activity of thousands of cells.
An influential framework posits that neural computations rely on latent low-dimensional dynamics
[54, 60] distributed across populations of neurons [66, 43]. In line with this proposal, a number of dataanalysis methods have been developed to infer latent dynamics from neural recordings [65, 25, 36, 32,
12, 31, 24, 33, 10, 19, 16, 40, 41, 45, 22] (reviewed in [11]). While these statistical approaches often
provide compelling descriptions of the recorded data, they generally lack a mechanistic interpretation
that would, for instance, allow them to make predictions for responses to novel interventions on the
underlying neural circuits. How to identify mechanistic, predictive models from neural data thus
currently remains an important challenge.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have emerged as key models for studying neural computations
[64]. Indeed, RNNs can be trained to solve various cognitive tasks, and lead to dynamics surprisingly
similar to those observed in neural recordings [29, 56, 5, 61, 39], and have also successfully been
trained to reproduce the activity of neurons recorded in vivo [38, 6, 14, 35]. While potentially
predictive, the obtained networks are however typically challenging to understand mechanistically [55,
28, 27, 26, 63, 57], and ongoing research directions aim at reducing them to simplified, interpretable
models, for example through the use of linearized dynamical systems [12, 19, 50] or through "network
distillation" methods [44, 22].
⇤
Correspondence to adrian.valente@ens.psl.eu.
Code available at https://github.com/adrian-valente/lowrank_inference/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

