Pruning’s Effect on Generalization Through the Lens
of Training and Regularization

Tian Jin1† Michael Carbin1 Daniel M. Roy2 Jonathan Frankle3 Gintare Karolina Dziugaite4
1

MIT

2

University of Toronto, Vector Institute

3

MosaicML

4

Google Research, Brain Team

Abstract
Practitioners frequently observe that pruning improves model generalization. A
long-standing hypothesis based on bias-variance trade-off attributes this generalization improvement to model size reduction. However, recent studies on overparameterization characterize a new model size regime, in which larger models
achieve better generalization. Pruning models in this over-parameterized regime
leads to a contradiction – while theory predicts that reducing model size harms
generalization, pruning to a range of sparsities nonetheless improves it. Motivated
by this contradiction, we re-examine pruning’s effect on generalization empirically.
We show that size reduction cannot fully account for the generalization-improving
effect of standard pruning algorithms. Instead, we find that pruning leads to better
training at specific sparsities, improving the training loss over the dense model. We
find that pruning also leads to additional regularization at other sparsities, reducing
the accuracy degradation due to noisy examples over the dense model. Pruning
extends model training time and reduces model size. These two factors improve
training and add regularization respectively. We empirically demonstrate that both
factors are essential to fully explaining pruning’s impact on generalization.

1

Introduction

Neural network pruning techniques remove unnecessary weights to reduce the memory and computational requirements of a model. Practitioners can remove a large fraction (often 80-90%) of weights
without harming generalization, measured by test error [31, 19, 13]. While recent pruning research
[19, 13, 53, 7, 30, 44, 11, 67, 4, 34, 65, 54, 35, 37, 57, 55, 9, 68, 60] focuses on reducing model
footprint, improving generalization has been a core design objective for earlier work on pruning
[31, 22]; recent pruning literature also frequently notes that it improves generalization [19, 13].
How does pruning affect generalization? An enduring hypothesis claims that pruning may benefit
generalization by reducing model size, defined as the number of weights in a model.1 We refer
to this as the size-reduction hypothesis. However, algorithms for pruning neural networks and our
understanding of the impact of model size on generalization have changed.
First, pruning algorithms have grown increasingly complex. Learning rate rewinding [53], a stateof-the-art algorithm prunes weights iteratively. An iteration consists of weight removal, where the
†

Correspondence to: tianjin@csail.mit.edu, mcarbin@csail.mit.edu, gkdz@google.com .
This hypothesis traces back to seminal work in pruning, such as Optimal Brain Surgeon [22]: “without
such weight elimination, overfitting problems and thus poor generalization will result.” And again in pioneering
work [19] applying pruning to deep neural network models: “we believe this accuracy improvement is due to
pruning finding the right capacity of the network and hence reducing overfitting.” Because the latter hypothesis
leaves the definition of network capacity unspecified, we examine an instantiation of it, measuring network
capacity with the number of weights in a neural network model.
1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

