The Pitfalls of Regularization
in Off-Policy TD Learning

Gaurav Manek
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
gmanek@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Temporal Difference (TD) learning is ubiquitous in reinforcement learning, where
it is often combined with off-policy sampling and function approximation. Unfortunately learning with this combination (known as the deadly triad), exhibits
instability and unbounded error. To account for this, modern RL methods often
implicitly (or sometimes explicitly) assume that regularization is sufficient to mitigate the problem in practice; indeed, the standard deadly triad examples from the
literature can be “fixed” via proper regularization. In this paper, we introduce a
series of new counterexamples to show that the instability and unbounded error
of TD methods is not solved by regularization. We demonstrate that, in the offpolicy setting with linear function approximation, TD methods can fail to learn
a non-trivial value function under any amount of regularization; we further show
that regularization can induce divergence under common conditions; and we show
that one of the most promising methods to mitigate this divergence (Emphatic
TD algorithms) may also diverge under regularization. We further demonstrate
such divergence when using neural networks as function approximators. Thus,
we argue that the role of regularization in TD methods needs to be reconsidered,
given that it is insufficient to prevent divergence and may itself introduce instability.
There needs to be much more care in the practical and theoretical application of
regularization to RL methods.

1

Introduction

Temporal Difference (TD) learning is a method for learning expected future-discounted quantities
from Markov processes, using transition samples to iteratively improve estimates. This is most
commonly used to estimate expected future-discounted rewards (the value function) in Reinforcement
Learning (RL). Advances in RL allow us to use powerful function approximators, and also to use
sampling strategies other than naively following the Markov process (MP). When TD, function
approximation, and off-policy training are all combined, learned functions exhibit severe instability
and divergence, as classically observed by Williams and Baird III [18], Tsitsiklis and Van Roy
[15]. This combination is known in the literature as the deadly triad [11, pg. 264], and while many
contemporary variants of TD are designed to converge despite the instability, the quality of the
solution at convergence may be arbitrarily poor.
A common technique to avoid unbounded error is ℓ2 regularization [14], i.e. penalizing the squared
norm of the weights in addition to the TD error. This is generally understood to bound the worst-case
error in exchange for biasing the model and potentially increasing the error everywhere else. When
used on three common examples of the deadly triad [6, 18, 11, pg.260], regularization appears to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

