SHAQ: Incorporating Shapley Value Theory into
Multi-Agent Q-Learning
Jianhong Wang
Imperial College London, UK
jianhong.wang16@imperial.ac.uk
Yunjie Gu∗
University of Bath, UK
yg934@bath.ac.uk

Yuan Zhang
University of Freiburg, Germany
yzhang@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Tae-Kyun Kim
KAIST, South Korea
kimtaekyun@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Value factorisation is a useful technique for multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) in global reward game, however, its underlying mechanism is not yet
fully understood. This paper studies a theoretical framework for value factorisation with interpretability via Shapley value theory. We generalise Shapley value
to Markov convex game called Markov Shapley value (MSV) and apply it as
a value factorisation method in global reward game, which is obtained by the
equivalence between the two games. Based on the properties of MSV, we derive
Shapley-Bellman optimality equation (SBOE) to evaluate the optimal MSV, which
corresponds to an optimal joint deterministic policy. Furthermore, we propose
Shapley-Bellman operator (SBO) that is proved to solve SBOE. With a stochastic
approximation and some transformations, a new MARL algorithm called Shapley
Q-learning (SHAQ) is established, the implementation of which is guided by the
theoretical results of SBO and MSV. We also discuss the relationship between
SHAQ and relevant value factorisation methods. In the experiments, SHAQ exhibits not only superior performances on all tasks but also the interpretability that
agrees with the theoretical analysis. The implementation of this paper is placed on
https://github.com/hsvgbkhgbv/shapley-q-learning.

1

Introduction

Cooperative games are a critical research area in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). Many
real-life tasks can be modeled as cooperative games, e.g. the coordination of autonomous vehicles
[1], autonomous distributed logistics [2] and distributed voltage control in power networks [3]. In
this paper, we consider global reward game (a.k.a. team reward game), an important subclass of
cooperative games, wherein agents aim to jointly maximize cumulative global rewards over time.
There are two categories of methods to solve this problem: (i) each agent identically maximizes
cumulative global rewards, i.e. learning with a shared value function [4–6]; and (ii) each agent
individually maximizes distributed values, i.e. learning with (implicit) credit assignments (e.g.
marginal contribution and value factorisation) [7–11].
By the view of non-cooperative game theory, global reward game are equivalent to Markov game [12]
with global reward (a.k.a. team reward). Its aim is to learn a stationary joint policy to reach a Markov
equilibrium so that no agent tends to unilaterally change its policy to maximize cumulative global
rewards. Standing by this view, learning with value factorisation cannot be directly explained [13]. In
∗

Correspondence to Yunjie Gu who is also an honorary lecturer at Imperial College London.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

