Structure-Aware Image Segmentation with Homotopy
Warping

Xiaoling Hu
Department of Computer Science
Stony Brook University
xiaolhu@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Besides per-pixel accuracy, topological correctness is also crucial for the segmentation of images with fine-scale structures, e.g., satellite images and biomedical
images. In this paper, by leveraging the theory of digital topology, we identify
pixels in an image that are critical for topology. By focusing on these critical pixels, we propose a new homotopy warping loss to train deep image segmentation
networks for better topological accuracy. To efficiently identify these topologically
critical pixels, we propose a new algorithm exploiting the distance transform. The
proposed algorithm, as well as the loss function, naturally generalize to different
topological structures in both 2D and 3D settings. The proposed loss function
helps deep nets achieve better performance in terms of topology-aware metrics,
outperforming state-of-the-art structure/topology-aware segmentation methods.

1

Introduction

Image segmentation with topological correctness is a challenging problem, especially for images
with fine-scale structures, e.g., satellite images, neuron images and vessel images. Deep learning
methods have delivered strong performance in image segmentation task [33, 22, 7, 8, 9]. However,
even with satisfying per-pixel accuracy, most existing methods are still prone to topological errors,
i.e., broken connections, holes in 2D membranes, missing connected components, etc. These
errors may significantly impact downstream tasks. For example, the reconstructed road maps from
satellite images can be used for navigation [3, 5]. A small amount of pixel errors will result in
broken connections, causing incorrect navigation route. See Fig. 1 for an illustration. In neuron
reconstruction [18, 27, 49, 54, 53], incorrect topology of the neuron membrane will result in erroneous
merge or split of neurons, and thus errors in morphology and connectivity analysis of neuronal circuits.
Topological errors usually happen at challenging locations, e.g., weak connections or blurred locations.
But not all challenging locations are topologically relevant; for example, pixels at the boundary of
the object of interest can generally be challenging, but not relevant to topology. To truly suppress
topological errors, we need to focus on topologically critical pixels, i.e., challenging locations that
are topologically relevant. Without identifying and targeting these locations, neural networks that are
optimized for standard pixel-wise losses (e.g., cross-entropy loss or mean-square-error loss) cannot
avoid topological errors, even if we increase the training set size.
Existing works have targeted these topologically critical pixels. The closest method to our work
is TopoNet [24], which is based on persistent homology [15, 14]. The main idea is to identify
topologically critical pixels corresponding to critical points of the likelihood map predicted by the
neural network. The selected critical points are reweighed in the training loss to force the neural
network to focus on them, and thus to avoid topological errors. But there are two main issues with
this approach: 1) the method is based on the likelihood map, which can be noisy with a large amount
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

