Few-shot Learning for Feature Selection with
Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion

Atsutoshi Kumagai
NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories
atsutoshi.kumagai.ht@hco.ntt.co.jp

Tomoharu Iwata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
tomoharu.iwata.gy@hco.ntt.co.jp

Yasutoshi Ida
NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories
yasutoshi.ida@ieee.org

Yasuhiro Fujiwara
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
yasuhiro.fujiwara.kh@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
We propose a few-shot learning method for feature selection that can select relevant
features given a small number of labeled instances. Existing methods require many
labeled instances for accurate feature selection. However, sufficient instances are
often unavailable. We use labeled instances in multiple related tasks to alleviate the
lack of labeled instances in a target task. To measure the dependency between each
feature and label, we use the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion, which is a
kernel-based independence measure. By modeling the kernel functions with neural
networks that take a few labeled instances in a task as input, we can encode the taskspecific information to the kernels such that the kernels are appropriate for the task.
Feature selection with such kernels is performed by using iterative optimization
methods, in which each update step is obtained as a closed-form. This formulation
enables us to directly and efficiently minimize the expected test error on features
selected by a small number of labeled instances. We experimentally demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms existing feature selection methods.

1

Introduction

Feature selection is a fundamental problem in machine learning that aims to find the subset of relevant
features [7]. By extracting a small subset of features, we can interpret the characteristics of datasets,
accelerate the learning processes of subsequent problems such as regression and classification, and
eliminate the cost of collecting irrelevant or redundant features. Thanks to these beneficial properties,
feature selection methods have been used in various applications such as biomarker discovery [52],
document categorization [10], disease diagnosis [1], and drug development [32].
Many feature selection methods have been proposed. An unsupervised approach aims to find relevant
features without label information [3, 30, 5]. Although it is useful, it has difficulty finding features
that are responsible for predicting responses without labels. On the other hand, a supervised approach
can find such features by using labeled instances [48, 34, 53, 54, 29]. Therefore, this paper focuses
on supervised feature selection. Existing supervised feature selection methods often require many
labeled instances to accurately select relevant features [21]. However, sufficient instances can be
difficult to collect in many applications. For example, although feature selection is used for analysis
in healthcare [36, 31], sufficient instances (e.g., patients) for prognosis analysis might be difficult to
collect in a hospital. In marketing, when data scientists want to analyze sales by using past data in
each area, sufficient instances might be difficult to collect from underdeveloped or new areas.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

