Learning Recourse on Instance Environment to
Enhance Prediction Accuracy

Lokesh Nagalapatti ∗ Guntakanti Sai Koushik Abir De Sunita Sarawagi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
IIT Bombay

Abstract
Machine Learning models are often susceptible to poor performance on instances
sampled from bad environments. For example, an image classifier could provide
low accuracy on images captured under low lighting conditions. In high stake
ML applications, such as AI-driven medical diagnostics, a better option could be
to provide recourse in the form of alternative environment settings in which to
recapture the instance for more reliable diagnostics. In this paper, we propose
a model called R ECOURSE N ET that learns to apply recourse on the space of
environments so that the recoursed instances are amenable to better predictions by
the classifier. Learning to output optimal recourse is challenging because we do
not assume access to the underlying physical process that generates the recoursed
instances. Also, the optimal setting could be instance-dependent — for example
the best camera angle for object recognition could be a function of the object’s
shape. We propose a novel three-level training method that (a) Learns a classifier
that is optimized for high performance under recourse, (b) Learns a recourse
predictor when the training data may contain only limited instances under good
environment settings, and (c) Triggers recourse selectively only when recourse
is likely to improve classifier confidence. We experiment with synthetic and real
world datasets to show the efficacy of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

The performance of any supervised learning model depends strongly on the quality of input instances.
However, in practice, instances may be of suboptimal quality when generated in adverse environment
settings. For example, even an expressive image classification model may misclassify an image shot
at an extreme close-up or at a wrong angle or under poor lighting [13, 28]. Despite large training sizes,
such unfavorable instances can deteriorate model performance which can have serious consequences
in high stake scenarios like AI guided crop monitoring [21], automatic disease diagnosis from
images [22], and AI driven accessibility enhancement for the hearing impaired.
Mitigating the effect of such unfavorable instances entails the design of recourse mechanism to
recommend alternative environment settings that yield instances revealing the target class. For
example, in low cost smartphone based medical diagnosis [22] where imaging is performed by
non-experts, such recourse mechanisms can interactively recommend camera settings that yield
images optimal for the downstream diagnosis model. Recourse could be particularly useful for
healthcare on the edge where users can be prompted to adjust their edge-device settings in real-time
to deploy the diagnosis model with higher accuracy. The optimal camera settings however could be
label dependent. For example, the best camera angle for recognizing an aeroplane could be different
from the angle for recognizing poles.
More formally, the problem that this paper seeks to address is as follows. We have an object z in
the physical space (e.g. a crop) with an unknown true label y (e.g. type of disease). Let β ∈ B be
∗

nlokeshiisc@gmail.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

