NodeFormer: A Scalable Graph Structure Learning
Transformer for Node Classification
Qitian Wu1 , Wentao Zhao1 , Zenan Li1 , David Wipf2 , Junchi Yan1⇤
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Amazon Web Service, Shanghai AI Lab
{echo740,permanent,emiyali,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, davidwipf@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Graph neural networks have been extensively studied for learning with interconnected data. Despite this, recent evidence has revealed GNNs’ deficiencies
related to over-squashing, heterophily, handling long-range dependencies, edge
incompleteness and particularly, the absence of graphs altogether. While a plausible
solution is to learn new adaptive topology for message passing, issues concerning
quadratic complexity hinder simultaneous guarantees for scalability and precision
in large networks. In this paper, we introduce a novel all-pair message passing
scheme for efficiently propagating node signals between arbitrary nodes, as an
important building block for a pioneering Transformer-style network for node
classification on large graphs, dubbed as N ODE F ORMER. Specifically, the efficient
computation is enabled by a kernerlized Gumbel-Softmax operator that reduces the
algorithmic complexity to linearity w.r.t. node numbers for learning latent graph
structures from large, potentially fully-connected graphs in a differentiable manner.
We also provide accompanying theory as justification for our design. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the promising efficacy of the method in various tasks
including node classification on graphs (with up to 2M nodes) and graph-enhanced
applications (e.g., image classification) where input graphs are missing. The codes
are available at https://github.com/qitianwu/NodeFormer.

1

Introduction

Relational structure inter-connecting instance nodes as a graph is ubiquitous from social domains
(e.g., citation networks) to natural science (protein-protein interaction), where graph neural networks
(GNNs) [32, 19, 14, 36] have shown promising power for leveraging such data dependence as
geometric priors. However, there arises increasing evidence challenging the core GNN hypothesis
that propagating information along observed graph structures will necessarily produce better nodelevel representations for prediction on each individual instance node. Conflicts with this premise
lead to commonly identified deficiencies with GNN message-passing rules w.r.t. heterophily [53],
over-squashing [2], long-range dependencies [8], and graph incompleteness [11], etc.
Moreover, in graph-enhanced applications, e.g., text classification [46], vision navigation [12], physics
simulation [30], etc., graph structures are often unavailable though individual instances are strongly
inter-correlated. A common practice is to artificially construct a graph via some predefined rules (e.g.,
k-NN), which is agnostic to downstream tasks and may presumably cause the misspecification of
GNNs’ inductive bias on input geometry (induced by the local feature propagation design).
Natural solutions resort to organically combining learning optimal graph topology with message
passing. However, one critical difficulty is the scalability issue with O(N 2 ) (where N denotes
⇤

Wentao Zhao and Zenan Li contribute equally. The SJTU authors are also with MoE Key Lab of Artificial
Intelligence, SJTU. Junchi Yan is the correspondence author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

