Provable Generalization of Overparameterized
Meta-learning Trained with SGD

Yu Huang
IIIS
Tsinghua University
y-huang20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Longbo Huang∗
IIIS
Tsinghua University
longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the superior empirical success of deep meta-learning, theoretical understanding of overparameterized meta-learning is still limited. This paper studies the
generalization of a widely used meta-learning approach, Model-Agnostic MetaLearning (MAML), which aims to find a good initialization for fast adaptation
to new tasks. Under a mixed linear regression model, we analyze the generalization properties of MAML trained with SGD in the overparameterized regime.
We provide both upper and lower bounds for the excess risk of MAML, which
captures how SGD dynamics affect these generalization bounds. With such sharp
characterizations, we further explore how various learning parameters impact the
generalization capability of overparameterized MAML, including explicitly identifying typical data and task distributions that can achieve diminishing generalization
error with overparameterization, and characterizing the impact of adaptation learning rate on both excess risk and the early stopping time. Our theoretical findings
are further validated by experiments.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning [22] is a learning paradigm which aims to design algorithms that are capable of gaining
knowledge from many previous tasks and then using it to improve the performance on future tasks
efficiently. It has exhibited great power in various machine learning applications spanning over
few-shot image classification [31, 32], reinforcement learning [21] and intelligent medicine [20].
One prominent type of meta-learning approaches is an optimization-based method, Model-Agnostic
Meta-Learning (MAML) [16], which achieves impressive results in different tasks [30, 4, 2]. The
idea of MAML is to learn a good initialization ω ∗ , such that for a new task we can adapt quickly
to a good task parameter starting from ω ∗ . MAML takes a bi-level implementation: the inner-level
initializes at the meta parameter and takes task-specific updates using a few steps of gradient descent
(GD), and the outer-level optimizes the meta parameter across all tasks.
With the superior empirical success, theoretical justifications have been provided for MAML and
its variants over the past few years from both optimization [18, 38, 14, 25] and generalization
perspectives [1, 11, 15, 9]. However, most existing analyses did not take overparameterization into
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

