Distributional Reward Estimation for Effective
Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
Jifeng Hu1

Yanchao Sun2

Hechang Chen3 ∗

Sili Huang4

Haiyin Piao5
Yi Chang6
Lichao Sun7∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jlilin University, Changchun, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
5
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, China
7
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA
1,4
hujf21@mails.jlu.edu.cn, huangsl21@mails.jlu.edu.cn
2
ycs@umd.edu
3,6
chenhc@jlu.edu.cn, yichang@jlu.edu.cn
5
haiyinpiao@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
7
lis221@lehigh.edu
1,3,4,6

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning has drawn increasing attention in practice, e.g.,
robotics and automatic driving, as it can explore optimal policies using samples
generated by interacting with the environment. However, high reward uncertainty
still remains a problem when we want to train a satisfactory model, because obtaining high-quality reward feedback is usually expensive and even infeasible. To
handle this issue, previous methods mainly focus on passive reward correction. At
the same time, recent active reward estimation methods have proven to be a recipe
for reducing the effect of reward uncertainty. In this paper, we propose a novel
Distributional Reward Estimation framework for effective Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (DRE-MARL). Our main idea is to design the multi-action-branch
reward estimation and policy-weighted reward aggregation for stabilized training.
Specifically, we design the multi-action-branch reward estimation to model reward
distributions on all action branches. Then we utilize reward aggregation to obtain
stable updating signals during training. Our intuition is that consideration of all
possible consequences of actions could be useful for learning policies. The superiority of the DRE-MARL is demonstrated using benchmark multi-agent scenarios,
compared with the SOTA baselines in terms of both effectiveness and robustness.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved substantial successes in solving real-time
competitive games [30], robotic manipulation [1], autonomous traffic control [32], and quantitative
trading strategies [15]. Most existing works require agents to receive high-quality supervision signals,
i.e., rewards, which are either infeasible or expensive to obtain in practice [61]. The rewards provided
by the environment are subject to multiple kinds of randomness. For example, the reward collected
from sensors on a robot will be affected by physical conditions such as temperature and lighting,
which makes the reward full of bias and intrinsic randomness. The interplay among agents will result
in more reward uncertainty. For instance, though an agent executes the same action under the same
state, the reward can still vary because other agents can execute other actions. Thus, handling non∗

Corresponding Author. Email address: chenhc@jlu.edu.cn (H. Chen) and lis221@lehigh.edu (L. Sun).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

