On the Theoretical Properties of Noise Correlation in
Stochastic Optimization
Aurelien Lucchi⇤
Department of Mathematics & Computer Science
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
Antonio Orvieto
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Frank Proske⇤
Department of Mathematics
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Francis Bach
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France.

Hans Kersting
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France.

Abstract
Studying the properties of stochastic noise to optimize complex non-convex functions has been an active area of research in the field of machine learning. Prior
work [55, 50] has shown that the noise of stochastic gradient descent improves
optimization by overcoming undesirable obstacles in the landscape. Moreover,
injecting artificial Gaussian noise has become a popular idea to quickly escape
saddle points. Indeed, in the absence of reliable gradient information, the noise is
used to explore the landscape, but it is unclear what type of noise is optimal in terms
of exploration ability. In order to narrow this gap in our knowledge, we study a
general type of continuous-time non-Markovian process, based on fractional Brownian motion, that allows for the increments of the process to be correlated. This
generalizes processes based on Brownian motion, such as the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process. We demonstrate how to discretize such processes which gives rise to the
new algorithm “fPGD”. This method is a generalization of the known algorithms
PGD and Anti-PGD [36]. We study the properties of fPGD both theoretically and
empirically, demonstrating that it possesses exploration abilities that, in some cases,
are favorable over PGD and Anti-PGD. These results open the field to novel ways
to exploit noise for training machine learning models.

1

Introduction

Injecting random noise to the parameters of a function has been a commonly used technique in
optimization, dating back to at least [31, 2]. More recently, [32] demonstrated the empirical benefits
of injecting Gaussian noise (a.k.a. Brownian motion noise) to the gradients while training deep
networks. Injecting Gaussian noise has also been a common technique used to show faster escape
from saddle points [15]. Importantly, the noise of the optimizer also has an effect on the type
of minima that can be reached, raising some important connections to flatness and generalization
properties [24]. A distinctive property of noise is its exploration ability which is crucial when the
gradient of the objective function is not reliable, either due to saddles, valleys, plateaus, or local
minima. Despite a large body of work debating the distribution of the intrinsic noise of stochastic
⇤

Shared first authorship, Correspondence: aurelien.lucchi@unibas.ch, proske@math.uio.no.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

