Local Latent Space Bayesian Optimization over
Structured Inputs
Natalie T. Maus
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
nmaus@seas.upenn.edu
Juston S. Moore
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM
juston@lanl.gov

John Bradshaw
Department of Chemical Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
jbrad@mit.edu

Haydn T. Jones
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM
hjones@lanl.gov

Matt J. Kusner
Centre for Artificial Intelligence,
University College London
London, UK
m.kusner@ucl.ac.uk
Jacob R. Gardner
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
jacobrg@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Bayesian optimization over the latent spaces of deep autoencoder models (DAEs)
has recently emerged as a promising new approach for optimizing challenging
black-box functions over structured, discrete, hard-to-enumerate search spaces
(e.g., molecules). Here the DAE dramatically simplifies the search space by mapping inputs into a continuous latent space where familiar Bayesian optimization
tools can be more readily applied. Despite this simplification, the latent space
typically remains high-dimensional. Thus, even with a well-suited latent space,
these approaches do not necessarily provide a complete solution, but may rather
shift the structured optimization problem to a high-dimensional one. In this paper,
we propose LOL-BO, which adapts the notion of trust regions explored in recent
work on high-dimensional Bayesian optimization to the structured setting. By reformulating the encoder to function as both an encoder for the DAE globally and as a
deep kernel for the surrogate model within a trust region, we better align the notion
of local optimization in the latent space with local optimization in the input space.
LOL-BO achieves as much as 20 times improvement over state-of-the-art latent
space Bayesian optimization methods across six real-world benchmarks, demonstrating that improvement in optimization strategies is as important as developing
better DAE models.

1

Introduction

Many challenges across the physical sciences and engineering require the optimization of structured
objects. For example, in the drug design setting, it is common to seek a molecule that maximizes
some property, e.g., binding affinity for a target protein [17], or similarity to a known drug molecule
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

