Learning Invariant Graph Representations for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Haoyang Li, Ziwei Zhang, Xin Wang∗, Wenwu Zhu∗
Tsinghua University
lihy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {zwzhang,xin_wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph representation learning has shown effectiveness when testing and training
graph data come from the same distribution, but most existing approaches fail to
generalize under distribution shifts. Invariant learning, backed by the invariance
principle from causality, can achieve guaranteed generalization under distribution
shifts in theory and has shown great successes in practice. However, invariant learning for graphs under distribution shifts remains unexplored and challenging. To
solve this problem, we propose Graph Invariant Learning (GIL) model capable of
learning generalized graph representations under distribution shifts. Our proposed
method can capture the invariant relationships between predictive graph structural
information and labels in a mixture of latent environments through jointly optimizing three tailored modules. Specifically, we first design a GNN-based subgraph
generator to identify invariant subgraphs. Then we use the variant subgraphs, i.e.,
complements of invariant subgraphs, to infer the latent environment labels. We
further propose an invariant learning module to learn graph representations that
can generalize to unknown test graphs. Theoretical justifications for our proposed
method are also provided. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method against state-of-the-art baselines
under distribution shifts for the graph classification task.

1

Introduction

Graph structured data is ubiquitous in the real world, e.g., social networks, biology networks, chemical
molecules, etc. Graph representation learning, which encodes graphs into vectorized representations,
has been the central topic in graph machine learning in the last decade. For example, graph neural
networks (GNNs) [1–3] design end-to-end learning schemes to extract useful graph information and
are shown to be successful in a variety of applications.
Despite the enormous success, the existing approaches for learning graph representations heavily rely
on the I.I.D. assumption, i.e., the testing and training graph data are independently drawn from an
identical distribution. However, distribution shifts of graph data widely exist in real-world scenarios
and are usually inevitable due to the uncontrollable underlying data generation mechanism [4].
Most existing approaches fail to generalize to out-of-distribution (OOD) testing graph data. One
critical bottleneck is that the existing methods ignore the invariant graph patterns and tend to rely on
correlations that are variant for graphs from different environments. Therefore, it is of paramount
significance to learn graph representations under distribution shifts and develop methods capable of
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. Such studies are particularly critical for high-stake graph
applications such as medical diagnosis [5], financial analysis [6], molecular prediction [7], etc.
In this work, we propose a brand new methodology to learn invariant graph representation under
distribution shifts. Invariant learning, which aims to exploit the invariant relationships between
∗

Corresponding authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

