Stochastic Multiple Target Sampling Gradient Descent

Hoang Phan1 Ngoc N. Tran1 Trung Le2 Toan Tran1 Nhat Ho3 Dinh Phung1,2
1

VinAI Research, Vietnam
Monash University, Australia
3
University of Texas, Austin

2

Abstract
Sampling from an unnormalized target distribution is an essential problem with
many applications in probabilistic inference. Stein Variational Gradient Descent
(SVGD) has been shown to be a powerful method that iteratively updates a set of
particles to approximate the distribution of interest. Furthermore, when analysing
its asymptotic properties, SVGD reduces exactly to a single-objective optimization
problem and can be viewed as a probabilistic version of this single-objective optimization problem. A natural question then arises: “Can we derive a probabilistic
version of the multi-objective optimization?”. To answer this question, we propose
Stochastic Multiple Target Sampling Gradient Descent (MT-SGD), enabling us
to sample from multiple unnormalized target distributions. Specifically, our MTSGD conducts a flow of intermediate distributions gradually orienting to multiple
target distributions, which allows the sampled particles to move to the joint highlikelihood region of the target distributions. Interestingly, the asymptotic analysis
shows that our approach reduces exactly to the multiple-gradient descent algorithm
for multi-objective optimization, as expected. Finally, we conduct comprehensive
experiments to demonstrate the merit of our approach to multi-task learning.

1

Introduction

Sampling from an unnormalized target distribution that we know the density function up to a scaling
factor is a pivotal problem with many applications in probabilistic inference [2, 18, 25]. For this
purpose, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) has been widely used to draw approximate posterior
samples, but unfortunately, is often time-consuming and has difficulty accessing the convergence [14].
Targeting an efficient acceleration of MCMC, some stochastic variational particle-based approaches
have been proposed, notably Stochastic Langevin Gradient Descent [26] and Stein Variational
Gradient Descent (SVGD) [14]. Outstanding among them is SVGD, with a solid theoretical guarantee
of the convergence of the set of particles to the target distribution by maintaining a flow of distributions.
More specifically, SVGD starts from an arbitrary and easy-to-sample initial distribution and learns
the subsequent distribution in the flow by push-forwarding the current one using a function T (x) =
x + ϵϕ (x), where x ∈ Rd , ϵ > 0 is the learning rate, and ϕ ∈ Hkd with Hk to be the Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space corresponding to a kernel k. It is well-known that for the case of using Gaussian
RBF kernel, by letting the kernel width approach +∞, the update formula of SVGD at each step
asymptotically reduces to the typical gradient descent (GD) [14], showing the connection between a
probabilistic framework like SVGD and a single-objective optimization algorithm. In other words,
SVGD can be viewed as a probabilistic version of the GD for single-objective optimization.
On the other side, multi-objective optimization (MOO) [7] aims to optimize a set of objective
functions and manifests itself in many real-world applications problems, such as in multi-task
learning (MTL) [17, 24], natural language processing [1], and reinforcement learning [9, 22, 21].
Leveraging the above insights, it is natural to ask: “Can we derive a probabilistic version of multi36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

