Finite Sample Analysis Of Dynamic Regression
Parameter Learning

Mark Kozdoba
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
markk@ef.technion.ac.il

Edward Moroshko
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
edward.moroshko@gmail.com

Shie Mannor
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology and NVIDIA Research
shie@ee.technion.ac.il
Koby Crammer
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
koby@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the dynamic linear regression problem, where the predictor vector
may vary with time. This problem can be modeled as a linear dynamical system, with non-constant observation operator, where the parameters that need to be
learned are the variance of both the process noise and the observation noise. While
variance estimation for dynamic regression is a natural problem, with a variety of
applications, existing approaches to this problem either lack guarantees altogether,
or only have asymptotic guarantees without explicit rates. In particular, existing
literature does not provide any clues to the following fundamental question: In
terms of data characteristics, what does the convergence rate depend on? In this
paper we study the global system operator – the operator that maps the noise vectors to the output. We obtain estimates on its spectrum, and as a result derive the
ﬁrst known variance estimators with ﬁnite sample complexity guarantees. The
proposed bounds depend on the shape of a certain spectrum related to the system
operator, and thus provide the ﬁrst known explicit geometric parameter of the data
that can be used to bound estimation errors. In addition, the results hold for arbitrary sub Gaussian distributions of noise terms. We evaluate the approach on
synthetic and real-world benchmarks.

1

Introduction

A dynamic linear regression (West and Harrison, 1997, Chapter 3), or non-stationary regression, is
a situation where we are given a sequence of scalar observations {Yt }t≤T ⊂ R, and observation
vectors {ut }t≤T ⊂ Rn such that Yt = ⟨Xt , ut ⟩ + zt where Xt ∈ Rn is a regressor vector, and zt a
random noise term. In contrast to a standard linear regression, the vector Xt may change with time.
One common objective for this problem is at time T , to estimate the trajectory of Xt for t ≤ T ,
given the observation vectors and observations, {ut }t≤T , {Yt }t≤T , and possibly to forecast YT +1 if
uT +1 is also known.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

