Finding Correlated Equilibrium of Constrained
Markov Game: A Primal-Dual Approach

Ziyi Chen, Shaocong Ma, Yi Zhou
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Utah
Salt lake city, UT 84112
{u1276972,s.ma,yi.zhou}@utah.edu

Abstract
Constrained Markov game is a fundamental problem that covers many applications,
where multiple agents compete with each other under behavioral constraints. The
existing literature has proved the existence of Nash equilibrium for constrained
Markov games, which turns out to be PPAD-complete and cannot be computed
in polynomial time. In this work, we propose a surrogate notion of correlated
equilibrium (CE) for constrained Markov games that can be computed in polynomial time, and study its fundamental properties. We show that the modification
structure of CE of constrained Markov games is fundamentally different from
that of unconstrained Markov games. Moreover, we prove that the corresponding
Lagrangian function has zero duality gap. Based on these results, we develop the
first primal-dual algorithm that provably converges to CE of constrained Markov
games. In particular, we prove that both the duality gap and the constraint violation
of the output policy converge at the rate O( √1T ). Moreover, when adopting the
V-learning algorithm as the subroutine in the primal update, our algorithm achieves
an approximate CE with ϵ duality gap with the sample complexity O(H 9 SA2 ϵ−4 ).

1

Introduction

Markov game [43] is a fundamental problem in game theory where multiple agents compete with
each other by interacting with a dynamic environment. It has broad applications in diverse fields,
including board games [44], inverse reinforcement learning [61], market pricing [34], etc.
In the existing literature, the goal of Markov game is often formulated as achieving Nash equilibrium
(NE) – a product policy under which no agent can benefit via deviating from its own policy alone.
Although NE has been shown to exist for general Markov games [22], computing NE turns out to be
a PPAD-complete problem that cannot be solved in polynomial time [17, 32], except for some special
Markov games with zero-sum structure [11, 16, 21, 63, 64] or potential structure [35, 58]. This further
motivates researchers to consider other surrogate notions of equilibrium that are slightly weaker than
NE but are computationally tractable, and correlated equilibrium (CE) is such a classic and popular
surrogate notion [40] (see Section 2 for the formal definition) for which many convergent and efficient
algorithms have been developed very recently [31, 37, 46].
While Markov game has been well studied, its formulation has limited applicability to real-life
applications where the behavior of agents is usually subject to certain constraints. For example, in
an uplink time division multiple access (TDMA) cognitive radio network, each user’s total latency
cannot exceed a threshold on average [62]. In an anti-jamming system, the jammer aims to jam
ligitimate signal transmitter under average power constraint [27]. To overcome this limitation,
constrained Markov game has been introduced where agents compete with each other under local
behavioral constraints encoded by state value functions [4]. However, most existing works on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

