LGDN: Language-Guided Denoising Network
for Video-Language Modeling

1

Haoyu Lu1,2 Mingyu Ding3 Nanyi Fei1,2 Yuqi Huo4 Zhiwu Lu1,2,∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
4
JD Corporation, Beijing, China
{lhy1998, luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Video-language modeling has attracted much attention with the rapid growth
of web videos. Most existing methods assume that the video frames and text
description are semantically correlated, and focus on video-language modeling at
video level. However, this hypothesis often fails for two reasons: (1) With the rich
semantics of video contents, it is difficult to cover all frames with a single videolevel description; (2) A raw video typically has noisy/meaningless information
(e.g., scenery shot, transition or teaser). Although a number of recent works deploy
attention mechanism to alleviate this problem, the irrelevant/noisy information still
makes it very difficult to address. To overcome such challenge, we thus propose
an efficient and effective model, termed Language-Guided Denoising Network
(LGDN), for video-language modeling. Different from most existing methods that
utilize all extracted video frames, LGDN dynamically filters out the misaligned
or redundant frames under the language supervision and obtains only 2–4 salient
frames per video for cross-modal token-level alignment. Extensive experiments on
five public datasets show that our LGDN outperforms the state-of-the-arts by large
margins. We also provide detailed ablation study to reveal the critical importance
of solving the noise issue, in hope of inspiring future video-language work.

1

Introduction

Humans are exposed to the world through a variety of sensory organs, such as eyes, ears, and the sense
of touch. In the past few years, multi-modal data (e.g., text or video) has grown and accumulated
rapidly on the Internet, which brings the increasing demands for video-language understanding. As
one of the fundamental topics, video-language modeling is still challenging due to the heterogeneity
of the video-text data. More notably, the video-text data is typically noisy (e.g., misaligned or
semi-relevant, as shown in Figure 1), leading to intractable video-language modeling.
The dominant paradigm [8, 30, 13, 14, 45] for video-language modeling is to first extract language
features and dense video features via off-the-shelf language and vision models (e.g., BERT [7], 3D
CNN [48]), and then model the cross-modal representation by defining the objective function (e.g.,
triplet loss [17]) within a joint semantic space. Although achieving great success, these methods
typically densely sample frames from a full sequence of raw video to obtain richer representation
and thus cost excessive computation. Since the heavy computation makes it challenging to train the
whole network end-to-end, they often achieve sub-optimal performance in video-language modeling.
Recently, ClipBERT [25] proposes a sparse sampling strategy to tackle this drawback. Concretely,
∗

The corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

