PDEB ENCH: An Extensive Benchmark for Scientific
Machine Learning
Makoto Takamoto⇤
NEC Labs Europe

Timothy Praditia†
University of Stuttgart

Raphael Leiteritz
University of Stuttgart

Dan MacKinlay
CSIRO’s Data61

Francesco Alesiani
NEC Labs Europe

Dirk Pflüger
University of Stuttgart

Mathias Niepert
University of Stuttgart

Abstract
Machine learning-based modeling of physical systems has experienced increased
interest in recent years. Despite some impressive progress, there is still a lack of
benchmarks for Scientific ML that are easy to use but still challenging and representative of a wide range of problems. We introduce PDEB ENCH, a benchmark
suite of time-dependent simulation tasks based on Partial Differential Equations
(PDEs). PDEB ENCH comprises both code and data to benchmark the performance
of novel machine learning models against both classical numerical simulations
and machine learning baselines. Our proposed set of benchmark problems contribute the following unique features: (1) A much wider range of PDEs compared
to existing benchmarks, ranging from relatively common examples to more realistic and difficult problems; (2) much larger ready-to-use datasets compared to
prior work, comprising multiple simulation runs across a larger number of initial and boundary conditions and PDE parameters; (3) more extensible source
codes with user-friendly APIs for data generation and baseline results with popular
machine learning models (FNO, U-Net, PINN, Gradient-Based Inverse Method).
PDEB ENCH allows researchers to extend the benchmark freely for their own purposes using a standardized API and to compare the performance of new models
to existing baseline methods. We also propose new evaluation metrics with the
aim to provide a more holistic understanding of learning methods in the context
of Scientific ML. With those metrics we identify tasks which are challenging for
recent ML methods and propose these tasks as future challenges for the community.
The code is available at https://github.com/pdebench/PDEBench.

1

Motivation

In the emergent area of Scientific Machine Learning (or machine learning for physical sciences or
data-driven science), recent progress has broadened the scope of traditional machine learning (ML)
methods to include the time-evolution of physical systems. Within this field, rapid progress has been
made in the use of neural networks to make predictions using functional observations over continuous
domains [8, 46] or with challenging constraints and with physically-motivated conservation laws [34,
61, 47]. These neural networks provide an approach to solving PDEs complementing traditional
⇤

E-mail:Makoto.Takamoto@neclab.eu

†

E-mail:timothy.praditia@iws.uni-stuttgart.de

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

