Wavelet Score-Based Generative Modeling

Florentin Guth
Computer Science Department,
ENS, CNRS, PSL University

Simon Coste
Computer Science Department,
ENS, CNRS, PSL University

Valentin De Bortoli
Computer Science Department,
ENS, CNRS, PSL University

Stéphane Mallat
Collège de France, Paris, France
Flatiron Institute, New York, USA

Abstract
Score-based generative models (SGMs) synthesize new data samples from Gaussian white noise by running a time-reversed Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE)
whose drift coefficient depends on some probabilistic score. The discretization of
such SDEs typically requires a large number of time steps and hence a high computational cost. This is because of ill-conditioning properties of the score that we
analyze mathematically. Previous approaches have relied on multiscale generation
to considerably accelerate SGMs. We explain how this acceleration results from an
implicit factorization of the data distribution into a product of conditional probabilities of wavelet coefficients across scales. The resulting Wavelet Score-based
Generative Model (WSGM) synthesizes wavelet coefficients with the same number
of time steps at all scales, and its time complexity therefore grows linearly with the
image size. This is proved mathematically for Gaussian distributions, and shown
numerically for physical processes at phase transition and natural image datasets.

1

Introduction

Score-based Generative Models (SGMs) have obtained remarkable results to learn and sample
probability distributions of image and audio signals [44, 3, 24, 38, 39, 6]. They proceed as follows: the
data distribution is mapped to a Gaussian white distribution by evolving along a Stochastic Differential
Equation (SDE), which progressively adds noise to the data. The generation is implemented using the
time-reversed SDE, which transforms a Gaussian white noise into a data sample. At each time step,
it pushes samples along the gradient of the log probability, also called score function. This score is
estimated by leveraging tools from score-matching and deep neural networks [13, 47]. At sampling
time, the computational complexity is therefore proportional to the number of time steps, i.e., the
number of forward network evaluations. Early SGMs in [44, 46, 11] used thousands of time steps,
and hence had a limited applicability.
Diffusion models map a Gaussian white distribution into a highly complex data distribution. We thus
expect that this process will require a large number of time steps. It then comes as a surprise that
recent approaches have drastically reduced this time complexity. This is achieved by optimizing the
discretization schedule or by modifying the original SGM formulation [18, 17, 27, 53, 42, 37, 43, 23,
11, 29, 41, 51]. High-quality score-based generative models have also been improved by cascading
multiscale image generations [40, 12, 6] or with subspace decompositions [16]. We make explicit the
reason of this improvement, which provably accelerates the sampling of SGMs.
A key idea is that typical high-dimensional probability distributions coming from physics or natural
images have complex multiscale properties. They can be simplified by factorizing them as a product
of conditional probabilities of normalized wavelet coefficients across scales, as shown in [33].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

