IM-Loss: Information Maximization Loss for Spiking
Neural Networks
Yufei Guo∗, Yuanpei Chen∗ , Liwen Zhang, Xiaode Liu, Yinglei Wang, Xuhui Huang, Zhe Ma†
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC
yfguo@pku.edu.cn, rop477@163.com, mazhe_thu@163.com

Abstract
Spiking Neural Network (SNN), recognized as a type of biologically plausible
architecture, has recently drawn much research attention. It transmits information
by 0/1 spikes. This bio-mimetic mechanism of SNN demonstrates extreme energy
efficiency since it avoids any multiplications on neuromorphic hardware. However,
the forward-passing 0/1 spike quantization will cause information loss and accuracy degradation. To deal with this problem, the Information maximization loss
(IM-Loss) that aims at maximizing the information flow in the SNN is proposed in
the paper. The IM-Loss not only enhances the information expressiveness of an
SNN directly but also plays a part of the role of normalization without introducing
any additional operations (e.g., bias and scaling) in the inference phase. Additionally, we introduce a novel differentiable spike activity estimation, Evolutionary
Surrogate Gradients (ESG) in SNNs. By appointing automatic evolvable surrogate
gradients for spike activity function, ESG can ensure sufficient model updates at
the beginning and accurate gradients at the end of the training, resulting in both
easy convergence and high task performance. Experimental results on both popular
non-spiking static and neuromorphic datasets show that the SNN models trained
by our method outperform the current state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) has been successfully applied in many machine
intelligence fields. Although ANNs imitate the structure of the brain to a certain extent, their signal
processing mechanism using operations on real, dense valued tensors, still differs from how the
brain works based on sparse spike events. Being another sub-category of brain-inspired learning
models, the Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) utilize 0/1 binary spike signals to transmit information
between units, and spatio-temporal dynamics to mimic brain behaviors [21; 13; 14]. Unlike the
ANN, where all neurons in the same layer need to be evaluated before passing information to the
next layer, the SNN processes information asynchronously and sparsely based on sparse spike events.
Benefitting from such an information processing paradigm, the SNN can efficiently run on specialized
neuromorphic hardware (e.g., Loihi [4]) and has achieved substantial progress in recent years [28].
Although the SNN is more energy-efficient compared with the ANN, it still has some limitations
to achieve satisfactory task performance. Due to the usage of spikes for information receiving and
transmitting, the SNN needs to quantize real analog values into 0/1-formed spikes in implementation.
This quantization causes information loss in forward propagation. There are some remarkable existing
works that alleviate the problem of information loss of SNNs by adjusting the spike rate by learning
more parameters. In [26] and [39], a method that aims to learn the correct membrane leak-and-firing
threshold for each layer of the SNN was proposed. Results showed that learning the correct threshold
∗
†

Equal Contributions.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

