Earthformer: Exploring Space-Time Transformers for
Earth System Forecasting
Zhihan Gao⇤
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
zhihan.gao@connect.ust.hk
Hao Wang
Rutgers University
hw488@cs.rutgers.edu
Mu Li
Amazon Web Services
mli@amazon.com

Yi Zhu
Amazon Web Services
yzaws@amazon.com

Xingjian Shi†
Amazon Web Services
xjshi@amazon.com
Yuyang Wang
Amazon Web Services
yuyawang@amazon.com

Dit-Yan Yeung
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
dyyeung@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Conventionally, Earth system (e.g., weather and climate) forecasting relies on
numerical simulation with complex physical models and hence is both expensive
in computation and demanding on domain expertise. With the explosive growth of
spatiotemporal Earth observation data in the past decade, data-driven models that
apply Deep Learning (DL) are demonstrating impressive potential for various Earth
system forecasting tasks. The Transformer as an emerging DL architecture, despite
its broad success in other domains, has limited adoption in this area. In this paper,
we propose Earthformer, a space-time Transformer for Earth system forecasting.
Earthformer is based on a generic, flexible and efficient space-time attention block,
named Cuboid Attention. The idea is to decompose the data into cuboids and apply
cuboid-level self-attention in parallel. These cuboids are further connected with a
collection of global vectors. We conduct experiments on the MovingMNIST dataset
and a newly proposed chaotic N -body MNIST dataset to verify the effectiveness
of cuboid attention and figure out the best design of Earthformer. Experiments on
two real-world benchmarks about precipitation nowcasting and El Niño/Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) forecasting show that Earthformer achieves state-of-the-art
performance.

1

Introduction

The Earth is a complex system. Variabilities of the Earth system, ranging from regular events like
temperature fluctuation to extreme events like drought, hail storm, and El Niño/Southern Oscillation
(ENSO), impact our daily life. Among all the consequences, Earth system variabilities can influence
crop yields, delay airlines, cause floods and forest fires. Precise and timely forecasting of these variabilities can help people take necessary precautions to avoid crisis, or better utilize natural resources
such as wind and solar energy. Thus, improving forecasting models for Earth variabilities (e.g.,
weather and climate) has a huge socioeconomic impact. Despite its importance, the operational
weather and climate forecasting systems have not fundamentally changed for almost 50 years [34].
These operational models, including the state-of-the-art High Resolution Ensemble Forecast (HREF)
⇤

Work done while being an intern at Amazon Web Services. † Contact person.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

