Provably sample-efficient RL with side information
about latent dynamics

Yao Liu∗
Amazon Web Services
yaoliuai@amazon.com

Dipendra Misra
Microsoft Research
dipendra.misra@microsoft.com

Miroslav Dudík
Microsoft Research
mdudik@microsoft.com

Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research
schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning (RL) in settings where observations are highdimensional, but where an RL agent has access to abstract knowledge about the
structure of the state space, as is the case, for example, when a robot is tasked to go
to a specific room in a building using observations from its camera, while having
access to the floor plan. We formalize this setting as transfer reinforcement learning
from an abstract simulator, which we assume is deterministic (such as a simple
model of moving around the floor plan), but which is only required to capture
the target domain’s latent-state dynamics approximately up to unknown (bounded)
perturbations (to account for environment stochasticity). Crucially, we assume no
prior knowledge about the structure of observations in the target domain except that
they can be used to identify the latent states (but the decoding map is unknown).
Under these assumptions, we present an algorithm, called TASID, that learns a
robust policy in the target domain, with sample complexity that is polynomial in
the horizon, and independent of the number of states, which is not possible without
access to some prior knowledge. In synthetic experiments, we verify various
properties of our algorithm and compare it with several transfer RL algorithms that
require access to “full simulators” (i.e., those that also simulate observations).

1

Introduction

When learning from scratch, reinforcement learning (RL) in the real world can be very expensive.
For example, a robot learning to navigate in a building might need to explore every possible state
or location, which can be painstakingly costly and time-consuming. Sometimes, however, it is not
necessary to begin such a learning process from scratch. For instance, in the robot example, we might
have access to a general floor map of the building. How can this kind of high-level but imprecise
information be used to learn how to operate in the environment more quickly and more effectively?
In this paper, we study how to effectively leverage prior information in the form of such “abstract”
descriptions of the environment. We formalize this abstract description as an “abstract simulator,”
which, like a map, can be used as an imperfect model. Importantly, our abstract simulators differ
from more standard simulators in that they only focus on the “latent structure” of the environment
dynamics, not on the observations that might be experienced by an agent in the environment.
In general, fully faithful simulators of even the latent dynamics might be hard to build, for instance,
due to the difficulty of exactly modeling all probabilistic outcomes, as when the robot’s actions do
∗

The work was done while the author was an intern at Microsoft Research and a graduate student at Stanford.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

