Transform Once
Efficient Operator Learning in Frequency Domain

Michael Poli∗
Stanford University
DiffeqML
Jinykoo Park
KAIST

Stefano Massaroli∗
Mila
DiffeqML

Tri Dao
Stanford University

Christopher Ré
Stanford University

Federico Berto∗
KAIST
DiffeqML
Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
CZ Biohub

Abstract
Spectral analysis provides one of the most effective paradigms for informationpreserving dimensionality reduction, as simple descriptions of naturally occurring
signals are often obtained via few terms of periodic basis functions. In this work,
we study deep neural networks designed to harness the structure in frequency domain for efficient learning of long-range correlations in space or time: frequencydomain models (FDMs). Existing FDMs are based on complex-valued transforms
i.e. Fourier Transforms (FT), and layers that perform computation on the spectrum and input data separately. This design introduces considerable computational
overhead: for each layer, a forward and inverse FT. Instead, this work introduces
a blueprint for frequency domain learning through a single transform: transform
once (T1). To enable efficient, direct learning in the frequency domain we derive a
variance preserving weight initialization scheme and investigate methods for frequency selection in reduced-order FDMs. Our results noticeably streamline the
design process of FDMs, pruning redundant transforms, and leading to speedups
of 3 x to 10 x that increase with data resolution and model size. We perform extensive experiments on learning the solution operator of spatio-temporal dynamics,
including incompressible Navier-Stokes, turbulent flows around airfoils and highresolution video of smoke. T1 models improve on the test performance of FDMs
while requiring significantly less computation (5 hours instead of 32 for our largescale experiment), with over 20% reduction in predictive error across tasks.

1

Introduction

Nature uses only the longest threads to weave her patterns, so that each small piece of her fabric reveals the
organization of the entire tapestry. (Feynman, 1965)

Naturally occurring signals are often sparse when projected on periodic basis functions (Strang,
1999). Central to recently-introduced instances of frequency-domain neural operators (Li et al.,
2020; Tran et al., 2021), which we refer to as frequency-domain models (FDMs), is the idea of
learning to modify specific frequency components of inputs to obtain a desired output in data space.
With a hierarchical structure that blends learned transformations on frequency domain coefficients
with regular convolutions, FDMs are able to effectively approximate global, long-range dependencies in higher resolution signals without requiring prohibitively deep architectures.

∗

Equal contribution authors. Contact email: poli@stanford.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

