BMU-MoCo: Bidirectional Momentum Update
for Continual Video-Language Modeling

Yizhao Gao1,2 Nanyi Fei1,2 Haoyu Lu1,2 Zhiwu Lu1,2,∗ Hao Jiang3 Yijie Li3 Zhao Cao3
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
Huawei Poisson Lab, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
{gaoyizhao, luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Video-language models suffer from forgetting old/learned knowledge when trained
with streaming data. In this work, we thus propose a continual video-language modeling (CVLM) setting, where models are supposed to be sequentially trained on five
widely-used video-text datasets with different data distributions. Although most of
existing continual learning methods have achieved great success by exploiting extra
information (e.g., memory data of past tasks) or dynamically extended networks,
they cause enormous resource consumption when transferred to our CVLM setting.
To overcome the challenges (i.e., catastrophic forgetting and heavy resource consumption) in CVLM, we propose a novel cross-modal MoCo-based model with
bidirectional momentum update (BMU), termed BMU-MoCo. Concretely, our
BMU-MoCo has two core designs: (1) Different from the conventional MoCo, we
apply the momentum update to not only momentum encoders but also encoders
(i.e., bidirectional) at each training step, which enables the model to review the
learned knowledge retained in the momentum encoders. (2) To further enhance
our BMU-MoCo by utilizing earlier knowledge, we additionally maintain a pair of
global momentum encoders (only initialized at the very beginning) with the same
BMU strategy. Extensive results show that our BMU-MoCo remarkably outperforms recent competitors w.r.t. video-text retrieval performance and forgetting rate,
even without using any extra data or dynamic networks.

1

Introduction

Existing video-language modeling (VLM) methods have achieved promising performance for videotext retrieval [59, 39, 61, 30, 24, 53, 28, 4] with non-streaming data. However, in real-world
application scenarios, VLM models need to evolve with streaming data (e.g., collected from the
Internet [39, 42]) to accommodate more tasks. Under this setting, since it costs too much resource to
retrain the model with both old and new data for each task, a common practice is to fine-tune VLM
models with only the newly-arrived data. Note that such model fine-tuning leads to severe performance
degradation on previous tasks. This is a well-documented phenomenon called catastrophic forgetting
[18, 38] under the conventional continual learning setting [48, 45, 34, 16, 23, 60].
Therefore, in this work, we propose a continual video-language modeling (CVLM) setting to better
simulate the realistic scenario. Under our CVLM setting, models are supposed to be sequentially
trained on five widely-used video-text datasets: VATEX [54], ActivityNet [25], MSR-VTT [55],
DiDeMo [20], and MSVD [10]. An evaluation protocol is also established for CVLM, which contains
three metrics to respectively measure the text-to-video retrieval performance (Recall@1, shortened as
∗

The corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

