Optimizing Relevance Maps of Vision
Transformers Improves Robustness

Hila Chefer Idan Schwartz Lior Wolf
School of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
It has been observed that visual classification models often rely mostly on spurious cues such as the image background, which hurts their robustness to distribution changes. To alleviate this shortcoming, we propose to monitor the
model’s relevancy signal and direct the model to base its prediction on the foreground object. This is done as a finetuning step, involving relatively few samples
consisting of pairs of images and their associated foreground masks. Specifically, we encourage the model’s relevancy map (i) to assign lower relevance
to background regions, (ii) to consider as much information as possible from
the foreground, and (iii) we encourage the decisions to have high confidence.
When applied to Vision Transformer (ViT) models, a marked improvement in
robustness to domain-shifts is observed. Moreover, the foreground masks can
be obtained automatically, from a self-supervised variant of the ViT model itself; therefore no additional supervision is required. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/hila-chefer/RobustViT.

1

Introduction

The reliance on simple image-level classification supervision, together with the sampling biases
of object recognition datasets, leads to vision models that exhibit unintuitive behavior, as depicted
in Fig 1. First, the models we tested (ViT [14], ViT AugReg [50], and DeiT [53]) tend to give
disproportional high weight to the background of the image in the decision-making process. Second,
the tested models occasionally regard a sparse subset of the pixels in the foreground object for the
classification, disregarding much of the object’s data. As argued by Geirhos et al. [19], and stated
in [26] “image classification datasets contain ‘spurious cues’ or ‘shortcuts’ . For instance, cows tend
to co-occur with green pastures, and even though the background is inessential to the identity of the
object, models may predict ‘cow’, using primarily the green pasture background cue.”
There is considerable evidence that context is a useful cue [31, 40]. However, many of the associated
background elements and foreground shortcuts are only relevant to the specific data distribution, which
leads to lack of robustness to distribution shifts [37, 43]. There are many methods for overcoming
domain shifts, including domain adaptation techniques [16, 1] and methods that augment the training
set or the training procedure [27, 38]. In this work, however, we opt for a direct approach, which
monitors the relevancy score of the model for each image region, and manipulates the relevancy map
to be focused on the regions within the foreground mask.
The method is based on a finetuning procedure, which is applied to a pretrained Vision Transformer
(ViT) model. A relatively small set of samples, for which the foreground is given, is employed during
this phase. In most of our experiments, we use three samples for half the classes, following work
that examined the effect of transfer learning on half of the classes [60]. The ground-truth foreground
mask is either human annotated [17], or estimated from a self-supervised ViT model [58].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

