Faster and Scalable Algorithms for Densest Subgraph
and Decomposition
Harb, Elfarouk⇤
eyharb2@illinois.edu
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Quanrud, Kent†
krq@purdue.edu
Purdue University

Chekuri, Chandra‡
chekuri@illinois.edu
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
We study the densest subgraph problem (DSG) and the densest subgraph local
decomposition problem (DSG-LD) in undirected graphs. We also consider supermodular generalizations of these problems. For large scale graphs simple iterative algorithms perform much better in practice than theoretically fast algorithms
based on network-flow or LP solvers. Boob et al. [1] recently gave a fast iterative
algorithm called G REEDY ++ for DSG. It was shown in [2] that it converges to
a (1 ✏) relative approximation to the optimum density in O( ✏12 (G)
⇤ ) iterations
where (G) is the maximum degree and ⇤ is the optimum density. Danisch et al.
[3] gave an iterative algorithm based on the Frank-Wolfe algorithm for DSG-LD
that takes O( m ✏2(G) ) iterations to converge to an ✏-additive approximate local decomposition vector b̂, where m is number of edges in the graph.
In this
p paper we give a new iterative algorithm for both problems that takes at most
m (G)

) iterations to converge to an ✏-additive approximate local decompoO(
✏
sition vector; each iteration can be implemented in O(m) time. We describe a
fractional peeling technique which has strong empirical performance as well as
theoretical guarantees. The algorithm is scalable and simple, and can be applied
to graphs with hundreds of millions of edges. We test our algorithm on real and
synthetic data sets and show that it provides a significant benefit over previous
algorithms. The algorithm and analysis extends to hypergraphs.

1. Introduction
The densest subgraph problem (DSG) is a classical problem in combinatorial optimization and has
many real world applications in data mining, network analysis, and machine learning. The input for
DSG is an undirected graph G = (V, E) with m = |E| and n = |V |. The goal is to return a subset
S ✓ V that maximizes |E(S)|
where E(S) = {{u, v} 2 E : u, v 2 S} is the set of edges with
|S|
both end points in S. DSG has a variety of applications in which dense subgraphs reveal important
information about the underlying network such as communities. One can view it as a subroutine in
⇤

Supported in part by NSF grant CCF-2028861.
Supported in part by NSF grant CCF-2129816.
‡
Supported in part by NSF grants CCF-2028861 and CCF-1910149.
We thank Professors Sariel Har-Peled and Ruoyu Sun from the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
for fruitful discussions in private correspondences.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

