ResT V2: Simpler, Faster and Stronger

Qing-Long Zhang, Yu-Bin Yang
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 21023, China
wofmanaf@smail.nju.edu.cn, yangyubin@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes ResTv2, a simpler, faster, and stronger multi-scale vision
Transformer for visual recognition. ResTv2 simplifies the EMSA structure in
ResTv1 (i.e., eliminating the multi-head interaction part) and employs an upsample
operation to reconstruct the lost medium- and high-frequency information caused by
the downsampling operation. In addition, we explore different techniques for better
applying ResTv2 backbones to downstream tasks. We find that although combining
EMSAv2 and window attention can greatly reduce the theoretical matrix multiply
FLOPs, it may significantly decrease the computation density, thus causing lower
actual speed. We comprehensively validate ResTv2 on ImageNet classification,
COCO detection, and ADE20K semantic segmentation. Experimental results show
that the proposed ResTv2 can outperform the recently state-of-the-art backbones
by a large margin, demonstrating the potential of ResTv2 as solid backbones. The
code and models will be made publicly available at https://github.com/
wofmanaf/ResT.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in Vision Transformers (ViTs) have created new state-of-the-art results on many
computer vision tasks. While scaling up ViTs with billions of parameters [22, 9, 45, 40, 13] is a wellproven way to improve the capacity of the ViTs, it is more important to explore more energy-efficient
approaches to build simpler ViTs with fewer parameters and less computation cost while retaining
high model capacity.
Toward this direction, there are a few works that significantly improve the efficiency of ViTs [35,
10, 12, 23, 5]. The first kind is reintroducing the “sliding window” strategy to ViTs. Among them,
Swin Transformer [23] is a milestone work that partitions the patched inputs into non-overlapping
windows and computes multi-head self-attention (MSA) independently within each window. Based
on Swin, Focal Transformer [41] further splits the feature map into multiple windows in which
tokens share the same surroundings to effectively capture short- and long-range dependencies. The
second type to improve efficiency is downsampling one or several dimension of MSA. PVT [35]
is a pioneer work in this area, which adopts another non-overlapping patch embedding module
to reduce the spatial dimension of keys and values in MSA. ResTv1 [47] further explores three
types of overlapping spatial reduction methods (i.e., max pooling, average pooling, and depth-wise
convolution) in MSA to balance the computation and effectiveness in different scenarios. However,
the downsampling operation in MSA will inevitably impair the model’s performance since it destroys
the global dependency modeling ability of MSA to a certain extent (shown in Figure 1).
In this paper, we propose EMSAv2, which explores different upsample strategies adding to EMSA to
compensate for the performance degradation caused by the downsampling operation. Surprisingly,
the “downsample-upsample” combination builds an independent convolution hourglass architecture,
which can efficiently capture the local information that is complementary to long-distance dependency
with fewer extra parameters and computation costs. Besides, EMSAv2 eliminates the multi-head
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

