Subgame Solving in Adversarial Team Games

Luca Carminati∗
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
luca.carminat@polimi.it

Brian Hu Zhang∗
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu
Federico Cacciamani
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
federico.cacciamani@polimi.it

Gabriele Farina
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Pierriccardo Olivieri
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
pierriccardo.olivieri@polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, CMU
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In adversarial team games, a team of players sequentially faces a team of adversaries. These games are the simplest setting with multiple players where cooperation and competition coexist, and it is known that the information asymmetry
among the team members makes equilibrium approximation computationally hard.
Although much effort has been spent designing scalable algorithms, the problem
of solving large game instances is open. In this paper, we extend the successful
approach of solving huge two-player zero-sum games, where a blueprint strategy
is computed offline by using an abstract version of the game and then it is refined
online, that is, during a playthrough. In particular, to the best of our knowledge, our
paper provides the first method for online strategy refinement via subgame solving
in adversarial team games. Our method, based on the team belief DAG, generates
a gadget game and then refine the blueprint strategy by using column-generation
approaches in anytime fashion. If the blueprint is sparse, then our whole algorithm
runs end-to-end in polynomial time given a best-response oracle; in particular, it
avoids expanding the whole team belief DAG, which has exponential worst-case
size. We apply our method to a standard test suite, and we empirically show the
performance improvement of the strategies thanks to subgame solving.

1

Introduction

Sequential strategic games with multiple players where cooperation and competition coexist are
fascinating problems receiving increasing interest in the scientific literature. The simplest case
∗

equal contribution; author order randomized

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

