Do Current Multi-Task Optimization Methods in Deep
Learning Even Help?

Derrick Xin∗
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
dxin@google.com

Behrooz Ghorbani∗
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
ghorbani@google.com

Orhan Firat
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
orhanf@google.com

Ankush Garg
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
ankugarg@google.com

Justin Gilmer
Google Research
Mountain View, CA
gilmer@google.com

Abstract
Recent research has proposed a series of specialized optimization algorithms for
deep multi-task models. It is often claimed that these multi-task optimization
(MTO) methods yield solutions that are superior to the ones found by simply optimizing a weighted average of the task losses. In this paper, we perform large-scale
experiments on a variety of language and vision tasks to examine the empirical
validity of these claims. We show that, despite the added design and computational
complexity of these algorithms, MTO methods do not yield any performance improvements beyond what is achievable via traditional optimization approaches. We
highlight alternative strategies that consistently yield improvements to the performance profile and point out common training pitfalls that might cause suboptimal
results. Finally, we outline challenges in reliably evaluating the performance of
MTO algorithms and discuss potential solutions.

1

Introduction

Multitask models are ubiquitous in deep learning [1, 2, 17]. This popularity stems from the fact that
these models can potentially leverage transfer learning in between different tasks and modalities.
Moreover, by reducing the number of the models that need to be maintained, multitask models greatly
simplify serving users.
Multitask models come with their own challenges and downsides. Different tasks often compete
with each other for model capacity, leading to the task interference problem. Finding the training
setting that strikes the right balance between different tasks is an engineering intensive endeavor that
requires extensive trial and error for most realistic setups.
Over the past few years, a vast number of multi-task optimization (MTO) algorithms have been
proposed in the literature that claim to alleviate the task interference problem [5, 9, 20, 21, 26, 30, 31].
These algorithms typically leverage clever intuitions about the training process to dynamically
balance the different tasks throughout training. However, in exchange for this, these algorithms often
drastically add to the computational and design complexity of the training process.
The goal of this paper is not to provide another MTO algorithm. Instead, we provide a largescale empirical study of the algorithms presented in the literature; we examine to what degree the
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

