MEMO: Test Time Robustness via
Adaptation and Augmentation
Marvin Zhang1 , Sergey Levine1 , Chelsea Finn2
1
UC Berkeley 2 Stanford University

Abstract
While deep neural networks can attain good accuracy on in-distribution test points,
many applications require robustness even in the face of unexpected perturbations
in the input, changes in the domain, or other sources of distribution shift. We study
the problem of test time robustification, i.e., using the test input to improve model
robustness. Recent prior works have proposed methods for test time adaptation,
however, they each introduce additional assumptions, such as access to multiple
test points, that prevent widespread adoption. In this work, we aim to study and
devise methods that make no assumptions about the model training process and are
broadly applicable at test time. We propose a simple approach that can be used in
any test setting where the model is probabilistic and adaptable: when presented
with a test example, perform different data augmentations on the data point, and
then adapt (all of) the model parameters by minimizing the entropy of the model’s
average, or marginal, output distribution across the augmentations. Intuitively,
this objective encourages the model to make the same prediction across different
augmentations, thus enforcing the invariances encoded in these augmentations,
while also maintaining confidence in its predictions. In our experiments, we
evaluate two baseline ResNet models, two robust ResNet-50 models, and a robust
vision transformer model, and we demonstrate that this approach achieves accuracy
gains of 1-8% over standard model evaluation and also generally outperforms prior
augmentation and adaptation strategies. For the setting in which only one test point
is available, we achieve state-of-the-art results on the ImageNet-C, ImageNet-R,
and, among ResNet-50 models, ImageNet-A distribution shift benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network models have achieved excellent performance on many machine learning
problems, such as image classification, but are often brittle and susceptible to issues stemming
from distribution shift. For example, deep image classifiers may degrade precipitously in accuracy
when encountering input perturbations, such as noise or changes in lighting [12] or domain shifts
which occur naturally in real world applications [21]. Therefore, robustification of deep models
against these test shifts is an important and active area of study.
Most prior works in this area have focused on techniques for training time robustification, including
utilizing larger models and datasets [34], various forms of adversarial training [39, 48], and aggressive
data augmentation [51, 13, 24, 14]. Employing these techniques requires modifying the training
process, which may not be feasible if, e.g., it involves heavy computation or non public data.
Furthermore, these techniques do not rely on any information about the test points that the model
must predict on, even though these test points may provide significant information for improving
model robustness. Recently, several works have proposed methods for improving accuracy via
adaptation after seeing the test data, typically by updating a subset of the model’s weights [44, 45,
18], normalization statistics [40], or both [46, 52]. Though effective at handling test shifts, these
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

