Discovery of Single Independent Latent Variable

Jonathan Svirsky
Faculty of Engineering
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat Gan, Israel
svirskj@biu.ac.il

Uri Shaham
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat Gan, Israel
uri.shaham@biu.ac.il
Ori Katz
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion
Haifa, Israel
orikats@campus.technion.ac.il

Ronen Talmon
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion
Haifa, Israel
ronen@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Latent variable discovery is a central problem in data analysis with a broad range
of applications in applied science. In this work, we consider data given as an
invertible mixture of two statistically independent components, and assume that
one of the components is observed while the other is hidden. Our goal is to recover
the hidden component. For this purpose, we propose an autoencoder equipped
with a discriminator. Unlike the standard nonlinear ICA problem, which was
shown to be non-identifiable, in the special case of ICA we consider here, we show
that our approach can recover the component of interest up to entropy-preserving
transformation. We demonstrate the performance of the proposed approach in
several tasks, including image synthesis, voice cloning, and fetal ECG extraction.

1

Introduction

The recovery of hidden components in data is a long-standing problem in applied science. This
problem dates back to the classical PCA [44, 20], yet it has numerous modern manifestations and
extensions, e.g., kernel-based methods [47], source separation [11, 3], manifold learning [54, 46, 2, 9],
and latent Dirichlet allocation [4], to name but a few. Perhaps the most relevant line of work in the
context of this paper is independent component analysis (ICA) [23], which attempts to decompose an
observed mixture into statistically independent components.
Here, we consider the following ICA-related recovery problem. Assume that the data is generated as
an invertible mixture of two (not necessarily one dimensional) independent components, and that
one of the components is observed while the other is hidden. In this setting, our goal is to recover
the latent component. At first glance, this problem setting may seem specific and perhaps artificial.
However, we posit that it is in fact broad and applies to many real-world problems.
For example, consider thorax and abdominal electrocardiogram (ECG) signals measured during
labor for the purpose of determining the fetal heart activity. In analogy to our problem setting, the
abdominal signal can be viewed as a mixture of the maternal and fetal heart activities, the maternal
signal can be viewed as an accurate proxy of the maternal heart activity alone, and the fetal heart
activity is the hidden component of interest we wish to recover. In another example from a different
domain, consider a speech signal as a mixture of two independent components: the spoken text
and the speaker identity. Arguably, the speaker identity is associated with the pitch and timbre,
which are independent of information about the textual content, rhythm and volume. Consequently,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

