Learning and Covering Sums of Independent
Random Variables with Unbounded Support

Alkis Kalavasis
National Technical University of Athens
kalavasisalkis@mail.ntua.gr

Konstantinos Stavropoulos
The University of Texas at Austin
kstavrop@utexas.edu

Manolis Zampetakis
University of California, Berkeley
mzampet@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of covering and learning sums 𝑋 = 𝑋1 + · · · + 𝑋𝑛 of independent integer-valued random variables 𝑋𝑖 (SIIRVs) with infinite support. De
et al. [2018] at FOCS 2018, showed that even when the collective support of 𝑋𝑖 ’s
is of size 4, the maximum value of the support necessarily appears in the sample
complexity of learning 𝑋. In this work, we address two questions: (i) Are there
general families of SIIRVs with infinite support that can be learned with sample
complexity independent of both 𝑛 and the maximal element of the support? (ii)
Are there general families of SIIRVs with infinite support that admit proper sparse
covers in total variation distance? As for question (i), we provide a set of simple
conditions that allow the infinitely supported SIIRV to be learned with complexity
poly(1/𝜖) bypassing the aforementioned lower bound. We further address question (ii) in the general setting where each variable 𝑋𝑖 has unimodal probability
mass function and is a different member of some, possibly multi-parameter, exponential family ℰ that satisfies some structural properties. These properties allow
ℰ to contain heavy tailed and non log-concave distributions. Moreover, we show
that for every 𝜖 > 0, and every 𝑘-parameter family ℰ that satisfies some structural
̃︀
assumptions, there exists an algorithm with 𝑂(𝑘)
· poly(1/𝜖) samples that learns a
sum of 𝑛 arbitrary members of ℰ within 𝜖 in TV distance. The output of the learning algorithm is also a sum of random variables within the family ℰ. En route,
we prove that any discrete unimodal exponential family with bounded constantdegree central moments can be approximated by the family corresponding to a
bounded subset of the initial (unbounded) parameter space.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we revisit the problem of learning distributions of the form 𝑋 = 𝑋1 + . . . + 𝑋𝑛 ,
where 𝑛 ∈ N and the terms 𝑋𝑖 are independent integer random variables. We focus on the cases
where each 𝑋𝑖 has unbounded, even infinite support. Our work follows the literature of learning
distributions from independent samples (see e.g., [Dasgupta, 1999, Rabani et al., 2014, Acharya
et al., 2015, Canonne, 2015, 2020, Diakonikolas et al., 2019, Moitra and Valiant, 2010]), that has
been introduced in Kearns et al. [1994]. In this problem, we observe independent samples from a
random variable 𝑋, which is a priori known to belong to a class of distributions 𝒞, and the goal is to
compute another random variable 𝑋 ′ such that 𝑑𝑇 𝑉 (𝑋, 𝑋 ′ ) ≤ 𝜖. The main question to ask follows:
Given 𝒞, how many samples from 𝑋 do we need to compute the estimate 𝑋 ′ ? If the output 𝑋 ′
belongs to 𝒞, we say that we have properly learned 𝑋.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

