Active Learning with Neural Networks: Insights from
Nonparametric Statistics
Yinglun Zhu
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
yinglun@cs.wisc.edu

Robert Nowak
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have great representation power, but typically require large
numbers of training examples. This motivates deep active learning methods that
can significantly reduce the amount of labeled training data. Empirical successes of
deep active learning have been recently reported in the literature, however, rigorous
label complexity guarantees of deep active learning have remained elusive. This
constitutes a significant gap between theory and practice. This paper tackles this
gap by providing the first near-optimal label complexity guarantees for deep active
learning. The key insight is to study deep active learning from the nonparametric
classification perspective. Under standard low noise conditions, we show that active
learning with neural networks can provably achieve the minimax label complexity,
up to disagreement coefficient and other logarithmic terms. When equipped with an
abstention option, we further develop an efficient deep active learning algorithm that
achieves polylog( 1ε ) label complexity, without any low noise assumptions. We also
provide extensions of our results beyond the commonly studied Sobolev/Hölder
spaces and develop label complexity guarantees for learning in Radon BV2 spaces,
which have recently been proposed as natural function spaces associated with
neural networks.

1

Introduction

We study active learning with neural network hypothesis classes, sometimes known as deep active
learning. Active learning agent proceeds by selecting the most informative data points to label: The
goal of active learning is to achieve the same accuracy achievable by passive learning, but with much
fewer label queries (Settles, 2009; Hanneke, 2014). When the hypothesis class is a set of neural
networks, the learner further benefits from the representation power of deep neural networks, which
has driven the successes of passive learning in the past decade (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; LeCun
et al., 2015). With these added benefits, deep active learning has become a popular research area,
with empirical successes observed in many recent papers (Sener and Savarese, 2018; Ash et al.,
2019; Citovsky et al., 2021; Ash et al., 2021; Kothawade et al., 2021; Emam et al., 2021; Ren et al.,
2021). However, due to the difficulty of analyzing a set of neural networks, rigorous label complexity
guarantees for deep active learning have remained largely elusive.
To the best of our knowledge, there are only two papers (Karzand and Nowak, 2020; Wang et al.,
2021) that have made the attempts at theoretically quantifying active learning gains with neural
networks. While insightful views are provided, these two works have their own limitations. The
guarantees provided in Karzand and Nowak (2020) only work in the 1d case where data points are
uniformly sampled from [0, 1] and labeled by a well-seperated piece-wise constant function in a
noise-free way (i.e., without any labeling noise). Wang et al. (2021) study deep active learning by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

