Natural gradient enables fast sampling
in spiking neural networks

Paul Masset1,2∗, Jacob A. Zavatone-Veth1,3∗, J. Patrick Connor4 ,
Venkatesh N. Murthy1,2†, Cengiz Pehlevan1,4†
1
Center for Brain Science, 2 Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
3
Department of Physics, 4 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
paul_masset@fas.harvard.edu, jzavatoneveth@g.harvard.edu,
cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
For animals to navigate an uncertain world, their brains need to estimate uncertainty at the timescales of sensations and actions. Sampling-based algorithms
afford a theoretically-grounded framework for probabilistic inference in neural
circuits, but it remains unknown how one can implement fast sampling algorithms
in biologically-plausible spiking networks. Here, we propose to leverage the
population geometry, controlled by the neural code and the neural dynamics, to
implement fast samplers in spiking neural networks. We first show that two classes
of spiking samplers—efficient balanced spiking networks that simulate Langevin
sampling, and networks with probabilistic spike rules that implement MetropolisHastings sampling—can be unified within a common framework. We then show
that careful choice of population geometry, corresponding to the natural space of
parameters, enables rapid inference of parameters drawn from strongly-correlated
high-dimensional distributions in both networks. Our results suggest design principles for algorithms for sampling-based probabilistic inference in spiking neural
networks, yielding potential inspiration for neuromorphic computing and testable
predictions for neurobiology.

1

Introduction

Neural circuits perform probabilistic computations at the sensory, motor and cognitive levels [1–4].
From abstract representations of decision confidence [5] to estimates of sensory uncertainty in visual
cortex [6, 7], evidence of probabilistic representations can be found at all levels of the cortical
processing hierarchy [8]. To be behaviorally useful, these probabilistic computations must occur
at the speed of perception [9]. However, how neuronal dynamics allow brain circuits to represent
uncertainty in high-dimensional spaces at perceptual timescales remains unknown [3, 10–12].
Several neural architectures for probabilistic computation have been proposed, including: probabilistic
population codes [13], which in certain cases allow a direct readout of uncertainty; direct encoding of
metacognitive variables, such as decision confidence [4, 5, 8]; doubly distributional codes [14, 15]
which distinguish uncertainty from multiplicity; and sampling-based codes [9, 16–25], where the
variability in neural dynamics corresponds to a signature of exploration of the posterior probability.
Most experiments quantifying uncertainty representations in single biological neurons have only
∗
†

PM and JAZ-V contributed equally to this work.
VNM and CP jointly supervised this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

