Long Range Graph Benchmark

Vijay Prakash Dwivedi∗
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Mikhail Galkin
Mila, McGill University

Ladislav Rampášek
Mila, Université de Montréal

Ali Parviz
NJIT, Mila, Université de Montréal

Anh Tuan Luu
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Guy Wolf
Mila, Université de Montréal

Dominique Beaini
Valence Discovery, Mila, Université de Montréal

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) that are based on the message passing (MP)
paradigm generally exchange information between 1-hop neighbors to build node
representations at each layer. In principle, such networks are not able to capture
long-range interactions (LRI) that may be desired or necessary for learning a given
task on graphs. Recently, there has been an increasing interest in development of
Transformer-based methods for graphs that can consider full node connectivity
beyond the original sparse structure, thus enabling the modeling of LRI. However, MP-GNNs that simply rely on 1-hop message passing often fare better in
several existing graph benchmarks when combined with positional feature representations, among other innovations, hence limiting the perceived utility and
ranking of Transformer-like architectures. Here, we present the Long Range Graph
Benchmark (LRGB)1 with 5 graph learning datasets: PascalVOC-SP, COCO-SP,
PCQM-Contact, Peptides-func and Peptides-struct that arguably require
LRI reasoning to achieve strong performance in a given task. We benchmark both
baseline GNNs and Graph Transformer networks to verify that the models which
capture long-range dependencies perform significantly better on these tasks. Therefore, these datasets are suitable for benchmarking and exploration of MP-GNNs
and Graph Transformer architectures that are intended to capture LRI.

1

Introduction

Considering a graph as a collection of nodes where arbitrary relations between nodes are represented
as edges, there are numerous real-world instances with data structures where complex and irregular
interactions among objects can be represented as edges where the objects themselves are denoted as
nodes. This has led to a rapid rise of interest in the development of graph neural networks (GNNs)
[24, 42, 9, 61] for deep learning on geometric and graph domains.
The popularly used class of GNNs is based on the message passing paradigm [22] where a node’s
feature representation, at each layer, is updated using a trainable function that receives and combines
feature information from all its neighboring nodes. A network that has L GNN layers, stacked
sequentially, can iteratively aggregate feature information from up to L hops for the update of a
node’s representation. If a long-range information to a node from its L-hop neighbor is needed for
a task (say, for a large L), the same number of GNN layers is ideally required. However, with the
∗
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed: vijaypra001@e.ntu.edu.sg
Open-sourced at https://github.com/vijaydwivedi75/lrgb and deposited at Zenodo [16].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

