Private Estimation with Public Data⇤
Alex Bie
University of Waterloo
yabie@uwaterloo.ca

Gautam Kamath
University of Waterloo
g@csail.mit.edu

Vikrant Singhal
University of Waterloo
vikrant.singhal@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We initiate the study of differentially private (DP) estimation with access to a
small amount of public data. For private estimation of d-dimensional Gaussians,
we assume that the public data comes from a Gaussian that may have vanishing
similarity in total variation distance with the underlying Gaussian of the private
data. We show that under the constraints of pure or concentrated DP, d + 1 public
data samples are sufficient to remove any dependence on the range parameters of
the private data distribution from the private sample complexity, which is known to
be otherwise necessary without public data. For separated Gaussian mixtures, we
assume that the underlying public and private distributions are the same, and we
consider two settings: (1) when given a dimension-independent amount of public
data, the private sample complexity can be improved polynomially in terms of
the number of mixture components, and any dependence on the range parameters
of the distribution can be removed in the approximate DP case; (2) when given
an amount of public data linear in the dimension, the private sample complexity
can be made independent of range parameters even under concentrated DP, and
additional improvements can be made to the overall sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06] guarantees the privacy of every point in a dataset. This is a
strong requirement, and often gives rise to qualitatively new requirements when performing private
data analysis. For instance, for the problem of private mean estimation (under pure or concentrated
DP), the analyst must specify a guess for the unknown parameter, and needs more data to get an
accurate estimate depending on how good their guess is. This cost can be prohibitive in cases where
the data domain may be unfamiliar.
Fortunately, in many cases, it is natural to assume that there exists an additional public dataset. This
public dataset may vary in both size and quality. For example, one could imagine that a fraction of
users opt out of privacy considerations, giving a small set of public in-distribution data. Alternatively,
it is common to pretrain models on large amounts of public data from the web, which may be orders
of magnitude larger than the private data but significantly out of distribution. In a variety of such
settings, this public data can yield dramatic theoretical and empirical improvements to utility in
private data analysis (see discussion in Section 1.3). We seek to answer the following question:
How can one take advantage of public data for private estimation?
We initiate the study of differentially private statistical estimation with a supplementary public dataset.
In particular, our goal is to understand when a small amount of public data can significantly reduce
the cost of private estimation.
⇤

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

