Sampling from Log-Concave Distributions with
Infinity-Distance Guarantees
Oren Mangoubi
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
For a d-dimensional log-concave distribution ﬁ(◊) Ã e≠f (◊) constrained to a convex body K, the problem of outputting samples from a distribution ‹ which is
‹(◊)
Á-close in infinity-distance sup◊œK | log ﬁ(◊)
| to ﬁ arises in differentially private
optimization. While sampling within total-variation distance Á of ﬁ can be done
by algorithms whose runtime depends polylogarithmically on 1Á , prior algorithms
for sampling in Á infinity distance have runtime bounds that depend polynomially
on 1Á . We bridge this gap by presenting an algorithm that outputs a point Á-close
to ﬁ in infinity distance that requires at most poly(log 1Á , d) calls to a membership
oracle for K and evaluation oracle for f , when f is Lipschitz. Our approach departs from prior works that construct Markov chains on a Á12 -discretization of K
to achieve a sample with Á infinity-distance error, and present a method to directly
convert continuous samples from K with total-variation bounds to samples with
infinity bounds. This approach also allows us to obtain an improvement on the
dimension d in the running time for the problem of sampling from a log-concave
distribution on polytopes K with infinity distance Á, by plugging in TV-distance
running time bounds for the Dikin Walk Markov chain.

1

Introduction

The problem of sampling from a log-concave distribution is as follows: For a convex body K ™
Rd and a convex function f : K æ R, output a sample ◊ from the distribution ﬁ(◊) Ã e≠f (◊) .
This is a basic problem in computer science, statistics, and machine learning, with applications
to optimization and integration [1, 29], Bayesian statistics [39], reinforcement learning [6], and
differential privacy [32, 20, 2, 24]. Sampling exactly from ﬁ is known to be computationally hard for
most interesting cases of K and f [16] and, hence, the goal is to output samples from a distribution
‹ that is at a small (specified) “distance” to ﬁ. For applications such as computing the integral of
ﬁ, bounds in the total variation (TV) distance [1] or KL divergence (which implies a TV bound) are
sufficient. In applications such as computing the expectation of a Lipschitz function with respect to
ﬁ, Wasserstein distance may also be sufficient. In differentially private optimization [32, 20, 2, 19,
24], one requires bounds on the stronger infinity-distance –
‹(◊) -dŒ (‹, ﬁ) := sup -log
ﬁ(◊) ◊œK

– to guarantee pure differential privacy, and TV, KL, or Wasserstein bounds are insufficient; see [14].
Pure differential privacy (DP) is the strongest notion of DP and has been extensively studied (see e.g.
the survey [14]). It has advantages over weaker notions of differential privacy. E.g., when privacy
of “groups” of individuals (rather than just single individuals) must be preserved, any mechanism
which is (pure) Á-DP (with respect to single individuals), is also kÁ-DP with respect to subsets of
k individuals. Motivated by applications to differential privacy, we study the problem of designing
efficient algorithms to output samples from a distribution ‹ which is Á-close in dŒ to ﬁ.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

