Adv-Attribute: Inconspicuous and Transferable
Adversarial Attack on Face Recognition

Shuai Jia1† Bangjie Yin2∗ Taiping Yao2 Shouhong Ding2
Chunhua Shen3 Xiaokang Yang1 Chao Ma1∗
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Zhejiang University
{jiashuai,xkyang,chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn, jamesyin10@gmail.com
{taipingyao,ericshding}@tencent.com, chunhua@me.com

Abstract
Deep learning models have shown their vulnerability when dealing with adversarial
attacks. Existing attacks almost perform on low-level instances, such as pixels
and super-pixels, and rarely exploit semantic clues. For face recognition attacks,
existing methods typically generate the ℓp -norm perturbations on pixels, however,
resulting in low attack transferability and high vulnerability to denoising defense
models. In this work, instead of performing perturbations on the low-level pixels,
we propose to generate attacks through perturbing on the high-level semantics
to improve attack transferability. Specifically, a unified flexible framework, Adversarial Attributes (Adv-Attribute), is designed to generate inconspicuous and
transferable attacks on face recognition, which crafts the adversarial noise and
adds it into different attributes based on the guidance of the difference in face
recognition features from the target. Moreover, the importance-aware attribute
selection and the multi-objective optimization strategy are introduced to further
ensure the balance of stealthiness and attacking strength. Extensive experiments on
the FFHQ and CelebA-HQ datasets show that the proposed Adv-Attribute method
achieves the state-of-the-art attacking success rates while maintaining better visual
effects against recent attack methods.

1

Introduction

Recent studies [1–6] have shown that deep learning based face recognition systems exhibit vulnerability to adversarial examples, which are constructed to fool models by adding perturbations to normal
face images. A host of methods were developed to craft adversarial examples, and they realize to
attack against white-box models [1], evaluate black-box model robustness [2], and create threats
under physical scenarios to some extent [5–7].
However, most of these methods focus on generating pixel-level perturbations over the whole image.
Considering that a human face is a typical combination of multiple significant parts, e.g., the face
form, the mustache, etc. Thus, the pixel-level attack may realize an imperceptible invade but lack
crucial semantic clues [8], which lead to low transferability to other black-box models [4, 8]. Some
other works attempt to generate wearable adversarial accessories [5–7], but such synthesized patches,
e.g., colorful glasses or distinct eyeshadows, are easily perceived by the observers. Recently, the
work in [4] focuses on performing semantically meaningful perturbations in the visual attribute space.
It directly interpolates the original faces and single attribute edited faces, which ignores the diverse
* Corresponding authors.
†

Work done during an internship at Youtu Lab, Tencent.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

