Sparsity in Continuous-Depth Neural Networks

Hananeh Aliee
Helmholtz Munich
Ignacio Ibarra
Helmholtz Munich

Till Richter
Helmholtz Munich
Fabian Theis
Technical University of Munich
Helmholtz Munich

Mikhail Solonin∗
Technical University of Munich
Niki Kilbertus
Technical University of Munich
Helmholtz AI, Munich

{hananeh.aliee,till.richter,ignacio.ibarra,fabian.theis,niki.kilbertus}

@helmholtz-muenchen.de

Abstract
Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (NODEs) have proven successful in learning dynamical systems in terms of accurately recovering the observed trajectories.
While different types of sparsity have been proposed to improve robustness, the
generalization properties of NODEs for dynamical systems beyond the observed
data are underexplored. We systematically study the influence of weight and feature sparsity on forecasting as well as on identifying the underlying dynamical
laws. Besides assessing existing methods, we propose a regularization technique to
sparsify “input-output connections” and extract relevant features during training.
Moreover, we curate real-world datasets consisting of human motion capture and
human hematopoiesis single-cell RNA-seq data to realistically analyze different
levels of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization in forecasting and dynamics
identification respectively. Our extensive empirical evaluation on these challenging
benchmarks suggests that weight sparsity improves generalization in the presence
of noise or irregular sampling. However, it does not prevent learning spurious
feature dependencies in the inferred dynamics, rendering them impractical for predictions under interventions, or for inferring the true underlying dynamics. Instead,
feature sparsity can indeed help with recovering sparse ground-truth dynamics
compared to unregularized NODEs.

1

Introduction

Extreme over-parameterization has shown to be part of the success story of deep neural networks
[52, 5, 4]. This has been linked to evidence that over-parameterized models are easier to train,
perhaps because they develop “convexity-like” properties that help convergence of gradient descent
[10, 14]. However, over-parameterization comes at the cost of additional computational footprint
during training and inference [13]. Therefore, motivation for sparse neural networks are manifold
and include: (i) imitation of human learning, where neuron activity is typically sparse [2], (ii)
computational efficiency (speed up, memory reduction, scalability) [20], (iii) interpretability [51], as
well as (iv) avoiding overfitting or improving robustness [6].
Enforcing sparsity in model weights, also called model pruning, and its effects for standard predictive
modelling tasks have been extensively studied in the literature [20]. However, sparsity in continuousdepth neural nets for modeling dynamical systems and its effects on generalization properties is still
∗

Work done while at TUM. MS is currently employed by J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.;
mikhail.solonin@jpmorgan.com
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

