HSDF: Hybrid Sign and Distance Field
for Modeling Surfaces with Arbitrary Topologies
Li Wang1,2 , Jie Yang1,2 , Weikai Chen3 ,
Xiaoxu Meng3 , Bo Yang3 , Jintao Li1,2 , and Lin Gao (B)†∗1,2
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device, Institute of Computing
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tencent Games Digital Content Technology Center
{wangli20s, yangjie01}@ict.ac.cn
{xiaoxumeng,brandonyang}@tencent.com

NDF

Ours

NDF

Ours

chenwk891@gmail.com
{jtli, gaolin}@ict.ac.cn

NDF

Ours

Figure 1: We reconstruct three groups of representative objects with both open and closed surfaces
using NDF [15] (left) and our proposed HSDF (right). Compared with the SOTA NDF [15], our
method achieves higher surface reconstruction quality and more consistent surface normals. All the
results are reconstructed with an equivalent resolution.

Abstract
Neural implicit function based on signed distance field (SDF) has achieved impressive progress in reconstructing 3D models with high fidelity. However, such
approaches can only represent closed surfaces. Recent works based on unsigned
distance function (UDF) are proposed to handle both watertight and open surfaces.
Nonetheless, as UDF is signless, its direct output is limited to the point cloud,
which imposes an additional challenge on extracting high-quality meshes from
discrete points. To address this challenge, we present a novel neural implicit
representation coded HSDF, which is a hybrid of signed and unsigned distance
fields. In particular, HSDF is able to represent arbitrary topologies containing
both closed and open surfaces while being compatible with existing iso-surface
extraction techniques for easy field-to-mesh conversion. In addition to predicting a
UDF, we propose to learn an additional sign field. Unlike traditional SDF, HSDF
is able to locate the surface of interest before level surface extraction by generating
surface points following NDF [15]. We are then able to obtain open surfaces via
an adaptive meshing approach that only instantiates regions containing surfaces
into a polygon mesh. We also propose HSDF-Net, a dedicated learning framework
that factorizes the learning of HSDF into two easier sub-problems. Experiments
and evaluations show that HSDF outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques both
qualitatively and quantitatively.
∗

Corresponding author is Lin Gao (gaolin@ict.ac.cn).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

