What I Cannot Predict, I Do Not Understand:
A Human-Centered Evaluation Framework for
Explainability Methods

1

Julien Colin1,3,5 ∗ †
Thomas Fel1,3,4 ∗
Rémi Cadène1,2 ‡
Thomas Serre1,3
2
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, USA Sorbonne Université, CNRS, France
3
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute, Université de Toulouse, France
4
Innovation & Research Division, SNCF
5
ELLIS Alicante, Spain
{julien_colin,thomas_fel,remi_cadene}@brown.edu

Abstract
A multitude of explainability methods has been described to try to help users better
understand how modern AI systems make decisions. However, most performance
metrics developed to evaluate these methods have remained largely theoretical –
without much consideration for the human end-user. In particular, it is not yet
clear (1) how useful current explainability methods are in real-world scenarios;
and (2) whether current performance metrics accurately reflect the usefulness of
explanation methods for the end user. To fill this gap, we conducted psychophysics
experiments at scale (n = 1, 150) to evaluate the usefulness of representative
attribution methods in three real-world scenarios. Our results demonstrate that
the degree to which individual attribution methods help human participants better
understand an AI system varies widely across these scenarios. This suggests the
need to move beyond quantitative improvements of current attribution methods,
towards the development of complementary approaches that provide qualitatively
different sources of information to human end-users.

1

Introduction

There is now broad consensus that modern AI systems might not be safe to be deployed in the real
world [1] despite their exhibiting very high levels of accuracy on held-out data because these systems
have been shown to exploit dataset biases and other statistical shortcuts [2–5]. A growing body of
research thus focuses on the development of explainability methods to help better interpret these
systems’ predictions [6–14] to make them more trustworthy. The application of these explainability
methods will find broad societal uses, like easing the debugging of self-driving vehicles [15] and
helping to fulfill the “right to explanation” that European laws guarantee to its citizens [16].
The most commonly used methods in eXplainable AI (XAI) are attribution methods, but despite a
plethora of different approaches [6–10, 12, 17–19], assessing the quality and reliability of these methods remains an open problem. So far the community has mostly focused on evaluating these methods
using surrogate measures defined axiomatically [15, 20–23]. The two most popular approaches are:
(1) using ground truth annotations [9, 10, 12, 24–27] and (2) measuring faithfulness using objective
metrics [9, 12, 24, 25, 28, 29].
The first approach takes humans into consideration only in so far as it evaluates the alignment of
an explanation with a human annotation. This metric assumes that the classifier relies on human* Equal contribution † Work done while the author was working at Brown University ‡ Work done before
April 2021 and joining Tesla

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

