Interpolation and Regularization for Causal Learning

Leena Chennuru Vankadara*
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center

Luca Rendsburg*
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center

Ulrike von Luxburg
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center

Debarghya Ghoshdastidar
Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Recent work shows that in complex model classes, interpolators can achieve statistical generalization and even be optimal for statistical learning. However, despite
increasing interest in learning models with good causal properties, there is no
understanding of whether such interpolators can also achieve causal generalization.
To address this gap, we study causal learning from observational data through the
lens of interpolation and its counterpart—regularization. Under a simple linear
causal model, we derive precise asymptotics for the causal risk of the min-norm
interpolator and ridge regressors in the high-dimensional regime. We find a large
range of behavior that can be precisely characterized by a new measure of confounding strength. When confounding strength is positive, which holds under
independent causal mechanisms—a standard assumption in causal learning—we
find that interpolators cannot be optimal. Indeed, causal learning requires stronger
regularization than statistical learning. Beyond this assumption, when confounding
is negative, we observe a phenomenon of self-induced regularization due to positive
alignment between statistical and causal signals. Here, causal learning requires
weaker regularization than statistical learning, interpolators can be optimal, and
optimal regularization can even be negative.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of learning the causal influence of multivariate covariates x ∈ Rd on a scalar
target variable y ∈ R purely from observational data and under the presence of hidden confounders.
n
Formally, given finite samples {(xi , yi )}i=1 drawn independently and identically (i.i.d) from the
joint observational distribution p(x, y) = p(x)p(y|x), the goal of causal learning is to predict the
effects on the target variable y under interventions on the covariates x. In other words, the goal is to
learn a predictive model that minimizes the expected loss on a random draw from the interventional
distribution pdo (x, y) = p(x)p(y|do(x)), which can be different from the observational distribution.
Recently, Janzing (2019) established a close analogy between statistical and causal learning (albeit
under a highly constructed confounded model). As a consequence, Janzing (2019) suggested that
standard statistical learning-theoretic techniques (such as norm-based regularization) may also help
learn good causal models. However, the classical statistical principles of bias-variance trade-off have
been challenged in recent years by highly complex classes of models that are trained to interpolate the
data and yet achieve remarkable generalization properties across a broad range of problem domains
(Zhang et al., 2021). A large volume of recent work suggests that interpolation can be compatible
with and may even be necessary to achieve optimal statistical generalization in the high-dimensional
regime (Belkin et al., 2018; Belkin et al., 2019a; Liang et al., 2020; Feldman, 2020). Despite the
surge in interest, causal properties of such interpolators have not yet been explored. In this work, we
* denotes equal contribution.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

