List-Decodable Sparse Mean Estimation
Shiwei Zeng
Department of Computer Science
Stevens Institute of Technology
szeng4@stevens.edu

Jie Shen
Department of Computer Science
Stevens Institute of Technology
jie.shen@stevens.edu

Abstract
Robust mean estimation is one of the most important problems in statistics: given a
set of samples in Rd where an ↵ fraction are drawn from some distribution D and
the rest are adversarially corrupted, we aim to estimate the mean of D. A surge of
recent research interest has been focusing on the list-decodable setting where ↵ 2
(0, 12 ], and the goal is to output a finite number of estimates among which at least
one approximates the target mean. In this paper, we consider that the underlying
distribution D is Gaussian with k-sparse mean. Our main contribution is the first
polynomial-time algorithm that enjoys sample complexity O poly(k, log d) , i.e.
poly-logarithmic in the dimension. One of our core algorithmic ingredients is using
low-degree sparse polynomials to filter outliers, which may find more applications.

1

Introduction

Mean estimation is arguably a fundamental inference task in statistics and machine learning. Given
a set of samples {x1 , . . . , xn } ⇢ Rd where an ↵ fraction are drawn from some well-behaved (e.g.
Gaussian) distribution D and the rest are adversarially corrupted, the goal is to estimate the mean of
D. In the noiseless case where ↵ = 1, the problem can be easily solved in view of the concentration
of measure phenomenon [LT91]. However, this is rarely the case as modern data sets are often
contaminated by random noise or even by adversarial corruptions. Thus, a great deal of recent efforts
are focused on efficiently and robustly estimating the target mean in the presence of outliers.
Generally speaking, there is a phase transition between ↵ > 1/2 and 0 < ↵  1/2, and solving
either problem in a computationally efficient manner is highly nontrivial. The problem that most of
the samples are uncorrupted, i.e. ↵ > 1/2, has a very long history dating back to the 1960s [Tuk60,
Hub64], yet only until recently have computationally efficient algorithms been established [DKK+ 16,
LRV16]. The other yet more challenging regime concerns that an overwhelming fraction of the
samples are corrupted, i.e. ↵  1/2, which even renders estimation impossible. This motivates
a line of research on list-decodable mean estimation [CSV17], where in place of outputting one
single estimate, the algorithm is allowed to generate a finite list of candidates and is considered to be
successful if there exists at least one candidate in the list that is sufficiently close to the target mean.
In this work, we investigate the problem of list-decodable mean estimation, for which there have been
a plethora of elegant results established in recent years. From a high level, most of them concern error
guarantees and running time. For example, [CSV17] proposed the first tractable algorithm based
on semidefinite programming, which runs in polynomial time and achieves optimal error rate for
variance-bounded distributions. [DKS18b] developed a multi-filtering scheme and showed that the
error rate can be improved by using high degree polynomials if the underlying distribution is Gaussian.
The more recent works [CMY20, DKK+ 21a] further addressed the computational efficiency of this
task and achieved almost linear running time in certain regimes.
Although all of these algorithms exhibit near-optimal guarantees on either error rate or computational
complexity, it turns out that less is explored to improve another yet important metric: the sample
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

