Optimal-er Auctions through Attention

Dmitry Ivanov∗
HSE University & Technion
Israel

Iskander Safiulin
Independent researcher
Russia

Igor Filippov
Independent researcher
Russia

Ksenia Balabaeva
ITMO University & BIOCAD
Russia

Abstract
RegretNet is a recent breakthrough in the automated design of revenue-maximizing
auctions. It combines the flexibility of deep learning with the regret-based approach
to relax the Incentive Compatibility (IC) constraint (that participants prefer to bid
truthfully) in order to approximate optimal auctions. We propose two independent
improvements of RegretNet. The first is a neural architecture denoted as RegretFormer that is based on attention layers. The second is a loss function that requires
explicit specification of an acceptable IC violation denoted as regret budget. We
investigate both modifications in an extensive experimental study that includes
settings with constant and inconstant numbers of items and participants, as well
as novel validation procedures tailored to regret-based approaches. We find that
RegretFormer consistently outperforms RegretNet in revenue (i.e. is optimal-er)
and that our loss function both simplifies hyperparameter tuning and allows to
unambiguously control the revenue-regret trade-off by selecting the regret budget.2

1

Introduction

Several decades ago, Myerson [42] has proposed a general solution for the problem of optimal
(revenue-maximizing) design of single-item auctions. Despite the collaborative effort of the community, the results of the same generality for the multi-item auctions have not been obtained. As an
alternative to analytical solutions, automated auction design [7, 8] takes a perspective of constrained
optimization. In particular, the objective is to maximize the revenue while satisfying the Incentive
Compatibility (IC) and Individual Rationality (IR) constraints. This framework can provide approximate solutions in settings where the optimal mechanisms are unknown, as well as hint at what the
analytical solutions may look like. Whereas the early algorithms utilize linear programming and
classic machine learning, modern algorithms focus on deep learning.
Dütting et al. [17] are the pioneers of this approach with their RegretNet architecture. RegretNet is a
neural network that represents a mechanism by mapping a matrix of bids that n participants report
for m items into a probabilistic allocation matrix and a payment vector. It is trained via differential
optimization on a mixture of two objectives: to maximize revenue and to minimize regret, which
is a relaxation of the IC constraint proposed in [15]. RegretNet recovers near-optimal revenue in
the analytically solved settings and outperforms the previous state-of-the-art while having vanishing
regret guarantees. In this paper, we propose two independent improvements of RegretNet.
First, we propose a neural architecture based on attention layers. We name it RegretFormer after
the widely-known Transformers [60]. An illustration of the architecture is provided in Figure 1.
∗
2

dimonenka@mail.ru, divanov@campus.technion.ac.il
Code is available here

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

