I2Q: A Fully Decentralized Q-Learning Algorithm
Jiechuan Jiang
School of Computer Science
Peking University
jiechuan.jiang@pku.edu.cn

Zongqing Lu†
School of Computer Science
Peking University
zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Fully decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning has shown great potential
for many real-world cooperative tasks, where the global information, e.g., the actions of other agents, is not accessible. Although independent Q-learning is widely
used for decentralized training, the transition probabilities are non-stationary since
other agents are updating policies simultaneously, which leads to non-guaranteed
convergence of independent Q-learning. To deal with non-stationarity, we first
introduce stationary ideal transition probabilities, on which independent Q-learning
could converge to the global optimum. Further, we propose a fully decentralized
method, I2Q, which performs independent Q-learning on the modeled ideal transition function to reach the global optimum. The modeling of ideal transition
function in I2Q is fully decentralized and independent from the learned policies
of other agents, helping I2Q be free from non-stationarity and learn the optimal
policy. Empirically, we show that I2Q can achieve remarkable improvement in a
variety of cooperative multi-agent tasks.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has shown great potential in real-world applications,
including UAV [20], IoT [3], and games [29]. A number of MARL methods have been proposed for
training agents to cooperatively maximize the cumulative shared reward, most of which follow the
paradigm of centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE), where the information of all
agents is collected and used in the training phase. However, in many industrial applications where
agents may belong to different companies, e.g., autonomous vehicles or robots, the actions of other
agents may not be accessible, so that CTDE methods cannot work. One way to address this challenge
is fully decentralized learning, where the agents only use local experiences without the actions of
other agents in both training and execution.
Independent Q-learning [28, 27] is one of the most straightforward decentralized methods. However,
since other agents are treated as a part of the environment, from the perspective of an individual
agent, the transition probabilities that also depend on the policies of other agents will change as
other agents are updating their policies simultaneously [7]. Whether the agent updates the individual
Q-values using the off-policy experiences, which are stored in the decentralized replay buffer, or
the on-policy experiences, which are collected under the latest learned policies of all agents, the
transition probabilities are non-stationary, thus the convergence of independent Q-learning is not
theoretically guaranteed.
To tackle the non-stationarity problem, we propose a novel variant of independent Q-learning. First,
we introduce ideal transition probabilities for each agent, which is induced by the optimal conditional
joint policy of other agents, conditioned on action of this agent. We theoretically show that if all
agents independently perform Q-learning on respective ideal transition probabilities, their policies
†

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

