Multi-Fidelity Best-Arm Identification

Riccardo Poiani
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
riccardo.poiani@polimi.it

Alberto Maria Metelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
In several real-world applications, a learner has access to multiple environment
simulators, each with a different precision (e.g., simulation accuracy) and cost
(e.g., computational time). In such a scenario, the learner faces the trade-off
between selecting expensive accurate simulators or preferring cheap imprecise
ones. We formalize this setting as a multi-fidelity variant of the stochastic bestarm identification problem, where querying the original arm is expensive, but
multiple and biased approximations (i.e., fidelities) are available at lower costs.
The learner’s goal, in this setting, is to sequentially choose which simulator to
query in order to minimize the total cost, while guaranteeing to identify the optimal
arm with high probability. We first derive a lower bound on the identification cost,
assuming that the maximum bias of each fidelity is known to the learner. Then,
we propose a novel algorithm, Iterative Imprecise Successive Elimination (IISE),
which provably reduces the total cost w.r.t. algorithms that ignore the multi-fidelity
structure and whose cost complexity upper bound mimics the structure of the lower
bound. Furthermore, we show that the cost complexity of IISE can be further
reduced when the agent has access to a more fine-grained knowledge of the error
introduced by the approximators. Finally, we numerically validate IISE, showing
the benefits of our method in simulated domains.

1

Introduction

In the multi-armed bandit setting [26], the agent selects, at each interaction round, an arm and
observes a sample drawn from its reward distribution. Unlike the regret minimization setting [26],
where the agent tries to maximize the cumulative return, in best-arm identification (BAI) problems
[10, 6, 2], the evaluation index relates exclusively to the quality of the arm recommended at the
end of the exploration phase. More specifically, in the fixed-confidence setting [17], the agent aims
at identifying, with probability 1 − δ, the arm with the largest mean reward, while minimizing the
sample complexity, i.e., the number of collected samples necessary to make the final decision. Due
to its generality, the BAI framework encompasses a wide spectrum of applications, ranging from
medical trials [38], to hyper-parameter optimization [27], crowdsourcing [47], recommender systems
[25], simulation-based studies in physics [43], and A/B testing [14].
However, in practical cases, querying an arm to obtain a sample from its reward distribution might
be expensive. For instance, in the context of physics simulation studies, where pulling an arm
corresponds to the evaluation of a complex model under some given arm parameters, intensive use
of computing power is required to obtain the reward we are interested in. Nevertheless, simpler
and, consequently, cheaper and biased, models might be available to the agent. Another example is
stochastic planning, where the agent needs to compute the best action (i.e., arm) that maximizes the
future sum of rewards over a maximum horizon H. However, while in principle it is possible to plan
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

