Enhance the Visual Representation via Discrete
Adversarial Training
Xiaofeng Mao† Yuefeng Chen† Ranjie Duan† Yao Zhu‡⇤ Gege Qi†
Shaokai Ye§ Xiaodan Li† Rong Zhang† Hui Xue†
†
Alibaba Group, ‡ Zhejiang University, § EPFL
{mxf164419,yuefeng.chenyf,ranjie.drj}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Adversarial Training (AT), which is commonly accepted as one of the most effective approaches defending against adversarial examples, can largely harm the
standard performance, thus has limited usefulness on industrial-scale production
and applications. Surprisingly, this phenomenon is totally opposite in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) task, where AT can even benefit for generalization.
We notice the merit of AT in NLP tasks could derive from the discrete and symbolic input space. For borrowing the advantage from NLP-style AT, we propose
Discrete Adversarial Training (DAT). DAT leverages VQGAN to reform the image
data to discrete text-like inputs, i.e. visual words. Then it minimizes the maximal risk on such discrete images with symbolic adversarial perturbations. We
further give an explanation from the perspective of distribution to demonstrate
the effectiveness of DAT. As a plug-and-play technique for enhancing the visual
representation, DAT achieves significant improvement on multiple tasks including
image classification, object detection and self-supervised learning. Especially, the
model pre-trained with Masked Auto-Encoding (MAE) and fine-tuned by our DAT
without extra data can get 31.40 mCE on ImageNet-C and 32.77% top-1 accuracy
on Stylized-ImageNet, building the new state-of-the-art. The code will be available
at https://github.com/alibaba/easyrobust.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has achieved excellent performance surpassing humans
in most computer vision tasks. Although remarkable progress has been made, the success of DNNs is
actually a false sense when i.i.d hypothesis is not satisfied in wild. Researchers have shown that deep
models fail in most circumstances including adversarial perturbations [1], common corruptions [2],
colors or textures changing [3, 4], etc. There is still a long way to make DNNs closer to the robust
human perception.
A possible way towards robust machine perception can be Adversarial Training (AT) [5], which
automatically finds failure input cases of DNNs and augment online with these cases for fixing "bugs".
With online augmentation of adversarial examples, AT greatly enhances the adversarial robustness,
and helps for learning perceptually-aligned representations [6] with good interpretability [7, 8]
and transferability [9]. However, AT is double-edged, which meanwhile degrades the standard
performance caused by problematic regularization [10]. Such problematic regularization makes the
decision boundaries over-smoothed and enlarges indecisive regions.
Surprisingly, previous works [11, 12] observe a strange phenomenon that AT behaves conversely
in Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. By automatically finding adversarial textual inputs,
⇤

Corresponding author: Yao Zhu (E-mail: ee_zhuy@zju.edu.cn)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

