Polynomial-Time Optimal Equilibria with a Mediator
in Extensive-Form Games
Brian Hu Zhang
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, CMU
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
For common notions of correlated equilibrium in extensive-form games, computing an optimal (e.g., welfare-maximizing) equilibrium is NP-hard. Other equilibrium notions—communication [11] and certification [12] equilibria—augment
the game with a mediator that has the power to both send and receive messages to
and from the players—and, in particular, to remember the messages. In this paper,
we investigate both notions in extensive-form games from a computational lens.
We show that optimal equilibria in both notions can be computed in polynomial
time, the latter under a natural additional assumption known in the literature. Our
proof works by constructing a mediator-augmented game of polynomial size that
explicitly represents the mediator’s decisions and actions. Our framework allows
us to define an entire family of equilibria by varying the mediator’s information
partition, the players’ ability to lie, and the players’ ability to deviate. From this
perspective, we show that other notions of equilibrium, such as extensive-form
correlated equilibrium, correspond to the mediator having imperfect recall. This
shows that, at least among all these equilibrium notions, the hardness of computation is driven by the mediator’s imperfect recall. As special cases of our general
construction, we recover 1) the polynomial-time algorithm of Conitzer and Sandholm [8] for automated mechanism design in Bayes-Nash equilibria and 2) the
correlation DAG algorithm of Zhang et al. [31] for optimal correlation. Our algorithm is especially scalable when the equilibrium notion is what we define as the
full-certification equilibrium, where players cannot lie about their information but
they can be silent. We back up our theoretical claims with experiments on a suite
of standard benchmark games.

1

Introduction

Various equilibrium notions in general-sum extensive-form games are used to describe situations
where the players have access to a trusted third-party mediator, who can communicate with the
players. Depending on the power of the mediator and the form of communication, these notions
include the normal-form [1] and extensive-form correlated equilibrium (NFCE and EFCE) [29], the
normal-form [25] and extensive-form [10] coarse-correlated equilibrium (NFCCE and EFCCE), the
communication equilibrium [11], and the certification equilibrium [12].
Several of these notions, in particular the EFCE and EFCCE, were defined for mainly computational reasons: the EFCE as a computationally-reasonable relaxation to NFCE, and the EFCCE as
a computationally-reasonable relaxation of EFCE. When the goal is to compute a single correlated
equilibrium, these relaxations are helpful: there are polynomial-time algorithms for computing an
EFCE [16]. However, from the perspective of computing optimal equilibria—that is, equilibria that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

