Multi-block-Single-probe Variance Reduced Estimator
for Coupled Compositional Optimization

Wei Jiang1 , Gang Li2 , Yibo Wang1 , Lijun Zhang1,∗ , Tianbao Yang3,∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, the University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, USA
jiangw@lamda.nju.edu.cn, gang-li@uiowa.edu.cn, wangyb@lamda.nju.edu.cn
zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, tianbao-yang@tamu.edu
1

Abstract
Variance reduction techniques such as SPIDER/SARAH/STORM have been extensively studied to improve the convergence rates of stochastic non-convex optimization, which usually maintain and update a sequence of estimators for a
single function across iterations. What if we need to track multiple functional
mappings across iterations but only with access to stochastic samples of O(1)
functional mappings at each iteration? There is an important application in solving
an P
emerging family of coupled compositional optimization problems in the form
m
of i=1 fi (gi (w)), where gi is accessible through a stochastic oracle. The key
issue is to track and estimate a sequence of g(w) = (g1 (w), . . . , gm (w)) across
iterations, where g(w) has m blocks and it is only allowed to probe O(1) blocks to
attain their stochastic values and Jacobians. To improve the complexity for solving
these problems, we propose a novel stochastic method named Multi-block-Singleprobe Variance Reduced (MSVR) estimator to track the sequence of g(w). It is
inspired by STORM but introduces a customized error correction term to alleviate
the noise not only in stochastic samples for the selected blocks but also in those
blocks that are not sampled. With the help of the MSVR estimator, we develop
several algorithms for solving the aforementioned compositional problems with improved complexities across a spectrum of settings with non-convex/convex/strongly
convex/Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) objectives. Our results improve upon prior ones
in several aspects, including the order of sample complexities and dependence
on the strong convexity parameter. Empirical studies on multi-task deep AUC
maximization demonstrate the better performance of using the new estimator.

1

Introduction

This paper is motivated by solving the following Finite-sum Coupled Compositional Optimization
(FCCO) problem that has broad applications in machine learning [Wang and Yang, 2022]:
m

min F (w) :=

w∈Rd

1 X
fi (gi (w)),
m i=1

(1)

where fi : Rp 7→ R is a simple deterministic function. We assume that only noisy estimations
of gi (·) and its Jacobian ∇gi (·) can be accessed, denoted as gi (·; ξi ) and ∇gi (·; ξi ), where ξi
represents the random sample(s) drawn from a stochastic oracle such that E [gi (·; ξi )] = gi (·) and
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

