Chain of Thought Imitation with Procedure Cloning

Mengjiao Yang
Google Brain, UC Berkeley
sherryy@google.com

Dale Schuurmans
Google Brain, Unversity of Alberta
schuurmans@google.com

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Ofir Nachum
Google Brain
ofirnachum@google.com

Abstract
Imitation learning aims to extract high-performance policies from logged demonstrations of expert behavior. It is common to frame imitation learning as a supervised learning problem in which one fits a function approximator to the input-output
mapping exhibited by the logged demonstrations (input observations to output
actions). While the framing of imitation learning as a supervised input-output
learning problem allows for applicability in a wide variety of settings, it is also an
overly simplistic view of the problem in situations where the expert demonstrations
provide much richer insight into expert behavior. For example, applications such as
path navigation, robot manipulation, and strategy games acquire expert demonstrations via planning, search, or some other multi-step algorithm, revealing not just the
output action to be imitated but also the procedure for how to determine this action.
While these intermediate computations may use tools not available to the agent
during inference (e.g., environment simulators), they are nevertheless informative
as a way to explain an expert’s mapping of state to actions. To properly leverage
expert procedure information without relying on the privileged tools the expert
may have used to perform the procedure, we propose procedure cloning, which
applies supervised sequence prediction to imitate the series of expert computations.
This way, procedure cloning learns not only what to do (i.e., the output action),
but how and why to do it (i.e., the procedure). Through empirical analysis on
navigation, simulated robotic manipulation, and game-playing environments, we
show that imitating the intermediate computations of an expert’s behavior enables
procedure cloning to learn policies exhibiting significant generalization to unseen
environment configurations, including those configurations for which running the
expert’s procedure directly is infeasible.1
‘

1

Introduction

The idea of learning by imitation in autonomous agents closely resembles how humans (especially
children) learn in real life — by watching and mimicking how someone else performs a certain task [1].
While humans are able to generalize exceedingly well from a small number of demonstrations, today’s
imitation-learned autonomous agents often struggle in situations that only slightly differ from the
demonstrations, e.g., opening a door in a different shape or color [2]. One explanation for such a
difference is that while humans imitate, we understand the task at a high level as opposed to only
remembering a mapping from images to actions [3], and indeed, generalization failures can also occur
1

https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/procedure_cloning.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

