Towards Better Evaluation for
Dynamic Link Prediction

Farimah Poursafaei∗, Shenyang Huang∗, Kellin Pelrine, Reihaneh Rabbany
McGill University School of Computer Science, Mila – Quebec AI Institute
[farimah.poursafaei,huangshe,kellin.pelrine,reihaneh.rabbany]@mila.quebec

Abstract
Despite the prevalence of recent success in learning from static graphs, learning
from time-evolving graphs remains an open challenge. In this work, we design
new, more stringent evaluation procedures for link prediction specific to dynamic
graphs, which reflect real-world considerations, to better compare the strengths and
weaknesses of methods. First, we create two visualization techniques to understand
the reoccurring patterns of edges over time and show that many edges reoccur at
later time steps. Based on this observation, we propose a pure memorization-based
baseline called EdgeBank. EdgeBank achieves surprisingly strong performance
across multiple settings which highlights that the negative edges used in the current
evaluation are easy. To sample more challenging negative edges, we introduce
two novel negative sampling strategies that improve robustness and better match
real-world applications. Lastly, we introduce six new dynamic graph datasets
from a diverse set of domains missing from current benchmarks, providing new
challenges and opportunities for future research. Our code repository is accessible
at https://github.com/fpour/DGB.git.

1

Introduction

Many evolving real-world relations can be modelled by a dynamic graph where nodes correspond
to entities and edges represent relations between nodes. Nodes, edges, weights or attributes in a
dynamic graph can be added, deleted or adjusted over time. Therefore, understanding and analyzing
the temporal patterns of a dynamic graph is an important problem. For instance, in popular online
social networks, many users join the platform on a daily basis while connections between users
are constantly added or removed [10]. To facilitate more efficient learning on dynamic graphs,
many efforts have been devoted to the development of dynamic graph representation learning
methods [40, 37, 41, 28, 42, 43, 29, 3].
Link prediction is a fundamental learning task on dynamic graphs which focuses on predicting future
connections between nodes. Recent methods such as [18, 38, 42, 28, 41] show promising performance
on this task, with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance [28, 41] being close to perfect on most
existing benchmark datasets. However, considering that link prediction in static graphs, an arguably
less complex task, still faces major challenges [12, 11], it is important to meticulously examine the
near-perfect performance of dynamic link prediction methods. We hypothesize that current evaluation
procedures and datasets fail to properly differentiate between the proposed approaches. Therefore,
we identify several limitations in current evaluation procedures and propose solutions towards more
robust and effective evaluation protocols.
Limited Domain Diversity. Existing benchmark datasets are mostly social or interaction networks
thus limited in domain diversity. It is well-known that networks across different domains exhibit a
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022), Datasets and Benchmarks Track.

