Sleeper Agent: Scalable Hidden Trigger Backdoors for
Neural Networks Trained from Scratch
Hossein Souri∗
Johns Hopkins University
hsouri1@jhu.edu
Rama Chellappa
Johns Hopkins University

Liam Fowl∗
University of Maryland

Micah Goldblum
New York University

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland

Abstract
As the curation of data for machine learning becomes increasingly automated,
dataset tampering is a mounting threat. Backdoor attackers tamper with training
data to embed a vulnerability in models that are trained on that data. This vulnerability is then activated at inference time by placing a “trigger” into the model’s input.
Typical backdoor attacks insert the trigger directly into the training data, although
the presence of such an attack may be visible upon inspection. In contrast, the
Hidden Trigger Backdoor Attack achieves poisoning without placing a trigger into
the training data at all. However, this hidden trigger attack is ineffective at poisoning neural networks trained from scratch. We develop a new hidden trigger attack,
Sleeper Agent, which employs gradient matching, data selection, and target model
re-training during the crafting process. Sleeper Agent is the first hidden trigger backdoor attack to be effective against neural networks trained from scratch. We demonstrate its effectiveness on ImageNet and in black-box settings. Our implementation
code can be found at: https://github.com/hsouri/Sleeper-Agent.

1

Introduction

High-performance deep learning systems have grown in scale at a rapid pace. As a result, practitioners
seek larger and larger datasets with which to train their data-hungry models. Due to the surging
demand for training data along with improved accessibility via the web, the data curation process is
increasingly automated. Dataset manipulation attacks exploit vulnerabilities in the curation pipeline to
manipulate training data so that downstream machine learning models contain exploitable behaviors.
Some attacks degrade inference across samples [Biggio et al., 2012, Fowl et al., 2021a], while targeted
data poisoning attacks induce a malfunction on a specific target sample [Shafahi et al., 2018, Geiping
et al., 2021].
Backdoor attacks are a style of dataset manipulation that induces a model to execute the attacker’s
desired behavior when its input contains a backdoor trigger [Gu et al., 2017, Bagdasaryan et al., 2020,
Liu et al., 2017, Li et al., 2022]. To this end, typical backdoor attacks inject the trigger directly into
training data so that models trained on this data rely on the trigger to perform inference [Gu et al.,
2017, Chen et al., 2017]. Such threat models for classification problems typically incorporate label
flips as well. However, images poisoned under this style of attack are often easily identifiable since
they belong to the incorrect class and contain a visible trigger. One line of work uses only small or
realistic-looking triggers, but these may still be visible and are often placed in conspicuous image
regions [Chen et al., 2017, Gu et al., 2017, Li et al., 2020]. Another recent method, Hidden Trigger
∗

Authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

