When does return-conditioned supervised learning
work for offline reinforcement learning?
David Brandfonbrener
New York University
david.brandfonbrener@nyu.edu

Alberto Bietti
New York University

Romain Laroche
Microsoft Research

Jacob Buckman
MILA

Joan Bruna
New York University

Abstract
Several recent works have proposed a class of algorithms for the offline reinforcement learning (RL) problem that we will refer to as return-conditioned supervised
learning (RCSL). RCSL algorithms learn the distribution of actions conditioned
on both the state and the return of the trajectory. Then they define a policy by
conditioning on achieving high return. In this paper, we provide a rigorous study
of the capabilities and limitations of RCSL, something which is crucially missing in previous work. We find that RCSL returns the optimal policy under a set
of assumptions that are stronger than those needed for the more traditional dynamic programming-based algorithms. We provide specific examples of MDPs
and datasets that illustrate the necessity of these assumptions and the limits of
RCSL. Finally, we present empirical evidence that these limitations will also
cause issues in practice by providing illustrative experiments in simple point-mass
environments and on datasets from the D4RL benchmark.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning has proven to be an exceptionally powerful generic algorithm for
solving supervised learning (SL) tasks. These approaches tend to be stable, and scale well with
compute and data [17]. In contrast, deep reinforcement learning algorithms seem to lack these nice
properties; results are well known to be sensitive to hyperparameters and difficult to replicate. In
spite of this, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive feats, such as defeating
human champions at Go [25]. This juxtaposition of success and instability has inspired researchers
to explore alternative approaches to reinforcement learning that more closely resemble supervised
learning in hopes of making deep RL as well-behaved as deep SL.
One family of algorithms that has garnered great interest recently is return-conditioned supervised
learning (RCSL). The core idea of RCSL is to learn the return-conditional distribution of actions
in each state, and then define a policy by sampling from the distribution of actions that receive
high return. This was first proposed for the online RL setting by work on Upside Down RL [23,
26] and Reward Conditioned Policies [21]. The idea was extended to the offline RL setting using
transformers that condition on the entire history of states rather than just the current Markovian state
in the Decision Transformer (DT) work [8, 12]. Recent work on RL via Supervised Learning (RvS)
[9] unifies and simplifies ideas from these prior works with ideas about goal-conditioned policies.
Importantly, none of this prior work provides theoretical guarantees or analysis of the failure modes
of the return-conditioning approach. In contrast, the more established dynamic programming (DP)
algorithms for RL are better understood theoretically. This paper attempts to address this gap in
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

