Perturbation Learning Based Anomaly Detection

Jinyu Cai1,2∗, Jicong Fan2,3†
Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
jinyucai1995@gmail.com fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn
1

Abstract
This paper presents a simple yet effective method for anomaly detection. The main
idea is to learn small perturbations to perturb normal data and learn a classifier to
classify the normal data and the perturbed data into two different classes. The perturbator and classifier are jointly learned using deep neural networks. Importantly,
the perturbations should be as small as possible but the classifier is still able to
recognize the perturbed data from unperturbed data. Therefore, the perturbed data
are regarded as abnormal data and the classifier provides a decision boundary between the normal data and abnormal data, although the training data do not include
any abnormal data. Compared with the state-of-the-art of anomaly detection, our
method does not require any assumption about the shape (e.g. hypersphere) of the
decision boundary and has fewer hyper-parameters to determine. Empirical studies
on benchmark datasets verify the effectiveness and superiority of our method.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD) is an important research problem in many areas such as computer vision,
machine learning, and chemical engineering [Chandola et al., 2009; Ramachandra et al., 2020; Pang
et al., 2021; Ruff et al., 2021]. AD aims to identify abnormal data from normal data and is usually an
unsupervised learning task because the anomaly samples are unknown in the training stage. In the
past decades, numerous AD methods [Schölkopf et al., 1999, 2001; Breunig et al., 2000; Liu et al.,
2008] have been proposed. For instance, one-class support vector machine (OCSVM) [Schölkopf
et al., 2001] maps the data into high-dimensional feature space induced by kernels and tries to find
a hyperplane giving the possibly maximal distance between the normal data and the origin. Tax
and Duin [2004] proposed a method called support vector data description (SVDD), which finds the
smallest hyper-sphere encasing the normal data in a high-dimensional feature space. SVDD is similar
to OCSVM with a Gaussian kernel function.
Classical anomaly detection methods such as OCSVM and SVDD are generally not suitable for
large-scale data due to the high computational costs and are not effective to deal with more complex
data such as those in vision scenarios. To address these issues, a few researchers [Erfani et al., 2016;
Golan and El-Yaniv, 2018; Abati et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Qiu et al., 2021] attempted to take
advantage of deep learning [LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016] to improve the performance
of anomaly detection. One typical way is to use a deep auto-encoder or its variants[Vincent et al.,
2008; Kingma and Welling, 2013; Pidhorskyi et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021] to learn effective
data representation or compression models. Auto-encoder and its variants have achieved promising
performance in AD. In fact, these methods do not explicitly define an objective for anomaly detection.
Instead, they usually use the data reconstruction error as a metric to detect anomalies.
∗
†

The work was done during the visiting at SRIBD and CUHK-Shenzhen.
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

