BEVFusion: A Simple and Robust LiDAR-Camera
Fusion Framework
Tingting Liang1⇤ Hongwei Xie2⇤ Kaicheng Yu2⇤ Zhongyu Xia1 Zhiwei Lin1
Yongtao Wang1§ Tao Tang2&3 Bing Wang2 Zhi Tang1
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, China
3
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, China
{tingtingliang, xiazhongyu, zhiweilin,wyt,tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn
{hongwei.xie.90, kaicheng.yu.yt trent.tangtao, blucewang6}@gmail.com

Abstract
Fusing the camera and LiDAR information has become a de-facto standard for
3D object detection tasks. Current methods rely on point clouds from the LiDAR
sensor as queries to leverage the feature from the image space. However, people
discovered that this underlying assumption makes the current fusion framework
infeasible to produce any prediction when there is a LiDAR malfunction, regardless
of minor or major. This fundamentally limits the deployment capability to realistic
autonomous driving scenarios. In contrast, we propose a surprisingly simple
yet novel fusion framework, dubbed BEVFusion, whose camera stream does not
depend on the input of LiDAR data, thus addressing the downside of previous
methods. We empirically show that our framework surpasses the state-of-the-art
methods under the normal training settings. Under the robustness training settings
that simulate various LiDAR malfunctions, our framework significantly surpasses
the state-of-the-art methods by 15.7% to 28.9% mAP. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to handle realistic LiDAR malfunction and can be deployed to
realistic scenarios without any post-processing procedure. The code is available at
https://github.com/ADLab-AutoDrive/BEVFusion.

1

Introduction

Vision-based perception tasks, like detecting bounding boxes in 3D space, have been a critical
aspect of fully autonomous driving tasks [56, 42, 57, 41]. Among all the sensors of a traditional
vision on-vehicle perception systems, LiDAR and camera are usually the two most critical sensors
that provide accurate point cloud and image features of a surrounding world. In the early stage of
perception systems, people design separate deep models for each sensor [37, 38, 59, 16, 53], and
fuse the information via post-processing approaches [32]. Note that, people discover that bird’s eye
view (BEV) has been an de-facto standard for autonomous driving scenarios as, generally speaking,
car cannot fly [20, 23, 39, 16, 54, 33]. However, it is often difficult to regress 3D bounding boxes on
pure image inputs due to the lack of depth information, and similarly, it is difficult to classify objects
on point clouds when LiDAR does not receive enough points.
Recently, people have designed LiDAR-camera fusion deep networks to better leverage information
from both modalities. Specifically, the majority of works can be summarized as follow: i) given one
or a few points of the LiDAR point cloud, LiDAR to world transformation matrix and the essential
matrix (camera to world); ii) people transform the LiDAR points [43, 46, 47, 46, 17, 60] or proposals
§

Corresponding Author.

* Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

