Self-supervised Heterogeneous Graph Pre-training
Based on Structural Clustering

Yaming Yang, Ziyu Guan, Zhe Wang, Wei Zhao∗, Cai Xu, Weigang Lu, Jianbin Huang
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
{yym@, zyguan@, zwang@stu., ywzhao@mail., cxu@, wglu@stu., jbhuang@}xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent self-supervised pre-training methods on Heterogeneous Information Networks (HINs) have shown promising competitiveness over traditional semisupervised Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks (HGNNs). Unfortunately, their
performance heavily depends on careful customization of various strategies for generating high-quality positive examples and negative examples, which notably limits
their flexibility and generalization ability. In this work, we present SHGP, a novel
Self-supervised Heterogeneous Graph Pre-training approach, which does not need
to generate any positive examples or negative examples. It consists of two modules
that share the same attention-aggregation scheme. In each iteration, the Att-LPA
module produces pseudo-labels through structural clustering, which serve as the
self-supervision signals to guide the Att-HGNN module to learn object embeddings
and attention coefficients. The two modules can effectively utilize and enhance each
other, promoting the model to learn discriminative embeddings. Extensive experiments on four real-world datasets demonstrate the superior effectiveness of SHGP
against state-of-the-art unsupervised baselines and even semi-supervised baselines.
We release our source code at: https://github.com/kepsail/SHGP.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, various semi-supervised graph neural networks (GNNs) have been proposed
to learn graph embeddings. They have achieved remarkable success in many graph analytic tasks.
This success, however, comes at the cost of a heavy reliance on high-quality supervision labels. In
real-world scenarios, labels are usually expensive to acquire, and sometimes even impossible due to
privacy concerns.
To relieve the label scarcity issue in (semi-) supervised learning, and take full advantage of a large
amount of easily available unlabeled data, the self-supervised learning (SSL) paradigm has recently
drawn considerable research interest in the computer vision research community. It leverages the
supervision signal from the data itself to learn generalizable embeddings, which are then transferred
to various downstream tasks with only a few task-specific labels. One of the most common SSL
paradigms is contrastive learning, which learns representations by estimating and maximizing the
mutual information between the input and the output of a deep neural network encoder [8].
For graphs, some recent graph contrastive learning methods [29, 7, 41, 25, 20, 19, 43, 36, 40] have
shown promising competitiveness compared with semi-supervised GNNs. They usually require three
typical steps: (1) constructing positive examples (semantically correlated structural instances) by
strategies such as node dropping, edge perturbation, and negative examples (uncorrelated instances) by
strategies such as feature shuffling, mini-batch sampling; (2) encoding these examples through graph
encoders such as GCN [16]; (3) maximizing/minimizing the similarity between these positive/negative
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

