360-MLC: Multi-view Layout Consistency for
Self-training and Hyper-parameter Tuning

Bolivar Solarte∗1 , Chin-Hsuan Wu∗1 , Yueh-Cheng Liu1 , Yi-Hsuan Tsai†2 , Min Sun1
1
National Tsing Hua University, 2 Phiar Technologies
https://enriquesolarte.github.io/360-mlc

Abstract
We present 360-MLC, a self-training method based on multi-view layout consistency for finetuning monocular room-layout models using unlabeled 360-images
only. This can be valuable in practical scenarios where a pre-trained model needs to
be adapted to a new data domain without using any ground truth annotations. Our
simple yet effective assumption is that multiple layout estimations in the same scene
must define a consistent geometry regardless of their camera positions. Based on
this idea, we leverage a pre-trained model to project estimated layout boundaries
from several camera views into the 3D world coordinate. Then, we re-project them
back to the spherical coordinate and build a probability function, from which we
sample the pseudo-labels for self-training. To handle unconfident pseudo-labels,
we evaluate the variance in the re-projected boundaries as an uncertainty value to
weight each pseudo-label in our loss function during training. In addition, since
ground truth annotations are not available during training nor in testing, we leverage
the entropy information in multiple layout estimations as a quantitative metric to
measure the geometry consistency of the scene, allowing us to evaluate any layout
estimator for hyper-parameter tuning, including model selection without ground
truth annotations. Experimental results show that our solution achieves favorable
performance against state-of-the-art methods when self-training from three publicly
available source datasets to a unique, newly labeled dataset consisting of multi-view
images of the same scenes.

1

Introduction

Room-layout geometry is one of the fundamental geometry representations for an indoor scene, which
can be parameterized with points and lines describing corners and wall boundaries. Therefore, this
geometry has been largely used as a primary stage for challenging tasks like robot localization [5, 42],
scene understanding [24], floor plan estimation [29], etc. Several methods have been proposed for
estimating layout geometry from imagery [12, 13, 45], while the current state-of-the-art methods
[19, 10, 17, 47, 15] leverage deep learning approaches to regress the wall-ceiling and floor boundaries
directly from monocular 360-images in a supervised manner.
However, deploying a room-layout model using 360-images in a new target domain remains a
challenging problem. For instance, a pre-trained layout model may estimate inconsistent geometry,
due to novel view positions, different lighting conditions, or severe object occlusions in the scene,
especially for large and complex rooms. To handle these issues, ground truth annotations in the new
target domain are usually required to finetune the model, which involves a cumbersome data labeling
process. Moreover, considering the large variety of indoor scene styles, a room-layout model may
∗
†

The authors contribute equally to this paper.
Currently at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

