Multi-Lingual Acquisition on Multimodal Pre-training
for Cross-modal Retrieval
Liang Zhang1 , Anwen Hu1 , Qin Jin1,2,∗
School of Information, Renmin University of China
2
Key Laboratory of Data Engineering and Knowledge Engineering (MOE),
Renmin University of China
{zhangliang00,anwenhu,qjin}@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Vision and diverse languages are important information sources in our living world.
A model that understands multi-modalities and multi-languages can be applied to
a wider range of real-life scenarios. To build such a multimodal and multilingual
model, existing works try to ensemble vision-language data from multiple languages in pre-training. However, due to the large number of languages, these works
often require huge computing resources and cannot be flexibly extended to new
languages. In this work, we propose a Multi-Lingual Acquisition (MLA) framework that can easily empower a monolingual Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP)
model with multilingual capability. Specifically, we design a lightweight language
acquisition encoder based on state-of-the-art monolingual VLP models. We further
propose a two-stage training strategy to optimize the language acquisition encoder,
namely the Native Language Transfer stage and the Language Exposure stage.
With much less multilingual training data and computing resources, our model
achieves state-of-the-art performance on multilingual image-text and video-text
retrieval benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Text Data
Monolingual Vision-Language Pre-training
Image Data
We live in a multimodal and multilingual world.
The information we receive in our daily lives
Fr
De
Fr
De
may come from different modalities and languages. Therefore, building multimodal and
Image
Ja
Cs
Ja
Cs
Image
En
multilingual models to effectively understand
such information has attracted much research
En
Zh
Zh
Ko
attention [12, 38, 21, 3]. Recently, Multilingual Vision-Language Pre-training (M-VLP) (a) Multilingual Vision-Language Pre-training (b) Multi-Lingual Acquisition
achieves convincing performance in various
cross-lingual cross-modal tasks such as multilin- Figure 1: Comparison of data usage between Mgual image-text retrieval [28, 44, 11, 16, 18] and VLP and MLA. The size of a circle reflects the
multimodal machine translation [35]. As shown amount of training data.
in Figure 1(a), M-VLP models handle multiple
languages and modalities simultaneously during pre-training. Despite their successes, M-VLP models suffer from two problems. First, pre-training on vision and multilingual data consumes huge
computing resources. For example, the state-of-the-art M-VLP model MURAL [18] is pre-trained on
128 Cloud TPUv3 for four days. It could support multimodal tasks on 100+ languages. However,
considering there are 6,900+ languages worldwide [44], building such a single model to handle all

∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

