Enhanced Latent Space Blind Model for Real Image
Denoising via Alternative Optimization

Chao Ren∗
Yizhong Pan
Jie Huang
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
chaoren@scu.edu.cn, {panyizhong, huangjiechn}@stu.scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Motivated by the achievements in model-based methods and the advances in deep
networks, we propose a novel enhanced latent space blind model based deep
unfolding network, namely ScaoedNet, for complex real image denoising. It is
derived by introducing latent space, noise information, and guidance constraint into
the denoising cost function. A self-correction alternative optimization algorithm is
proposed to split the novel cost function into three alternative subproblems, i.e.,
guidance representation (GR), degradation estimation (DE) and reconstruction
(RE) subproblems. Finally, we implement the optimization process by a deep
unfolding network consisting of GR, DE and RE networks. For higher performance
of the DE network, a novel parameter-free noise feature adaptive enhancement
(NFAE) layer is proposed. To synchronously and dynamically realize internalexternal feature information mining in the RE network, a novel feature multimodulation attention (FM2 A) module is proposed. Our approach thereby leverages
the advantages of deep learning, while also benefiting from the principled denoising
provided by the classical model-based formulation. To the best of our knowledge,
our enhanced latent space blind model, optimization scheme, NFAE and FM2 A
have not been reported in the previous literature. Experimental results show the
promising performance of ScaoedNet on real image denoising. Code is available at
https://github.com/chaoren88/ScaoedNet.

1

Introduction

Image denoising is important for various computer vision tasks, and numerous outstanding methods
have been developed [13, 17, 46, 18, 36, 26, 49, 54, 27, 32, 20]. The filtering-based methods are
representative, such as the classic local low-pass filtering methods: mean filtering and median filtering.
In recent decades, many non-local filtering methods [13, 14, 16, 25] have achieved a great success.
However, their results may suffer from blurring artifacts caused by their block-wise operations.
The model-based methods largely depend on image priors, e.g., graph-based [34], sparsity [3,
30, 47], local smoothing [33, 45], and low-rank [17, 44, 46, 43, 55] priors. Pang et al. [34]
interpreted neighborhood graphs of pixel patches as discrete counterparts of Riemannian manifolds,
providing insights into several fundamental aspects of graph Laplacian regularization for denoising.
By introducing three weight matrices into the data and regularization terms of the sparse coding
framework, Xu et al. [47] developed a denoising method to characterise the statistics of real noise and
image priors. Gu et al. [17] proposed an image restoration method by studying the weighted nuclear
norm minimization problem. However, most of these methods focus on removing the additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN), without taking the real noise and external guidance into consideration.
The learning-based methods are promising ways for addressing the image denoising problem. Generally, it can be divided into traditional and deep network-based methods. The deep network-based
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

