Towards Hard-pose Virtual Try-on via 3D-aware
Global Correspondence Learning

Zaiyu Huang1∗ , Hanhui Li1∗, Zhenyu Xie1,2
Michael Kampffmeyer3 , Qingling Cai1† , Xiaodan Liang1,4†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University
2
ByteDance, 3 UiT The Arctic University of Norway
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{huangzy225, xiezhy6} @mail2.sysu.edu.cn
{lihh77, caiqingl} @mail.sysu.edu.cn
michael.c.kampffmeyer@uit.no, xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we target image-based person-to-person virtual try-on in the presence
of diverse poses and large viewpoint variations. Existing methods are restricted
in this setting as they estimate garment warping flows mainly based on 2D poses
and appearance, which omits the geometric prior of the 3D human body shape.
Moreover, current garment warping methods are confined to localized regions,
which makes them ineffective in capturing long-range dependencies and results in
inferior flows with artifacts. To tackle these issues, we present 3D-aware global
correspondences, which are reliable flows that jointly encode global semantic correlations, local deformations, and geometric priors of 3D human bodies. Particularly,
given an image pair depicting the source and target person, (a) we first obtain
their pose-aware and high-level representations via two encoders, and introduce a
coarse-to-fine decoder with multiple refinement modules to predict the pixel-wise
global correspondence. (b) 3D parametric human models inferred from images are
incorporated as priors to regularize the correspondence refinement process so that
our flows can be 3D-aware and better handle variations of pose and viewpoint. (c)
Finally, an adversarial generator takes the garment warped by the 3D-aware flow,
and the image of the target person as inputs, to synthesize the photo-realistic try-on
result. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks and our HardPose test set
demonstrate the superiority of our method against the SOTA try-on approaches.

1

Introduction

Current image-based virtual try-on (VTON) methods typically include two key modules, namely a
warping module that transfers a given garment to the desired pose and a blending module/generator
that synthesizes the try-on result given the target person and the warped garment. To facilitate
high-quality VTON, it is therefore crucial to accurately preserve garment details (e.g., color, texture,
shape, pattern) in the warping stage. This, however, is a difficult problem, which most existing
methods try to address by relying on thin plate splines (TPS) [1] or appearance flows [2].
While TPS is a well-studied and efficient method that performs the warping based on a set of control
points and has a closed-form solution, it is prone to inaccurate transformations under large geometric
deformations [3]. To further improve the warping quality, there has been a shift towards directly
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors. Our code will be available at 3D-GCL.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

