Fair Rank Aggregation

Diptarka Chakraborty
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
diptarka@comp.nus.edu.sg

Syamantak Das
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi
syamantak@iiit.ac.in

Arindam Khan
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru
arindamkhan@iisc.ac.in
Aditya Subramanian
Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru
adityasubram@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Ranking algorithms find extensive usage in diverse areas such as web search,
employment, college admission, voting, etc. The related rank aggregation problem
deals with combining multiple rankings into a single aggregate ranking. However,
algorithms for both these problems might be biased against some individuals or
groups due to implicit prejudice or marginalization in the historical data. We study
ranking and rank aggregation problems from a fairness or diversity perspective,
where the candidates (to be ranked) may belong to different groups and each group
should have a fair representation in the final ranking. We allow the designer to set
the parameters that define fair representation. These parameters specify the allowed
range of the number of candidates from a particular group in the top-k positions of
the ranking. Given any ranking, we provide a fast and exact algorithm for finding
the closest fair ranking for the Kendall tau metric under strong fairness, i.e., when
the final ranking is fair for all values of k. We also provide an exact algorithm for
finding the closest fair ranking for the Ulam metric under strong fairness when
there are only O(1) number of groups. Our algorithms are simple, fast, and might
be extendable to other relevant metrics. We also give a novel meta-algorithm for
the general rank aggregation problem under the fairness framework. Surprisingly,
this meta-algorithm works for any generalized mean objective (including center
and median problems) and any fairness criteria. As a byproduct, we obtain 3approximation algorithms for both center and median problems, under both Kendall
tau and Ulam metrics. Furthermore, using sophisticated techniques we obtain a
(3 − ε)-approximation algorithm, for a constant ε > 0, for the Ulam metric under
strong fairness.

1

Introduction

Ranking a set of candidates or items is a ubiquitous problem arising in diverse areas ranging from
social choice theory [BCE+ 16] to information retrieval [Har92]. Given a set of d candidates and a
set of n different, potentially conflicting, rankings of these candidates, one fundamental task is to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

