Hardness of Noise-Free Learning for
Two-Hidden-Layer Neural Networks

Sitan Chen
UC Berkeley
sitanc@berkeley.edu

Aravind Gollakota
UT Austin
aravindg@cs.utexas.edu

Adam R. Klivans
UT Austin
klivans@cs.utexas.edu

Raghu Meka
UCLA
raghum@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We give superpolynomial statistical query (SQ) lower bounds for learning twohidden-layer ReLU networks with respect to Gaussian inputs in the standard
(noise-free) model. No general SQ lower bounds were known for learning ReLU
networks of any depth in this setting: previous SQ lower bounds held only for adversarial noise models (agnostic learning) [KK14, GGK20, DKZ20] or restricted
models such as correlational SQ [GGJ+ 20, DKKZ20]. Prior work hinted at the
impossibility of our result: Vempala and Wilmes [VW19] showed that general SQ
lower bounds cannot apply to any real-valued family of functions that satisfies a
simple non-degeneracy condition. To circumvent their result, we refine a lifting
procedure due to Daniely and Vardi [DV21] that reduces Boolean PAC learning
problems to Gaussian ones. We show how to extend their technique to other learning models and, in many well-studied cases, obtain a more efficient reduction. As
such, we also prove new cryptographic hardness results for PAC learning twohidden-layer ReLU networks, as well as new lower bounds for learning constantdepth ReLU networks from label queries.

1

Introduction

In this paper we extend a central line of research proving representation-independent hardness results
for learning classes of neural networks. We will consider arguably the simplest possible setting:
given samples (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ) where for every i ∈ [n], xi is sampled independently from
some distribution D over Rd and yi = f (xi ) for an unknown neural network f : Rd → R, the goal
is to output any function fb for which Ex∼D [(f (x) − fb(x))2 ] is small. This model is often referred
to as the realizable or noise-free setting.
This problem has long been known to be computationally hard for discrete input distributions. For
example, if D is supported over a discrete domain like the Boolean hypercube, then we have a variety of hardness results based on cryptographic/average-case assumptions [KS09, DLSS14, DSS16,
DV20, DV21].
Over the last few years there has been a very active line of research on the complexity of learning
with respect to continuous distributions, the most widely studied case being the assumption that D is
a standard Gaussian in d dimensions. A rich algorithmic toolbox has been developed for the Gaussian setting [JSA15, ZSJ+ 17, BG17, LY17, Tia17, GKM18, GLM18, BJW19, ZYWG19, DGK+ 20,
LMZ20, DK20, ATV21, CKM20, SZB21, VSS+ 22], but all known efficient algorithms can only
Pk
handle networks with a single hidden layer, that is, functions of the form f (x) = i=1 λi σ(⟨wi , x⟩).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

