S3-NeRF: Neural Reflectance Field from Shading and
Shadow under a Single Viewpoint

Wenqi Yang
The University of Hong Kong
wqyang@cs.hku.hk

Guanying Chen∗
FNii and SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen
chenguanying@cuhk.edu.cn

Chaofeng Chen
Nanyang Technological University
chaofenghust@gmail.com

Zhenfang Chen
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
chenzhenfang2013@gmail.com

Kwan-Yee K. Wong
The University of Hong Kong
kykwong@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we address the “dual problem” of multi-view scene reconstruction
in which we utilize single-view images captured under different point lights to
learn a neural scene representation. Different from existing single-view methods
which can only recover a 2.5D scene representation (i.e., a normal / depth map
for the visible surface), our method learns a neural reflectance field to represent
the 3D geometry and BRDFs of a scene. Instead of relying on multi-view photoconsistency, our method exploits two information-rich monocular cues, namely
shading and shadow, to infer scene geometry. Experiments on multiple challenging
datasets show that our method is capable of recovering 3D geometry, including
both visible and invisible parts, of a scene from single-view images. Thanks to the
neural reflectance field representation, our method is robust to depth discontinuities.
It supports applications like novel-view synthesis and relighting. Our code and
model can be found at https://ywq.github.io/s3nerf.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction from images is a central and important problem in computer vision. Multi-view
stereo methods, which capture a target scene from multiple viewpoints under a fixed lighting condition [12, 24, 45, 46], are the most widely adopted approach for scene reconstruction. These methods,
however, often assume surfaces with Lambertian reflectance and have difficulties in recovering highfrequency surface details.
An alternative approach to scene reconstruction is to utilize images captured from a fixed viewpoint
but under different point light sources (see Fig. 1 (a)). This setup is adopted by photometric stereo
(PS) methods [15, 47, 56] where shading information is utilized to reconstruct surface details of nonLambertian objects. Shadow is another cue that has been exploited for shape recovery by shape-fromshadow methods [11, 61, 67]. However, existing single-view methods typically adopt a single normal
or depth map to represent the visible surface, making them incapable of describing back-facing and
occluded surfaces (see Fig. 1 (b)). Besides, methods relying on surface normal representation struggle
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

