When to Ask for Help: Proactive Interventions in
Autonomous Reinforcement Learning
Annie Xie⇤, Fahim Tajwar⇤, Archit Sharma⇤, Chelsea Finn
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{anniexie,tajwar93,architsh,cbfinn}@stanford.edu

Abstract
A long-term goal of reinforcement learning is to design agents that can autonomously interact and learn in the world. A critical challenge to such autonomy is the presence of irreversible states which require external assistance
to recover from, such as when a robot arm has pushed an object off of a table.
While standard agents require constant monitoring to decide when to intervene,
we aim to design proactive agents that can request human intervention only when
needed. To this end, we propose an algorithm that efficiently learns to detect
and avoid states that are irreversible, and proactively asks for help in case the
agent does enter them. On a suite of continuous control environments with unknown irreversible states, we find that our algorithm exhibits better sample- and
intervention-efficiency compared to existing methods. Our code is publicly available at https://sites.google.com/view/proactive-interventions.

Figure 1: Autonomous agents struggle to make progress without external interventions when they are stuck
in an irreversible state. Reinforcement learning agents therefore need active monitoring throughout training to
detect and intervene when the agent reaches an irreversible state. Enabling the agents to detect irreversible states
and proactively request for help can substantially reduce the human monitoring required for training agents.

1

Introduction

A reinforcement learning (RL) agent should be able to autonomously learn behavior by exploring
in and interacting with its environment. However, in most realistic learning environments, there are
irreversible states from which the agent cannot recover on its own. For example, a robot arm can
inadvertently push an object off the table, such that an external supervisor must return it back to the
robot’s workspace to continue the learning process. Current agents demand constant monitoring to
decide when the agent enters an irreversible state and therefore when to intervene. In this work, we
aim to build greater autonomy into RL agents by addressing this problem. In particular, we envision
⇤

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

