Visual Concepts Tokenization

Tao Yang1∗, Yuwang Wang2†, Yan Lu2 , Nanning Zheng1
yt14212@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
{yuwwan,yanlu}@microsoft.com,
nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
https://github.com/thomasmry/VCT

Abstract
Obtaining the human-like perception ability of abstracting visual concepts from
concrete pixels has always been a fundamental and important target in machine
learning research fields such as disentangled representation learning and scene
decomposition. Towards this goal, we propose an unsupervised transformer-based
Visual Concepts Tokenization framework, dubbed VCT, to perceive an image into
a set of disentangled visual concept tokens, with each concept token responding
to one type of independent visual concept. Particularly, to obtain these concept
tokens, we only use cross-attention to extract visual information from the image
tokens layer by layer without self-attention between concept tokens, preventing
information leakage across concept tokens. We further propose a Concept Disentangling Loss to facilitate that different concept tokens represent independent visual
concepts. The cross-attention and disentangling loss play the role of induction and
mutual exclusion for the concept tokens, respectively. Extensive experiments on
several popular datasets verify the effectiveness of VCT on the tasks of disentangled representation learning and scene decomposition. VCT achieves the state of
the art results by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Despite the remarkable success of deep learning in various vision tasks, such as classification [21, 11],
detection [35, 7], segmentation [32, 40], it still suffers from the requirement of a tremendous amount
of training data [44], low robustness and generalization [43, 19], and lack of interpretability [1]. Those
traditional vision tasks learn the visual concepts, such as semantics and object localization, from
artificially predefined guidance. On the contrary, human is capable of extracting abstract concepts
from concrete visual signals, then using those visual concepts to understand and depict the world
comprehensively. Towards learning visual concepts from observations, Bengio et al. [4] propose
disentangled representation learning to discover the visual concepts as the explanatory factors hidden
in the observed data. To achieve disentangled representation, the following works, based on VAE
[22, 5, 28, 27, 8] or GAN [9], rely on probabilistic-based regularization of the latent space. However,
it has been fundamentally proved to be impossible if only relying on probability constrains [30].
Introducing inductive bias is necessary to solve the identifiability issue. Besides, those methods often
fail in complex scenes with multiple objects. To address those complex scenes, another branch of
learning visual concepts aims to spatially decompose a scene image into different object regions
represented as different segmentation masks [18, 6]. Typically, these methods rely on explicit spatial
decomposition and can not learn global visual concepts. In this paper, we are particularly interested
∗
†

Work done during internships at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

