Can Adversarial Training Be Manipulated By
Non-Robust Features?
Lue Tao1∗
Lei Feng2,3
Hongxin Wei4
5
6
Jinfeng Yi
Sheng-Jun Huang
Songcan Chen6†
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Chongqing University, Chongqing, China
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
6
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China

Abstract
Adversarial training, originally designed to resist test-time adversarial examples,
has shown to be promising in mitigating training-time availability attacks. This
defense ability, however, is challenged in this paper. We identify a novel threat
model named stability attack, which aims to hinder robust availability by slightly
manipulating the training data. Under this threat, we show that adversarial training
using a conventional defense budget ϵ provably fails to provide test robustness
in a simple statistical setting, where the non-robust features of the training data
can be reinforced by ϵ-bounded perturbation. Further, we analyze the necessity of
enlarging the defense budget to counter stability attacks. Finally, comprehensive
experiments demonstrate that stability attacks are harmful on benchmark datasets,
and thus the adaptive defense is necessary to maintain robustness.1

1

Introduction

Robustness to input perturbations is crucial to machine learning deployment in various applications,
such as spam filtering [13] and autonomous driving [6]. One of the most popular methods for
improving test robustness is adversarial training [39, 1]. By augmenting the training data with
ϵ-bounded and on-the-fly crafted adversarial examples, adversarial training helps the learned model
resist test-time perturbations [39].
On the other hand, machine learning systems are vulnerable to training-time availability attacks [3].
In particular, small perturbations applied into the training data (before training) suffice to degrade the
overall test performance of naturally trained models [16, 28]. Fortunately, recent work has proven
that adversarial training [39] is capable of mitigating this type of threat [64]. In other words, even if
the training data is manipulated to maximize the test error, considerable accuracy on clean test data
can still be achieved by adversarially trained models. However, previous work hardly inspects the
test robustness of the models, which is what adversarial training was originally proposed for [23, 39].
This naturally raises the following question:
Are the models adversarially trained on the manipulated data robust to test-time perturbations?
* Work done when Lue Tao was a master’s student at Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
†
1

Corresponding author: Songcan Chen <s.chen@nuaa.edu.cn>.
Our code is available at https://github.com/TLMichael/Hypocritical-Perturbation.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

