Beyond Real-world Benchmark Datasets: An
Empirical Study of Node Classification with GNNs

Seiji Maekawa1 , Koki Noda2 , Yuya Sasaki1 , Makoto Onizuka1
Graduate school of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University
2
TDAI Lab Co., Ltd.
{maekawa.seiji,sasaki,onizuka}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp, koki.noda@tdailab.com
1

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved great success on a node classification task. Despite the broad interest in developing and evaluating GNNs, they have
been assessed with limited benchmark datasets. As a result, the existing evaluation
of GNNs lacks fine-grained analysis from various characteristics of graphs. Motivated by this, we conduct extensive experiments with a synthetic graph generator
that can generate graphs having controlled characteristics for fine-grained analysis.
Our empirical studies clarify the strengths and weaknesses of GNNs from four major characteristics of real-world graphs with class labels of nodes, i.e., 1) class size
distributions (balanced vs. imbalanced), 2) edge connection proportions between
classes (homophilic vs. heterophilic), 3) attribute values (biased vs. random), and
4) graph sizes (small vs. large). In addition, to foster future research on GNNs,
we publicly release our codebase that allows users to evaluate various GNNs with
various graphs. We hope this work offers interesting insights for future research.

1

Introduction

The semi-supervised node classification task is one of the hottest topics. Its goal is to predict unknown
labels of the nodes by using the topology structure and node attributes, given partially labeled networks.
In the last several years, graph neural networks (GNNs) [3, 9, 12, 16, 17, 22, 23, 29, 34, 38, 45, 46]
have gained wide research interest from various domains including chemistry [7, 10], physics [27],
social science [16], and neuroscience [43]. For further improvement of classification accuracy, most
researches focus on developing expressive and powerful GNNs.
Towards practical use cases of GNNs, researchers and developers need to deeply understand the
strengths and weaknesses of GNNs from various aspects such as their accuracy, efficiency, and
parameter sensitivity. To this end, it is important to conduct extensive experiments using various
graphs with different characteristics.
Limitations of existing evaluation of GNNs. Several studies [8, 10] addressed benchmarking the
performance of GNNs. However, the comprehensive evaluation of GNNs has been challenging since
most models are assessed on well-known but limited benchmark datasets such as Cora, Citeseer, and
PubMed [36]. Although recent studies [14, 19] provide a collection of real-world datasets to mitigate
the shortage of datasets, these datasets are still insufficient to understand the pros/cons of various
model architectures. Concretely, we require a variety of graphs to evaluate GNNs, in terms of four
major characteristics of attributed graphs with class labels of nodes: 1) class size distributions, 2) the
relationship between classes and topology, 3) the relationship between classes and attributes, and 4)
graph sizes.
To examine GNNs on graphs with different characteristics, a study [8] uses a commonly used graph
generator, SBM [1]. However, the quality and variety of synthetic graphs generated by SBM are
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

