Learning to Accelerate Partial Differential Equations
via Latent Global Evolution
Tailin Wu
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
tailin@cs.stanford.edu

Takashi Maruyama
NEC Corp. & Stanford University
49takashi@nec.com &
takashi279@cs.stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Simulating the time evolution of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) of largescale systems is crucial in many scientific and engineering domains such as fluid
dynamics, weather forecasting and their inverse optimization problems. However,
both classical solvers and recent deep learning-based surrogate models are typically
extremely computationally intensive, because of their local evolution: they need to
update the state of each discretized cell at each time step during inference. Here we
develop Latent Evolution of PDEs (LE-PDE), a simple, fast and scalable method
to accelerate the simulation and inverse optimization of PDEs. LE-PDE learns
a compact, global representation of the system and efficiently evolves it fully in
the latent space with learned evolution models. LE-PDE achieves speed-up by
having a much smaller latent dimension to update during long rollout as compared
to updating in the input space. We introduce new learning objectives to effectively
learn such latent dynamics to ensure long-term stability. We further introduce
techniques for speeding up inverse optimization of boundary conditions for PDEs
via backpropagation through time in latent space, and an annealing technique to
address the non-differentiability and sparse interaction of boundary conditions. We
test our method in a 1D benchmark of nonlinear PDEs, 2D Navier-Stokes flows
into turbulent phase and an inverse optimization of boundary conditions in 2D
Navier-Stokes flow. Compared to other strong baselines, we demonstrate up to
128⇥ reduction in the dimensions to update, and up to 15⇥ improvement in speed,
while achieving competitive accuracy. 1 .

1

Introduction

Many problems across science and engineering are described by Partial Differential Equations (PDEs).
Among them, temporal PDEs are of huge importance. They describe how the state of a (complex)
system evolves with time, and numerically evolving such equations are used for forward prediction
and inverse optimization across many disciplines. Example application includes weather forecasting
[1], jet engine design [2], nuclear fusion [3], laser-plasma interaction [4], astronomical simulation
[5], and molecular modeling [6].
To numerically evolve such PDEs, decades of works have yielded (classical) PDE solvers that are
tailored to each specific problem domain [7]. Albeit principled and accurate, classical PDE solvers
1

Project website and code can be found at http://snap.stanford.edu/le_pde/.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

