Improved Imaging by Invex Regularizers
with Global Optima Guarantees

∗
1

Samuel Pinilla1,2 , Tingting Mu3 , Neil Bourne2 , Jeyan Thiyagalingam1
Scientific Computing Department, Science and Technology Facilities Council, Harwell, UK
2
University of Manchester at Harwell, UK
3
Computer Science, University of Manchester, UK
{samuel.pinilla,t.jeyan}@stfc.ac.uk
{tingting.mu,neil.bourne}@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
Image reconstruction enhanced by regularizers, e.g., to enforce sparsity, low rank
or smoothness priors on images, has many successful applications in vision tasks
such as computer photography, biomedical and spectral imaging. It has been
well accepted that non-convex regularizers normally perform better than convex
ones in terms of the reconstruction quality. But their convergence analysis is
only established to a critical point, rather than the global optima. To mitigate
the loss of guarantees for global optima, we propose to apply the concept of
invexity and provide the first list of proved invex regularizers for improving image
reconstruction. Moreover, we establish convergence guarantees to global optima
for various advanced image reconstruction techniques after being improved by such
invex regularization. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first practical work
applying invex regularization to improve imaging with global optima guarantees.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of invex regularization, numerical experiments
are conducted for various imaging tasks using benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Image reconstruction (restoration) enhanced by regularizers has a wide application in vision tasks such
as computed tomography [1, 2], optical imaging [3, 4], magnetic resonance imaging [5, 6], computer
photography [7, 8], biomedical and spectral imaging [9, 10]. In general, an image reconstruction task
can be formulated as the solution of the following optimization problem:
minimize
F (x) = f (x) + g(x).
n
x∈R

(1)

Here f (x) models a data fidelity term, which usually corresponds to an error loss for image reconstruction, and is assumed to be differentiable. The other function g(x) acts as a regularizer which can
be non-smooth. It imposes image priors such as sparsity, low rank or smoothness [11]. The use of an
appropriate regularizer plays an important role in obtaining robust reconstruction results.
Convex regularization has been popular in the last decade [11, 12, 13, 14, 15], because it can result in
guaranteed global optima. The most well-known examples include the ℓ1 -norm and nuclear norm,
which are the continuous and convex surrogates of the ℓ0 -pseudo norm and rank, respectively [16].
Although convex regularizers have demonstrated their success in signal/image processing, biomedical
informatics and computer vision applications [13, 17, 18, 19], they are suboptimal in many cases, as
they promote sparsity and low rank only under very limited conditions (more measurements from the
scene are needed [20, 21]). To address such limitations, non-convex regularizers have been proposed.
∗

Rutherford Appleton Laboratory.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

