Autoregressive Search Engines:
Generating Substrings as Document Identifiers

Michele Bevilacqua1,2 Giuseppe Ottaviano2 Patrick Lewis2
Wen-tau Yih2 Sebastian Riedel2,3 Fabio Petroni2
1
Sapienza University of Rome 2 Meta AI 3 University College London

Abstract
Knowledge-intensive language tasks require NLP systems to both provide the correct answer and retrieve supporting evidence for it in a given corpus. Autoregressive
language models are emerging as the de-facto standard for generating answers,
with newer and more powerful systems emerging at an astonishing pace. In this
paper we argue that all this (and future) progress can be directly applied to the
retrieval problem with minimal intervention to the models’ architecture. Previous
work has explored ways to partition the search space into hierarchical structures
and retrieve documents by autoregressively generating their unique identifier. In
this work we propose an alternative that doesn’t force any structure in the search
space: using all ngrams in a passage as its possible identifiers. This setup allows
us to use an autoregressive model to generate and score distinctive ngrams, that
are then mapped to full passages through an efficient data structure. Empirically,
we show this not only outperforms prior autoregressive approaches but also leads
to an average improvement of at least 10 points over more established retrieval
solutions for passage-level retrieval on the KILT benchmark, establishing new stateof-the-art downstream performance on some datasets, while using a considerably
lighter memory footprint than competing systems. Code and pre-trained models
are available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/SEAL.

1

Introduction

Surfacing knowledge from large corpora is a crucial step when dealing with knowledge intensive
language tasks [Levy et al., 2017, Dinan et al., 2019, Elsahar et al., 2018, Petroni et al., 2021], such
as open-domain question answering [Voorhees et al., 1999, Joshi et al., 2017, Yang et al., 2018,
Kwiatkowski et al., 2019] and fact checking [Thorne et al., 2018]. A popular paradigm to approach
such tasks is to combine a search engine with a machine reader component. The former retrieves
relevant context, usually in the form of short passages, which the latter then examines to produce
answers [Chen et al., 2017, Lewis et al., 2020, Izacard and Grave, 2021].
In recent years we have witnessed a surge of research and development in autoregressive language
models [Radford et al., 2019, Lewis et al., 2019, Raffel et al., 2019, Brown et al., 2020, Rae et al., 2021,
Artetxe et al., 2021, Smith et al., 2022], with ever increasing size and natural language understanding
(NLU) capabilities. Such models are currently the de-facto implementation of the machine reader
component in retrieval-reader architectures, and have contributed to rapid progress on a wide range
of benchmarks [Joshi et al., 2017, Kwiatkowski et al., 2019, Petroni et al., 2021]. However, these
tremendous advances in aggressive modelling has yet to bring similar transformational changes in
how retrieval is approached.
Transferring the NLU capabilities of modern autoregressive models to retrieval is non-trivial. Some
works have demonstrated that knowledge stored in the parameters of these models can be retrieved
to some extend by directly generating evidence given a query [Petroni et al., 2019, 2020, Roberts
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

