Large-Scale Differentiable
Causal Discovery of Factor Graphs

Romain Lopez1,2 , Jan-Christian Hütter1 ,
Jonathan K. Pritchard2,3,† , Aviv Regev1,†
1

Division of Research and Early Development, Genentech
{lopez.romain, huettej1, regeva}@gene.com

†

2

Department of Genetics, Stanford University
pritch@stanford.edu

3

Department of Biology, Stanford University

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract
A common theme in causal inference is learning causal relationships between
observed variables, also known as causal discovery. This is usually a daunting
task, given the large number of candidate causal graphs and the combinatorial
nature of the search space. Perhaps for this reason, most research has so far
focused on relatively small causal graphs, with up to hundreds of nodes. However,
recent advances in fields like biology enable generating experimental data sets with
thousands of interventions followed by rich profiling of thousands of variables,
raising the opportunity and urgent need for large causal graph models. Here, we
introduce the notion of factor directed acyclic graphs (f -DAGs) as a way to restrict
the search space to non-linear low-rank causal interaction models. Combining
this novel structural assumption with recent advances that bridge the gap between
causal discovery and continuous optimization, we achieve causal discovery on
thousands of variables. Additionally, as a model for the impact of statistical noise
on this estimation procedure, we study a model of edge perturbations of the f -DAG
skeleton based on random graphs and quantify the effect of such perturbations
on the f -DAG rank. This theoretical analysis suggests that the set of candidate
f -DAGs is much smaller than the whole DAG space and thus may be more suitable
as a search space in the high-dimensional regime where the underlying skeleton
is hard to assess. We propose Differentiable Causal Discovery of Factor Graphs
(DCD-FG), a scalable implementation of f -DAG constrained causal discovery
for high-dimensional interventional data. DCD-FG uses a Gaussian non-linear
low-rank structural equation model and shows significant improvements compared
to state-of-the-art methods in both simulations as well as a recent large-scale
single-cell RNA sequencing data set with hundreds of genetic interventions.

1

Introduction

Characterizing causal dependencies between variables is a fundamental problem in science [1, 2, 3].
Such relationships are often described via a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where nodes represent
variables and directed edges encode causal links between pairs of variables. One may then consider a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

