Out-of-Distribution Detection via Conditional Kernel
Independence Model

Yu Wang∗ 1 , Jingjing Zou∗2 , Jingyang Lin3 , Qing Ling3 , Yingwei Pan4 , Ting Yao4 , Tao Mei4
1
: Qiyuan Lab, Beijing, China
2
: University of California, San Diego, USA
3
: Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
4
: JD AI Research, Beijing, China
feather1014@gmail.com, j2zou@ucsd.edu, yung.linjy@gmail.com
lingqing556@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, tmei@jd.com

Abstract
Recently, various methods have been introduced to address the OOD detection
problem with training outlier exposure. These methods usually count on discriminative softmax metric or energy method to screen OOD samples. In this paper, we
probe an alternative hypothesis on OOD detection by constructing a novel latent
variable model based on independent component analysis (ICA) techniques. This
novel method named Conditional-i builds upon the probabilistic formulation, and
applies the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criteria that offers a convenient solution
for optimizing variable dependencies. Conditional-i exclusively encodes the useful
class condition into the probabilistic model, which provides the desired convenience in delivering theoretical support for the OOD detection task. To facilitate
the implementation of the Conditional-i model, we construct unique memory bank
architectures that allow for convenient end-to-end training within a tractable budget.
Empirical results demonstrate an evident performance boost on benchmarks against
SOTA methods. We also provide valuable theoretical justifications that our training
strategy is guaranteed to bound the error in the context of OOD detection. Code is
available at: https://github.com/OODHSIC/conditional-i.

1

Introduction

The out-of-distribution (OOD) detection ability of models is at the core of achieving machine learning
safety and reliability. Knowing how the classifiers perform on unseen OOD data remains as a
challenging task, owing to the train-test distribution divergence [3]. Conventional computer vision
tasks such as [8, 24, 36, 47, 53, 54, 55, 64, 65, 66, 70, 77], NLP tasks [15, 74, 75] and other machine
learning tasks therefore need to carefully take into account the effect of potential distribution shift
between training and test data. While deep generative models have become immensely popular,
seminal OOD detection works consider applying generative modeling techniques to reconstruct the
training data distribution density, so that statistical test can be implemented on the density. However,
it is found that such inference can perform strong prediction artifact owing to various possible reasons
[12, 48, 50, 67, 78]. Instead, another line of work considers deploying discriminative methods on
OOD detection [28, 34, 37, 38, 41] where the detection is implemented by thresholding some class
uncertainty measurements obtained from training inlier classifiers. However, as the train and test data
i.i.d. assumption is severely violated for the OOD detection task, only limited theoretical guarantees
hold when deploying these discriminative models. There has been a surge of interest in the OOD
detection task recently [9, 18, 40, 49, 56, 58, 59, 60, 69].
∗

Yu Wang and Jingjing Zou contributed equally to this work (joint first author).

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

