On Feature Learning in the Presence of Spurious
Correlations
Pavel Izmailov∗ Polina Kirichenko∗ Nate Gruver∗
New York University

Andrew Gordon Wilson

Abstract
Deep classifiers are known to rely on spurious features — patterns which are correlated with the target on the training data but not inherently relevant to the learning
problem, such as the image backgrounds when classifying the foregrounds. In this
paper we evaluate the amount of information about the core (non-spurious) features
that can be decoded from the representations learned by standard empirical risk
minimization (ERM) and specialized group robustness training. Following recent
work on Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR), we evaluate the feature representations
by re-training the last layer of the model on a held-out set where the spurious
correlation is broken. On multiple vision and NLP problems, we show that the
features learned by simple ERM are highly competitive with the features learned
by specialized group robustness methods targeted at reducing the effect of spurious
correlations. Moreover, we show that the quality of learned feature representations
is greatly affected by the design decisions beyond the training method, such as the
model architecture and pre-training strategy. On the other hand, we find that strong
regularization is not necessary for learning high-quality feature representations.
Finally, using insights from our analysis, we significantly improve upon the best
results reported in the literature on the popular Waterbirds, CelebA hair color prediction and WILDS-FMOW problems, achieving 97%, 92% and 50% worst-group
accuracies, respectively.

1

Introduction

In classification problems, a feature is spurious if it is predictive of the label without being causally
related to it. Models that exploit the predictive power of spurious features can achieve strong average
performance on training and in-distribution test data but often perform poorly on sub-groups of the
data where the spurious correlation does not hold [18]. For example, neural networks trained on
ImageNet are known to rely on backgrounds [93] or texture [19], which are often correlated with
labels without being causally significant. Similarly in natural language processing, models often
rely on specific words and syntactic heuristics when predicting the sentiment of a sentence or the
relationship between a pair of sentences [56, 22]. In extreme cases, neural networks completely ignore
task-relevant core features and only use spurious features in their predictions [97, 79], achieving zero
accuracy on the subgroups of the data where the spurious correlation does not hold.
In recent work, Kirichenko et al. [40] showed that, surprisingly, standard Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) learns a high-quality representation of the core features on datasets with spurious
correlations, even when the model primarily relies on spurious features to make predictions. Moreover, they showed that it is often possible to recover state-of-the-art performance on benchmark
problems by simply retraining the last layer of the model on a small held-out dataset where the
spurious correlation does not hold. This procedure is called Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR).
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

