Object Representations as Fixed Points:
Training Iterative Refinement Algorithms
with Implicit Differentiation
Michael Chang⇤ , Thomas L. Griffiths† , Sergey Levine⇤
⇤
University of California, Berkeley, † Princeton University
mbchang@berkeley.edu, tomg@princeton.edu, svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Iterative refinement – start with a random guess, then iteratively improve the guess
– is a useful paradigm for representation learning because it offers a way to break
symmetries among equally plausible explanations for the data. This property
enables the application of such methods to infer representations of sets of entities,
such as objects in physical scenes, structurally resembling clustering algorithms
in latent space. However, most prior works differentiate through the unrolled
refinement process, which can make optimization challenging. We observe that
such methods can be made differentiable by means of the implicit function theorem,
and develop an implicit differentiation approach that improves the stability and
tractability of training by decoupling the forward and backward passes. This
connection enables us to apply advances in optimizing implicit layers to not only
improve the optimization of the slot attention module in SLATE, a state-of-the-art
method for learning entity representations, but do so with constant space and time
complexity in backpropagation and only one additional line of code. 1

1

Introduction

Conventionally, neural network models implement feedforward computation, transforming the input
x into the output z through a fixed series of operations corresponding to distinct layers as z =
fN (fN 1 (...f2 (f1 (x))...)). However, a range of more sophisticated models implement iterative
computation with the network, typically formulated and motivated as some sort of optimization
procedure where the correct answer is the fixed point of an iterative refinement z = fx (z) of an
initial guess z0 . This includes diffusion models [30, 52, 58, 59], energy-based models [14, 37],
deep equilibrium models [7], iterative amortized inference procedures [40–42], neural ordinary
differential equations [11], meta-learning algorithms [5, 17, 23], and object-centric models [16,
35, 61, 62]. Such iterative refinement procedures may have a number of advantages over direct
feedforward computation: they can serve to simplify the learned function (e.g., in the same way that a
recursive program might be much simpler than an equivalent program implemented without recursion),
introduce an inductive bias into the model that improves generalization, and break symmetries.
In this work, we consider the case of iterative refinement applied to representation learning of
latent sets, which has primarily been applied to learning representations of objects from pixels [24–
26, 35, 39, 57, 61, 62, 70]. The particular challenge of this setting is that invariance of set elements to
permutation means there are many latent sets that serve as equally plausible explanations for the data.
Iterative refinement is especially useful in this context because it breaks the symmetry among these
explanations with the randomness of the initial guess z0 rather than encoding the symmetry-breaking
mechanism in the weights of the network, as do conventional methods that learn a direct feedforward
1

Project website: https://sites.google.com/view/implicit-slot-attention.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

