Sharper Convergence Guarantees for Asynchronous
SGD for Distributed and Federated Learning

Anastasia Koloskova
EPFL
anastasia.koloskova@epfl.ch

Sebastian U. Stich
CISPA∗
stich@cispa.de

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study the asynchronous stochastic gradient descent algorithm for distributed
training over n workers which have varying computation and communication
frequency over time. In this algorithm, workers compute stochastic gradients in
parallel at their own pace and return those to the server without any synchronization.
Existing convergence rates for this algorithm for non-convex smooth objectives
depend on the maximum gradient delay
 τmax and show that an ε-stationary point
is reached after O σ 2 ε−2 + τmax ε−1 iterations, where σ denotes the variance of
stochastic gradients.
In this work we obtain
(i) a tighter convergence rate of

√
O σ 2 ε−2 + τmax τavg ε−1 without any change in the algorithm, where τavg is
the average delay, which can be significantly smaller than τmax . We also provide
(ii) a simple delay-adaptive learning rate scheme, under
 which asynchronous SGD
achieves a convergence rate of O σ 2 ε−2 + τavg ε−1 , and does not require any
extra hyperparameter tuning nor extra communications. Our result allows to show
for the first time that asynchronous SGD is always faster than mini-batch SGD.
In addition, (iii) we consider the case of heterogeneous functions motivated by
federated learning applications and improve the convergence rate by proving a
weaker dependence on the maximum delay compared to prior works. In particular,
we show that the heterogeneity term in convergence rate is only affected by the
average delay within each worker.

1

Introduction

The stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm [43, 13] and its variants (momentum SGD, Adam,
etc.) form the foundation of modern machine learning and frequently achieve state of the art results.
With recent growth in the size of models and available training data, parallel and distributed versions
of SGD are becoming increasingly important [57, 17, 16]. Without those, modern state-of-the art
language models [44], generative models [40, 41], and many others [50] would not be possible. In
the distributed setting, also known as data-parallel training, optimization is distributed over many
compute devices working in parallel (e.g. cores, or GPUs on a cluster) in order to speed up training.
Every worker computes gradients on a subset of the training data, and the resulting gradients are
aggregated (averaged) on a server.
The same type of SGD variants also form the core algorithms for federated learning applications [34,
24] where the training process is naturally distributed over many user devices, or clients, that keep
their local data private, and only transfer (e.g. encrypted or differentially private) gradients to the
server.
A rich literature exists on the convergence theory of above mentioned parallel SGD methods, see
e.g. [17, 13] and references therein. Plain parallel SGD still faces many challenges in practice, motivat∗

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

