Assaying Out-Of-Distribution
Generalization in Transfer Learning
Florian Wenzel⇤ 1
Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel1
David Kernert1
Bernt Schiele1
1

Andrea Dittadi† 2
Max Horn1
Chris Russell1
Bernhard Schölkopf1

Peter Gehler1
Dominik Zietlow1
Thomas Brox1
Francesco Locatello1

AWS Tübingen 2 Technical University of Denmark

Abstract
Since out-of-distribution generalization is a generally ill-posed problem, various
proxy targets (e.g., calibration, adversarial robustness, algorithmic corruptions,
invariance across shifts) were studied across different research programs resulting
in different recommendations. While sharing the same aspirational goal, these
approaches have never been tested under the same experimental conditions on real
data. In this paper, we take a unified view of previous work, highlighting message
discrepancies that we address empirically, and providing recommendations on how
to measure the robustness of a model and how to improve it. To this end, we
collect 172 publicly available dataset pairs for training and out-of-distribution evaluation of accuracy, calibration error, adversarial attacks, environment invariance,
and synthetic corruptions. We fine-tune over 31k networks, from nine different
architectures in the many- and few-shot setting. Our findings confirm that in- and
out-of-distribution accuracies tend to increase jointly, but show that their relation is
largely dataset-dependent, and in general more nuanced and more complex than
posited by previous, smaller scale studies1 .

1

Introduction

With deep learning enabling a variety of downstream applications [1–4], failures of robustness leading
to systematic [5–7] and catastrophic deployment errors [8–10] have become increasingly relevant.
From early work on studying distribution shifts [e.g., 11, 12] and the classical “cow on the beach”
example (e.g., in [13]), several works have highlighted sometimes spectacular failures of machine
learning when the test distribution differs from training [10, 14–21]. This has motivated the study
of different types of distribution shifts, ultimately branching the field into several sub-communities
that, while sharing the same underlying objective, rely on different evaluation protocols and provide
different recommendations to practitioners.
(1) The studies [15, 17–20, 22, 23] focused on algorithmically corrupting upstream pre-training
datasets [24] to test generalization. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the choice of augmentations can significantly alter this notion of robustness [25–29]. (2) As synthetic corruptions need not transfer
to real world distribution shifts [27], new realistic datasets were collected to test upstream robustness [15, 27, 30–33]. Here, scale has been identified as a reliable ingredient [30, 34–37], despite
⇤

Correspondence to: flwenzel@amazon.de.
Part of this work was done during an internship at AWS Tübingen.
1
The code for the evaluation study is at github.com/amazon-research/assaying-ood. Author contributions are
listed at the end of paper.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

