Enhanced Bilevel Optimization via Bregman Distance

Feihu Huang1,2 , Junyi Li1 , Shangqian Gao1 , Heng Huang1
Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
2
College of Computer Science & Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics,
Nanjing, China
1

huangfeihu2018@gmail.com, junyili.ai@gmail.com, shg84@pitt.edu, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has been recently used in many machine learning problems
such as hyperparameter optimization, policy optimization, and meta learning. Although many bilevel optimization methods have been proposed, they still suffer
from the high computational complexities and do not consider the more general
bilevel problems with nonsmooth regularization. In the paper, thus, we propose a
class of enhanced bilevel optimization methods with using Bregman distance to
solve bilevel optimization problems, where the outer subproblem is nonconvex and
possibly nonsmooth, and the inner subproblem is strongly convex. Specifically,
we propose a bilevel optimization method based on Bregman distance (BiO-BreD)
to solve deterministic bilevel problems, which achieves a lower computational
complexity than the best known results. Meanwhile, we also propose a stochastic
bilevel optimization method (SBiO-BreD) to solve stochastic bilevel problems
based on stochastic approximated gradients and Bregman distance. Moreover, we
further propose an accelerated version of SBiO-BreD method (ASBiO-BreD) using
the variance-reduced technique, which can achieve a lower computational complexity than the best known computational complexities with respect to condition
number κ and target accuracy ϵ for finding an ϵ-stationary point. We conduct data
hyper-cleaning task and hyper-representation learning task to demonstrate that our
new algorithms outperform related bilevel optimization approaches.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization can effectively solve the problems with a hierarchical structure, thus it recently
has been widely used in many machine learning tasks such as hyper-parameter optimization [37, 20,
9, 38], meta learning [9, 31, 22], neural network architecture search [30], reinforcement learning
[15], and image processing [31]. In the paper, we consider solving the following nonconvex-stronglyconvex bilevel optimization problem:
f (x, y ∗ (x)) + h(x),

(Outer)

s.t. y ∗ (x) ∈ arg min g(x, y),

(Inner)

min

x∈X ⊆Rd1

y∈Rd2

(1)

where function F (x) = f (x, y ∗ (x)) : X → R is smooth and possibly nonconvex, and function
h(x) is convex and possibly nonsmooth, and function g(x, y) : X × Rd2 → R is µ-strongly convex
in y ∈ Rd2 . The constraint set X ⊆ Rd1 is compact and convex. Problem (1) covers a rich
class of nonconvex objective functions with nonsmooth regularization, and is more general than
the existing nonconvex bilevel optimization formulation in [11, 22] that does not consider any
nonsmooth regularization. Here the function h(x) can be the nonsmooth regularization term such as
h(x) = λ∥x∥1 .
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

