On the Safety of Interpretable Machine Learning:
A Maximum Deviation Approach

Dennis Wei
IBM Research
dwei@us.ibm.com
Kush R. Varshney
IBM Research
krvarshn@us.ibm.com

Rahul Nair
IBM Research
rahul.nair@ie.ibm.com

Amit Dhurandhar
IBM Research
adhuran@us.ibm.com

Elizabeth M. Daly
IBM Research
elizabeth.daly@ie.ibm.com

Moninder Singh
IBM Research
moninder@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Interpretable and explainable machine learning has seen a recent surge of interest.
We focus on safety as a key motivation behind the surge and make the relationship
between interpretability and safety more quantitative. Toward assessing safety,
we introduce the concept of maximum deviation via an optimization problem
to find the largest deviation of a supervised learning model from a reference
model regarded as safe. We then show how interpretability facilitates this safety
assessment. For models including decision trees, generalized linear and additive
models, the maximum deviation can be computed exactly and efficiently. For
tree ensembles, which are not regarded as interpretable, discrete optimization
techniques can still provide informative bounds. For a broader class of piecewise
Lipschitz functions, we leverage the multi-armed bandit literature to show that
interpretability produces tighter (regret) bounds on the maximum deviation. We
present case studies, including one on mortgage approval, to illustrate our methods
and the insights about models that may be obtained from deviation maximization.

1

Introduction

Interpretable and explainable machine learning (ML) has seen a recent surge of interest because it is
viewed as a key pillar in making models trustworthy, with implications on fairness, reliability, and
safety [1]. In this paper, we focus on safety as a key reason behind the demand for explainability.
The motivation of safety has been discussed at a qualitative level by several authors [2–5]. Its role is
perhaps clearest in the dichotomy between directly interpretable models vs. post hoc explanations
of black-box models. The former have been called “inherently safe” [3] and promoted as the only
alternative in high-risk applications [5]. The crux of this argument is that post hoc explanations leave
a gap between the explanation and the model producing predictions. Thus, unusual data points may
appear to be harmless based on the explanation, but truly cause havoc. We aim to go beyond these
qualitative arguments and address the following questions quantitatively: 1) What does safety mean
for such models, and 2) how exactly does interpretability aid safety?
Towards answering the first question, we make a conceptual contribution in the form of an optimization
problem, intended as a tool for assessing the safety of supervised learning (i.e. predictive) models.
Viewing these models as functions mapping an input space to an output space, a key way in which
these models can cause harm is through grossly unexpected outputs, corresponding to inputs that
are poorly represented in training data. Accordingly, we approach safety assessment for a model by
determining where it deviates the most from the output of a reference model and by how much (i.e., its
maximum deviation). The reference model, which represents expected behavior and is deemed to be
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

