CodeRL: Mastering Code Generation through
Pretrained Models and Deep Reinforcement Learning

Hung Le∗, Yue Wang∗, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, Steven C.H. Hoi †
Salesforce Research
https://github.com/salesforce/CodeRL

Abstract
Program synthesis or code generation aims to generate a program that satisfies a
problem specification. Recent approaches using large-scale pretrained language
models (LMs) have shown promising results, yet they have some critical limitations.
In particular, they often follow a standard supervised fine-tuning procedure to train
a code generation model from natural language problem descriptions and groundtruth programs only. Such paradigm largely ignores some important but potentially
useful signals in the problem specification such as unit tests, which thus results
in poor performance when solving complex unseen coding tasks. To address the
limitations, we propose “CodeRL”, a new framework for program synthesis tasks
through pretrained LMs and deep reinforcement learning (RL). Specifically, during
training, we treat the code-generating LM as an actor network, and introduce a
critic network that is trained to predict the functional correctness of generated
programs and provide dense feedback signals to the actor. During inference, we
introduce a new generation procedure with a critical sampling strategy that allows a
model to automatically regenerate programs based on feedback from example unit
tests and critic scores. For the model backbones, we extended the encoder-decoder
architecture of CodeT5 with enhanced learning objectives, larger model sizes and
better pretraining data. Our method not only achieves new SOTA results on the
challenging APPS benchmark, but also shows strong zero-shot transfer capability
with new SOTA results on the simpler MBPP benchmark.

1

Introduction

Considering program synthesis as a sequence-to-sequence task, pretrained language models (LMs)
[Hendrycks et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2021a, Austin et al., 2021] can be adapted to receive input
sequence as problem specification in natural language and generate a sequence of codes as the
output program (see Figure 1, right, for an example). While these models achieve promising results,
especially in basic programming tasks [Chen et al., 2021a, Austin et al., 2021], we observe that they
still fail to generate codes to solve complex problems [Hendrycks et al., 2021, Li et al., 2022].
There are two main limitations. First, current models are trained using a conventional next-token
prediction (NTP) objective which maximizes the next ground-truth token likelihood. As noted in NLP
domains [Bengio et al., 2015, Ranzato et al., 2016], training models only with next-token prediction
objective in a "teacher-forcing" manner often leads to accumulating errors during test time when
tokens are generated by conditioning on previously sampled tokens, not the ground-truth tokens. This
issue becomes more serious in the domain of program synthesis, where token-matching scores such
as BLEU [Papineni et al., 2002, Ren et al., 2020] are more appropriate in partial program synthesis
tasks (i.e. code completion) [Husain et al., 2019] but have failed to measure the functional correctness
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: {hungle, shoi}@salesforce.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

