VectorAdam for Rotation Equivariant
Geometry Optimization

Selena Ling
University of Toronto
selena.ling@mail.utoronto.ca

Nicholas Sharp
University of Toronto
nsharp@cs.toronto.edu

Alec Jacobson
University of Toronto, Adobe Research
jacobson@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
The Adam optimization algorithm has proven remarkably effective for optimization
problems across machine learning and even traditional tasks in geometry processing.
At the same time, the development of equivariant methods, which preserve their
output under the action of rotation or some other transformation, has proven to
be important for geometry problems across these domains. In this work, we
observe that Adam — when treated as a function that maps initial conditions to
optimized results — is not rotation equivariant for vector-valued parameters due
to per-coordinate moment updates. This leads to significant artifacts and biases
in practice. We propose to resolve this deficiency with VectorAdam, a simple
modification which makes Adam rotation-equivariant by accounting for the vector
structure of optimization variables. We demonstrate this approach on problems in
machine learning and traditional geometric optimization, showing that equivariant
VectorAdam resolves the artifacts and biases of traditional Adam when applied to
vector-valued data, with equivalent or even improved rates of convergence.

1

Introduction

Over the last decades, gradient-based optimization has enabled rapid progress in machine learning
and related fields. To tackle the problems caused by large variance of network weight gradients,
researchers have developed adaptive variants of stochastic gradient descent such as Adam [11], which
adaptively rescale the step size based on per-scalar gradient statistics to accelerate convergence.
In the field of computer graphics and geometry processing, we also see an increasing use of Adam to
optimize geometric energies. For example, the progress in differentiable rendering made derivatives
on rendering parameters such as geometry, lighting and texture parameters amenable to these gradientbased optimization techniques. Two recent differentiable rendering works [20, 14] default to Adam
for their experiments. Recently, we also see the successful use of a customized Adam algorithm for
optimizing geometric interpolation weights [31]. This work taps into this trend and takes a closer
look at the use of Adam in geometric optimization problems in geometry processing and machine
learning.
Another important concern in geometric learning is the design of equivariant functions, which have
the property that rotating the input to the function causes the output to rotate in the same way. This
property is natural for many geometric problems, where the choice of coordinate system is arbitrary.
In this work we adopt the perspective that the optimization process is itself a function, mapping initial
conditions to optimized results, and it is likewise expected that this function be equivariant. The
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

