Model-based Lifelong Reinforcement Learning
with Bayesian Exploration
Haotian Fu, Shangqun Yu, Michael Littman, George Konidaris
Department of Computer Science, Brown University
{hfu7,syu68,mlittman,gdk}@cs.brown.edu

Abstract
We propose a model-based lifelong reinforcement-learning approach that estimates
a hierarchical Bayesian posterior distilling the common structure shared across
different tasks. The learned posterior combined with a sample-based Bayesian
exploration procedure increases the sample efficiency of learning across a family
of related tasks. We first derive an analysis of the relationship between the sample
complexity and the initialization quality of the posterior in the finite MDP setting.
We next scale the approach to continuous-state domains by introducing a Variational Bayesian Lifelong Reinforcement Learning algorithm that can be combined
with recent model-based deep RL methods, and that exhibits backward transfer.
Experimental results on several challenging domains show that our algorithms
achieve both better forward and backward transfer performance than state-of-the-art
lifelong RL methods.1

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [42; 26] has been successfully applied to solve challenging individual
tasks such as learning robotic control [11] and playing Go [38]. However, the typical RL setting
assumes that the agent solves exactly one task, which it has the opportunity to interact with repeatedly.
In many real-world settings, an agent instead experiences a collection of distinct tasks that arrive
sequentially throughout its operational lifetime; learning each new task from scratch is inefficient, but
treating them all as a single task will fail. Therefore, recent research has focused on algorithms that
enable agents to learn across multiple, sequentially posed tasks, leveraging knowledge from previous
tasks to accelerate the learning of new tasks. This problem setting is known as lifelong reinforcement
learning [7; 50; 25]. The key questions in lifelong RL research are: How can an algorithm exploit
knowledge gained from past tasks to quickly adapt to new tasks (forward transfer), and how can data
from new tasks help the agent perform better on previously learned tasks (backward transfer)?
We propose to address these problems by extracting the common structure existing in previously
encountered tasks so that the agent can quickly learn the dynamics specific to the new tasks. We
consider lifelong RL problems that can be modeled as hidden-parameter MDPs or HiP-MDPs [10; 27],
where variations among the true task dynamics can be described by a set of hidden parameters. Our
algorithm goes further than previous work in both lifelong learning and HiP-MDPs by 1) Separately
modeling epistemic and aleatory uncertainty over different levels of abstraction across the collection
of tasks: the uncertainty captured by a world-model distribution describing the probability distribution
over tasks, and the uncertainty captured by a task-specific model of the (stochastic) dynamics within a
single task. To enable more accurate sequential knowledge transfer, we separate the learning process
for these two quantities and maintain a hierarchical Bayesian posterior that approximates them. 2)
Performing Bayesian exploration enabled by the hierarchical posterior: The method lets the agent act
optimistically according to models sampled from the posterior, and thus increases sample efficiency.
1

Code repository available at https://github.com/Minusadd/VBLRL.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

