Rethinking Alignment in Video Super-Resolution
Transformers
Shuwei Shi1,2,∗ , Jinjin Gu3,4,∗, Liangbin Xie2,5,6 , Xintao Wang6 , Yujiu Yang1 , Chao Dong2,3,†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory
The University of Sydney
5
6
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
jinjin.gu@sydney.edu.au, ssw20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{chao.dong, lb.xie}@siat.ac.cn, xintaowang@tencent.com
yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The alignment of adjacent frames is considered an essential operation in video
super-resolution (VSR). Advanced VSR models, including the latest VSR Transformers, are generally equipped with well-designed alignment modules. However,
the progress of the self-attention mechanism may violate this common sense. In
this paper, we rethink the role of alignment in VSR Transformers and make several
counter-intuitive observations. Our experiments show that: (i) VSR Transformers
can directly utilize multi-frame information from unaligned videos, and (ii) existing
alignment methods are sometimes harmful to VSR Transformers. These observations indicate that we can further improve the performance of VSR Transformers
simply by removing the alignment module and adopting a larger attention window.
Nevertheless, such designs will dramatically increase the computational burden,
and cannot deal with large motions. Therefore, we propose a new and efficient
alignment method called patch alignment, which aligns image patches instead
of pixels. VSR Transformers equipped with patch alignment could demonstrate
state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks. Our work provides valuable
insights on how multi-frame information is used in VSR and how to select alignment methods for different networks/datasets. Codes and models will be released
at https://github.com/XPixelGroup/RethinkVSRAlignment.

1

Introduction

Video Super-Resolution (VSR) could provide more accurate SR results than Single-Image SuperResolution (SISR) by exploiting the complementary sub-pixel information from multiple frames. The
well-established paradigms of VSR networks usually include an alignment module to compensate for
the motion of objects between frames. The alignment module is critical for CNN-based VSR networks,
because the locality inductive bias of CNNs only allows them to utilize spatial-close distributed
information effectively. Many VSR networks have achieved better performance by introducing more
advanced alignment methods [43, 4, 39, 24].
Recently, the general paradigm of vision network design has gradually shifted from CNNs to
Transformers [10, 23, 7]. Unlike the locality property of CNNs, the self-attention operation in
Transformers is very efficient for processing elements with spatially long-term distribution. VSR is
no exception: Transformers have also been introduced into VSR for better results [3, 22, 24]. However,
∗
†

Jinjin Gu and Shuwei Shi contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

