Foundation Posteriors for Approximate
Probabilistic Inference
Mike Wu, Noah Goodman
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
{wumike, ngoodman}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic programs provide an expressive representation language for generative
models. Given a probabilistic program, we are interested in the task of posterior
inference: estimating a latent variable given a set of observed variables. Existing
techniques for inference in probabilistic programs often require choosing many
hyper-parameters, are computationally expensive, and/or only work for restricted
classes of programs. Here we formulate inference as masked language modeling:
given a program, we generate a supervised dataset of variables and assignments,
and randomly mask a subset of the assignments. We then train a neural network
to unmask the random values, defining an approximate posterior distribution. By
optimizing a single neural network across a range of programs we amortize the cost
of training, yielding a “foundation” posterior able to do zero-shot inference for new
programs. The foundation posterior can also be fine-tuned for a particular program
and dataset by optimizing a variational inference objective. We show the efficacy
of the approach, zero-shot and fine-tuned, on a benchmark of STAN programs.

1

Introduction

The primary goal of probabilistic programming is to enable practitioners from any domain to easily
reason about random variables of interest [29, 61]. The main challenge is to build posterior inference
algorithms that are both efficient for practical usage and universal – working for any program
that might be written. Many probabilistic programming languages (PPLs) have been developed
[27, 45, 28, 44, 18, 58, 47, 53, 59, 12, 23, 17, 7, 57] each with inference approaches with strengths
and weaknesses. Some require users to assist in the inference process by programmatically specifying
conditional independencies [7] or hand-crafting variational distributions [52, 7, 17]. Others place
strong restrictions on what kinds of programs can be represented [12]. In this paper, we propose
a complementary approach to scale inference for probabilistic programs. By treating a program
as a constrained form of language with some additional nomenclature, we show that probabilistic
inference can be viewed as masked language modeling [62, 19], a technique popular in natural
language processing. Since little is assumed about the program, we need impose few constraints
on users upfront. Further, the generality of treating inference as a text prediction problem naturally
enables more advanced features, such as plating, with little additional work. We call this approach
masked language inference, or MLI.
While MLI can be used to solve inference queries for a single program, it becomes more powerful
when meta-amortized (or twice-amortized) to do inference across different queries and programs.
Success requires a dense set of programs that cover sufficient diversity for the meta-algorithm to
generalize. Since this is not always obtainable, we propose program augmentations to enlarge
a small dataset of programs. The result of meta-amortized MLI on the augmented programs is
a foundation posterior: a large neural network trained to do inference across many probabilistic
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

