Free Probability for predicting the performance of
feed-forward fully connected neural networks

Reda CHHAIBI1 Tariq DAOUDA2 Ezéchiel KAHN3
Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
2
Institute of Biological Sciences, Mohammed VI Polytechnic University, Benguerir, Morocco.
3
CERMICS, Ecole des Ponts, INRIA, Marne-la-Vallée, France.
1

reda.chhaibi@math.univ-toulouse.fr,
tariq.daouda@um6p.ma, ezechiel.kahn@enpc.fr

Abstract
Gradient descent during the learning process of a neural network can be subject
to many instabilities. The spectral density of the Jacobian is a key component for
analyzing stability. Following the works of Pennington et al., such Jacobians are
modeled using free multiplicative convolutions from Free Probability Theory (FPT).
We present a reliable and very fast method for computing the associated spectral
densities, for given architecture and initialization. This method has a controlled
and proven convergence. Our technique is based on an homotopy method: it is an
adaptative Newton-Raphson scheme which chains basins of attraction. In order to
demonstrate the relevance of our method we show that the relevant FPT metrics
computed before training are highly correlated to final test accuracies – up to 85%.
We also nuance the idea that learning happens at the edge of chaos by giving
evidence that a very desirable feature for neural networks is the hyperbolicity of
their Jacobian at initialization.

1

Introduction

Neural network training and tuning can be wasteful in human and energy resources. For example
[23, Table 1] show that a single GPU training can have high energetic costs. Often, this is nothing
compared to architecture search. In this context, an obvious moonshot is estimating the performance
of an architecture before training. The goal of this paper is more realistic: providing a fast and reliable
computational method for estimating stability before training – and stability is a good proxy for
performance [12].
Framework: Consider a feed-forward network of depth L ∈ N, with L full-connected layers. For
each depth ℓ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L}, the layer has activation vector xℓ ∈ RNℓ , where Nℓ is the current
width. The vector x0 ∈ RN0 takes in the neural network’s input, while xL ∈ RNL gives the
output. The vector of widths is written N := (N0 , N1 , . . . , NL ) and will appear in superscript
to indicate the dependence
in any of

 the Nℓ ’s. The following recurrence relation holds between
(N)
(N)
layers xℓ = ϕℓ Wℓ xℓ−1 + bℓ
, where ϕℓ is a choice of non-linearity applied entry-wise,
(N)

(N)

Wℓ
∈ MNℓ ,Nℓ−1 (R) is a weight matrix and bℓ
(N)
(N)
hℓ := Wℓ xℓ−1 + bℓ for the pre-activations.

∈ RNℓ is the vector of biases. We write

The Jacobian computed during back-propagation can be written explicitly by using the chain rule:
∂xL
∂xL ∂xL−1
∂x1
(N)
(N) (N)
(N)
(N)
(N)
J (N) :=
=
...
= DL WL DL−1 WL−1 . . . D1 W1 ,
(1.1)
∂x0
∂xL−1 ∂xL−2
∂x0
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

