Generative multitask learning mitigates target-causing
confounding

Taro Makino1

Krzysztof J. Geras2,1

Kyunghyun Cho1,3,4

1

2

NYU Center for Data Science
NYU Grossman School of Medicine
3
Genentech 4 CIFAR LMB
taro@nyu.edu

Abstract
We propose generative multitask learning (GMTL), a simple and scalable approach
to causal machine learning in the multitask setting. Our approach makes a minor
change to the conventional multitask inference objective, and improves robustness
to target shift. Since GMTL only modifies the inference objective, it can be used
with existing multitask learning methods without requiring additional training.
The improvement in robustness comes from mitigating unobserved confounders
that cause the targets, but not the input. We refer to them as target-causing
confounders. These confounders induce spurious dependencies between the input
and targets. This poses a problem for conventional multitask learning, due to its
assumption that the targets are conditionally independent given the input. GMTL
mitigates target-causing confounding at inference time, by removing the influence
of the joint target distribution, and predicting all targets jointly. This removes the
spurious dependencies between the input and targets, where the degree of removal
is adjustable via a single hyperparameter. This flexibility is useful for managing
the trade-off between in- and out-of-distribution generalization. Our results on the
Attributes of People and Taskonomy datasets reflect an improved robustness to
target shift across four multitask learning methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) excel at extracting patterns from unstructured data, but these patterns
can fail to generalize outside of the training distribution. These failures are often attributed to DNNs
learning statistical associations rather than causal relations [Ribeiro et al., 2016, Jo and Bengio, 2017,
Geirhos et al., 2020]. Therefore, there is a concerted effort to make patterns learned by DNNs satisfy
certain properties of causal relations, such as invariance and modularity [Schölkopf, 2019, Schölkopf
et al., 2021, Wang and Jordan, 2021]. This research direction is called causal machine learning
(ML). Existing approaches to causal ML often require additional information in the form of labeled
environments [Arjovsky et al., 2019, Lu et al., 2021] or labeled confounders [Puli et al., 2021]. These
requirements are restrictive, and it is therefore beneficial to identify more natural settings where
existing information can be used for causal ML.
We consider the setting of multitask learning (MTL) [Caruana, 1997, Ruder, 2017, Zhang and Yang,
2017], where there is an input x ∈ X and multiple targets. Without loss of generality, we consider
two targets y ∈ Y and y′ ∈ Y ′ . As is common in the MTL literature, we distinguish y as being the
main target, and y′ as the auxiliary target. Both targets are used during training, but only the main
target is used during evaluation. In the conventional approach to MTL, which we call discriminative
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

