Alleviating the Sample Selection Bias in Few-shot
Learning by Removing Projection to the Centroid

Jing Xu1,3 , Xu Luo2 , Xinglin Pan2 , Wenjie Pei1 , Yanan Li4 , Zenglin Xu1,3∗
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Pengcheng Laboratory 4 Zhejiang Lab
jingxu.may@gmail.com, frank.luox@outlook.com, kp600168@gmail.com
wenjiecoder@outlook.com, ynli.zju@gmail.com, zenglin@gmail.com

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) targets at generalization of vision models towards unseen
tasks without sufficient annotations. Despite the emergence of a number of fewshot learning methods, the sample selection bias problem, i.e., the sensitivity to the
limited amount of support data, has not been well understood. In this paper, we find
that this problem usually occurs when the positions of support samples are in the
vicinity of task centroid—the mean of all class centroids in the task. This motivates
us to propose an extremely simple feature transformation to alleviate this problem,
dubbed Task Centroid Projection Removing (TCPR). TCPR is applied directly to all
image features in a given task, aiming at removing the dimension of features along
the direction of the task centroid. While the exact task centoid cannot be accurately
obtained from limited data, we estimate it using base features that are each similar
to one of the support features. Our method effectively prevents features from
being too close to the task centroid. Extensive experiments over ten datasets from
different domains show that TCPR can reliably improve classification accuracy
across various feature extractors, training algorithms and datasets. The code has
been made available at https://github.com/KikimorMay/FSL-TCBR.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have made great progress in image classification [16, 14, 47, 31]. However, large-scale
annotated datasets are costly and even infeasible to obtain in many real-world applications. To explore
the possibility of vision models to learn visual concept quickly, few-shot learning (FSL) [10, 41] has
raised attention recently. In this problem, a vision model, trained on a base dataset with labeled data,
needs to recognize novel classes of data (query set) given only a few labeled images (support set).
Typical few-shot learning methods usually first learn a good feature extractor from the base dataset.
Then in each test-time task, the extracted features of all images in the support set are used to construct
a linear classifier to recognize category of images from the query set [40, 8]. While a good feature
extractor may help cluster unseen data, the task distribution shift between training and testing [25]
still makes it hard to estimate novel class distribution using a small number of samples from the
support set. Thus, the performance is strongly correlated with the sample quality of the support
data. If the support data are not typical enough to represent the whole class, or if there exists outlier
data that is not representative, the constructed classifier will be biased, which is called the sample
selection bias problem [6]. In this paper, we delve into this problem in the context of few-shot
learning, and find that the task centroid, defined as the mean of all class centroids in a task, plays
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

