Rethinking and Scaling Up Graph Contrastive
Learning: An Extremely Efficient Approach with
Group Discrimination

1

Yizhen Zheng1 , Shirui Pan2∗, Vincent CS Lee1 , Yu Zheng3 , Phillip S. Yu4 ,
Monash University, 2 Griffith University, 3 La Trobe University, 4 University of Illinons at Chicago
yizhen.zheng1@monash.edu, s.pan@griffth.edu.au, vincent.cs.lee@monash.edu
yu.zheng@latrobe.edu.au, psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) alleviates the heavy reliance on label information
for graph representation learning (GRL) via self-supervised learning schemes.
The core idea is to learn by maximising mutual information for similar instances,
which requires similarity computation between two node instances. However,
GCL is inefficient in both time and memory consumption. In addition, GCL
normally requires a large number of training epochs to be well-trained on largescale datasets. Inspired by an observation of a technical defect (i.e., inappropriate
usage of Sigmoid function) commonly used in two representative GCL works,
DGI and MVGRL, we revisit GCL and introduce a new learning paradigm for
self-supervised graph representation learning, namely, Group Discrimination (GD),
and propose a novel GD-based method called Graph Group Discrimination (GGD).
Instead of similarity computation, GGD directly discriminates two groups of node
samples with a very simple binary cross-entropy loss. In addition, GGD requires
much fewer training epochs to obtain competitive performance compared with
GCL methods on large-scale datasets. These two advantages endow GGD with very
efficient property. Extensive experiments show that GGD outperforms state-of-theart self-supervised methods on eight datasets. In particular, GGD can be trained in
0.18 seconds (6.44 seconds including data preprocessing) on ogbn-arxiv, which
is orders of magnitude (10,000+) faster than GCL baselines while consuming
much less memory. Trained with 9 hours on ogbn-papers100M with billion edges,
GGD outperforms its GCL counterparts in both accuracy and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely-adopted in learning representations for graphstructured data. By utilising message-passing over the topology of a graph, GNNs can learn effective
low-dimensional node embeddings, which can be used for a variety of downstream tasks such as node
classification [1]. GNNs have been further applied in diverse domains, e.g., federated learning [2, 3],
trustworthy systems [4, 5], dynamic graphs [6, 7] and anomaly detection [8, 9].
However, many GNNs adopt a supervised learning manner to train models with label information,
which is expensive and labour-intensive to collect in real-world. To address this issue, a few studies
(e.g., DGI [10], MVGRL [11], GMI [12], and GRACE [13]) borrow the idea of contrastive learning
from computer vision (CV), and introduce graph contrastive learning (GCL) methods for selfsupervised GRL. The core idea of these methods is to maximise the mutual information (MI) between
an anchor node and its positive counterparts, sharing similar semantic information while doing the
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

