PopArt: Efficient Sparse Regression and Experimental
Design for Optimal Sparse Linear Bandits

Kyoungseok Jang
University of Arizona
ksajks@arizona.edu

Chicheng Zhang
University of Arizona
chichengz@cs.arizona.edu

Kwang-Sung Jun
University of Arizona
kjun@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
In sparse linear bandits, a learning agent sequentially selects an action and receive
reward feedback, and the reward function depends linearly on a few coordinates of
the covariates of the actions. This has applications in many real-world sequential
decision making problems. In this paper, we propose a simple and computationally
efficient sparse linear estimation method called P OPA RT that enjoys a tighter ℓ1
recovery guarantee compared to Lasso (Tibshirani, 1996) in many problems. Our
bound naturally motivates an experimental design criterion that is convex and
thus computationally efficient to solve. Based on our novel estimator and design
criterion, we derive sparse linear bandit algorithms that enjoy improved regret
upper bounds upon the state of the art (Hao et al., 2020), especially w.r.t. the
geometry of the given action set. Finally, we prove a matching lower bound for
sparse linear bandits in the data-poor regime, which closes the gap between upper
and lower bounds in prior work.

1

Introduction

In many modern science and engineering applications, high-dimensional data naturally emerges,
where the number of features significantly outnumber the number of samples. In gene microarray
analysis for cancer prediction [30], for example, tens of thousands of genes expression data are
measured per patient, far exceeding the number of patients. Such practical settings motivate the study
of high-dimensional statistics, where certain structures of the data are exploited to make statistical
inference possible. One representative example is sparse linear models [19], where we assume that a
linear regression task’s underlying predictor depends only on a small subset of the input features.
On the other hand, online learning with bandit feedback, due to its practicality in many applications
such as online news recommendations [25] or clinical trials [26, 41], has attracted a surge of research
interests. Of particular interest is linear bandits, where in n rounds, the learner repeatedly takes
an action At (e.g., some feature representation of a product or a medicine) from a set of available
actions A ⊂ Rd and receives a reward rt = ⟨θ∗ , At ⟩ + ηt as feedback where ηt ∈ R is an independent
zero-mean, σ-sub-Gaussian noise. Sparsity structure is abundant in linear bandit applications: for
example, customers’ interests on a product depend only on a number of its key specs; the effectiveness
of a medicine only depends on a number of key medicinal properties, which means that the unknown
parameter θ∗ sparse; i.e., it has a small number of nonzero entries.
Early studies [2, 8, 24] on sparse linear bandits have revealed that leveraging sparsity assumptions
yields bandit algorithms with lower regret than those provided by full-dimensional linear bandit
algorithms [3, 4, 11, 1]. However, most existing studies either rely on a particular arm set (e.g., a
norm ball), which is unrealistic in many applications, or use computationally intractable
√ algorithms.
If we consider an arbitrary arm set, however, the optimal worst-case regret is Θ( sdn) where s
is the sparsity level of θ∗ , which means that as long as n = O(sd), there exists an instance for
which the algorithm suffers a linear regret [23]. This is in stark contrast to supervised learning
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

