Discovered Policy Optimisation

Chris Lu∗
FLAIR, University of Oxford
christopher.lu@exeter.ox.ac.uk
Luke Metz
Google Brain
luke.s.metz@gmail.com

Jakub Grudzien Kuba∗ †
BAIR, UC Berkeley
kuba@berkeley.edu

Christian Schroeder de Witt
FLAIR, University of Oxford
cs@robots.ox.ac.uk

Alistair Letcher
aletcher.github.io
ahp.letcher@gmail.com

Jakob Foerster
FLAIR, University of Oxford
jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Tremendous progress has been made in reinforcement learning (RL) over the past
decade. Most of these advancements came through the continual development
of new algorithms, which were designed using a combination of mathematical
derivations, intuitions, and experimentation. Such an approach of creating algorithms manually is limited by human understanding and ingenuity. In contrast,
meta-learning provides a toolkit for automatic machine learning method optimisation, potentially addressing this flaw. However, black-box approaches which
attempt to discover RL algorithms with minimal prior structure have thus far not
outperformed existing hand-crafted algorithms. Mirror Learning, which includes
RL algorithms, such as PPO, offers a potential middle-ground starting point: while
every method in this framework comes with theoretical guarantees, components
that differentiate them are subject to design. In this paper we explore the Mirror
Learning space by meta-learning a “drift” function. We refer to the immediate
result as Learnt Policy Optimisation (LPO). By analysing LPO we gain original
insights into policy optimisation which we use to formulate a novel, closed-form
RL algorithm, Discovered Policy Optimisation (DPO). Our experiments in Brax
environments confirm state-of-the-art performance of LPO and DPO, as well as
their transfer to unseen settings.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in deep learning have allowed reinforcement learning algorithms [35, RL]
to successfully tackle large-scale problems [36, 34]. As a result, great efforts have been put into
designing methods that are capable of training a neural-network policies in increasingly more complex
tasks [33, 31, 24, 9]. Among the most practical such algorithms are TRPO [31] and PPO [32] which
are known for their performance and stability [2]. Nevertheless, although these research threads have
delivered a handful of successful techniques, their design relies on concepts handcrafted by humans,
rather than discovered in a scalable learning process. As a possible consequence, many of these
methods suffer from design flaws, such as the brittleness to hyperparameter settings [31, 12], or a
lack of robustness guarantees.
However, the most promising alternative approach, algorithm discovery via meta-reinforcement
learning, thus far has been a “tough nut to crack”. On the one end of the spectrum, popular “blackbox” approaches in meta-RL [30, 7, 4] are unable to generalise to tasks outside of their meta-training
distribution. On the other end of the spectrum, approaches that attempt to meta-learn algorithms
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Work done while at FLAIR, University of Oxford

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

