3DOS: Towards 3D Open Set Learning –
Benchmarking and Understanding
Semantic Novelty Detection on Point Clouds

Antonio Alliegro∗, Francesco Cappio Borlino∗, Tatiana Tommasi
Department of Control and Computer Engineering. Politecnico di Torino, Italy
Italian Institute of Technology, Italy
{antonio.alliegro, francesco.cappio, tatiana.tommasi}@polito.it

Abstract
In recent years there has been significant progress in the field of 3D learning on
classification, detection and segmentation problems. The vast majority of the
existing studies focus on canonical closed-set conditions, neglecting the intrinsic
open nature of the real-world. This limits the abilities of robots and autonomous
systems involved in safety-critical applications that require managing novel and
unknown signals. In this context exploiting 3D data can be a valuable asset since
it provides rich information about the geometry of perceived objects and scenes.
With this paper we provide the first broad study on 3D Open Set learning. We
introduce 3DOS: a novel testbed for semantic novelty detection that considers
several settings with increasing difficulties in terms of semantic (category) shift,
and covers both in-domain (synthetic-to-synthetic, real-to-real) and cross-domain
(synthetic-to-real) scenarios. Moreover, we investigate the related 2D Open Set
literature to understand if and how its recent improvements are effective on 3D
data. Our extensive benchmark positions several algorithms in the same coherent
picture, revealing their strengths and limitations. The results of our analysis may
serve as a reliable foothold for future tailored 3D Open Set methods.

1

Introduction

Most existing machine learning models rely on the assumption that train and test data are drawn
i.i.d. from the same distribution. While reasonable for lab experiments, this assumption frequently
fails to hold when models are deployed in the open world, where a variety of distributional shifts
with respect to the training data can emerge. For example, new object categories may induce a
semantic shift, or data from new domains may give rise to a covariate shift [53, 54, 36]. Such cases
can occur separately or jointly, and the test samples that differ from what was observed during
training are generally indicated as out-of-distribution (OOD) data. These data may become extremely
dangerous for autonomous agents as testified by the numerous accidents involving self-driving
cars that misbehaved when encountering anomalous objects in the streets2 . To avoid similar risks
it is of paramount importance to build robust models capable of maintaining their discrimination
ability over the closed set of known classes while rejecting unknown categories. Solving this task is
challenging for existing deep models: their exceptional closed set performance hides miscalibration
[16] and over-confidence issues [33]. In other words, their output score cannot be regarded as a
reliable measure of prediction correctness. This drawback has been largely discussed in the 2D visual
∗

Equal contribution
https://edition.cnn.com/2021/08/27/cars/toyota-self-driving-vehicle-paralympics-accident/index.html
https://www.foxnews.com/auto/tesla-smashes-overturned-truck-autopilot
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

