Learning Bipartite Graphs: Heavy Tails and Multiple
Components

José Vinícius de M. Cardoso1 , Jiaxi Ying2 , Daniel P. Palomar1,3
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering1
Department of Mathematics2
Department of Industrial Engineering and Decision Analytics3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong SAR China
{jvdmc, jx.ying}@connect.ust.hk, palomar@ust.hk

Abstract
We investigate the problem of learning an undirected, weighted bipartite graph
under the Gaussian Markov random field model, for which we present an optimization formulation along with an efficient algorithm based on the projected gradient
descent. Motivated by practical applications, where outliers or heavy-tailed events
are present, we extend the proposed learning scheme to the case in which the
data follow a multivariate Student-t distribution. As a result, the optimization
program is no longer convex, but a verifiably convergent iterative algorithm is
proposed based on the majorization-minimization framework. Finally, we propose
an efficient and provably convergent algorithm for learning k-component bipartite
graphs that leverages rank constraints of the underlying graph Laplacian matrix.
The proposed estimators outperform state-of-the-art methods for bipartite graph
learning, as evidenced by real-world experiments using financial time series data.

1

Introduction

Efficient optimization formulations alongside scalable optimization algorithms have been critical tools
for performing inference in graphical models. In particular, learning sparse, unconstrained Gaussian
Markov random fields (MRF) has enabled a wide range of practical applications across a number
of fields, including brain network analysis [1], single-cell sequencing [2], time-varying network
estimation [3], time-series clustering [4] and model selection [5], and financial networks [6, 7]. Such
an impact may be attributed to the early development of the graphical lasso algorithm via iterative
block coordinate descent methods [8–10].
More recently, there has been a growing interest in constraining Gaussian MRFs into a particular
family such as bipartite and k-component graphs for data clustering [11–14], and considering robust
statistics that account for heavy-tailed events [15, 16]. In addition, constraints on the sign of the
elements of the precision matrix of a Gaussian MRF have been employed to learn total positivity
models [17–20] as well as Laplacian models in sparse settings [21–23]. Estimating undirected graphs
under smooth signal assumptions has been investigated in [24–27].
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning undirected, weighted bipartite graphs under the
MRF assumption. The key contributions of this paper include:
1. We design an efficient optimization algorithm based on the projected gradient descent (PGD)
framework for the problem of learning an undirected, weighted bipartite graph from the
Gaussian MRF framework.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

