Seeing the forest and the tree:
Building representations of both individual and
collective dynamics with transformers

Ran Liu∗, Mehdi Azabou, Max Dabagia, Jingyun Xiao, Eva L. Dyer∗
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Complex time-varying systems are often studied by abstracting away from the
dynamics of individual components to build a model of the population-level dynamics from the start. However, when building a population-level description, it
can be easy to lose sight of each individual and how they contribute to the larger
picture. In this paper, we present a novel transformer architecture for learning
from time-varying data that builds descriptions of both the individual as well as
the collective population dynamics. Rather than combining all of our data into our
model at the onset, we develop a separable architecture that operates on individual
time-series first before passing them forward; this induces a permutation-invariance
property and can be used to transfer across systems of different size and order.
After demonstrating that our model can be applied to successfully recover complex
interactions and dynamics in many-body systems, we apply our approach to populations of neurons in the nervous system. On neural activity datasets, we show
that our model not only yields robust decoding performance, but also provides
impressive performance in transfer across recordings of different animals without
any neuron-level correspondence. By enabling flexible pre-training that can be
transferred to neural recordings of different size and order, our work provides a
first step towards creating a foundation model for neural decoding.

1

Introduction

Complex systems (such as the brain) contain multiple individual elements (e.g. neurons) that interact
dynamically to generate their outputs. The process by which these local interactions give rise to
large-scale behaviors is important in many domains of science and engineering, from ecology [1, 2]
and social networks [3–5] to microbial interactions [6] and brain dynamics [7].
A natural way to model the activity of a system is to build a collective or population-level view,
where we consider individuals (or channels) jointly to determine the dynamics of the population
(Figure 1(A)). In many cases, studying systems from this population-level perspective has provided
important insights into collective computations and emergent behaviors [7]; however, it is also
possible to lose sight of the contributions of different individuals’ dynamics to the final prediction or
inference. This is important in many settings where the dynamics of different individuals may be of
interest, either due to their different functional roles in the system [8, 9, 6, 10], or due to shift in their
dynamics because of sensor displacement or corruption [11–13]. Moving forward, we need methods
that can build good population-level representations while also providing an interpretable view of the
data at the individual level.
∗

Contact: rliu361@gatech.edu, evadyer@gatech.edu. Project page and code: https://nerdslab.github.io/EIT/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

