A Theoretical Understanding of Gradient Bias in
Meta-Reinforcement Learning
Bo Liu⇤
Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
benjaminliu.eecs@gmail.com
Jie Ren
University of Edinburgh
jieren9806@gmail.com

Xidong Feng⇤
University College London
xidong.feng.20@ucl.ac.uk

Luo Mai
University of Edinburgh
luo.mai@ed.ac.uk

Haifeng Zhang
Institute of Automation, CAS
Nanjing Artificial Intelligence Research of IA
haifeng.zhang@ia.ac.cn

Rui Zhu
DeepMind
ruizhu@google.com

Jun Wang
University College London
jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Yaodong Yang†
Institute for AI, Peking University
Beijing Institute for General AI
yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Gradient-based Meta-RL (GMRL) refers to methods that maintain two-level optimisation procedures wherein the outer-loop meta-learner guides the inner-loop
gradient-based reinforcement learner to achieve fast adaptations. In this paper, we
develop a unified framework that describes variations of GMRL algorithms and
points out that existing stochastic meta-gradient estimators adopted by GMRL are
actually biased. Such meta-gradient bias comes from two sources: 1) the compositional bias incurred by the two-level problem structure, which has an upper bound
of O U f̂In |g| 0.5 w.r.t. inner-loop update step , learning rate U, estimate
2 and sample size |g|, and 2) the multi-step Hessian estimation bias ˆ
variance f̂In
due to the use of autodiff, which has a polynomial impact O (
1) ( ˆ ) 1 on
the meta-gradient bias. We study tabular MDPs empirically and offer quantitative
evidence that testifies our theoretical findings on existing stochastic meta-gradient
estimators. Furthermore, we conduct experiments on Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma
and Atari games to show how other methods such as off-policy learning and
low-bias estimator can help fix the gradient bias for GMRL algorithms in general.

1

Introduction

Meta Learning, also known as learning to learn, is proposed to equip intelligent agents with meta
knowledge for fast adaptations [30]. Meta-Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms aim to train RL
* Equal contribution, the order is determined by flipping a coin. See Appendix J for more details.
† Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

