Consistency of Constrained Spectral Clustering under
Graph Induced Fair Planted Partitions

Shubham Gupta ∗
IBM Research Paris-Saclay
Orsay 91400, France.
shubhamg@iisc.ac.in

Ambedkar Dukkipati
Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
ambedkar@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Spectral clustering is popular among practitioners and theoreticians alike. While
performance guarantees for spectral clustering are well understood, recent studies
have focused on enforcing “fairness” in clusters, requiring them to be “balanced”
with respect to a categorical sensitive node attribute (e.g. the race distribution
in clusters must match the race distribution in the population). In this paper, we
consider a setting where sensitive attributes indirectly manifest in an auxiliary
representation graph rather than being directly observed. This graph specifies
node pairs that can represent each other with respect to sensitive attributes and is
observed in addition to the usual similarity graph. Our goal is to find clusters in the
similarity graph while respecting a new individual-level fairness constraint encoded
by the representation graph. We develop variants of unnormalized and normalized
spectral clustering for this task and analyze their performance under a fair planted
partition model induced by the representation graph. This model uses both the
cluster membership of the nodes and the structure of the representation graph to
generate random similarity graphs. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first
consistency results for constrained spectral clustering under an individual-level
fairness constraint. Numerical results corroborate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Consider a recommendation service that groups news articles by finding clusters in a graph which
connects these articles via cross-references. Unfortunately, as cross-references between articles with
different political viewpoints are uncommon, this service risks forming ideological filter bubbles. To
counter polarization, it must ensure that clusters on topics like finance and healthcare include a diverse
range of opinions. This is an example of a constrained clustering problem. The popular spectral
clustering algorithm [Ng et al., 2001, von Luxburg, 2007] has been adapted over the years to include
constraints such as must-link and cannot-link constraints [Kamvar et al., 2003, Wang and Davidson,
2010], size-balanced clusters [Banerjee and Ghosh, 2006], and statistical fairness [Kleindessner
et al., 2019]. These constraints can be broadly divided into two categories: (i) Population level
constraints that must be satisfied by the clusters as a whole (e.g. size-balanced clusters and statistical
fairness); and (ii) Individual level constraints that must be satisfied at the level of individual nodes (e.g.
must/cannot link constraints). To the best of our knowledge, the only known statistical consistency
guarantees for constrained spectral clustering were studied in Kleindessner et al. [2019] in the context
of a population level fairness constraint where the goal is to find clusters that are balanced with
respect to a categorical sensitive node attribute. In this paper, we establish consistency guarantees for
constrained spectral clustering under a new and more general individual level fairness constraint.
∗

Work done while the author was at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

