Near-Optimal Randomized Exploration for Tabular
Markov Decision Processes
Zhihan Xiong1∗
zhihanx@cs.washington.edu

Ruoqi Shen1∗
shenr3@cs.washington.edu

Qiwen Cui1∗
qwcui@cs.washington.edu

Maryam Fazel2
mfazel@uw.edu

Simon S. Du1
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington

Abstract
We study algorithms using randomized value functions for exploration in reinforcement learning. This type of algorithms enjoys appealing empirical performance.
We show that when we use 1) a single random seed in eachepisode, and
 2) a
√
e
Bernstein-type magnitude of noise, we obtain a worst-case O H SAT regret
bound for episodic time-inhomogeneous Markov Decision Process where S is the
size of state space, A is the size of action space, H is the planning horizon and
T is the number of interactions. This bound polynomially improves all existing
bounds for
algorithms based

 on randomized value functions, and for the first time,
√
matches the Ω H SAT lower bound up to logarithmic factors. Our result
highlights that randomized exploration can be near-optimal, which was previously
achieved only by optimistic algorithms. To achieve the desired result, we develop
1) a new clipping operation to ensure both the probability of being optimistic and
the probability of being pessimistic are lower bounded by a constant, and 2) a new
recursive formula for the absolute value of estimation errors to analyze the regret.

1

Introduction

This paper concerns learning in tabular Markov Decision Processes (MDP), arguably the most
fundamental model for reinforcement
learning (RL). Existing algorithms that achieve the near
√
e
optimal minimax O H SAT regret bound are based on the principle of Optimism in the face
of Uncertainty (OFU), such as upper confidence bound (UCB) [7, 53, 16, 57, 55].1 Here S is the
number of states, A is the number of actions, H is the planning horizon, and T is the total number of
interactions between the agent and the environment.
∗
1

Equal Contribution
This bound is for time-inhomogeneous MDP with each reward bounded by 1 and T is sufficiently large.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

