Mask-based Latent Reconstruction for Reinforcement
Learning

Tao Yu1∗ † Zhizheng Zhang2∗ Cuiling Lan2 Yan Lu2 Zhibo Chen1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
yutao666@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhizzhang,culan,yanlu}@microsoft.com
chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
For deep reinforcement learning (RL) from pixels, learning effective state representations is crucial for achieving high performance. However, in practice, limited
experience and high-dimensional inputs prevent effective representation learning.
To address this, motivated by the success of mask-based modeling in other research
fields, we introduce mask-based reconstruction to promote state representation
learning in RL. Specifically, we propose a simple yet effective self-supervised
method, Mask-based Latent Reconstruction (MLR), to predict complete state representations in the latent space from the observations with spatially and temporally
masked pixels. MLR enables better use of context information when learning state
representations to make them more informative, which facilitates the training of
RL agents. Extensive experiments show that our MLR significantly improves the
sample efficiency in RL and outperforms the state-of-the-art sample-efficient RL
methods on multiple continuous and discrete control benchmarks. Our code is
available at https://github.com/microsoft/Mask-based-Latent-Reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Learning effective state representations is crucial for reinforcement learning (RL) from visual signals
(where a sequence of images is usually the input of an RL agent), such as in DeepMind Control Suite
[43], Atari games [5], etc. Inspired by the success of mask-based pretraining in the fields of natural
language processing (NLP) [11, 37, 38, 7] and computer vision (CV) [4, 21, 47], we make the first
endeavor to explore the idea of mask-based modeling in RL.
Mask-based pretraining exploits the reconstruction of masked word embeddings or pixels to promote
feature learning in NLP or CV fields. This is, in fact, not straightforwardly applicable for RL due to
the following two reasons. First, RL agents learn policies from the interactions with environments,
where the experienced states vary as the policy network is updated. Intuitively, collecting additional
rollouts for pretraining is often costly especially in real-world applications. Besides, it is challenging
to learn effective state representations without the awareness of the learned policy. Second, visual
signals usually have high information densities, which may contain distractions and redundancies
for policy learning. Thus, for RL, performing reconstruction in the original (pixel) space is not as
necessary as it is in the CV or NLP fields.
Based on the analysis above, we study the mask-based modeling tailored to vision-based RL. We
present Mask-based Latent Reconstruction (MLR), a simple yet effective self-supervised method, to
better learn state representations in RL. Contrary to treating mask-based modeling as a pretraining
task in the fields of CV and NLP, our proposed MLR is an auxiliary objective optimized together
∗
†

Equal contribution.
This work was done when Tao Yu was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

