MGNNI: Multiscale Graph Neural Networks with
Implicit Layers
Juncheng Liu

Bryan Hooi Kenji Kawaguchi Xiaokui Xiao
National University of Singapore
{juncheng,bhooi,kenji,xiaoxk}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Recently, implicit graph neural networks (GNNs) have been proposed to capture
long-range dependencies in underlying graphs. In this paper, we introduce and
justify two weaknesses of implicit GNNs: the constrained expressiveness due to
their limited effective range for capturing long-range dependencies, and their lack
of ability to capture multiscale information on graphs at multiple resolutions. To
show the limited effective range of previous implicit GNNs, we first provide a
theoretical analysis and point out the intrinsic relationship between the effective
range and the convergence of iterative equations used in these models. To mitigate
the mentioned weaknesses, we propose a multiscale graph neural network with
implicit layers (MGNNI) which is able to model multiscale structures on graphs and
has an expanded effective range for capturing long-range dependencies. We conduct
comprehensive experiments for both node classification and graph classification to
show that MGNNI outperforms representative baselines and has a better ability for
multiscale modeling and capturing of long-range dependencies.

1

Introduction

In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely adopted on graph-related tasks,
such as node classification, link prediction, and graph classification [29]. In general, GNNs utilize
both node attributes and graph topology to produce meaningful node representations for downstream
applications. To achieve this, most modern GNNs follow a “message passing” mechanism: at
each iteration, they iteratively aggregate representations of neighboring nodes of each node with its
own representation to generate new representations. During this process, each iteration is typically
parameterized as a single-layer neural network with learnable weights. Many GNN models have been
proposed by adopting different aggregations techniques (e.g., GCN with renormalization [17], GAT
with attentive aggregations on neighbors [27], and SGC [28] using aggregations without non-linear
activation). In spite of the effectiveness achieved by the aforementioned GNNs on different tasks,
they fail to effectively capture long-range information on graphs, since a GNN with T layers can only
capture information up to T hops away.
To overcome this deficiency of previous GNNs, recent work has proposed implicit graph neural
networks [13, 20, 21] to effectively capture long-range dependencies. These implicit graph neural
networks generally define a fixed-point equation as an implicit layer for aggregation and generate
the equilibrium Z ⇤ as the node representations. To get the equilibrium, they either use an iterative
solver to solve the equation or directly obtain a closed-form solution with guaranteed convergence.
Meanwhile, they utilize implicit differentiation to achieve O(1) memory complexity when computing
the gradients during the iterations. As mentioned in Gu et al. [13], Liu et al. [20], these models can be
treated as a graph neural network with infinite layers which has the same transformation and shared
weights in each layer. This makes them able to effectively capture long-range dependencies without
excessive memory requirements as compared with previous GNNs.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

