Environment Diversification with Multi-head Neural
Network for Invariant Learning
Bo-Wei Huang Keng-Te Liao Chang-Sheng Kao Shou-De Lin
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Taiwan University, Taiwan
{r10922007,d05922001,b07902046,sdlin}@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Neural networks are often trained with empirical risk minimization; however, it
has been shown that a shift between training and testing distributions can cause
unpredictable performance degradation. On this issue, a research direction, invariant learning, has been proposed to extract causal features insensitive to the
distributional changes. This work proposes EDNIL, an invariant learning framework containing a multi-head neural network to absorb data biases. We show that
this framework does not require prior knowledge about environments or strong assumptions about the pre-trained model. We also reveal that the proposed algorithm
has theoretical connections to recent studies discussing properties of variant and
invariant features. Finally, we demonstrate that models trained with EDNIL are
empirically more robust against distributional shifts.

1

Introduction

Ensuring model performance on unseen data is a common yet challenging task in machine learning. A
widely adopted solution would be empirical risk minimization (ERM), where training and testing data
are assumed to be independent and identically distributed. However, data in real-world applications
can come with undesired biases, causing a shift between training and testing distributions. It has
been known that the distributional shifts can severely harm ERM model performance and even cause
the trained model to be worse than random predictions [10]. In this work, we focus on Invariant
Learning, which aims at learning causal features expected to be robust against distributional changes.
Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) [1] has been proposed as a popular solution for invariant learning.
Specifically, IRM is based on an assumption that training data are collected from multiple sources or
environments having distinct data distributions. The learning objective is then designed as a standard
ERM loss function with a penalty term constraining the trained model (e.g. classifier) to be optimal
in all the environments.
IRM has shown to be effective; however, we note that IRM and many invariant learning methods rely
on strict assumptions which limit the practical impacts. The limitations are summarized as follows.
Prior Knowledge of Environments IRM assumes training data are collected from environments,
and the environment labels (i.e. which data instance belongs to which environment) are given.
However, the environment labels are often unavailable. Moreover, the definition of environments
can be implicit, making human labeling more difficult and expensive. To find environments without
supervision, Creager et al. [6] propose EIIL, a min-max optimization framework training the model of
interest and inferring the environment labels. Another work, HRM [22] (or the extension, KerHRM
[23]), parameterizes the environments and proposes clustering-based approaches to estimate the
parameters. A recent method, ZIN [20], also learns to label data. However, it relies on carefully
chosen features satisfying a series of theoretical constraints, and thus human efforts are still required.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

