Spectrum Random Masking for Generalization in
Image-based Reinforcement Learning

Yangru Huang1 , Peixi Peng1 2 ∗ , Yifan Zhao1 , Guangyao Chen1 , Yonghong Tian1 2 ∗
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
yrhuang@stu.pku.edu.cn, {pxpeng, zhaoyf, gychen, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalization in image-based reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn a robust
policy that could be applied directly on unseen visual environments, which is a
challenging task since agents usually tend to overfit to their training environment.
To handle this problem, a natural approach is to increase the data diversity by
image based augmentations. However, different with most vision tasks such as
classification and detection, RL tasks are not always invariant to spatial based
augmentations due to the entanglement of environment dynamics and visual appearance. In this paper, we argue with two principles for augmentations in RL:
First, the augmented observations should facilitate learning a universal policy,
which is robust to various distribution shifts. Second, the augmented data should be
invariant to the learning signals such as action and reward. Following these rules,
we revisit image-based RL tasks from the view of frequency domain and propose a
novel augmentation method, namely Spectrum Random Masking (SRM),which
is able to help agents to learn the whole frequency spectrum of observation for
coping with various distributions and compatible with the pre-collected action and
reward corresponding to original observation. Extensive experiments conducted on
DMControl Generalization Benchmark demonstrate the proposed SRM achieves
the state-of-the-art performance with strong generalization potentials.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) from image-based observations is a task where representation and
decision-making are jointly learned from visual signals. Although this type of RL methods has made
significant progresses due to the development of deep Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs), most
of them suffer from drastic performance decline on previously unseen environments [24, 44, 4],
especially for image-based inputs [44, 32, 4, 48, 27]. The reason is that classical RL methods assume
the environments of training and testing are identical [17]. However, there usually exists significant
distributions divergences between them in real-world scenarios. The high dimensionality of visual
inputs coupled with the shifted distributions of environment make the generalization of RL tasks even
more challenging [30].
To handle this challenge, one natural way is to decrease the distribution gap of training and testing data
by simulating the diversity of test environments in training. Recent studies show that the appropriate
data augmentation could facilitate the generalization of the policy network [41]. Most of these data
augmentation methods have been carried out directly in the spatial domain [19], such as flipping and
rotation. However, the dynamic of environment has the disadvantages of lacking sensitivity to such
spatial-based data augmentation [28]. An example is illustrated in Fig. 1: when horizontal flipping is
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

