Minimax-Optimal Multi-Agent RL in Markov Games
With a Generative Model
Gen Li
UPenn

Yuejie Chi
CMU

Yuting Wei
UPenn

Yuxin Chen
UPenn

Abstract
This paper studies multi-agent reinforcement learning in Markov games, with the
goal of learning Nash equilibria or coarse correlated equilibria (CCE) sampleoptimally. All prior results suffer from at least one of the two obstacles: the curse
of multiple agents and the barrier of long horizon, regardless of the sampling protocol in use. We take a step towards settling this problem, assuming access to a
flexible sampling mechanism: the generative model. Focusing on non-stationary
finite-horizon Markov games, we develop a fast learning algorithm called QFTRL and an adaptive sampling scheme that leverage the optimism principle
in online adversarial learning (particularly the Follow-the-Regularized-Leader
(FTRL) method). Our algorithm learns an ε-approximate CCE in a general-sum
Markov game using
 4 Pm

e H S i=1 Ai
O
ε2
samples, where m is the number of players, S indicates the number of states, H
is the horizon, and Ai denotes the number of actions for the i-th player. This
is minimax-optimal (up to log factor) when m is fixed. When applied to twoplayer zero-sum Markov games, our algorithm provably finds an ε-approximate
Nash equilibrium with a minimal number of samples. Along the way, we derive a
refined regret bound for FTRL that makes explicit the role of variance-type quantities, which might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

The thriving field of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) studies how a group of interacting
agents make decisions autonomously in a shared dynamic environment [80]. The recent developments in game playing [66, 9], self-driving vehicles [58], and multi-robot control [45] are prime
examples of MARL in action. In practice, there is no shortage of situations where the agents involved have conflict of interest, and they have to act competitively in order to promote their own
benefits (possibly at the expense of one another). Scenarios of this kind are frequently modeled via
Markov games (MGs) [59, 42], a framework that has been a fruitful playground to formalize and
stimulate the studies of competitive MARL.
In view of the irreconcilable competition between individual players, solutions of competitive
MARL normally take the form of certain equilibrium strategy profiles, which are perhaps best epitomized by the concept of Nash equilibrium (NE) [49]. In a Nash equilibrium, no gain can be realized
through a unilateral change — assuming no coordination between players — and hence no player
has incentives to deviate from her current strategy/policy. A myriad of research has been conducted
surrounding NE, which spans various aspects like existence, learnability, computational hardness,
and algorithm design, among others [59, 20, 12, 53, 52, 22, 42, 28, 50, 33]. Given that finding NE is
notoriously expensive in general (except for special cases like two-player zero-sum MGs) [20, 21],
several more tractable solution concepts have emerged in the studies of game theory and MARL, a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

