Planning to the Information Horizon of BAMDPs via
Epistemic State Abstraction

Dilip Arumugam
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
dilip@cs.stanford.edu

Satinder Singh
DeepMind, London
baveja@deepmind.com

Abstract
The Bayes-Adaptive Markov Decision Process (BAMDP) formalism pursues the
Bayes-optimal solution to the exploration-exploitation trade-off in reinforcement
learning. As the computation of exact solutions to Bayesian reinforcement-learning
problems is intractable, much of the literature has focused on developing suitable
approximation algorithms. In this work, before diving into algorithm design, we
first define, under mild structural assumptions, a complexity measure for BAMDP
planning. As efficient exploration in BAMDPs hinges upon the judicious acquisition of information, our complexity measure highlights the worst-case difficulty
of gathering information and exhausting epistemic uncertainty. To illustrate its
significance, we establish a computationally-intractable, exact planning algorithm
that takes advantage of this measure to show more efficient planning. We then conclude by introducing a specific form of state abstraction with the potential to reduce
BAMDP complexity and gives rise to a computationally-tractable, approximate
planning algorithm.

1

Introduction

The Bayes-Adaptive Markov Decision Process (BAMDP) [Duff, 2002] is a classic formalism encapsulating the optimal treatment of the exploration-exploitation trade-off by a reinforcement-learning
agent with respect to prior beliefs over an uncertain environment. Unfortunately, the standard formulation suffers from an intractably-large hyperstate space (that is, the joint collection of environment
states coupled with the agent’s current state of knowledge over the unknown environment) and much
of the literature has been dedicated to identifying suitable approximations [Bellman and Kalaba,
1959, Dayan and Sejnowski, 1996, Duff and Barto, 1997, Dearden et al., 1998, Strens, 2000, Duff,
2001, 2003b,a, Wang et al., 2005, Poupart et al., 2006, Castro and Precup, 2007, Kolter and Ng,
2009, Asmuth et al., 2009, Dimitrakakis, 2009, Sorg et al., 2010, Araya-López et al., 2012, Guez
et al., 2012, 2013, 2014, Ghavamzadeh et al., 2015, Zintgraf et al., 2019]. In this work, we take steps
toward clarifying the hardness of BAMDPs before outlining an algorithmic concept that may help
mitigate problem difficulty and facilitate near-optimal solutions.
First, we introduce the notion of information horizon as a complexity measure on BAMDP planning,
characterizing when it is truly difficult to identify the underlying uncertain environment. Naturally, the
agent’s state of knowledge at each timestep (a component of the overall BAMDP hyperstate) reflects
its current epistemic uncertainty and, as the agent accumulates data, this posterior concentrates,
exhausting uncertainty and identifying the true environment; after this point, the Bayes-optimal
policy naturally coincides with the optimal policy of the underlying Markov Decision Process (MDP).
Simply put, the information horizon quantifies the worst-case number of timesteps needed for the
agent to reach this point whereupon there is no more information to be gathered about the uncertain
environment.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

