High-dimensional Additive Gaussian Processes
under Monotonicity Constraints
Andrés F. López-Lopera
CERAMATHS, UPHF
59313 Valenciennes, France
andres.lopezlopera@uphf.fr

François Bachoc
IMT, UMR5219 CNRS
Université Paul Sabatier
31062 Toulouse, France

Olivier Roustant
IMT, UMR5219 CNRS
INSA Toulouse
31077 Toulouse, France

Abstract
We introduce an additive Gaussian process framework accounting for monotonicity
constraints and scalable to high dimensions. Our contributions are threefold. First,
we show that our framework enables to satisfy the constraints everywhere in the
input space. We also show that more general componentwise linear inequality
constraints can be handled similarly, such as componentwise convexity. Second,
we propose the additive MaxMod algorithm for sequential dimension reduction.
By sequentially maximizing a squared-norm criterion, MaxMod identifies the
active input dimensions and refines the most important ones. This criterion can
be computed explicitly at a linear cost. Finally, we provide open-source codes
for our full framework. We demonstrate the performance and scalability of the
methodology in several synthetic examples with hundreds of dimensions under
monotonicity constraints as well as on a real-world flood application.

1

Introduction

The framework of additive and constrained Gaussian processes. In high dimension, many
statistical regression models are based on additive structures of the form:
y(x1 , · · · , xd ) = y1 (x1 ) + · · · + yd (xd ).
(1)
Although such structures may lead to more “rigid” models than non-additive ones, they result
in simple frameworks that easily scale in high dimensions [1, 2]. Generalized additive models
(GAMs) [1] and additive Gaussian processes (GPs) [3, 4] are the most common models in a wide
range of applications. The latter can also be seen as a generalization of GAMs that allow uncertainty
quantification. As shown in [3, 4], additive GPs can significantly improve modeling efficiency and
have major advantages for interpretability. Furthermore, in non-additive small-dimensional GP
models, adding inequality constraints (in particular monotonicity which will be the main focus of this
paper) leads to more realistic uncertainty quantification in learning from real data [5–10].
Contributions. Our contributions are threefold. 1) We combine the additive and constrained
frameworks to propose an additive constrained GP (cGP) prior. Our framework is based on a
finite-dimensional representation involving one-dimensional knots for each active variable. The
corresponding mode predictor can be computed and posterior realizations can be sampled, both in
a scalable way to high dimension. 2) We suggest the additive MaxMod algorithm for sequential
dimension reduction. At each step, MaxMod either adds a new variable to the model or inserts a knot
for an active one. This choice is made by maximizing the squared-norm modification of the mode
function, for which we supply exact expressions with linear complexity. 3) We provide open-source
codes for our full framework. We demonstrate the performance and scalability of our methodology
with numerical examples in dimension up to 1000 as well as in a real-world application in dimension
37. MaxMod identifies the most important input variables, with data size as low as n = 2d in
dimension d. It also yields accurate models satisfying the constraints everywhere on the input space.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

