VaiPhy: a Variational Inference Based Algorithm for
Phylogeny

Hazal Koptagel12∗ Oskar Kviman12∗ Harald Melin12
Negar Safinianaini12 Jens Lagergren12
1
School of EECS, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
2
Science for Life Laboratory, Solna, Sweden
∗
Equal contribution
{koptagel,okviman,haraldme,negars,jensl}@kth.se

Abstract
Phylogenetics is a classical methodology in computational biology that today has
become highly relevant for medical investigation of single-cell data, e.g., in the context of cancer development. The exponential size of the tree space is, unfortunately,
a substantial obstacle for Bayesian phylogenetic inference using Markov chain
Monte Carlo based methods since these rely on local operations. And although
more recent variational inference (VI) based methods offer speed improvements,
they rely on expensive auto-differentiation operations for learning the variational
parameters. We propose VaiPhy, a remarkably fast VI based algorithm for approximate posterior inference in an augmented tree space. VaiPhy produces marginal
log-likelihood estimates on par with the state-of-the-art methods on real data and is
considerably faster since it does not require auto-differentiation. Instead, VaiPhy
combines coordinate ascent update equations with two novel sampling schemes:
(i) SLANTIS, a proposal distribution for tree topologies in the augmented tree
space, and (ii) the JC sampler, to the best of our knowledge, the first-ever scheme
for sampling branch lengths directly from the popular Jukes-Cantor model. We
compare VaiPhy in terms of density estimation and runtime. Additionally, we
evaluate the reproducibility of the baselines. We provide our code on GitHub:
https://github.com/Lagergren-Lab/VaiPhy.

1

Introduction

Phylogenetic software has for a long time been applied in biological research, and biological findings
relying on phylogenetic trees are frequent. Moreover, due to the emergence of single-cell sequencing,
phylogenetic inference for bifurcating and multifurcating trees can now be utilized in medical studies
of how cells differentiate during development and how tumor cells progress in cancer.
When attempting to infer the posterior distribution over phylogenetic trees for |X| taxa, represented
as sequences, the main obstacle is the exponential size of the tree space, i.e., the set of candidate trees
having those taxa as leaves. In Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based Bayesian phylogenetic
inference, e.g., MrBayes [28] and RevBayes [20], this tree space is explored by performing local
operations on the trees. In order to avoid local operations, Bouchard-Côté et al. [3] launched
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) as an alternative methodology for Bayesian phylogenetic inference.
Probabilistic phylogenetic inference is a machine learning problem, and the key to unlocking this
crucial application can be expected to be found in the machine learning methodology; in particular,
considering the capacity of the VI methodology, [32, 1], to deliver impressive performance gains
for Bayesian inference, e.g., compared to MCMC. Expectedly, such gains have recently been made
within the realm of phylogenetic analysis.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

