MultiGuard: Provably Robust Multi-label
Classification against Adversarial Examples

Jinyuan Jia∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jinyuan@illinois.edu

Wenjie Qu∗
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
wen_jie_qu@outlook.com

Neil Zhenqiang Gong
Duke University
neil.gong@duke.edu

Abstract
Multi-label classification, which predicts a set of labels for an input, has many applications. However, multiple recent studies showed that multi-label classification
is vulnerable to adversarial examples. In particular, an attacker can manipulate the
labels predicted by a multi-label classifier for an input via adding carefully crafted,
human-imperceptible perturbation to it. Existing provable defenses for multi-class
classification achieve sub-optimal provable robustness guarantees when generalized to multi-label classification. In this work, we propose MultiGuard, the first
provably robust defense against adversarial examples to multi-label classification.
Our MultiGuard leverages randomized smoothing, which is the state-of-the-art
technique to build provably robust classifiers. Specifically, given an arbitrary
multi-label classifier, our MultiGuard builds a smoothed multi-label classifier
via adding random noise to the input. We consider isotropic Gaussian noise in
this work. Our major theoretical contribution is that we show a certain number of ground truth labels of an input are provably in the set of labels predicted
by our MultiGuard when the ℓ2 -norm of the adversarial perturbation added to
the input is bounded. Moreover, we design an algorithm to compute our provable robustness guarantees. Empirically, we evaluate our MultiGuard on VOC
2007, MS-COCO, and NUS-WIDE benchmark datasets. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/quwenjie/MultiGuard

1

Introduction

Multi-class classification assumes each input only has one ground truth label and thus often predicts
a single label for an input. In contrast, in multi-label classification [42, 41, 35, 43], each input has
multiple ground truth labels and thus a multi-label classifier predicts a set of labels for an input.
For instance, an image could have multiple objects, attributes, or scenes. Multi-label classification
has many applications such as diseases detection [16], object recognition [43], retail checkout
recognition [18], document classification [34], etc..
However, similar to multi-class classification, multiple recent studies [56, 53, 30] showed that
multi-label classification is also vulnerable to adversarial examples. In particular, an attacker can
manipulate the set of labels predicted by a multi-label classifier for an input via adding carefully
crafted perturbation to it. Adversarial examples pose severe security threats to the applications of
multi-label classification in security-critical domains. To mitigate adversarial examples to multi-label
∗

Equal contribution. Wenjie Qu performed this research when he was a remote intern in Gong’s group.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

