Improving Barely Supervised Learning by
Discriminating Unlabeled Data with Super-Class

Guan Gui
Nanjing University
guiguan@smail.nju.edu.cn
Luping Zhou
University of Sydney
luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au

Zhen Zhao
University of Sydney
zhen.zhao@sydney.edu.au

Lei Qi
Southeast University
qilei@seu.edu.cn

Lei Wang
University of Wollongong
leiw@uow.edu.au

Yinghuan Shi∗ †
Nanjing University
syh@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In semi-supervised learning (SSL), a common practice is to learn consistent information from unlabeled data and discriminative information from labeled data to
ensure both the immutability and the separability of the classification model. Existing SSL methods suffer from failures in barely-supervised learning (BSL), where
only one or two labels per class are available, as the insufficient labels cause the discriminative information to be difficult or even infeasible to learn. To bridge this gap,
we investigate a simple yet effective way to leverage unlabeled data for discriminative learning, and propose a novel discriminative information learning module
to benefit model training. Specifically, we formulate the learning objective of
discriminative information at the super-class level and dynamically assign different
categories into different super-classes based on model performance improvement.
On top of this on-the-fly process, we further propose a distribution-based loss to
learn discriminative information by utilizing the similarity between samples and
super-classes. It encourages the unlabeled data to stay closer to the distribution of
their corresponding super-class than those of others. Such a constraint is softer than
the direct assignment of pseudo labels, while the latter could be very noisy in BSL.
We compare our method with state-of-the-art SSL and BSL methods through extensive experiments on standard SSL benchmarks. Our method can achieve superior
results, e.g., an average accuracy of 76.76% on CIFAR-10 with merely 1 label per
class. The code is available at https://github.com/GuanGui-nju/SCMatch.

1

Introduction

As a paradigm to reduce the dependency on a large amount of labeled data, semi-supervised learning
(SSL) has been widely concerned and utilized [1, 2]. Although existing advanced SSL methods [3, 4,
5, 6] could achieve outstanding performance even with less than 1% labels on several datasets (e.g.,
CIFAR-10), the labeling process could still be lengthy, especially when there is a large number of
object categories, which may preclude the deployment of SSL model in those applications. To tackle
this challenge, barely-supervised learning (BSL), a novel paradigm with rising interest [3, 7], has
been proposed recently to explore whether the model can be trained with the extremely scarce label,
e.g., only one label per class.
∗

Corresponding author.
Guan Gui, Yinghuan Shi are with the National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology and the
National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

