Learning to Discover and Detect Objects

Vladimir Fomenko1∗ Ismail Elezi2 Deva Ramanan3
Laura Leal-Taixé2 Aljoša Ošep2,3
1

Microsoft Azure AI 2 Technical University of Munich
3
Carnegie Mellon University
vladfomenko@microsoft.com
{ismail.elezi, leal.taixe, aljosa.osep}@tum.de deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We tackle the problem of novel class discovery and localization (NCDL). In
this setting, we assume a source dataset with supervision for only some object
classes. Instances of other classes need to be discovered, classified, and localized
automatically based on visual similarity without any human supervision. To tackle
NCDL, we propose a two-stage object detection network Region-based NCDL
(RNCDL) that uses a region proposal network to localize regions of interest (RoIs).
We then train our network to learn to classify each RoI, either as one of the known
classes, seen in the source dataset, or one of the novel classes, with a long-tail
distribution constraint on the class assignments, reflecting the natural frequency of
classes in the real world. By training our detection network with this objective in
an end-to-end manner, it learns to classify all region proposals for a large variety
of classes, including those not part of the labeled object class vocabulary. Our
experiments conducted using COCO and LVIS datasets reveal that our method
is significantly more effective than multi-stage pipelines that rely on traditional
clustering algorithms. Furthermore, we demonstrate the generality of our approach
by applying our method to a large-scale Visual Genome dataset, where our network
successfully learns to detect various semantic classes without direct supervision.
Our code is available at https://github.com/vlfom/RNCDL.

1

Introduction

We tackle novel class discovery and localization in unlabeled datasets, a long-standing problem
in computer vision [55, 59, 41, 42, 54]. As we are approaching the limits of well-understood and
successful supervised training of object detectors [22, 21, 53, 27] and labeling novel and rare classes
that appear in the long tail of object class distribution is becoming prohibitively expensive [24], we
expect joint novel class discovery and localization to become increasingly more important.
Object class discovery in image collections is a difficult problem, as there are, in general, many
possible equally valid attributes (e.g., object color or orientation) for grouping of visual patterns.
As shown in [29, 30], novel class discovery (NCD) can be well-posed and tackled in a data-driven
manner by injecting prior knowledge on how we wish to group semantic classes using some degree
of supervision. However, existing NCD methods [29, 30, 25, 26, 72, 7, 73, 74, 19] all assume curated
datasets, where objects of interest are pre-cropped and semantic classes are fairly balanced. By
contrast, in this paper, we tackle joint novel class discovery and localization (NCDL), a task of
learning to discover and detect objects from raw, unlabeled, and uncurated data. This is a significantly
more challenging and realistic problem setting, as images always contain a mixture of labeled and
unlabeled object classes, and we need to localize and categorize them.
∗

Work done while at Technical University of Munich.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

