DARE: Disentanglement-Augmented Rationale
Extraction
Linan Yue1,2 , Qi Liu1,2⇤, Yichao Du1,2 , Yanqing An1,2 , Li Wang1,2,3 , Enhong Chen1,2
1: Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Application,
University of Science and Technology of China
2: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3: ByteDance
{lnyue,duyichao,anyq,wl063}@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
{qiliuql,cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Rationale extraction can be considered as a straightforward method of improving
the model explainability, where rationales are a subsequence of the original inputs,
and can be extracted to support the prediction results. Existing methods are mainly
cascaded with the selector which extracts the rationale tokens, and the predictor
which makes the prediction based on selected tokens. Since previous works fail
to fully exploit the original input, where the information of non-selected tokens
is ignored, in this paper, we propose a Disentanglement-Augmented Rationale
Extraction (DARE) method, which encapsulates more information from the input
to extract rationales. Specifically, it first disentangles the input into the rationale
representations and the non-rationale ones, and then learns more comprehensive
rationale representations for extracting by minimizing the mutual information (MI)
between the two disentangled representations. Besides, to improve the performance
of MI minimization, we develop a new MI estimator by exploring existing MI
estimation methods. Extensive experimental results on three real-world datasets
and simulation studies clearly validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.
Code is released at https://github.com/yuelinan/DARE.

1

Introduction

Although the performance of deep neural networks (DNNs) has significantly improved across a
range of natural language understanding tasks [43, 49, 50], the inability of DNNs to provide the
explainability for their predictions still remains a serious risk. To this end, several researchers
[35, 26, 28] have focused on improving the explainability of DNNs. Among them, the rationale
extraction method [24, 4] can provide an intuitive explanation by identifying the important features
of inputs. Specifically, it extracts a short and coherent part of original inputs (i.e., the rationale) as an
explanation to support the prediction results when yielding them.
Traditional rationale extraction approaches [24, 4, 44, 33] cascade the selector and the predictor. As
shown in Figure 1(a), we illustrate this type of approaches with an example of the charge prediction,
where charges are automatically predicted based on the case fact. Specifically, the selector first selects
a subsequence of the fact description (i.e., the bolded tokens in Figure 1(a). Then, the predictor
yields the charge result based on the selected tokens. And the extracted subsequence is defined as
the rationale. However, since the extractive rationales only depend on the comparison between the
prediction results and labels, this kind of approach may fail to fully exploit the information of the
original input. To solve that, Sha et al. [37] add an external guider (i.e., Figure 1(b)) which takes the
⇤

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

