Batch-Size Independent Regret Bounds for
Combinatorial Semi-Bandits with Probabilistically
Triggered Arms or Independent Arms

Xutong Liu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China
liuxt@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Siwei Wang
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
siweiwang@microsoft.com

Jinhang Zuo
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
jzuo@andrew.cmu.edu
Carlee Joe-Wong
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
cjoewong@andrew.cmu.edu

John C.S. Lui
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, China
cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study the combinatorial semi-bandits (CMAB) and focus on reducing the dependency of the batch-size K in the regret bound, where K is the total
number of arms that can be pulled or triggered in each round. First, for the setting
of CMAB with probabilistically triggered arms (CMAB-T), we discover a novel (directional) triggering probability and variance modulated (TPVM) condition that can
replace the previously-used smoothness condition for various applications, such as
cascading bandits, online network exploration and online influence maximization.
Under this new condition, we propose a BCUCB-T algorithm with variance-aware
confidence intervals and conduct regret analysis which reduces the O(K) factor
to O(log K) or O(log2 K) in the regret bound, significantly improving the regret
bounds for the above applications. Second, for the setting of non-triggering CMAB
with independent arms, we propose a SESCB algorithm which leverages on the
non-triggering version of the TPVM condition and completely removes the dependency on K in the leading regret. As a valuable by-product, the regret analysis
used in this paper can improve several existing results by a factor of O(log K).
Finally, experimental evaluations show our superior performance compared with
benchmark algorithms in different applications.

1

Introduction

Stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) [26, 3, 4] is a classical model that has been extensively studied
in online decision making. As an extension of MAB, combinatorial multi-armed bandits (CMAB)
have drawn much attention recently, owing to its wide applications in marketing, network optimization
and online advertising [13, 17, 7, 8, 29, 23]. In CMAB, the learning agent chooses a combinatorial
action in each round, and this action would trigger a set of arms (or a super arm) to be pulled
simultaneously, and the outcomes of these pulled arms are observed as feedback. Typically, such
feedback is known as the semi-bandit feedback. The agent’s goal is to minimize the expected regret,
which is the difference in expectation for the overall rewards between always playing the best action
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

