Unified Optimal Transport Framework for Universal
Domain Adaptation

Wanxing Chang1
3

Ye Shi1,3∗

Hoang Duong Tuan2

Jingya Wang1,3∗

1
ShanghaiTech University 2 University of Technology Sydney
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging

{changwx,shiye,wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
tuan.hoang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) aims to transfer knowledge from a source
domain to a target domain without any constraints on label sets. Since both domains
may hold private classes, identifying target common samples for domain alignment
is an essential issue in UniDA. Most existing methods require manually specified
or hand-tuned threshold values to detect common samples thus they are hard to
extend to more realistic UniDA because of the diverse ratios of common classes.
Moreover, they cannot recognize different categories among target-private samples
as these private samples are treated as a whole. In this paper, we propose to use
Optimal Transport (OT) to handle these issues under a unified framework, namely
UniOT. First, an OT-based partial alignment with adaptive filling is designed
to detect common classes without any predefined threshold values for realistic
UniDA. It can automatically discover the intrinsic difference between common
and private classes based on the statistical information of the assignment matrix
obtained from OT. Second, we propose an OT-based target representation learning
that encourages both global discrimination and local consistency of samples to
avoid the over-reliance on the source. Notably, UniOT is the first method with
the capability to automatically discover and recognize private categories in the
target domain for UniDA. Accordingly, we introduce a new metric H3 -score to
evaluate the performance in terms of both accuracy of common samples and
clustering performance of private ones. Extensive experiments clearly demonstrate
the advantages of UniOT over a wide range of state-of-the-art methods in UniDA.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have boosted performance in extensive computer vision tasks but still struggle to
generalize well in cross-domain tasks that source and target domain data are drawn from the different
data distributions. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [28] aims to transfer knowledge from
fully labeled source to unlabeled target domain by minimizing the domain gap between source
and target. However, existing UDA methods tackle the domain gap under a strong closed-set
assumption that two domains share identical label sets, limiting their applications to real-world
scenarios. Recently, Partial Domain Adaptation (PDA) [4] and Open Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA)
[2] are proposed to relax the closed-set assumption, allowing the existence of private classes in the
source and target domain respectively. However, all the above-mentioned settings heavily rely on
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

