On the Interpretability of Regularisation for Neural
Networks Through Model Gradient Similarity

Vincent Szolnoky
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Chalmers University of Technology
Göteborg, Chalmers Tvärgata 3, 41296, Sweden
szolnoky@chalmers.se
Viktor Andersson
Department of Electrical Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
Göteborg, Chalmersplatsen 4, 41296, Sweden
vikta@chalmers.se

Balázs Kulcsár
Department of Electrical Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
Göteborg, Chalmersplatsen 4, 41296, Sweden
kulscar@chalmers.se

Rebecka Jörnsten
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Chalmers University of Technology
Göteborg, Chalmers Tvärgata 3, 41296, Sweden
jornsten@chalmers.se

Abstract
Most complex machine learning and modelling techniques are prone to overﬁtting and may subsequently generalise poorly to future data. Artiﬁcial neural
networks are no different in this regard and, despite having a level of implicit regularisation when trained with gradient descent, often require the aid of explicit
regularisers. We introduce a new framework, Model Gradient Similarity (MGS),
that (1) serves as a metric of regularisation, which can be used to monitor neural network training, (2) adds insight into how explicit regularisers, while derived
from widely different principles, operate via the same mechanism underneath by
increasing MGS, and (3) provides the basis for a new regularisation scheme which
exhibits excellent performance, especially in challenging settings such as high levels of label noise or limited sample sizes.

1

Introduction

Since the inception of modern neural network architecture and training, many efforts have been
made to understand their generalisation properties. When neural networks are trained with Gradient Descent (GD) this induces implicit regularisation in the network, causing it to attain surprising
generalisation performance with no extra intervention. Despite this, neural networks will in many
instances overﬁt in the presence of noise and have been shown to have the capacity to completely
memorise data [Zhang et al., 2016]. Therefore, alongside the desire to understand how neural networks are implicitly regularised, explicit regularisation has been an ongoing pursuit to improve
generalisation even further.
A broad range of explicit regularisers now exist that attack the problem from many different angles.
Below, we provide a short overview of some of the most commonly used methods. Weight decay
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

