Data Augmentation MCMC for
Bayesian Inference from Privatized Data
Nianqiao Phyllis Ju
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
nianqiao@purdue.edu

Jordan A. Awan
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
jawan@purdue.edu

Ruobin Gong
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
ruobin.gong@rutgers.edu

Vinayak A. Rao
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
varao@purdue.edu

Abstract
Differentially private mechanisms protect privacy by introducing additional randomness into the data. Restricting access to only the privatized data makes it
challenging to perform valid statistical inference on parameters underlying the
confidential data. Specifically, the likelihood function of the privatized data requires integrating over the large space of confidential databases and is typically
intractable. For Bayesian analysis, this results in a posterior distribution that is
doubly intractable, rendering traditional MCMC techniques inapplicable. We propose an MCMC framework to perform Bayesian inference from the privatized
data, which is applicable to a wide range of statistical models and privacy mechanisms. Our MCMC algorithm augments the model parameters with the unobserved
confidential data, and alternately updates each one. For the potentially challenging step of updating the confidential data, we propose a generic approach that
exploits the privacy guarantee of the mechanism to ensure efficiency. We give
results on the computational complexity, acceptance rate, and mixing properties
of our MCMC. We illustrate the efficacy and applicability of our methods on a
naïve-Bayes log-linear model and on a linear regression model.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006] presents a formal mathematical framework
to protect the confidentiality of individuals and businesses in aggregate data products. It is the
state-of-the-art standard for statistical disclosure limitation (SDL), and has become widely adopted
by curators of large-scale scientific, commercial, and official databases. Differentially private data
products are produced by probabilistic mechanisms that carry proven privacy guarantees. Generally
speaking, these mechanisms work by introducing carefully designed random noise into the query of
interest, which is an otherwise deterministic function of the underlying database.
The privatization of data products through noise infusion poses a challenge to statistical analysis in
the downstream. Statistical estimators are typically complex functions of the data. If instead of the
confidential data, the analyst only has access to a probabilistically processed version of them, how
can they maintain the statistical validity of the resulting inference?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

