CLEAR: Generative Counterfactual Explanations
on Graphs

Jing Ma
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA, USA
jm3mr@virginia.edu

Ruocheng Guo
Bytedance AI Lab
London, UK
rguo.asu@gmail.com

Aidong Zhang
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA, USA
aidong@virginia.edu

Saumitra Mishra
J.P. Morgan AI Research
London, UK
saumitra.mishra@jpmorgan.com
Jundong Li
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA, USA
jundong@virginia.edu

Abstract
Counterfactual explanations promote explainability in machine learning models
by answering the question “how should an input instance be perturbed to obtain a
desired predicted label?". The comparison of this instance before and after perturbation can enhance human interpretation. Most existing studies on counterfactual
explanations are limited in tabular data or image data. In this work, we study
the problem of counterfactual explanation generation on graphs. A few studies
have explored counterfactual explanations on graphs, but many challenges of this
problem are still not well-addressed: 1) optimizing in the discrete and disorganized
space of graphs; 2) generalizing on unseen graphs; and 3) maintaining the causality
in the generated counterfactuals without prior knowledge of the causal model. To
tackle these challenges, we propose a novel framework CLEAR which aims to
generate counterfactual explanations on graphs for graph-level prediction models.
Specifically, CLEAR leverages a graph variational autoencoder based mechanism
to facilitate its optimization and generalization, and promotes causality by leveraging an auxiliary variable to better identify the underlying causal model. Extensive
experiments on both synthetic and real-world graphs validate the superiority of
CLEAR over the state-of-the-art methods in different aspects.

1

Introduction

To facilitate explainability in opaque machine learning (ML) models (e.g., how predictions are made
by a model, and what to do to achieve a desired outcome), explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) [1]
has recently attracted significant attention in many communities. Among the existing work of XAI, a
special class, i.e., counterfactual explanation (CFE) [2], promotes model explainability by answering
the following question: “For a specific instance, how should the input features X be slightly perturbed
to new features X ′ to obtain a different predicted label (often a desired label) from ML models?".
The original instance whose prediction needs to be explained is called an explainee instance, and
the generated instances after perturbation are referred to as “counterfactual explanations". Generally,
CFE promotes human interpretation through the comparison between X and X ′ . With its intuitive
nature, CFEs can be deployed in various real-world scenarios such as loan application and legal
framework [3]. Different from traditional CFE studies [2, 3, 4, 5] on tabular or image data, recently,
CFE on graphs is also an emerging field in many domains with graph structure data such as molecular
analysis [6] and professional networking [7]. For example, consider a grant application prediction
[8] model with each input instance as a graph representing a research team’s collaboration network,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

