Kernel Multimodal Continuous Attention
Alexander Moreno⇤
Luminous Computing

Zhenke Wu
University of Michigan

Supriya Nagesh
Georgia Tech

Walter Dempsey
University of Michigan

James M. Rehg
Georgia Tech

Abstract
Attention mechanisms average a data representation with respect to probability
weights. Recently, [23–25] proposed continuous attention, focusing on unimodal
exponential and deformed exponential family attention densities: the latter can
have sparse support. [8] extended to multimodality via Gaussian mixture attention
densities. In this paper, we propose using kernel exponential families [4] and our
new sparse counterpart, kernel deformed exponential families. Theoretically, we
show new existence results for both families, and approximation capabilities for
the deformed case. Lacking closed form expressions for the context vector, we
use numerical integration: we prove exponential convergence for both families.
Experiments show that kernel continuous attention often outperforms unimodal
continuous attention, and the sparse variant tends to highlight time series peaks.

1

Introduction

Attention mechanisms [3] are weighted averages of data representations used to make predictions.
Discrete attention 1) cannot easily handle irregularly spaced observations, and 2) attention maps may
be scattered, lacking focus. [23, 24] proposed continuous attention, showing that attention densities
maximize the regularized expectation of a function of the data location (i.e. time). Special cases
lead to exponential and deformed exponential families: the latter has sparse support. They form a
continuous data representation and take expectations with respect to attention densities. In [25] they
apply this to a transformer architecture.
[23–25] used unimodal attention densities, giving importance to one data region. [8] extended this to
multimodal Gaussian mixture attention densities. However 1) Gaussian mixtures lie in neither the
exponential nor deformed exponential families, and are difficult to study in the context of [23, 24];
and 2) they have dense support. Sparse support can say that certain regions of data do not matter: a
region of time has no effect on class probabilities, or a region of an image is not some object. We
would like to use multimodal exponential and deformed exponential family attention densities, and
understand how [8] relates to the framework of [23, 24].
This paper makes three contributions: 1) we introduce kernel deformed exponential families, a sparse
multimodal density class, and apply it along with the multimodal kernel exponential families [4]
as attention densities. The latter have been used for density estimation, but not weighting data
importance; 2) we theoretically analyze kernel exponential and deformed exponential family i)
normalization, ii) approximation and iii) context vector numerical integration properties; 3) we apply
⇤
An earlier draft was done at Georgia Tech as a dissertation chapter. Additional experiments and extensive
rewriting were done at Luminous Computing.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

