Online Algorithms for the Santa Claus Problem
MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
hajiagha@umd.edu

MohammadReza Khani
Microsoft Bing Ads
Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, WA
khani87@gmail.com

Debmalya Panigrahi
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC
debmalya@cs.duke.edu

Max Springer
Department of Mathematics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
mss423@umd.edu

Abstract
The Santa Claus problem is a fundamental problem in fair division: the goal is
to partition a set of heterogeneous items among heterogeneous agents so as to
maximize the minimum value of items received by any agent. In this paper, we
study the online version of this problem where the items are not known in advance
and have to be assigned to agents as they arrive over time. If the arrival order of
items is arbitrary, then no good assignment rule exists in the worst case. However,
we show that, if the arrival order is random, then for n agents and any " > 0, we
can obtain a competitive ratio of 1 " when the optimal assignment gives value
at least ⌦(log n/"2 ) to every agent (assuming each item has at most unit value).
We also show that this result is almost tight: namely, if the optimal solution has
value at most C ln n/" for some constant C, then there is no (1 ")-competitive
algorithm even for random arrival order.

1

Introduction

Fair allocation of resources is one of the central themes of algorithmic fairness and game theory. In
fact, the theory of fair division has its roots in mathematics going back to as early as 1948 [56]. In
the general setting, this problem comprises a set of items that must be divided among a set of agents
in an egalitarian manner, where each agent has a (possibly non-uniform) valuation for each item. A
natural objective to capture the goal of fair division is to maximize the minimum total value of items
received by any agent. This gives rise to the famous “Santa Claus problem” that we describe below.
In the Santa Claus problem, originally described by Bansal and Sviridenko in 2006 [12] (although it
was studied under different names or assumptions prior to this), the Santa Claus is said to have a set
of m presents to be distributed equitably among n children. Each child i 2 [n] has some arbitrary
non-negative value vij for present j 2 [m]. Santa’s goal is to distribute the presents in a way that
makes the least satisfied child maximally satisfied. More formally, this means that the assignment
seeks to maximize the minimum total value of the presents received by any child, where the total
value of presents received by a child is the sum of her values for the presents that she received. The
Santa Claus problem can be formalized as the following integer program:
⇢
m
n
X
X
max min
vij xij |
xij  1 8j 2 [m], x 2 {0, 1}mn .
i2[n]

j=1

i=1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

