Understanding Deep Contrastive Learning via
Coordinate-wise Optimization

Yuandong Tian
Meta AI (FAIR)
yuandong@meta.com

Abstract
We show that Contrastive Learning (CL) under a broad family of loss functions
(including InfoNCE) has a unified formulation of coordinate-wise optimization
on the network parameter θ and pairwise importance α, where the max player θ
learns representation for contrastiveness, and the min player α puts more weights
on pairs of distinct samples that share similar representations. The resulting
formulation, called α-CL, unifies not only various existing contrastive losses,
which differ by how sample-pair importance α is constructed, but also is able
to extrapolate to give novel contrastive losses beyond popular ones, opening a
new avenue of contrastive loss design. These novel losses yield comparable (or
better) performance on CIFAR10, STL-10 and CIFAR-100 than classic InfoNCE.
Furthermore, we also analyze the max player in detail: we prove that with fixed
α, max player is equivalent to Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for deep
linear network, and almost all local minima are global and rank-1, recovering
optimal PCA solutions. Finally, we extend our analysis on max player to 2-layer
ReLU networks, showing that its fixed points can have higher ranks. Codes are
available 1 .

1

Introduction

While contrastive self-supervised learning has been shown to learn good features (Chen et al., 2020;
He et al., 2020; Oord et al., 2018) and in many cases, comparable with features learned from
supervised learning, it remains an open problem what features it learns, in particular when deep
nonlinear networks are used. Theory on this is quite sparse, mostly focusing on loss function (Arora
et al., 2019) and treating the networks as a black-box function approximator.
In this paper, we present a novel perspective of contrastive learning (CL) for a broad family of
contrastive loss functions L(θ): minimizing L(θ) corresponds to a coordinate-wise optimization
procedure on an objective Eα (θ)−R(α) with respect to network parameter θ and pairwise importance
α on batch samples, where Eα (θ) is an energy function and R(α) is a regularizer, both associated
with the original contrastive loss L. In this view, the max player θ learns a representation to maximize
the contrastiveness of different samples and keep different augmentation view of the same sample
similar, while the min player α puts more weights on pairs of different samples that appear similar
in the representation space, subject to regularization. Empirically, this formulation, named Pairweighed Contrastive Learning (α-CL), when coupled with various regularization terms, yields novel
contrastive losses that show comparable (or better) performance in CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009)
and STL-10 (Coates et al., 2011).
We then focus on the behavior of the max player who does representation learning via maximizing
the energy function Eα (θ). When the underlying network is deep linear, we show that maxθ Eα (θ) is
the loss function (under re-parameterization) of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Wold et al.,
1987), a century-old unsupervised dimension reduction method. To further show they are equivalent,
1

https://github.com/facebookresearch/luckmatters/tree/main/ssl/real-dataset

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

