Bridging Central and Local Differential Privacy in
Data Acquisition Mechanisms

Alireza Fallah
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
afallah@mit.edu
Azarakhsh Malekian
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
azarakhsh.malekian@rotman.utoronto.ca

Ali Makhdoumi
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
ali.makhdoumi@duke.edu
Asuman Ozdaglar
EECS Department
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
asuman@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the design of optimal Bayesian data acquisition mechanisms for a platform interested in estimating the mean of a distribution by collecting data from
privacy-conscious users. In our setting, users have heterogeneous sensitivities for
two types of privacy losses corresponding to local and central differential privacy
measures. The local privacy loss is due to the leakage of a user’s information when
she shares her data with the platform, and the central privacy loss is due to the released estimate by the platform to the public. The users share their data in exchange
for a payment (e.g., through monetary transfers or services) that compensates for
their privacy losses. The platform knows the distribution of privacy sensitivities
but not their realizations, and must design a mechanism to solicit their preferences
and then deliver both local and central privacy guarantees while minimizing the
estimation error plus the expected payment to users. We first establish minimax
lower bounds for the estimation error, given a vector of privacy guarantees, and
show that a linear estimator is (near) optimal. We then turn to our main goal:
designing an optimal data acquisition mechanism. We establish that the design of
such mechanisms in a Bayesian setting (where the platform knows the distribution of users’ sensitivities and not their realizations) can be cast as a nonconvex
optimization problem. Additionally, for the class of linear estimators, we prove
that finding the optimal mechanism admits a Polynomial Time Approximation
Scheme.

1

Introduction

Users’ personal data are currently being utilized for personalized advertising, medical trials, targeted
advertising, and recommendation systems, among others. The transaction of individual data is set to
grow exponentially in the coming years, with more widespread applications of artificial intelligence
(AI) and machine learning techniques. Even though it is widely accepted that users need to own their
data (see, e.g., Posner and Weyl [2019], Kushmaro [2021], and WILL.I.AM [2019]), the impact of
different market architectures on the design and operation of data markets are not clear: some users
prefer to protect their own raw data while others expect companies to protect their data proactively
(see, e.g., GDMA [2018]). In this paper, we consider the design of data acquisition mechanisms when
users have heterogeneous privacy concerns and ask the following question:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

