Making Look-Ahead Active Learning Strategies
Feasible with Neural Tangent Kernels

Mohamad Amin Mohamadi∗
University of British Columbia
lemohama@cs.ubc.ca

Wonho Bae∗
University of British Columbia
whbae@cs.ubc.ca

Danica J. Sutherland
University of British Columbia
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
We propose a new method for approximating active learning acquisition strategies
that are based on retraining with hypothetically-labeled candidate data points.
Although this is usually infeasible with deep networks, we use the neural tangent
kernel to approximate the result of retraining, and prove that this approximation
works asymptotically even in an active learning setup – approximating “look-ahead”
selection criteria with far less computation required. This also enables us to conduct
sequential active learning, i.e. updating the model in a streaming regime, without
needing to retrain the model with SGD after adding each new data point. Moreover,
our querying strategy, which better understands how the model’s predictions will
change by adding new data points in comparison to the standard (“myopic”) criteria,
beats other look-ahead strategies by large margins, and achieves equal or better
performance compared to state-of-the-art methods on several benchmark datasets
in pool-based active learning.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has drastically advanced over the past decade along with a dramatic increase in
the volume of available data. It is, however, time-consuming and expensive to manually annotate
large datasets. Active learning attempts to alleviate this by allowing a model to “actively” request
annotation of specific data points, with the expectation that a model trained on informative points
will learn a better prediction than one on a random, “passively” labeled set of the same size.
The most common form of active learning is based on using an acquisition function to measure the
informativeness of potential data points or batches from some unlabeled pool. Many successful
acquisition functions are based on the current model’s uncertainty, such as maximum entropy [1]
and Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement (BALD) [2]. These functions are based on the
expectation that training on points about which the current model is uncertain will be effective at
decreasing the future model’s uncertainty about similar points. This assumption, however, often does
not hold: uncertain points might be inherently difficult to predict (aleatoric uncertainty) or simply too
difficult for the model to learn right now.
It would be helpful, then, to see how a new data point would change a model, potentially with respect
to other unseen data. One such strategy is known as Expected Model Change, which approximates
∗

These authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

