Learning Representations via a Robust Behavioral
Metric for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Jianda Chen
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
jianda001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Sinno Jialin Pan
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Learning an informative representation with behavioral metrics is able to accelerate
the deep reinforcement learning process. There are two key research issues on
behavioral metric-based representation learning: 1) how to relax the computation
of a specific behavioral metric, which is difficult or even intractable to compute,
and 2) how to approximate the relaxed metric by learning an embedding space
for states. In this paper, we analyze the potential relaxation and/or approximation
gaps for existing behavioral metric-based representation learning methods. Based
on the analysis, we propose a new behavioral distance, the RAP distance, and
develop a practical representation learning algorithm on top of it with a theoretical
analysis. We conduct extensive experiments on DeepMind Control Suite with
distraction, Robosuite, and autonomous driving simulator CARLA to demonstrate
new state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) aims to interactively learn an optimal policy from high-dimensional
environmental observations or states in an end-to-end manner. In the literature, it has been demonstrated that a robust representation of states, which are task-relevant and invariant to task-irrelevant
background information, is able to significantly speed up the RL process and makes the learned policy
more generalizable. Therefore, representation learning has played a key role in Deep RL algorithms
and attracts more and more attention in the RL community [4, 23, 17, 20].
Prior work on representation learning is focused on learning embeddings to represent states based
on a reconstruction loss [26, 25, 13]. Though promising results have been reported on some RL
application domains, policies learned with such representations usually fail to generalize well
in a complex environment because minimizing a reconstruction loss may potentially introduce
local (visual) features with task-irrelevant information. Another research direction is to apply data
augmentation techniques to learn robust state representations for an RL agent [19, 28, 27]. While data
augmentation-based approaches may be able to learn more robust feature representations, they do not
take the characteristics of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), e.g., reward signals and dynamics
models, into consideration when learning representations. As a result, the learned representations may
not be informative for learning an optimal policy for the task of interest. A third research direction
is to construct some auxiliary tasks in addition to the prime RL task and learn state representations
by learning all the tasks simultaneously [14, 2, 21]. These approaches can be considered as shaping
the state representations implicitly by learning the auxiliary tasks, which do not have a guarantee for
learning a better policy, especially when the auxiliary tasks fail to benefit the learning of the RL task.
Recently, behavioral metrics, such as the bisimulation metric and its variants [7, 8, 3], have been
exploited in representation learning for deep RL. Behavioral metrics are originally proposed to
measure the behavioral similarity between states in terms of rewards and dynamics models, e.g, state
transition probabilities. The high-level idea is to learn state embeddings by preserving the behavioral
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

