The Nature of Temporal Difference Errors in
Multi-step Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Yunhao Tang
DeepMind
robintyh@deepmind.com

Mark Rowland
DeepMind
markrowland@deepmind.com

Rémi Munos
DeepMind
munos@deepmind.com

Bernardo Ávila Pires
DeepMind
bavilapires@deepmind.com

Will Dabney
DeepMind
wdabney@deepmind.com

Marc G. Bellemare
Google Brain
bellemare@google.com

Abstract
We study the multi-step off-policy learning approach to distributional RL. Despite
the apparent similarity between value-based RL and distributional RL, our study
reveals intriguing and fundamental differences between the two cases in the multistep setting. We identify a novel notion of path-dependent distributional TD
error, which is indispensable for principled multi-step distributional RL. The
distinction from the value-based case bears important implications on concepts such
as backward-view algorithms. Our work provides the first theoretical guarantees on
multi-step off-policy distributional RL algorithms, including results that apply to
the small number of existing approaches to multi-step distributional RL. In addition,
we derive a novel algorithm, Quantile Regression-Retrace, which leads to a deep
RL agent QR-DQN-Retrace that shows empirical improvements over QR-DQN on
the Atari-57 benchmark. Collectively, we shed light on how unique challenges in
multi-step distributional RL can be addressed both in theory and practice.

1

Introduction

P∞
The return t=0 γ t Rt is a fundamental concept in reinforcement learning (RL). In general, the return
is a random variable, whose distribution captures important information such as the stochasticity in
future events. While the classic view of value-based RL typically focuses on the expected return
[1–3], learning the full return distribution is of both theoretical and practical importance [4–10].
To design efficient algorithms for learning return distributions, a natural idea is to construct distributional equivalents of existing multi-step off-policy value-based algorithms. In value-based RL,
multi-step learning tends to propagate useful information more efficiently and off-policy learning is
ubiquitous in modern RL systems. Meanwhile, the return distribution shares inherent commonalities
with the expected return, thanks to the close connection between the distributional Bellman equation
[4–6, 10] and the celebrated value-based Bellman equation [2]. The Bellman equation is foundational
to value-based RL algorithms, including many multi-step off-policy methods [11–14]. Due to the
apparent similarity between distributional and value-based Bellman equations, should we expect key
value-based concepts and algorithms to seamlessly transfer to distributional learning?
Our study indicates that the answer is no. There are critical differences between distributional and
value-based RL, which requires a distinct treatment of multi-step learning. Indeed, thanks to the
focus on expected returns, the value-based setup offers many unique conceptual and computational
simplifications in algorithmic design. However, we find that such simplifications do not hold for
distributional learning. Multi-step distributional RL requires a deeper look at the connections between
fundamental concepts such as n-step returns, TD errors and importance weights for off-policy
learning. To this end, we make the following conceptual, theoretical and algorithmic contributions:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

