Anonymous Bandits for Multi-User Systems

Hossein Esfandiari
Google Research
esfandiari@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Jon Schneider
Google Research
jschnei@google.com

Abstract
In this work, we present and study a new framework for online learning in systems
with multiple users that provide user anonymity. Specifically, we extend the
notion of bandits to obey the standard k-anonymity constraint by requiring each
observation to be an aggregation of rewards for at least k users. This provides a
simple yet effective framework where one can learn a clustering of users in an
online fashion without observing any user’s individual decision. We initiate the
study of anonymous bandits and provide the first sublinear regret algorithms and
lower bounds for this setting.

1

Introduction

In many modern systems, the system learns the behavior of the users by adaptively interacting with
the users and adjusting to their responses. For example, in online advertisement, a website may show
a certain type of ads to a user, observe whether the user clicks on the ads or not, and based on this
feedback adjust the type of ads it serves the user. As part of this learning process, the system faces a
dilemma between “exploring” new types of ads, which may or may not seem interesting to the user,
and “exploiting” its knowledge of what types of ads historically seemed interesting to the user. This
concept is very well studied in the context of online learning.
In principle, users benefit from a system that automatically adapts to their preferences. However,
users may naturally worry about a system that observes all of their actions, and worry that the system
may use this personal information against them or mistakenly reveal it to hackers or untrustworthy
third parties. There therefore arises an additional dilemma between providing a better personalized
user experience and acquiring the users’ trust.
We study the problem of online learning in multi-user systems under a version of anonymity inspired
by k-anonymity [Sweeney, 2002]. In its most general form, k-anonymity is a property of anonymous
data guaranteeing that for every data point, there exist at least k − 1 other indistinguishable data
points in the dataset. Although there exist more recent notions of privacy and anonymity with stronger
guarantees (e.g. various forms of differential privacy), k-anonymity is a simple and practical notion
of anonymity that remains commonly employed in practice and enforced in various legal settings
[Goldsteen et al., 2021, Saf, November 2019, Slijepčević et al., 2021].
To explain our notion of anonymity, consider the online advertisement application mentioned earlier.
In online advertisement, when a user visits a website the website selects a type of ad and shows that
user an ad of that type. The user may then choose to click on that ad or not, and a reward is paid
out based on whether the user clicks on the ad or not (this reward may represent either the utility of
the user or the revenue of the online advertisement system). Note that the ad here is chosen by the
website, and the fact that the website assigns a user a specific type of ad is not something we intend
to hide from the website. However, the decision to click on the ad is made by the user. We intend to
protect these individual decisions, while allowing the website to learn what general types of ads each
user is interested in. In particular, we enforce a form of group level C-anonymity on these decisions,
by forcing the system to group users into groups of at least C users and to treat each group equally by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

