Bayesian Spline Learning for Equation Discovery of
Nonlinear Dynamics with Quantified Uncertainty

Luning Sun∗
University of Notre Dame
lsun7@nd.edu

Daniel Zhengyu Huang∗
California Institute of Technology
dzhuang@caltech.edu
Jian-Xun Wang †
University of Notre Dame
jwang33@nd.edu

Hao Sun
Renmin University of China
haosun@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Nonlinear dynamics are ubiquitous in science and engineering applications, but the
physics of most complex systems is far from being fully understood. Discovering
interpretable governing equations from measurement data can help us understand
and predict the behavior of complex dynamic systems. Although extensive work
has recently been done in this field, robustly distilling explicit model forms from
very sparse data with considerable noise remains intractable. Moreover, quantifying and propagating the uncertainty of the identified system from noisy data is
challenging, and relevant literature is still limited. To bridge this gap, we develop
a novel Bayesian spline learning framework to identify parsimonious governing
equations of nonlinear (spatio)temporal dynamics from sparse, noisy data with
quantified uncertainty. The proposed method utilizes spline basis to handle the
data scarcity and measurement noise, upon which a group of derivatives can be
accurately computed to form a library of candidate model terms. The equation
residuals are used to inform the spline learning in a Bayesian manner, where
approximate Bayesian uncertainty calibration techniques are employed to approximate posterior distributions of the trainable parameters. To promote the sparsity,
an iterative sequential-threshold Bayesian learning approach is developed, using
the alternative direction optimization strategy to systematically approximate L0
sparsity constraints. The proposed algorithm is evaluated on multiple nonlinear dynamical systems governed by canonical ordinary and partial differential equations,
and the merit/superiority of the proposed method is demonstrated by comparison
with state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

In the realm of science and engineering, dynamical systems are ubiquitous. However, in actual
circumstances, the governing equations behind complicated dynamics may not be completely understood, preventing researchers from developing first-principled models. On the other hand, the
ever-increasing data availability opens up new avenues for scientists to identify predictive models
from enormous observation data, a process known as system identification (SI). Recent advances in
deep learning have prompted the rapid development of powerful SI models for high-dimensional
problems using deep neural networks (DNNs). Many DNN-based SI models have been proposed to
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

