Post-hoc Estimators for
Learning to Defer to an Expert
Harikrishna Narasimhan
Google Research, Mountain View
hnarasimhan@google.com
Aditya Krishna Menon
Google Research, New York
adityakmenon@google.com

Wittawat Jitkrittum
Google Research, New York
wittawat@google.com

Ankit Singh Rawat
Google Research, New York
ankitsrawat@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research, New York
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
Many practical settings allow a classifier to defer predictions to one or more costly
experts. For example, the learning to defer paradigm allows a classifier to defer to
a human expert, at some monetary cost. Similarly, the adaptive inference paradigm
allows a base model to defer to one or more large models, at some computational
cost. The goal in these settings is to learn classification and deferral mechanisms to
optimise a suitable accuracy-cost tradeoff. To achieve this, a central issue studied
in prior work is the design of a coherent loss function for both mechanisms. In this
work, we demonstrate that existing losses can underfit the training set when there is
a non-trivial deferral cost, owing to an implicit application of a high level of label
smoothing. To resolve this, we propose two post-hoc estimators that fit a deferral
function on top of a base model, either by threshold correction, or by learning
when the base model’s error rate exceeds the cost of deferring to the expert. Both
approaches are equipped with theoretical guarantees, and empirically yield effective
accuracy-cost tradeoffs on learning to defer and adaptive inference benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Supervised classification conventionally considers learning a single model with good average-case
test performance. However, many practical settings allow for choosing amongst multiple models to
classify a given sample. For example, in the learning to defer (L2D) paradigm [18], a base classifier
may be used in conjunction with a human expert. Specifically, the classifier has the option of deferring
to the expert, at the expense of incurring some additional cost (e.g., monetary expense). The goal is
to learn a classifier and deferral function achieving a suitable accuracy-cost tradeoff. This problem
has received a surge of interest [26, 19, 22, 34] given the increasing use of machine learning in
high-stakes decision making. Interestingly, similar considerations are also found in the problem of
adaptive inference for resource-constrained prediction [13]: here, a base model can choose to defer to
one or more experts, which are themselves learning models with higher capacity and inference cost.
Similar to L2D, the goal is to achieve a suitable tradeoff between accuracy and (inference) cost.
A key problem in such settings is deciding when the base model should defer its prediction to the
expert(s). An intuitive strategy is to defer when the model has low prediction confidence (e.g.,
classification margin). While theoretically grounded [8], this strategy can under-perform when the
base model has low capacity [9]. An alternate strategy is to explicitly formulate and optimise a joint
loss function for the base classifier and deferral function. This has been followed with success in the
L2D literature, particularly with the cost-sensitive softmax cross-entropy loss (CSS) of Mozannar and
Sontag [19], and one-versus-all (OvA) loss of Verma and Nalisnick [34].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

