SecureFedYJ: a safe feature Gaussianization protocol
for Federated Learning
Tanguy Marchand
Owkin Inc., New York, USA.
tanguy.marchand@owkin.com
Constance Beguier⇤

Boris Muzellec
Owkin Inc., New York, USA.
boris.muzellec@owkin.com

Jean Ogier du Terrail
Owkin Inc., New York, USA.
jean.du-terrail@owkin.com

Mathieu Andreux
Owkin Inc., New York, USA.
mathieu.andreux@owkin.com

Abstract
The Yeo-Johnson (YJ) transformation is a standard parametrized per-feature unidimensional transformation often used to Gaussianize features in machine learning.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of applying the YJ transformation in a
cross-silo Federated Learning setting under privacy constraints. For the first time,
we prove that the YJ negative log-likelihood is in fact convex, which allows us
to optimize it with exponential search. We numerically show that the resulting
algorithm is more stable than the state-of-the-art approach based on the Brent
minimization method. Building on this simple algorithm and Secure Multiparty
Computation routines, we propose S ECURE F EDYJ, a federated algorithm that
performs a pooled-equivalent YJ transformation without leaking more information
than the final fitted parameters do. Quantitative experiments on real data demonstrate that, in addition to being secure, our approach reliably normalizes features
across silos as well as if data were pooled, making it a viable approach for safe
federated feature Gaussianization.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [45, 32] is an approach that was recently proposed to train machine learning
(ML) models across multiple data holders, or clients, without centralizing data points, notably for
privacy reasons. While many FL applications have been proposed, two main settings have emerged
[23]: cross-device FL, involving a large number of small edge devices, and cross-silo FL, dealing
with a smaller number of clients, with larger computational capabilities. Due to the sensitivity and
relative local scarcity of medical data, healthcare is a promising application of cross-silo FL [40], e.g.
to train a biomedical ML model between different hospitals as if all the datasets were pooled in a
central server. In this paper, we focus on the cross-silo setting.
The constraints of cross-silo FL Although cross-silo FL resembles standard distributed learning,
it faces at least two important distinct challenges: privacy and heterogeneity. Due to data sensitivity,
clients might impose stringent security and privacy constraints on FL collaborations. This arises in
coopetitive FL projects, where models are jointly trained on industrial competitors’ datasets [55], as
well as medical FL applications, where conservative data regulations might apply. In this setting,
using standard FL algorithms such as F EDAVG [32] might not provide enough privacy guarantees, as
privacy attacks such as data reconstruction can be carried out based on the clients’ gradients [56, 54].
⇤

Contribution done while at Owkin, Inc.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

