HF-NeuS: Improved Surface Reconstruction Using
High-Frequency Details

Yiqun Wang
KAUST

Ivan Skorokhodov
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

Abstract
Neural rendering can be used to reconstruct implicit representations of shapes
without 3D supervision. However, current neural surface reconstruction methods
have difficulty learning high-frequency geometry details, so the reconstructed
shapes are often over-smoothed. We develop HF-NeuS, a novel method to improve
the quality of surface reconstruction in neural rendering. We follow recent work to
model surfaces as signed distance functions (SDFs). First, we offer a derivation
to analyze the relationship between the SDF, the volume density, the transparency
function, and the weighting function used in the volume rendering equation and
propose to model transparency as a transformed SDF. Second, we observe that
attempting to jointly encode high-frequency and low-frequency components in a
single SDF leads to unstable optimization. We propose to decompose the SDF
into base and displacement functions with a coarse-to-fine strategy to increase
the high-frequency details gradually. Finally, we design an adaptive optimization
strategy that makes the training process focus on improving those regions near
the surface where the SDFs have artifacts. Our qualitative and quantitative results
show that our method can reconstruct fine-grained surface details and obtain better
surface reconstruction quality than the current state of the art. Code available at
https://github.com/yiqun-wang/HFS.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction from a set of images is a fundamental challenge in computer vision [9]. In the
recent past, the seminal framework NeRF [19] inspired a lot of follow up work by modeling 3D
objects as a density function σ(x) and view-dependent color c(x, v) for each point x ∈ R3 in the
volume. The density function and view-dependent color function are implicit functions modeled by
a neural network. The results of this approach are very strong and therefore NeRF inspired a large
amount of follup up work, e.g. [18, 17, 24, 35, 20, 2].
In particular, one direction of work tries to constrain the density field to make it more consistent with
a density field stemming from a surface. In the original formulation, almost arbitrary densities can be
modeled by the neural network and there is no guarantee that a meaningful surface can be extracted
from the density. Two noteworthy recent approaches, Neus [30] and VolSDF [32], proposed to embed
a signed distance field in the volume rendering equation. Therefore, instead of modeling the density
σ with a neural network, these approaches model a signed distance function f with a neural network.
This leads to greatly improved surface reconstruction.
We build on this exciting recent work and seek further improvement in the quality of surfaces that are
being reconstructed. To this end, we propose our method HF-NeuS consisting of three new building
blocks. First, we analyze the relationship between the signed distance function on the one hand and
the volume density, the transparency, and the weighting function on the other hand. We conclude from
our derivation that it would be best to model a function that maps signed distances to the transparency
and propose a class of functions that fulfill the theoretical requirements. Second, we observe that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

