New Definitions and Evaluations for Saliency Methods:
Staying Intrinsic, Complete and Sound
Arushi Gupta*,1 , Nikunj Saunshi*,1 , Dingli Yu*,1 , Kaifeng Lyu1 , Sanjeev Arora1
1
Princeton University
{arushig,nsaunshi,dingliy,klyu,arora}@cs.princeton.edu
*

Denotes equal contribution

Abstract
Saliency methods compute heat maps that highlight portions of an input that were
most important for the label assigned to it by a deep net. Evaluations of saliency
methods convert this heat map into a new masked input by retaining the k highestranked pixels of the original input and replacing the rest with “uninformative”
pixels, and checking if the net’s output is mostly unchanged. This is usually seen
as an explanation of the output, but the current paper highlights reasons why this
inference of causality may be suspect. Inspired by logic concepts of completeness
& soundness, it observes that the above type of evaluation focuses on completeness
of the explanation, but ignores soundness. New evaluation metrics are introduced
to capture both notions, while staying in an intrinsic framework—i.e., using the
dataset and the net, but no separately trained nets, human evaluations, etc. A
simple saliency method is described that matches or outperforms prior methods
in the evaluations. Experiments also suggest new intrinsic justifications, based on
soundness, for popular heuristic tricks such as TV regularization and upsampling.

1

Introduction

Saliency methods try to understand why the deep net gave a certain answer on a particular input,
and are an important component of explainability, fairness, robustness, etc., in deep learning. This
paper restricts attention to the (large) class of saliency methods that return an importance score for
each coordinate of the input — often visualized as a heat map — which captures the coordinate’s
importance to the final decision.1 Early saliency methods used an axiomatic system of “credit attribution” to individual input coordinates, using backpropagation-like methods [5, 36] and cooperative
game theory, such as Shapley values [27, 45]. See Section 2 and Samek et al. [34] for discussion of
strengths and limitations of such methods. More recent methods try to find heat maps that are largely
concentrated on a smaller set of pixels/coordinates and are discussed further below.
There exists an ecosystem of evaluation metrics to evaluate saliency methods. Evaluations can be
extrinsic, involving human evaluation [1], and comparison to certain ground truth explanations [47].
We restrict attention to intrinsic evaluations, which use computations involving the net itself and
the heat/saliency map — but no human evaluations or evaluations that involve training new deep
nets. Popular intrinsic evaluations include saliency metric [9] and insertion & deletion metrics [30].
A frequent idea in intrinsic evaluations (see Section 3 for references) is to create a new composite input
— or sequence of such inputs — using the heat map and the original input, and to evaluate the original
net on this composite input. For example, if M is a binary vector with 1’s in the k coordinates with
1

Heat maps suffice for recognition/classification tasks; other tasks may require more complex explanations.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

