Learning Deep Input-Output Stable Dynamics
Ryosuke Kojima⇤
Graduate School of Medicine
Kyoto University
Kyoto, 606-8501
kojima.ryosuke.8e@kyoto-u.ac.jp

Yuji Okamoto⇤
Graduate School of Medicine
Kyoto University
Kyoto, 606-8501
okamoto.yuji.2c@kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Learning stable dynamics from observed time-series data is an essential problem
in robotics, physical modeling, and systems biology. Many of these dynamics are
represented as an inputs-output system to communicate with the external environment. In this study, we focus on input-output stable systems, exhibiting robustness
against unexpected stimuli and noise. We propose a method to learn nonlinear
systems guaranteeing the input-output stability. Our proposed method utilizes the
differentiable projection onto the space satisfying the Hamilton-Jacobi inequality
to realize the input-output stability. The problem of finding this projection can
be formulated as a quadratic constraint quadratic programming problem, and we
derive the particular solution analytically. Also, we apply our method to a toy
bistable model and the task of training a benchmark generated from a glucoseinsulin simulator. The results show that the nonlinear system with neural networks
by our method achieves the input-output stability, unlike naive neural networks.
Our code is available at https://github.com/clinfo/DeepIOStability.

1

Introduction

Learning dynamics from time-series data has many applications such as industrial robot systems
[1], physical systems[2], and biological systems [3, 4]. Many of these real-world systems equipped
with inputs and outputs to connect for each other, which are called input-output systems [5]. For
example, biological systems sustain life by obtaining energy from the external environment through
their inputs. Such real-world systems have various properties such as stability, controllability, and
observability, which provide clues to analyze the complex systems.
Our purpose is to learn a complex system with “desired properties” from a dataset consisting of
pairs of input and output signals. To represent the target system, this paper considers the following
nonlinear dynamics:
ẋ = f (x) + G(x)u,
y = h(x).

x(0) = x0

(1)

where the inner state x, the input u, and the output y belong to a signal space that maps time interval
[0, 1) to the Euclidean space. We denote the dimension of x, u, and y as n, m, and l, respectively.

Recently, with the development of deep learning, many methods to learn systems from time-series
data using neural networks have been proposed [6–8]. By representing the maps (f, G, h) in Eq. (1)
as neural networks, complex systems can be modeled and trained from a given dataset. However,
guaranteeing that a trained system has the desired properties is challenging.

A naively trained system fits the input signals contained in the training dataset, but does not always
fit for new input signals. For example, Figure 1 shows our preliminary experiments where we
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

