DART: Articulated Hand Model with Diverse
Accessories and Rich Textures
Daiheng Gao1∗ Yuliang Xiu2∗ Kailin Li3∗ Lixin Yang3∗ Feng Wang1
Peng Zhang1 Bang Zhang1 Cewu Lu3 Ping Tan4
1
Alibaba XR Lab 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Simon Fraser University
{daiheng.gdh,yunzong.wf,funtian.zp,zhangbang.zb}@alibaba-inc.com
yuliang.xiu@tuebingen.mpg.de
{kailinli,siriusyang,lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
pingtan@sfu.ca

Abstract
Hand, the bearer of human productivity and intelligence, is receiving much attention
due to the recent fever of digital twins. Among different hand morphable models,
MANO has been widely used in vision and graphics community. However, MANO
disregards textures and accessories, which largely limits its power to synthesize
photorealistic hand data. In this paper, we extend MANO with Diverse Accessories
and Rich Textures, namely DART. DART is composed of 50 daily 3D accessories
which varies in appearance and shape, and 325 hand-crafted 2D texture maps covers
different kinds of blemishes or make-ups. Unity GUI is also provided to generate
synthetic hand data with user-defined settings, e.g. pose, camera, background,
lighting, texture, and accessory. Finally, we release DARTset, which contains
large-scale (800K), high-fidelity synthetic hand images, paired with perfect-aligned
3D labels. Experiments demonstrate its superiority in diversity. As a complement
to existing hand datasets, DARTset boosts the generalization in both hand pose
estimation and mesh recovery tasks. Raw ingredients (textures, accessories), Unity
GUI, source code and DARTset are publicly available at dart2022.github.io.

1

Introduction

Humans rely heavily on their hands to interact with surrounding objects and express their attitudes
by sign language. Accurate reconstruction of these hand gestures from raw pixels, could facilitate
the immersive experience in AR/VR, and lead us to a better understanding of human mental and
physical activities. Emerging data-driven hand reconstruction approaches demand high-fidelity and
diverse hand images, paired with perfect-aligned hand geometries. In addition to manually labeling
the collected in-the-wild hand pictures, building large-scale synthetic data aided with photorealistic
rendering engines and articulated hand model seems a promising and more affordable alternative.
However, existing articulated hand models [40, 36, 24, 23] are too idealized to represent the complexity and diversity of real hands. Realistic hands often vary in appearance (e.g. colors of skin and
nails, palm prints), with blemishes (e.g. moles, scars, bandages), personalized make-up (e.g. tattoos),
and accessories (e.g. ring, watch, bracelet, glove). Also, the captured textures with baked-in factors,
i.e. lighting, shading, and materials, like HTML [36], are not suitable for photorealistic rendering
pipeline. The comparison between different hand models is summarized in Tab. 1.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

