How and Why to Manipulate Your Own Agent:
On the Incentives of Users of Learning Agents

Yoav Kolumbus
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
yoav.kolumbus@mail.huji.ac.il

Noam Nisan
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
noam@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
The usage of automated learning agents is becoming increasingly prevalent in
many online economic applications such as online auctions and automated trading.
Motivated by such applications, this paper is dedicated to fundamental modeling
and analysis of the strategic situations that the users of automated learning agents
are facing. We consider strategic settings where several users engage in a repeated
online interaction, assisted by regret-minimizing learning agents that repeatedly
play a “game” on their behalf. We propose to view the outcomes of the agents’
dynamics as inducing a “meta-game” between the users. Our main focus is on
whether users can benefit in this meta-game from “manipulating” their own agents
by misreporting their parameters to them. We define a general framework to model
and analyze these strategic interactions between users of learning agents for general
games and analyze the equilibria induced between the users in three classes of
games. We show that, generally, users have incentives to misreport their parameters
to their own agents, and that such strategic user behavior can lead to very different
outcomes than those anticipated by standard analysis.

1

Introduction

This paper deals with the following common type of scenario: several users engage in some strategic
online interaction, where each of them is assisted by a learning agent. A typical example is advertisers
that compete for advertising slots over some platform. Typically, each of these advertisers enters his
key parameters into some advertiser-facing website, and then this website’s “agent” participates on
the advertiser’s behalf in a sequence of auctions for ad slots. Often, the platform designer provides
this agent as its advertiser-facing user interface. In cases where the platform’s agent does not optimize
sufficiently well for the advertiser (but rather, say, for the auctioneer), one would expect some other
company to provide a better (for the advertiser) agent.
The basic model for such scenarios is as follows. There is an underlying n-person game that n
“software learning agents” will play repeatedly. Some of the parameters of this game, typically the
players’ utilities, are private to the n “human users,” and each of these users enters his key parameters
into his own software agent. From this point on, these software agents repeatedly play the game
on behalf of their users, where each agent aims to optimize the utility of its owner according to the
parameters reported to it by using some learning algorithm. A typical learning algorithm of this type
will have at its core some regret-minimization algorithm [15, 47], such as “multiplicative weights”
[1], “online gradient descent” [94], or some variant of fictitious play [18, 79], such as “follow the
perturbed leader” [45, 51].
On an intuitive level, these agents, playing between themselves, each aiming to maximize its owner’s
utility, will reach some kind of a game-theoretic equilibrium of the underlying game, and the average
utilities of the agents over time will converge to the utilities of this equilibrium. Specifically, while it
is known that the dynamics of regret-minimization algorithms may fail to converge to any equilibrium
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

