Near-Optimal Multi-Agent Learning for
Safe Coverage Control

Manish Prajapat
ETH Zurich
manishp@ai.ethz.ch

Matteo Turchetta
ETH Zurich
matteotu@inf.ethz.ch

Melanie N. Zeilinger†
ETH Zurich
mzeilinger@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause†
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
In multi-agent coverage control problems, agents navigate their environment to
reach locations that maximize the coverage of some density. In practice, the density
is rarely known a priori, further complicating the original NP-hard problem.
Moreover, in many applications, agents cannot visit arbitrary locations due to a
priori unknown safety constraints. In this paper, we aim to efficiently learn the
density to approximately solve the coverage problem while preserving the agents’
safety. We first propose a conditionally linear submodular coverage function that
facilitates theoretical analysis. Utilizing this structure, we develop M ACO PT, a
novel algorithm that efficiently trades off the exploration-exploitation dilemma
due to partial observability, and show that it achieves sublinear regret. Next, we
extend results on single-agent safe exploration to our multi-agent setting and
propose S AFE M AC for safe coverage and exploration. We analyze S AFE M AC and
give first of its kind results: near optimal coverage in finite time while provably
guaranteeing safety. We extensively evaluate our algorithms on synthetic and real
problems, including a biodiversity monitoring task under safety constraints, where
S AFE M AC outperforms competing methods.

1

Introduction

In multi-agent coverage control (M AC) problems, multiple agents coordinate to maximize coverage
over some spatially distributed events. Their applications abound, from collaborative mapping [1],
environmental monitoring [2], inspection robotics [3] to sensor networks [4]. In addition, the coverage
formulation can address core challenges in cooperative multi-agent RL [5, 6], e.g., exploration [7],
by providing high-level goals. In these applications, agents often encounter safety constraints that
may lead to critical accidents when ignored, e.g., obstacles [8] or extreme weather conditions [9, 10].
Deploying coverage control solutions in the real world presents many challenges: (i) for a given
density of relevant events, this is an NP hard problem [11]; (ii) such density is rarely known in
practice [2] and must be learned from data, which presents a complex active learning problem as
the quantity we measure (the density) differs from the one we want to optimize (its coverage); (iii)
agents often operate under safety-critical conditions, [8–10], that may be unknown a priori. This
requires cautious exploration of the environment to prevent catastrophic outcomes. While prior work
addresses subsets of these challenges (see Section 7), we are not aware of methods that address them
jointly.
† Joint supervision. Code available at https://github.com/manish-pra/SafeMaC
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

