Emergence of Hierarchical Layers in a Single Sheet of
Self-Organizing Spiking Neurons

Paul Bertens
Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering
Korea University
Seoul, South Korea
paulbertens@korea.ac.kr

Seong-Whan Lee
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Korea University
Seoul, South Korea
sw.lee@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Traditionally convolutional neural network architectures have been designed by
stacking layers on top of each other to form deeper hierarchical networks. The cortex in the brain however does not just stack layers as done in standard convolution
neural networks, instead different regions are organized next to each other in a large
single sheet of neurons. Biological neurons self organize to form topographic maps,
where neurons encoding similar stimuli group together to form logical clusters.
Here we propose new self-organization principles that allow for the formation of
hierarchical cortical regions (i.e. layers) in a completely unsupervised manner without requiring any predefined architecture. Synaptic connections are dynamically
grown and pruned, which allows us to actively constrain the number of incoming
and outgoing connections. This way we can minimize the wiring cost by taking into
account both the synaptic strength and the connection length. The proposed method
uses purely local learning rules in the form of spike-timing-dependent plasticity
(STDP) with lateral excitation and inhibition. We show experimentally that these
self-organization rules are sufficient for topographic maps and hierarchical layers
to emerge. Our proposed Self-Organizing Neural Sheet (SONS) model can thus
form traditional neural network layers in a completely unsupervised manner from
just a single large pool of unstructured spiking neurons.

1

Introduction

Neurons are highly organized in the brain such that neurons encoding similar features are clustered
closer together [1, 2]. These clusters of neurons form large hierarchical modules along the cortex.
There is the formation of the major distinct cortical regions (visual cortex, auditory cortex, motor
cortex etc.), and also subdivisions within each region (e.g. V1, V2, V3, etc.) [1]. Furthermore these
regions are divided into cortical columns [3], where nearby cortical columns also encode similar
features. For example neurons encoding edges of similar orientations are clustered together in the
visual cortex, forming so called topographic maps [4, 5, 6]. These topographic maps have been
extensively studied and are found everywhere along the cortex [1, 2].
Classically deep neural networks (DNNs) are constructed by stacking multiple layers on top of each
other, manually designing the neural architecture [7]. Recent techniques in neural architecture search
do try to find more optimal architectures for a given problem [8, 9], but they still consist of modules
of layers that are combined to optimize some objective function. This creates an inherent bias in the
type of information the network can process, and each architecture has to be optimized for the task at
hand. In this paper a different approach is taken instead, we define local learning rules such that a
neural architecture of multiple hierarchical regions automatically emerges. This enables us to start
with a large pool of completely unstructured neurons that self-organize into logical modules.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

