Safety Guarantees for Neural Network Dynamic
Systems via Stochastic Barrier Functions

Rayan Mazouz1∗ , Karan Muvvala1∗ , Akash Ratheesh1 , Luca Laurenti2 , Morteza Lahijanian1
1
Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences, University of Colorado Boulder, USA
2
Delft Center for Systems and Control, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
{rayan.mazouz,karan.muvvala,akash.ratheesh,morteza.lahijanian}@colorado.edu
{l.laurenti}@tudelft.nl
∗
Equal Contribution

Abstract
Neural Networks (NNs) have been successfully employed to represent the state
evolution of complex dynamical systems. Such models, referred to as NN dynamic
models (NNDMs), use iterative noisy predictions of NN to estimate a distribution
of system trajectories over time. Despite their accuracy, safety analysis of NNDMs
is known to be a challenging problem and remains largely unexplored. To address
this issue, in this paper, we introduce a method of providing safety guarantees for
NNDMs. Our approach is based on stochastic barrier functions, whose relation
with safety are analogous to that of Lyapunov functions with stability. We first show
a method of synthesizing stochastic barrier functions for NNDMs via a convex
optimization problem, which in turn provides a lower bound on the system’s safety
probability. A key step in our method is the employment of the recent convex
approximation results for NNs to find piece-wise linear bounds, which allow the
formulation of the barrier function synthesis problem as a sum-of-squares optimization program. If the obtained safety probability is above the desired threshold, the
system is certified. Otherwise, we introduce a method of generating controls for
the system that robustly minimize the unsafety probability in a minimally-invasive
manner. We exploit the convexity property of the barrier function to formulate
the optimal control synthesis problem as a linear program. Experimental results
illustrate the efficacy of the method. Namely, they show that the method can scale
to multi-dimensional NNDMs with multiple layers and hundreds of neurons per
layer, and that the controller can significantly improve the safety probability.

1

Introduction

Safety is a major concern for autonomous dynamical systems, especially in safety-critical applications.
Examples include UAVs, autonomous cars, and surgical robots. To this end, various methods are
developed to provide safety guarantees for such systems [1–3]. Most of these methods, however,
assume (simple) analytical models, which are often unavailable or too expensive to obtain due to
complexity (nonlinearities) in real-world systems [4]. This has given rise to recent efforts to harvest
the representational power of neural networks (NNs) to predict how the state of a system evolves
over time, referred to as NN dynamic models (NNDMs) [5, 6]. Despite their efficient and accurate
representation of realistic dynamics, it has been difficult to make formal claims about the behavior of
NNDMs over time. This poses a major challenge in safety-critical domains: how to provide safety
guarantees for NNDMs?
In this paper, we propose a framework to provide safety certificates for NNDMs. The approach is
based on stochastic barrier functions [7, 8], whose role for safety is analogous to that of Lyapunov
functions for stability, and which can guarantee forward invariance of a safe set. Specifically, we
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

