Forward-Backward Latent State Inference for
Hidden Continuous-Time semi-Markov Chains
Nicolai Engelmann
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technische Universitat Darmstadt
64289, Darmstadt
nicolai.engelmann@tu-darmstadt.de

Heinz Köppl
Department of Electrical Engineering
Department of Biology
Technische Universitat Darmstadt
64289, Darmstadt
heinz.koeppl@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Hidden semi-Markov Models (HSMM’s) - while broadly in use - are restricted to
a discrete and uniform time grid. They are thus not well suited to explain often
irregularly spaced discrete event data from continuous-time phenomena. We show
that non-sampling-based latent state inference used in HSMM’s can be generalized
to latent Continuous-Time semi-Markov Chains (CTSMC’s). We formulate integrodifferential forward and backward equations adjusted to the observation likelihood
and introduce an exact integral equation for the Bayesian posterior marginals
and a scalable Viterbi-type algorithm for posterior path estimates. The presented
equations can be efficiently solved using well-known numerical methods. As a
practical tool, variable-step HSMM’s are introduced. We evaluate our approaches
in latent state inference scenarios in comparison to classical HSMM’s.

1

Introduction

Continuous-Time semi-Markov Chains (CTSMC’s) comprise the continuous time analogue of
(discrete-time) semi-Markov chains. In comparison to Markov chains, semi-Markov chains allow to model non-exponential, arbitrary waiting times between state changes. This more accurately
matches such times occurring in many scientific fields [11]. Hidden semi-Markov Models (HSMM’s)
on finite state spaces have seen wide application and thorough research [22]. However, confronted
with measurements from continuous-time systems, their adaptivity is limited and computation might
become unnecessarily expensive. Because of that, continuous-time analogues of HSMM’s have seen
increased research interest lately [17, 1, 6, 7]. However, latent state inference is hard in continuous
time, since the usual methods demand a reformulation of the process to obtain the Markov property. Markovianization by state space expansion as used for HSMM’s demands propagation of a
semi-infinite uncountable state for latent CTSMC’s even if the original state space is finite. Thus,
besides ad-hoc discretization, two classes of solution methods have emerged. First, a variety of
sampling-based solutions has been published, often targeted at even generalized problems [7, 2, 1, 9].
Second, if non-sampling based solutions are sought, state-space expansions based on approximations
of waiting time measures are available [16]. This second class, by detour, essentially tries to approximate Kolmogorov’s (forward/backward) equations. However, a general framework - not tailored
to specific families of waiting time measures - is still lacking. Kolmogorov’s equations in integrodifferential form have been studied recently [20]. Although initial or terminal states are given, the
equations rely on specific boundary conditions to restrict the non-Markovian process to the considered
time-window. Fixed conditions hinder the equations’ usage in latent state inference which typically
spans many such time-windows. To alleviate this restriction, we show how to adjust the memory
terms in Kolmogorov’s equations to include observations. As a consequence, we provide general
forward and a backward algorithms, each encoded in a single inhomogeneous integro-differential
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

