ASPiRe:
Adaptive Skill Priors for Reinforcement Learning

Mengda Xu 1, 2 , Manuela Veloso 2,3 , Shuran Song 1
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
2
J.P. Morgan AI Research 3 School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University (emeritus)
https://aspire.cs.columbia.edu/
1

Abstract
We introduce ASPiRe (Adaptive Skill Prior for RL), a new approach that leverages
prior experience to accelerate reinforcement learning. Unlike existing methods that
learn a single skill prior from a large and diverse dataset, our framework learns a
library of different distinction skill priors (i.e., behavior priors) from a collection
of specialized datasets, and learns how to combine them to solve a new task. This
formulation allows the algorithm to acquire a set of specialized skill priors that
are more reusable for downstream tasks; however, it also brings up additional
challenges of how to effectively combine these unstructured sets of skill priors to
form a new prior for new tasks. Specifically, it requires the agent not only to identify
which skill prior(s) to use but also how to combine them (either sequentially or
concurrently) to form a new prior. To achieve this goal, ASPiRe includes Adaptive
Weight Module (AWM) that learns to infer an adaptive weight assignment between
different skill priors and uses them to guide policy learning for downstream tasks
via weighted Kullback-Leibler divergences. Our experiments demonstrate that
ASPiRe can significantly accelerate the learning of new downstream tasks in the
presence of multiple priors and show improvement on competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Transferring prior experience to new tasks is central to an agent’s adaptability. In this work, we
aim to accelerate online reinforcement learning by leveraging prior experience from large offline
data. Previous works [1, 2, 3] have proposed to extract temporally extended actions into skills from
offline datasets and learn a single behavior prior over the skill space, which we refer to as skill
prior. The skill prior is then used to guide the learning for a new downstream task by constraining
the learned policy to stay close to the prior distribution. However, regularizing with a single skill
prior might be insufficient for more complex downstream tasks. We conclude two major limitations
for using a single skill prior: (1) The datasets could be generated by multiple policies for diverse
tasks. As a consequence, the action distribution from behavior trajectories might be multi-modal,
and the resulting learned prior might learn an "average" behavior [4] (2) Complex tasks not only
require reusing previous skills but also composing them. Consider a task that requires the agent to
traverse a maze with obstacles inside. The agent needs to compose navigation skills and avoid skills
concurrently when the obstacle is observed (See Fig. 1) and only activate navigation skills when it is
not. Guided with only navigation skill prior or avoid skill prior might lead to inefficient learning.
This observation suggests guiding the learning with multiple skill priors, with each prior specialized
in one task. During the learning of new downstream tasks, the most relevant priors should be selected
to regularize the policy based on the task and specific states. Specifically, it requires the agent to:
(1) Identify which skill prior(s) to use. Since not all skill priors are relevant to the new task at
hand, imposing irrelevant skill priors to regularize can mislead the learning process. (2) Learn how
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

