Uncertainty Estimation Using Riemannian
Model Dynamics for Offline Reinforcement Learning

Guy Tennenholtz∗
Technion Institute of Technology

Shie Mannor
Technion Institute of Technology & Nvidia Research

Abstract
Model-based offline reinforcement learning approaches generally rely on bounds
of model error. Estimating these bounds is usually achieved through uncertainty
estimation methods. In this work, we combine parametric and nonparametric
methods for uncertainty estimation through a novel latent space based metric. In
particular, we build upon recent advances in Riemannian geometry of generative
models to construct a pullback metric of an encoder-decoder based forward model.
Our proposed metric measures both the quality of out-of-distribution samples
as well as the discrepancy of examples in the data. We leverage our method
for uncertainty estimation in a pessimistic model-based framework, showing a
significant improvement upon contemporary model-based offline approaches on
continuous control and autonomous driving benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) [Levine et al., 2020], a.k.a. batch-mode RL [Ernst et al.,
2005, Riedmiller, 2005, Fonteneau et al., 2013], involves learning a policy from data sampled by a
potentially suboptimal policy. Offline RL seeks to surpass the average performance of the agents that
generated the data. Traditional methodologies fall short in offline settings, causing overestimation of
the return [Buckman et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2020, Zanette, 2020].
One approach to overcome this in model-based settings is to penalize the return in out of distribution
(OOD) regions, as depicted in Figure 1. In this manner, the agent is constrained to stay “near" areas
of low model error, thereby limiting possible overestimation. However, reliable estimates of model
error are key to the success of such methods.
Estimating model error in OOD regions can be achieved through uncertainty estimation [Yu et al.,
2020]. Methods of parametric uncertainty estimation such as bootstrap ensembles [Efron, 1982],
Monte Carlo Dropout [Gal and Ghahramani, 2016], and randomized priors [Osband et al., 2018], may
be susceptible to poor model specification and are most effective when dealing with large datasets.
In contrast, nonparametric methods such as k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) [Villa Medina et al., 2013,
Fathabadi et al., 2021] are beneficial in regions of limited data, yet require a proper metric to be used.
We propose to combine parametric and nonparametric methods for uncertainty estimation. Particularly,
we define a novel Riemmannian metric which captures the epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty of a
generative parametric forward model. This distance metric is then applied to measure the average
geodesic distance to the k-nearest neighbors in the data. We derive analytical expressions for our
metric and provide an efficient manner to estimate it. We then demonstrate the effectiveness of
our metric for penalizing an offline RL agent compared to contemporary approaches on continuous
control and autonomous driving benchmarks. As we empirically show, common approaches, including
statistical bootstrap ensemble or Euclidean distances in latent space, do not necessarily capture the
underlying degree of error needed for model-based offline RL.
∗

Correspondence to guytenn@gmail.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

