BILCO: An Efficient Algorithm for Joint Alignment of
Time Series
Xuelong Mi1 , Mengfan Wang1 , Alex Bo-Yuan Chen2 , Jing-Xuan Lim2 ,
Yizhi Wang1 , Misha Ahrens2 , Guoqiang Yu1
1
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech
2
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Research Campus
1
{mixl18,mengfanw,yzwang,yug}@vt.edu
2
{chena,limj2,ahrensm}@janelia.hhmi.org

Abstract
Multiple time series data occur in many real applications and the alignment among
them is usually a fundamental step of data analysis. Frequently, these multiple time
series are inter-dependent, which provides extra information for the alignment task
and this information cannot be well utilized in the conventional pairwise alignment
methods. Recently, the joint alignment was modeled as a max-flow problem, in
which both the profile similarity between the aligned time series and the distance
between adjacent warping functions are jointly optimized. However, despite
the new model having elegant mathematical formulation and superior alignment
accuracy, the long computation time and large memory usage, due to the use of the
existing general-purpose max-flow algorithms, limit significantly its well-deserved
wide use. In this report, we present BIdirectional pushing with Linear Component
Operations (BILCO), a novel algorithm that solves the joint alignment max-flow
problems efficiently and exactly. We develop the strategy of linear component
operations that integrates dynamic programming technique and the push-relabel
approach. This strategy is motivated by the fact that the joint alignment maxflow problem is a generalization of dynamic time warping (DTW) and numerous
individual DTW problems are embedded. Further, a bidirectional-pushing strategy
is proposed to introduce prior knowledge and reduce unnecessary computation,
by leveraging another fact that good initialization can be easily computed for the
joint alignment max-flow problem. We demonstrate the efficiency of BILCO using
both synthetic and real experiments. Tested on thousands of datasets under various
simulated scenarios and in three distinct application categories, BILCO consistently
achieves at least 10 and averagely 20-folds increase in speed, and uses at most 1/8
and averagely 1/10 memory compared with the best existing max-flow method.
Our source code can be found at https://github.com/yu-lab-vt/BILCO.

1

Introduction

Time series data appear naturally in a wide range of fields, such as motion capture, speech recognition,
and bioinformatics. As sequences are usually not directly comparable due to possible delay and
distortion, alignment among them is a prerequisite step before further analysis. The most popular
alignment technique, dynamic time warping (DTW) [3], finds an optimal match between two
sequences in linear time using dynamic programming (DP). However, DTW and its variants [2, 15]
only compare a single pair of time series, while real data often contain structural information. For
example, in time-lapse microscopy data, the pixel intensities are recorded over time in a 2D grid, and
adjacent pixels tend to have similar temporal patterns. Thus, joint alignment of more than a single
pair is expected to achieve better performance by taking advantage of dependency from the structure.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

