Accelerated Primal-Dual Gradient Method for Smooth
and Convex-Concave Saddle-Point Problems with
Bilinear Coupling

Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST∗
dakovalev1@gmail.com

Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT†, ISP RAS‡, HSE§
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Peter Richtárik
KAUST
richtarik@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper we study the convex-concave saddle-point problem minx maxy f (x)+
y T Ax − g(y), where f (x) and g(y) are smooth and convex functions. We propose
an Accelerated Primal-Dual Gradient Method (APDG) for solving this problem,
achieving (i) an optimal linear convergence rate in the strongly-convex-stronglyconcave regime, matching the lower complexity bound (Zhang et al., 2021), and (ii)
an accelerated linear convergence rate in the case when only one of the functions
f (x) and g(y) is strongly convex or even none of them are. Finally, we obtain a
linearly convergent algorithm for the general smooth and convex-concave saddle
point problem minx maxy F (x, y) without the requirement of strong convexity or
strong concavity.

1

Introduction

In this paper we revisit the well studied smooth convex-concave saddle point problem with a bilinear
coupling function, which takes the form
min max F (x, y) = f (x) + y ⊤ Ax − g(y),

x∈Rdx y∈Rdy

(1)

where f (x) : Rdx → R and g(y) : Rdy → R are smooth and convex functions, and A ∈ Rdy ×dx is a
coupling matrix.
Problem (1) has a large number of application, some of which we now briefly introduce.
1.1

Empirical risk minimization

A classical application is the regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) with linear predictors,
which is a classical supervised learning problem. Given a data matrix A = [a1 , . . . , an ]⊤ ∈ Rn×d ,
where ai ∈ Rd is the feature vector of the i-th data entry, our goal is to find a solution of
min f (x) + ℓ(Ax),
x

(2)

where f (x) : Rd → R is a convex regularizer, ℓ(y) : Rn → R is a convex loss function, and x ∈ Rd
is a linear predictor. Alterantively, one can solve the following equivalent saddle-point reformulation
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
‡
Institute for System Programming RAS, Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow, Russia
§
National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

