Fast Mixing of Stochastic Gradient Descent
with Normalization and Weight Decay
Zhiyuan Li
Princeton University
zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu

Tianhao Wang
Yale University
tianhao.wang@yale.edu

Dingli Yu
Princeton University
dingliy@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We prove the Fast Equilibrium Conjecture proposed by Li et al. [1], i.e., stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) on a scale-invariant loss (e.g., using networks with various
normalization schemes) with learning rate ⌘ and weight decay factor mixes in
function space in e
O(1/(⌘ )) steps, under two standard assumptions: (1) the noise
covariance matrix is non-degenerate and (2) the minimizers of the loss form a
connected, compact and analytic manifold. The analysis uses the framework of Li
et al. [2] and shows that for every T > 0, the iterates of SGD with learning rate
⌘ and weight decay factor on the scale-invariant loss converge in distribution
in ln(1 + T /⌘)/(4⌘ ) iterations as ⌘ ! 0 while satisfying ⌘  O( ) 
O(1). Moreover, the evolution of the limiting distribution can be described by a
stochastic differential equation that mixes to the same equilibrium distribution for
every initialization around the manifold of minimizers as T ! 1.

1

Introduction

Generalization in modern deep learning has significantly deviated from classical learning theory
due to the vast overparametrization in deep neural networks and is underlain by the implicit bias of
training algorithms [3]. Instead of decreasing the training objective as fast as possible, the training
algorithm and its hyperparameters are often tuned for good implicit bias, i.e., the ability to pick
empirical minimizers with good generalization among various different minimizers. Sometimes
good implicit bias occurs at the cost of less efficient optimization, including the usage of large
learning rates (LR) [4] or small batch size [5, 6]. Thus the training objective alone is not an effective
measure of the entire training progress. In other words, behind the minimization of the training
objective, there potentially exists some hidden progress, and the evolution of the model therein
plays a crucial role in the implicit bias.
The current paper aims to provide a better theoretical understanding of such hidden progress for
neural networks equipped with normalization layers (e.g., BatchNorm [7], LayerNorm [8], and
others [9–13]) trained by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with Weight Decay (WD), dubbed
SGD+WD. For learning rate (LR) ⌘ and WD factor , we formulate SGD+WD as
x⌘, (k + 1) = (1

⌘ )x⌘, (k)

⌘rL⇠k (x⌘, (k))

(1)

where x⌘, (k) 2 RD is the parameter after k iterations, and L⇠k is the loss over the ⇠k -th sample
with each ⇠k being sampled independently and uniformly randomly across all training data. In
particular, we are interested in explaining the following phenomenon:
Longer training with SGD+WD after LR decay improves final test accuracy of
normalized networks.
We demonstrate such phenomenon in Figure 1, where test accuracy after LR decay keeps improving
when training accuracy plateaus. In an extreme case, Li et al. [1] empirically showed that the test
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

