Distributed Distributionally Robust Optimization with
Non-Convex Objectives

Yang Jiao
Tongji University
yangjiao@tongji.edu.cn

Kai Yang∗
Tongji University
kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn

Dongjin Song
University of Connecticut
dongjin.song@uconn.edu

Abstract
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO), which aims to find an optimal decision that minimizes the worst case cost over the ambiguity set of probability
distribution, has been widely applied in diverse applications, e.g., network behavior
analysis, risk management, etc. However, existing DRO techniques face three key
challenges: 1) how to deal with the asynchronous updating in a distributed environment; 2) how to leverage the prior distribution effectively; 3) how to properly
adjust the degree of robustness according to different scenarios. To this end, we
propose an asynchronous distributed algorithm, named Asynchronous Single-looP
alternatIve gRadient projEction (ASPIRE) algorithm with the itErative Active
SEt method (EASE) to tackle the distributed distributionally robust optimization
(DDRO) problem. Furthermore, a new uncertainty set, i.e., constrained D-norm
uncertainty set, is developed to effectively leverage the prior distribution and flexibly control the degree of robustness. Finally, our theoretical analysis elucidates
that the proposed algorithm is guaranteed to converge and the iteration complexity
is also analyzed. Extensive empirical studies on real-world datasets demonstrate
that the proposed method can not only achieve fast convergence, and remain robust
against data heterogeneity as well as malicious attacks, but also tradeoff robustness
with performance.

1

Introduction

The past decade has witnessed the proliferation of smartphones and Internet of Things (IoT) devices,
which generate a plethora of data everyday. Centralized machine learning requires gathering the
data to a particular server to train models which incurs high communication overhead [46] and
suffers privacy risks [43]. As a remedy, distributed machine learning methods have been proposed.
Considering a distributed system composed of N workers (devices), we denote the dataset of
these workers as {D1 , · · · , DN }. For the j th (1 ≤ j ≤ N ) worker, the labeled dataset is given as
Dj = {xij , yji }, where xij ∈ Rd and yji ∈ {1, · · · , c} denote the ith data sample and the corresponding
label, respectively. The distributed learning tasks can be formulated as the following optimization
problem,
X
min F (w) with F (w) :=
fj (w),
(1)
w∈W

j

p

where w ∈ R is the model parameter to be learned and W ⊆ Rp is a nonempty closed convex set,
fj (·) is the empirical risk over the j th worker involving only the local data:
X
1
fj (w) =
Lj (xij , yji ; w),
(2)
i:xij ∈Dj |Dj |
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

