AdaFocal: Calibration-aware Adaptive Focal Loss

Arindam Ghosh
3M Health Info. Systems
Pittsburgh, PA 15217
aghosh4@mmm.com

Thomas Schaaf
3M Health Info. Systems
Pittsburgh, PA 15217
tschaaf@mmm.com

Matt Gormley
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
mgormley@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Much recent work has been devoted to the problem of ensuring that a neural
network’s confidence scores match the true probability of being correct, i.e. the
calibration problem. Of note, it was found that training with focal loss leads to better
calibration than cross-entropy while achieving similar level of accuracy [19]. This
success stems from focal loss regularizing the entropy of the model’s prediction
(controlled by the parameter γ), thereby reining in the model’s overconfidence.
Further improvement is expected if γ is selected independently for each training
sample (Sample-Dependent Focal Loss (FLSD-53) [19]). However, FLSD-53 is
based on heuristics and does not generalize well. In this paper, we propose a
calibration-aware adaptive focal loss called AdaFocal that utilizes the calibration
properties of focal (and inverse-focal) loss and adaptively modifies γt for different
groups of samples based on γt−1 from the previous step and the knowledge of
model’s under/over-confidence on the validation set. We evaluate AdaFocal on
various image recognition and one NLP task, covering a wide variety of network
architectures, to confirm the improvement in calibration while achieving similar
levels of accuracy. Additionally, we show that models trained with AdaFocal
achieve a significant boost in out-of-distribution detection.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have found tremendous success in almost every field including computer vision,
natural language processing, and speech recognition. Over time, these networks have grown complex
and larger in size to achieve state-of-the-art performance and they continue to evolve in that direction.
Along with these advances it has also been well established that these networks suffer from poor
calibration [4], i.e. the confidence scores of the predictions do not reflect the real world probabilities
of those predictions being true. For example, if the network assigns 0.8 confidence to a set of
predictions, we should expect 80% of those predictions to be correct. However, this is far from
reality since modern networks tend to be grossly over-confident. This is of great concern, particularly
for mission-critical applications such as autonomous driving or medical diagnosis, wherein the
downstream decision making relies not only on the predictions but also on their confidences.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in developing methods for neural network calibration.
These roughly fall into two categories (1) post hoc approaches that perform calibration after training
(2) methods that calibrate the model during training. The first category includes methods such as
temperature scaling [4], histogram binning [31], isotonic regression [32], Bayesian binning and
averaging [22, 21], Dirichlet scaling [10], mix-n-match methods [34], and spline fitting [5]. Methods
in the second category focus on designing objective functions that account for calibration during
training, such as Maximum Mean Calibration Error (MMCE) [13], Label smoothing [20], and recently
focal loss [19]. These aim to inherently calibrate the model during training, yet when combined with
post hoc calibration further improvement is often obtained.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

