Diversity vs. Recognizability: Human-like
generalization in one-shot generative models
Victor Boutin1,2 , Lakshya Singhal2 , Xavier Thomas2 and Thomas Serre1,2
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute, Université de Toulouse, France
2
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Dpt. of Cognitive Linguistic & Psychological Sciences
Brown University, Providence, RI 02912
{victor_boutin, thomas_serre}@brown.edu
1

Abstract
Robust generalization to new concepts has long remained a distinctive feature of
human intelligence. However, recent progress in deep generative models has now
led to neural architectures capable of synthesizing novel instances of unknown
visual concepts from a single training example. Yet, a more precise comparison
between these models and humans is not possible because existing performance
metrics for generative models (i.e., FID, IS, likelihood) are not appropriate for
the one-shot generation scenario. Here, we propose a new framework to evaluate
one-shot generative models along two axes: sample recognizability vs. diversity
(i.e., intra-class variability). Using this framework, we perform a systematic evaluation of representative one-shot generative models on the Omniglot handwritten
dataset. We first show that GAN-like and VAE-like models fall on opposite ends
of the diversity-recognizability space. Extensive analyses of the effect of key
model parameters further revealed that spatial attention and context integration
have a linear contribution to the diversity-recognizability trade-off. In contrast,
disentanglement transports the model along a parabolic curve that could be used to
maximize recognizability. Using the diversity-recognizability framework, we were
able to identify models and parameters that closely approximate human data.

1

Introduction

Our ability to learn and generalize from a limited number of samples is a hallmark of human cognition.
In language, scientists have long highlighted how little training data children need in comparison to
the richness and complexity of the language they learn so efficiently to master [12, 40]. Similarly,
children and adults alike are able to learn novel object categories from as little as a single training
example [17, 8]. From a computational point of view, such feats are remarkable because they suggest
that learners must be relying on inductive biases to overcome such challenges [33] – from an ability
to detect suspicious coincidences or ’non-accidental’ features [43, 52] to exploiting the principle of
compositionality [32, 33].
While a common criticism of modern AI approaches is their reliance on large training datasets,
progress in one-shot categorization has been significant. One-shot categorization involves predicting
an image category based on a unique training sample per class. Multiple algorithms have been
proposed including meta-learning algorithms [18, 46, 14, 37] or metric-learning algorithms [47, 31,
48] that are now starting to approach human accuracy. Perhaps a less studied problem is the one-shot
generation problem – aimed at creating new variations of a prototypical shape seen only once. Since
the seminal work of Lake et al. [32] who introduced the Bayesian Program Learning algorithm, only
a handful of promising one-shot generative algorithms have been proposed [42, 15, 1] (see section 2.2
for a more exhaustive description of prior work).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

