Learning General World Models in a Handful of
Reward-Free Deployments
Yingchen Xu⇤
UCL, FAIR

Jack Parker-Holder⇤
University of Oxford

Aldo Pacchiano⇤
Microsoft Research

Philip J. Ball⇤
University of Oxford

Oleh Rybkin
UPenn

Stephen J. Roberts
University of Oxford

Tim Rocktäschel
UCL

Edward Grefenstette
UCL, Cohere

Abstract
Building generally capable agents is a grand challenge for deep reinforcement
learning (RL). To approach this challenge practically, we outline two key desiderata:
1) to facilitate generalization, exploration should be task agnostic; 2) to facilitate
scalability, exploration policies should collect large quantities of data without
costly centralized retraining. Combining these two properties, we introduce the
reward-free deployment efficiency setting, a new paradigm for RL research. We
then present CASCADE, a novel approach for self-supervised exploration in this
new setting. CASCADE seeks to learn a world model by collecting data with a
population of agents, using an information theoretic objective inspired by Bayesian
Active Learning. CASCADE achieves this by specifically maximizing the diversity
of trajectories sampled by the population through a novel cascading objective.
We provide theoretical intuition for CASCADE which we show in a tabular setting
improves upon naı̈ve approaches that do not account for population diversity.
We then demonstrate that CASCADE collects diverse task-agnostic datasets and
learns agents that generalize zero-shot to novel, unseen downstream tasks on Atari,
MiniGrid, Crafter and the DM Control Suite. Code and videos are available at
https://ycxuyingchen.github.io/cascade/

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL, [105]) has achieved a number of impressive feats over the past decade,
with successes in games [69, 13, 100], robotics [48, 77], and the emergence of real world applications
[11, 25]. Indeed, now that RL has successfully mastered a host of individual tasks, the community
has begun to focus on the grand challenge of building generally capable agents [90, 109, 68, 5].
In this work, we take steps towards building generalist agents at scale, where we outline two key
desiderata. First, for agents to become generalists that can adapt to novel tasks, we eschew the
notion of restricting agent learning to task-specific reward functions and focus on the reward-free
problem setting instead [83, 28], whereby agents must discover novel skills and behaviors without
supervision.2 Consider the problem of learning to control robotic arms, where we may already have
some expert offline data to learn from. In many cases this data will cover only a subset of the entire
range of possible behaviors. Therefore, to learn additional general skills, it is imperative to collect
additional novel and diverse data, and to do so without a pre-specified reward function.
Second, to ensure scalability, we should have access to a large fleet of robots that we can deploy
to gather this data for a large number of timesteps [60], without costly and lengthy centralized
⇤

2

Equal contribution. Correspondence to ycxu@meta.com.
Indeed, designing reward functions to learn behaviors can have unintended consequences [74, 6].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

