Causality-driven Hierarchical Structure Discovery for
Reinforcement Learning

Shaohui Peng1,2,3 Xing Hu1 Rui Zhang1,3 Ke Tang4
Jiaming Guo1,2,3 Qi Yi1,3,6 Ruizhi Chen2,5 Xishan Zhang1,3
Zidong Du1,3 Ling Li2,5 Qi Guo1 Yunji Chen1,2,†
1
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Cambricon Technologies
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
5
SKL of Computer Science, Institute of Software, CAS
6
University of Science and Technology of China
{pengshaohui18z, huxing, zhangrui, guojiaming18s,
zhangxishan, duzidong, guoqi, cyj}@ict.ac.cn,
tangk3@sustech.edu.cn, yiqi@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{ruizhi, liling}@iscas.ac.cn

Abstract
Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) effectively improve agents’ exploration
efficiency on tasks with sparse reward, with the guide of high-quality hierarchical
structures (e.g., subgoals or options). However, how to automatically discover highquality hierarchical structures is still a great challenge. Previous HRL methods can
hardly discover the hierarchical structures in complex environments due to the low
exploration efficiency by exploiting the randomness-driven exploration paradigm.
To address this issue, we propose CDHRL, a causality-driven hierarchical reinforcement learning framework, leveraging a causality-driven discovery instead
of a randomness-driven exploration to effectively build high-quality hierarchical
structures in complicated environments. The key insight is that the causalities
among environment variables are naturally fit for modeling reachable subgoals
and their dependencies and can perfectly guide to build high-quality hierarchical
structures. The results in two complex environments, 2D-Minecraft and Eden, show
that CDHRL significantly boosts exploration efficiency with the causality-driven
paradigm.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) enables the intelligence of the agents by learning to take actions in
the environments for maximum rewards [32, 23, 21]. For complex tasks with large state spaces
and sparse delayed rewards [14], hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) extends RL methods’
successes by discovering beneficial hierarchical structures, which helps the agent train multiple levels
of policies and explore efficiently using high-level actions [26].
The major challenge of HRL methods is how to discover high-quality hierarchical structures (e.g.,
subgoals, skills, or options)1 . A straightforward method is to manually define the hierarchical
structures based on task-specific prior knowledge. However, in observing that the hand-crafted
1

† Corresponding author.
In this paper, the hierarchical structure refers to the subgoal hierarchy in the environment.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

