Asymptotic Properties for Bayesian Neural Network in
Besov Space

Kyeongwon Lee
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea 08826
lkw1718@snu.ac.kr

Jaeyong Lee
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea 08826
leejyc@gmail.com

Abstract
Neural networks have shown great predictive power when applied to unstructured
data such as images and natural languages. The Bayesian neural network captures
the uncertainty of prediction by computing the posterior distribution of the model
parameters. In this paper, we show that the Bayesian neural network with spikeand-slab prior has posterior consistency with a near minimax optimal convergence
rate when the true regression function belongs to the Besov space. The spikeand-slab prior is adaptive to the smoothness of the regression function and the
posterior convergence rate does not change even when the smoothness of the
regression function is unknown. We also consider the shrinkage prior, which is
computationally more feasible than the spike-and-slab prior, and show that it has
the same posterior convergence rate as the spike-and-slab prior.

1

Introduction

The neural network is a machine learning technique that can handle complex structures in data by
combining linear and non-linear transformations [Goodfellow et al., 2016]. The neural network has
shown great predictive power when applied to unstructured data ranging from image data to natural
languages. The neural network automatically grasps the inherent structure of the data and makes
end-to-end learning possible only with inputs and outputs without explicit intermediate steps, which
is the main reason for the rapid development of numerous artificial intelligence applications.
The Bayesian neural network (BNN) provides the uncertainty of the prediction from the probability
distribution of the model parameters. Before observing the data, a prior distribution that reflects prior
beliefs about the model is put over the parameter space of the neural network model. As observations
are added, a posterior distribution is computed by updating the prior distribution via Bayes’ rule.
Neal [1996], Williams [1996] showed that a shallow BNN which has only one infinite-width hidden
layer converges to a Gaussian process regression model. This means that the shallow BNN can be
regarded as a finite approximation of the nonparametric Bayesian regression model. Lee et al. [2017],
Matthews et al. [2018] extended this result to the deep BNN model.
However, it is difficult to compute the exact posterior distribution of the BNN. Various methods
have been proposed for BNN through approximate Bayesian computation algorithms. The methods
based on the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm such as the Gibbs sampler [Geman
and Geman, 1984, Casella and George, 1992] and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [Neal et al.,
2011] are effective to approximate true posterior. By constructing a Markov chain that has the desired
distribution as its stationary distribution, one can obtain a sample of the desired distribution. Recently,
scalable MCMC algorithms such as stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics [Welling and Teh, 2011]
and stochastic gradient HMC (SGHMC, Chen et al. [2014]) were proposed. The variational inference
(VI) is an approximation method that finds the closest variational distribution from the posterior
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

