Generalization Bounds for Estimating Causal Effects
of Continuous Treatments
Xin Wang

Shengfei Lyu

Xingyu Wu

Tianhao Wu

Huanhuan Chen∗

University of Science and Technology of China
{wz520, saintfe, xingyuwu, wutianhao8888}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
hchen@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We focus on estimating causal effects of continuous treatments (e.g., dosage in
medicine), also known as dose-response function. Existing methods in causal
inference for continuous treatments using neural networks are effective and to some
extent reduce selection bias, which is introduced by non-randomized treatments
among individuals and might lead to covariate imbalance and thus unreliable
inference. To theoretically support the alleviation of selection bias in the setting
of continuous treatments, we exploit the re-weighting schema and the Integral
Probability Metric (IPM) distance to derive an upper bound on the counterfactual
loss of estimating the average dose-response function (ADRF), and herein the IPM
distance builds a bridge from a source (factual) domain to an infinite number of
target (counterfactual) domains. We provide a discretized approximation of the
IPM distance with a theoretical guarantee in the practical implementation. Based on
the theoretical analyses, we also propose a novel algorithm, called Average Doseresponse estiMatIon via re-weighTing schema (ADMIT). ADMIT simultaneously
learns a re-weighting network, which aims to alleviate the selection bias, and
an inference network, which makes factual and counterfactual estimations. In
addition, the effectiveness of ADMIT is empirically demonstrated in both synthetic
and semi-synthetic experiments by outperforming the existing benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Causal inference, which estimates causal effects from observational data, is a fundamental problem in
identifying causal reactions between actions/treatments and effects. It facilitates the decision-making
process in a wide variety of domains, such as economics [1], public policy [2], medicine [3, 4]
and advertising [5, 6]. Specifically, causal inference aims to estimate the causal effects of taking
different treatments (e.g., whether to take a medication or not), where neural network-based methods
have made a breakthrough in the binary setting [7, 8, 9, 10]. In real-world applications, e.g. a
medical experiment, treatments usually cannot be simplified as binary treatments since the dosage is a
critical factor for the effect of the medication. Compared with causal inference for binary treatments,
causal inference for continuous treatments, also known as dose-response estimation, deals with an
infinite number of treatments, resulting in an infinite number of counterfactuals, far more than one
counterfactual in the binary setting.
The success of neural networks on causal inference for binary treatments [11, 12, 13] can be attributed
in part to the alleviation of selection bias, which leads to unreliable counterfactual inference since the
covariates of subpopulations receiving different treatments are unbalanced due to non-randomized
treatments among them. Specifically, the two distributions of the treated and control groups can
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

