On the Discrimination Risk of Mean Aggregation
Feature Imputation in Graphs

Arjun Subramonian
UCLA
arjunsub@cs.ucla.edu

Kai-Wei Chang
UCLA
kwchang@cs.ucla.edu

Yizhou Sun
UCLA
yzsun@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
In human networks, nodes belonging to a marginalized group often have a disproportionate rate of unknown or missing features. This, in conjunction with graph
structure and known feature biases, can cause graph feature imputation algorithms
to predict values for unknown features that make the marginalized group’s feature
values more distinct from the the dominant group’s feature values than they are in
reality. We call this distinction the discrimination risk. We prove that a higher
discrimination risk can amplify the unfairness of a machine learning model applied to the imputed data. We then formalize a general graph feature imputation
framework called mean aggregation imputation and theoretically and empirically
characterize graphs in which applying this framework can yield feature values
with a high discrimination risk. We propose a simple algorithm to ensure mean
aggregation-imputed features provably have a low discrimination risk, while minimally sacrificing reconstruction error (with respect to the imputation objective).
We evaluate the fairness and accuracy of our solution on synthetic and real-world
credit networks.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] have been successfully applied to graph-structured
data such as social networks, product graphs, and molecules [6, 7] to aid in important problems like
content recommendation, product recommendation, and molecular property prediction [8, 9, 7, 10, 11].
However, many methods rely on fully-observed features for each node, which are not available for
privacy reasons, as a consequence of exclusionary data collection practices, or due to the high
expenses involved in feature annotation [12, 13, 14]. As a result, the development of algorithms to
leverage a graph’s structure and known node feature values to impute unknown or missing features
has emerged as an important research area [15, 16].
In human networks, nodes belonging to a marginalized group (e.g., on the basis of race, gender,
disability, etc.) often have a disproportionate rate of unknown features compared to the dominant
group because marginalized communities may be more reluctant to share their data, annotators erase
their data, and they are sidelined in data collection [17, 18, 19, 20]. Furthermore, node neighborhoods
are often associated with group membership [21, 22], especially in homophilic graphs where nodes
belonging to the same group have a higher likelihood of being connected [23]. Homophily can be
due to social stratification [24] or the limited collection of inter-links (i.e., edges between nodes
belonging to different groups) [23, 7]. Moreover, known feature values can be tainted and proxies for
group membership [18, 25]. Hence, even if graph feature imputation algorithms do not have direct
access to the group membership of a node, these algorithms are influenced by unknown feature rate
disparities, graph structure, and known feature values. In fact, they can predict values for unknown
features that cause the the marginalized group’s feature values to be more distinct from the dominant
group’s feature values than they are in reality.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

