FeLMi : Few shot Learning with hard Mixup

Aniket Roy
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA
aroy28@jhu.edu

Anshul Shah
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA
ashah95@jhu.edu

Ketul Shah
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA
kshah33@jhu.edu

Prithviraj Dhar
Reality Labs, Meta
Sunnyvale, USA
prithvirj95@meta.com

Anoop Cherian
MERL
Cambridge, MA
cherian@merl.com

Rama Chellappa
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA
rchella4@jhu.edu

Abstract
Learning from a few examples is a challenging computer vision task. Traditionally,
meta-learning-based methods have shown promise towards solving this problem.
Recent approaches show benefits by learning a feature extractor on the abundant
base examples and transferring these to the fewer novel examples. However, the
finetuning stage is often prone to overfitting due to the small size of the novel
dataset. To this end, we propose Few shot Learning with hard Mixup (FeLMi)
using manifold mixup to synthetically generate samples that helps in mitigating
the data scarcity issue. Different from a naïve mixup, our approach selects the hard
mixup samples using an uncertainty-based criteria. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to use hard-mixup for the few-shot learning problem. Our approach
allows better use of the pseudo-labeled base examples through base-novel mixup
and entropy-based filtering. We evaluate our approach on several common few-shot
benchmarks - FC-100, CIFAR-FS, miniImageNet and tieredImageNet and obtain
improvements in both 1-shot and 5-shot settings. Additionally, we experimented on
the cross-domain few-shot setting (miniImageNet → CUB) and obtain significant
improvements. Code: https://github.com/aniket004/Felmi

1

Introduction

Supervised deep learning has revolutionized data-driven computer vision tasks, e.g., object detection,
segmentation [5], etc. However, it is expensive to collect and annotate large amounts of data,
especially in some fields like medical image diagnosis where one needs to rely on experts for
annotating the data. Despite recent progress in learning from large data, learning robust models using
a few labeled examples still remains quite challenging. Few-shot learning (FSL) [31, 28, 33] deals
with this problem, where there exists base classes with plenty of training examples, and novel classes
with only a few training samples. The goal is to learn a representation from the base classes, then
quickly and efficiently adapt to the novel classes from few examples.
There are two paradigms for training few-shot learner - (1) episodic training and (2) transfer learning.
During episodic training, in each episode, a few examples from the training data are sampled to form
the “support set”, on which training is performed and evaluated on the “query set” drawn from the
test dataset. Generally, the model is trained for a large number of episodes to get better generalization.
On the one hand, this approach is both time consuming and also incurs inductive (prior knowledge
driven bias) and sampling bias. On the other hand, recent approaches use simple transfer learning
to the novel classes and obtained comparative performance. Tian et al. [31] show that pretraining
on the large scale base dataset to learn a good representation, followed by finetuning on the few
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

