The Power and Limitation of Pretraining-Finetuning
for Linear Regression under Covariate Shift
Jingfeng Wu⇤
Johns Hopkins University
uuujf@jhu.edu

Difan Zou⇤
The University of Hong Kong
dzou@cs.hku.hk

Quanquan Gu
University of California, Los Angeles
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Vladimir Braverman
Johns Hopkins University
vova@cs.jhu.edu

Sham M. Kakade
Harvard University
sham@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We study linear regression under covariate shift, where the marginal distribution
over the input covariates differs in the source and the target domains, while the
conditional distribution of the output given the input covariates is similar across
the two domains. We investigate a transfer learning approach with pretraining on
the source data and finetuning based on the target data (both conducted by online
SGD) for this problem. We establish sharp instance-dependent excess risk upper
and lower bounds for this approach. Our bounds suggest that for a large class of
linear regression instances, transfer learning with O(N 2 ) source data (and scarce
or no target data) is as effective as supervised learning with N target data. In
addition, we show that finetuning, even with only a small amount of target data,
could drastically reduce the amount of source data required by pretraining. Our
theory sheds light on the effectiveness and limitation of pretraining as well as the
benefits of finetuning for tackling covariate shift problems.

1

Introduction

In transfer learning [Pan and Yang, 2009, Sugiyama and Kawanabe, 2012], an algorithm is provided
with abundant data from a source domain and scarce or no data from a target domain, and aims to
train a model that generalizes well on the target domain. A simple yet effective approach is to pretrain
a model with the rich source data and then finetune the model with the available target data via, e.g.,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (see, e.g., Yosinski et al. [2014]). Despite its wide applicability in
practice, the power and limitation of the pretraining-finetuning based transfer learning framework is
not fully understood in theory. The focus of this work is to consider this issue in a specific transfer
learning setup known as covariate shift [Pan and Yang, 2009, Sugiyama and Kawanabe, 2012], where
the source and target distributions differ in their marginal distributions over the input, but coincide in
their conditional distribution of the output given the input.
Regarding the theory of learning with covariate shift, there exists a rich set of results [Ben-David
et al., 2010, Germain et al., 2013, Mansour et al., 2009, Mohri and Muñoz Medina, 2012, Cortes and
Mohri, 2014, Cortes et al., 2019, Kpotufe and Martinet, 2018, Hanneke and Kpotufe, 2019, Ma et al.,
2022] for the (regularized) empirical risk minimizer, which minimizes the empirical loss over the
source data and target data (if available) with potential regularization terms (e.g., `2 -regularization).
However, in most of these works [Ben-David et al., 2010, Germain et al., 2013, Mansour et al., 2009,
Mohri and Muñoz Medina, 2012, Cortes and Mohri, 2014, Cortes et al., 2019], the generalization
⇤

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

