A Reduction to Binary Approach for Debiasing
Multiclass Datasets
Jessica Schrouff ∗
Google Research
London, United Kingdom
schrouff@google.com

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin
Google Research
Zürich, Switzerland
ibomohsin@google.com

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
Google Research
Mountain View, United States
sanmik@google.com

Abstract
We propose a novel reduction-to-binary (R2B) approach that enforces demographic
parity for multiclass classification with non-binary sensitive attributes via a reduction to a sequence of binary debiasing tasks. We prove that R2B satisfies optimality
and bias guarantees and demonstrate empirically that it can lead to an improvement
over two baselines: (1) treating multiclass problems as multi-label by debiasing
labels independently and (2) transforming the features instead of the labels. Surprisingly, we also demonstrate that independent label debiasing yields competitive
results in most (but not all) settings. We validate these conclusions on synthetic
and real-world datasets from social science, computer vision, and healthcare.

1

Introduction

Several studies have demonstrated that predictors are susceptible to unintended bias – for example,
deep neural networks (DNNs) can amplify spurious correlations in the training data (Hendricks et al.,
2018; Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Caliskan et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020b; Wang et al.,
2020b; Stock and Cisse, 2018). Moreover, error disparities can arise, where the performance of
the model for minority groups is disproportionately worse than for the majority (Zhao et al., 2017;
Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018; Deuschel et al., 2020). Studies, such as Buolamwini and Gebru (2018)
and Wang et al. (2020a), observe that one source of this disparity is that datasets may reflect societal
stereotypes, thereby highlighting the importance of debiasing datasets.
Nevertheless, despite the proliferation of research on algorithmic fairness in recent years, very few
methods exist that can handle multiclass classification tasks with non-binary sensitive attributes.
This gap is particularly noteworthy given that this setting is the norm in real-world applications, not
the exception. Considering multiclass classification, out of the 70+ image classification datasets
in the TensorFlow Dataset catalog (Abadi et al., 2015), less than 10% are for binary classification
problems. Along similar lines, considering non-binary sensitive attributes, the seven protected
attributes according to the US Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1974 (U.S. Government Publishing
Office, 1974) are non-binary, such as gender, race, religion, and age.
Two approaches are available to handle such a broad setting, to the best of our knowledge. One option
is to view the multiclass problem as multi-label and debias every label separately, i.e. transform the
labels such that they are uncorrelated with the sensitive attribute, before normalizing the output into a
∗

Now at DeepMind

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

