Constrained Update Projection Approach to Safe
Policy Optimization
Long Yang1,2,⇤ , Jiaming Ji1,⇤, Juntao Dai1 , Linrui Zhang3 , Binbin Zhou,4 , Pengfei Li,1 , Yaodong
Yang2,5 , Gang Pan1,†
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, China
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Computing, Zhejiang University City College, China
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University & BIGAI, China
yanglong001@pku.edu.cn, gpan@zju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning (RL) studies problems where an intelligent agent
has to not only maximize reward but also avoid exploring unsafe areas. In this
study, we propose CUP, a novel policy optimization method based on Constrained
Update Projection framework that enjoys rigorous safety guarantee. Central to
our CUP development is the newly proposed surrogate functions along with the
performance bound. Compared to previous safe reinforcement learning methods, CUP enjoys the benefits of 1) CUP generalizes the surrogate functions to
generalized advantage estimator (GAE), leading to strong empirical performance.
2) CUP unifies performance bounds, providing a better understanding and interpretability for some existing algorithms; 3) CUP provides a non-convex implementation via only first-order optimizers, which does not require any strong
approximation on the convexity of the objectives. To validate our CUP method,
we compared CUP against a comprehensive list of safe RL baselines on a wide
range of tasks. Experiments show the effectiveness of CUP both in terms of reward
and safety constraint satisfaction. We have opened the source code of CUP at
https://github.com/zmsn-2077/CUP-safe-rl.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto, 1998] has achieved significant successes in many
fields (e.g., [Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2017; OpenAI, 2019; Afsar et al., 2021; Yang et al.,
2022]). However, most RL algorithms improve the performance under the assumption that an agent
is free to explore any behaviors. In real-world applications, only considering return maximization
is not enough, and we also need to consider safe behaviors. For example, a robot agent should
avoid playing actions that irrevocably harm its hardware, and a recommender system should avoid
presenting offending items to users. Thus, it is crucial to consider safe exploration for RL, which is
usually formulated as constrained Markov decision processes (CMDP) [Altman, 1999].
It is challenging to solve CMDP since traditional approaches (e.g., Q-learning [Watkins, 1989] &
policy gradient [Williams, 1992]) usually violate the safe exploration constraints, which is undesirable
for safe RL. Recently, Achiam et al. [2017]; Yang et al. [2020]; Bharadhwaj et al. [2021] suggest to
use some surrogate functions to replace the objective and constraints. However, their implementations
involve some convex approximations to the non-convex objective and safe constraints, which leads to
⇤

L.Yang and J.Ji share equal contributions. † G.Pan is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

