Beyond IID: data-driven decision-making in
heterogeneous environments

Omar Besbes∗
Will Ma
Omar Mouchtaki
Decision, Risk, and Operations Division
Columbia University
{ob2105,wm2428,om2316}@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study data-driven decision-making and depart from the classical
identically and independently distributed (i.i.d.) assumption. We present a new
framework in which historical samples are generated from unknown and different
distributions, which we dub heterogeneous environments. These distributions are
assumed to lie in a heterogeneity ball with known radius and centered around the
(also) unknown future (out-of-sample) distribution on which the performance of a
decision will be evaluated. We quantify the asymptotic worst-case regret that is
achievable by central data-driven policies such as Sample Average Approximation,
but also by rate-optimal ones, as a function of the radius of the heterogeneity
ball. Our work shows that the type of achievable performance varies considerably
across different combinations of problem classes and notions of heterogeneity. We
demonstrate the versatility of our framework by comparing achievable guarantees
for the heterogeneous version of widely studied data-driven problems such as
pricing, ski-rental, and newsvendor. En route, we establish a new connection
between data-driven decision-making and distributionally robust optimization.

1

Introduction

In optimization under uncertainty, the desirability of a decision (e.g., inventory) depends on an
unknown future outcome (e.g., demand). Typically, past data is collected to be indicative of the future,
and hence inform our decision. However, ideal data-driven decision-making requires postulating
beliefs about the reliability of the past data, and importantly, whether the future may deviate from it.
In practice, past data may depend on contexts, some of which can be controlled for, and some of which
cannot (unobserved confounders). This may introduce data heterogeneity that is not "correctable."
In this paper, we consider a framework for modeling how the future may deviate from past data. At
a high level, it accomplishes three goals: i.) capture different forms of future deviation, including
no deviation, under the same umbrella; ii.) understand the performance of a central policy, which
makes the decision that optimizes the average objective value over past data, under different forms of
unexpected deviation; iii.) if the central policy performs poorly, then derive modifications that are
robust to different forms of anticipated deviation, and quantify the achievable performance.
This framework is general, capturing different problems, and our analysis leads to insightful problemspecific conclusions. The only assumption is that the policy defined in ii.) above can be computed,
which requires perfect counterfactual evaluation of any decision on all data points, as opposed to
settings where past data are affected by previous actions [5, 16, 33, 41, 42, 43]. The policy described
in ii.) is widely studied across different fields, known as Sample Average Approximation (SAA)
[37, 36, 39], although we emphasize that we also derive new policies beyond SAA when it falters.
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

