Flowification: Everything is a Normalizing Flow
Bálint Máté⇤
University of Geneva
balint.mate@unige.ch

Samuel Klein⇤
University of Geneva
samuel.klein@unige.ch

Tobias Golling
University of Geneva
tobias.golling@unige.ch

François Fleuret
University of Geneva
francois.fleuret@unige.ch

Abstract
The two key characteristics of a normalizing flow is that it is invertible (in particular,
dimension preserving) and that it monitors the amount by which it changes the
likelihood of data points as samples are propagated along the network. Recently,
multiple generalizations of normalizing flows have been introduced that relax
these two conditions [1, 2]. On the other hand, neural networks only perform
a forward pass on the input, there is neither a notion of an inverse of a neural
network nor is there one of its likelihood contribution. In this paper we argue
that certain neural network architectures can be enriched with a stochastic inverse
pass and that their likelihood contribution can be monitored in a way that they fall
under the generalized notion of a normalizing flow mentioned above. We term this
enrichment flowification. We prove that neural networks only containing linear and
convolutional layers and invertible activations such as LeakyReLU can be flowified
and evaluate them in the generative setting on image datasets.

1

Introduction

Density estimation techniques have proven effective on a wide variety of downstream tasks such
as sample generation and anomaly detection [3–8]. Normalizing flows and autoregressive models
perform very well at density estimation but do not easily scale to large dimensions [8–10] and have
to satisfy strict design constraints to ensure efficient computation of their Jacobians and inverses. Advances in other areas of machine learning cannot be utilized as flow architectures because they are not
typically seen as being invertible; this restricts the application of highly optimized architectures from
many domains to density estimation, and the use of the likelihood for diagnosing these architectures.
Methods using standard convolutions and residual layers for density estimation have been developed
for architectures with specific properties [11–14]. These methods do not provide a recipe for
converting general architectures into flows. There is no known correspondence between normalizing
flows and the operations defined by linear and convolutional layers.
In this paper we show that a large proportion of machine learning models can be trained as normalizing
flows. The forward pass of these models remains unchanged apart from the possible addition of
uncorrelated noise. To demonstrate our formulation works we apply it to fully connected layers,
convolutions and residual connections.
The contributions of this paper include:
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

