Whitening Convergence Rate of
Coupling-based Normalizing Flows
Felix Draxler
Heidelberg University
felix.draxler@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Christoph Schnörr
Heidelberg University
schnoerr@math.uni-heidelberg.de

Ullrich Köthe
Heidelberg University
ullrich.koethe@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Coupling-based normalizing flows (e.g. RealNVP) are a popular family of normalizing flow architectures that work surprisingly well in practice. This calls for
theoretical understanding. Existing work shows that such flows weakly converge
to arbitrary data distributions [1]. However, they make no statement about the
stricter convergence criterion used in practice, the maximum likelihood loss. For
the first time, we make a quantitative statement about this kind of convergence:
We prove that all coupling-based normalizing flows perform whitening of the
data distribution (i.e. diagonalize the covariance matrix) and derive corresponding
convergence bounds that show a linear convergence rate in the depth of the flow.
Numerical experiments demonstrate the implications of our theory and point at
open questions.

1

Introduction

Normalizing flows [2, 3] are among the most promising approaches to generative machine learning
and have already demonstrated convincing performance in a wide variety of practical applications,
ranging from image analysis [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] to astrophysics [9], mechanical engineering [10], causality
[11], computational biology [12] and medicine [13]. As the name suggests, normalizing flows
represent complex data distributions as bijective transformations (also known as flows or pushforwards) of standard normal or other well-understood distributions.
In this paper, we focus on a theoretical underpinning of coupling-based normalizing flows, a particularly effective class of normalizing flows in terms of invertible neural networks. All of the
above applications are actually implemented using coupling-based normalizing flows. Their central
building blocks are coupling layers, which decompose the space into two subspaces called active and
passive subspace (see Section 3). Only the active dimensions are transformed conditioned on the
passive dimensions, which makes the mapping computationally easy to invert. In order to vary the
assignment of dimensions to the active and passive subspaces, coupling layers are combined with
preceding orthonormal transformation layers into coupling blocks. These blocks are arranged into
deep networks such that the orthonormal transformations are sampled uniformly at random from the
orthogonal matrices and the coupling layers are trained with the maximum likelihood objective, see
Equation (2). Upon convergence of the training, the sequence of coupling blocks gradually transforms
the probability density that generated the given training data, into a standard normal distribution and
vice versa.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

