Single-Stage Visual Relationship Learning using
Conditional Queries

Alakh Desai1 , Tz-Ying Wu1 , Subarna Tripathi2 , Nuno Vasconcelos1
1
University of California San Diego, USA
2
Intel Labs, USA

Abstract
Research in scene graph generation (SGG) usually considers two-stage models, that
is, detecting a set of entities, followed by combining them and labelling all possible
relationships. While showing promising results, the pipeline structure induces large
parameter and computation overhead, and typically hinders end-to-end optimizations. To address this, recent research attempts to train single-stage models that
are computationally efficient. With the advent of DETR[3], a set based detection
model, one-stage models attempt to predict a set of subject-predicate-object triplets
directly in a single shot. However, SGG is inherently a multi-task learning problem
that requires modeling entity and predicate distributions simultaneously. In this
paper, we propose Transformers with conditional queries for SGG, namely, TraCQ
with a new formulation for SGG that avoids the multi-task learning problem and the
combinatorial entity pair distribution. We employ a DETR-based encoder-decoder
design and leverage conditional queries to significantly reduce the entity label
space as well, which leads to 20% less parameters compared to state-of-the-art
single-stage models. Experimental results show that TraCQ not only outperforms
existing single-stage scene graph generation methods, it also beats many state-ofthe-art two-stage methods on Visual Genome dataset, yet is capable of end-to-end
training and faster inference.

1

Introduction

Scene graph generation (SGG) provides a structured representation of visual relations in a scene. A
scene graph is a set of subject-predicate-object triplets, where subjects and objects are entity nodes
in the graph and predicates are edges representing the relationship between pairs of entities. Due to
its compact structure, SGG has been adopted as a foundational step for several high-level machine
cognition tasks, including caption generation [48, 47, 29], visual question answering [13, 30], image
retrieval [14, 38] and image generation [15, 22, 36]. However, SGG is far from a trivial problem, due
to the complexity of detecting and pairing subject-object entities and inferring the predicate between
each subject-object pair, requiring the model to excel at both entity and relationship detection. Hence,
most research in the problem decomposes it into two separate sub-tasks, entity detection and predicate
detection, which are modeled sequentially. This leverages success in object detection [7, 31] and
leads to the predominance of two-stage networks in the literature [4, 52, 35, 34, 21, 43, 45, 25],
where an object detector such as the faster-RCNN [31] solves the first sub-task, reducing the SGG
modeling to the second stage that addresses the pairing of subject-object entities and classifying
of predicate categories. The predicate detection part is typically achieved by ranking the O(N 2 )
triplet proposals generated by the exhaustive pairing of N entity predictions. While these models
have shown promising results, the pipeline structure usually comes with significant parameter and
computation overhead, which hinders end-to-end SGG optimization under memory constraints, and
leads to sub-optimal solutions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

