Conformal Off-Policy Prediction in Contextual Bandits
Muhammad Faaiz Taufiq*
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
Rob Cornish
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Jean-Francois Ton*†
AI-Lab-Research
Bytedance AI Lab

Yee Whye Teh
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Arnaud Doucet
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Abstract
Most off-policy evaluation methods for contextual bandits have focused on the
expected outcome of a policy, which is estimated via methods that at best provide
only asymptotic guarantees. However, in many applications, the expectation may
not be the best measure of performance as it does not capture the variability of the
outcome. In addition, particularly in safety-critical settings, stronger guarantees
than asymptotic correctness may be required. To address these limitations, we
consider a novel application of conformal prediction to contextual bandits. Given
data collected under a behavioral policy, we propose conformal off-policy prediction
(COPP), which can output reliable predictive intervals for the outcome under a
new target policy. We provide theoretical finite-sample guarantees without making
any additional assumptions beyond the standard contextual bandit setup, and
empirically demonstrate the utility of COPP compared with existing methods on
synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Before deploying a decision-making policy to production, it is usually important to understand the
plausible range of outcomes that it may produce. However, due to resource or ethical constraints, it is
often not possible to obtain this understanding by testing the policy directly in the real-world. In such
cases we have to rely on observational data collected under a different policy than the target. Using
this observational data to evaluate the target policy is known as off-policy evaluation (OPE).
Traditionally, most techniques for OPE in contextual bandits focus on evaluating policies based
on their expected outcomes; see e.g., [12; 30; 26; 23; 24; 6]. However, this can be problematic as
methods that are only concerned with the average outcome do not take into account any notions of
variance, for example. Therefore, in risk-sensitive settings such as econometrics, where we want
to minimize the potential risks, metrics such as CVaR (Conditional Value at Risk) might be more
appropriate [11]. Additionally, when only small sample sizes of observational data are available, the
average outcomes under finite data can be misleading, as they are prone to outliers and hence, metrics
such as medians or quantiles are more robust in these scenarios [1].
Notable exceptions in the OPE literature are [9; 5]. Instead of estimating bounds on the expected
outcomes, [9; 5] establish finite-sample bounds for a general class of metrics (e.g., Mean, CVaR,
CDF) on the outcome. Their methods can be used to estimate quantiles of the outcomes under the
target policy and are therefore robust to outliers. However, the resulting bounds do not depend on the
⇤
Denotes equal contribution, where ordering was determined through coin flip. Corresponding authors
muhammad.taufiq@stats.ox.ac.uk and jeanfrancois@bytedance.com.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

