Dict-TTS: Learning to Pronounce with Prior
Dictionary Knowledge for Text-to-Speech

Ziyue Jiang∗
Zhejiang University
ziyuejiang@zju.edu.cn

Zhe Su∗
Zhejiang University
suzhesz00@gmail.com

Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University
zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn

Qian Yang
Zhejiang University
qyang1021@foxmail.com

Yi Ren
Bytedance AI Lab
ren.yi@bytedance.com

Jinglin Liu
Zhejiang University
jinglinliu@zju.edu.cn

Zhenhui Ye
Zhejiang University
zhenhuiye@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Polyphone disambiguation aims to capture accurate pronunciation knowledge
from natural text sequences for reliable Text-to-speech (TTS) systems. However,
previous approaches require substantial annotated training data and additional
efforts from language experts, making it difficult to extend high-quality neural TTS
systems to out-of-domain daily conversations and countless languages worldwide.
This paper tackles the polyphone disambiguation problem from a concise and novel
perspective: we propose Dict-TTS, a semantic-aware generative text-to-speech
model with an online website dictionary (the existing prior information in the
natural language). Specifically, we design a semantics-to-pronunciation attention
(S2PA) module to match the semantic patterns between the input text sequence and
the prior semantics in the dictionary and obtain the corresponding pronunciations;
The S2PA module can be easily trained with the end-to-end TTS model without
any annotated phoneme labels. Experimental results in three languages show that
our model outperforms several strong baseline models in terms of pronunciation
accuracy and improves the prosody modeling of TTS systems. Further extensive
analyses demonstrate that each design in Dict-TTS is effective. The code is
available at https://github.com/Zain-Jiang/Dict-TTS.

1

Introduction

Capturing the pronunciations from raw texts is challenging for end-to-end text-to-speech (TTS)
systems [2, 31, 42, 45, 55, 27, 14, 41, 22, 21], since there are full of words that are not covered by
general pronunciation rules [4, 24, 50]. Therefore, polyphone3 disambiguation (one of the biggest
challenges in converting texts into phonemes [37, 60, 46]) plays an important role in the construction
of high-quality neural TTS systems [18, 38]. However, since the exact pronunciation of a polyphone
must be inferred based on its semantic contexts, current solutions still face several challenges: 1) the
rule-based approaches [64, 19] with limited linguistic knowledge or the neural models [60, 38, 46]
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author
3
Polyphones are characters having more than one phonetic value. See Appendix D for further details.

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

