Generalization Properties of NAS under Activation
and Skip Connection Search

Zhenyu Zhu,

Fanghui Liu,

Grigorios G Chrysos,

Volkan Cevher

EPFL, Switzerland
{[first name].[surname]}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has fostered the automatic discovery of stateof-the-art neural architectures. Despite the progress achieved with NAS, so far
there is little attention to theoretical guarantees on NAS. In this work, we study
the generalization properties of NAS under a unifying framework enabling (deep)
layer skip connection search and activation function search. To this end, we
derive the lower (and upper) bounds of the minimum eigenvalue of the Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) under the (in)finite-width regime using a certain search
space including mixed activation functions, fully connected, and residual neural
networks. We use the minimum eigenvalue to establish generalization error bounds
of NAS in the stochastic gradient descent training. Importantly, we theoretically
and experimentally show how the derived results can guide NAS to select the
top-performing architectures, even in the case without training, leading to a trainfree algorithm based on our theory. Accordingly, our numerical validation shed
light on the design of computationally efficient methods for NAS. Our analysis is
non-trivial due to the coupling of various architectures and activation functions
under the unifying framework and has its own interest in providing the lower bound
of the minimum eigenvalue of NTK in deep learning theory.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [Zoph and Le, 2017] is a powerful technique that enables the
automatic design of neural architectures. NAS defines a set of operations (referred to as the search
space), that include various activation functions and layer types, or potential connections among
layers [Elsken et al., 2019, Ren et al., 2021]. Optimization over the search space returns the optimal
architecture as a subset of the possible combinations of operations. NAS1 obtains state-of-the-art
results in image recognition [Liu et al., 2019a, Ding et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2019]
or can be used to further improve architectures defined by a human expert [Tan and Le, 2019]. The
spectacular results obtained by NAS have led to a significant interest in the community to further
improve the NAS algorithms, the search space etc. However, to date little focus has been provided
in the following question: Can NAS 1 achieve generalization guarantees similar to a typical neural
network?
Neural tangent kernel (NTK)-based analysis [Jacot et al., 2018] is a powerful method for analyzing
the optimization and the generalization of deep networks [Allen-Zhu et al., 2019, Cao and Gu, 2019,
Chen et al., 2020a, Arora et al., 2019a]. The minimum eigenvalue of NTK has been used in previous
work to demonstrate the global convergence of gradient descent, such as two-layer networks [Du
et al., 2019b], and deep networks with polynomially wide layers [Allen-Zhu et al., 2019]. Besides,
the minimum eigenvalue of NTK is also used to prove generalization bounds [Arora et al., 2019a] and
1
In the sequel, we interchangeably refer to NAS as the “architecture obtained from NAS” or the framework
to design the neural architecture.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

