MACK: Multimodal Aligned Conceptual Knowledge
for Unpaired Image-text Matching

Yan Huang
Yuming Wang
Yunan Zeng
Liang Wang
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
Chinese Academy of Sciences Artificial Intelligence Research (CAS-AIR)
{yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,
{yuming.wang, yunan.zeng}@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, the accuracy of image-text matching has been greatly improved by
multimodal pretrained models, all of which are trained on millions or billions of
paired images and texts. Different from them, this paper studies a new scenario as
unpaired image-text matching, in which paired images and texts are assumed to
be unavailable during model training. To deal with this, we propose a simple yet
effective method namely Multimodal Aligned Conceptual Knowledge (MACK),
which is inspired by the knowledge use in human brain. It can be directly used as
general knowledge to correlate images and texts even without model training, or
further fine-tuned based on unpaired images and texts to better generalize to certain
datasets. In addition, we extend it as a re-ranking method, which can be easily
combined with existing image-text matching models to substantially improve their
performance.

1

Introduction

Image-text matching is one of the most representative techniques in the field of vision and language
understanding, which has wide applications such as online shopping, human-robot interaction and
autonomous driving. Its major challenge lies in how to accurately measure the cross-modal similarity
between images and texts. Recently, by training on very large-scale (millions or billions) paired
images and texts, various multimodal pretrained models [23, 20, 7] alleviate the challenge in a
supervised learning manner. Although the accuracy of image-text matching is greatly improved,
collecting and annotating such large-scale data in real world applications is time-consuming and
expensive.
Different from them, this work attempts to study the image-text matching in the context of a new
scenario, namely unpaired image-text matching, in which paired images and texts are assumed to be
unavailable during model training. It is motivated by the fact that the human brain can well correlate
arbitrary images with texts while does not need to learn from such large-scale paired images and texts.
Instead, it stores semantic knowledge about objects, actions, attributes, etc., which is multimodal
aligned and can be used to correlate visual and linguistic information [28, 2]. Inspired by these
neuroscience evidences, this work tries to deal with the unpaired image-text matching by modeling
human brain-like knowledge.
Unimodal visual or linguistic knowledge has been widely used for vision and language understanding
such as image captioning [39], visual reasoning [45] and visual question answering [31]. By directly
combining these two types of knowledge together, multimodal knowledge shows more complementary
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

