Conformal Frequency Estimation with Sketched Data

Matteo Sesia
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California, USA
sesia@marshall.usc.edu

Stefano Favaro
Department of Economics and Statistics
University of Torino and Collegio Carlo Alberto
Torino, Italy
stefano.favaro@unito.it

Abstract
A flexible conformal inference method is developed to construct confidence intervals for the frequencies of queried objects in very large data sets, based on a
much smaller sketch of those data. The approach is data-adaptive and requires
no knowledge of the data distribution or of the details of the sketching algorithm;
instead, it constructs provably valid frequentist confidence intervals under the sole
assumption of data exchangeability. Although our solution is broadly applicable,
this paper focuses on applications involving the count-min sketch algorithm and
a non-linear variation thereof. The performance is compared to that of frequentist
and Bayesian alternatives through simulations and experiments with data sets of
SARS-CoV-2 DNA sequences and classic English literature.

1

Introduction

1.1

Frequency queries from sketched data

An important task in computer science is to estimate the frequency of an object given a lossy compressed representation, or sketch, of a big data set [1, 2]; this task has real-world relevance in diverse
fields including machine learning [3], cybersecurity [4], natural language processing [5], genetics [6], and privacy [7]. Practically, sketching may be motivated for example by memory limitations,
as large numbers of distinct symbols may otherwise be computationally expensive to analyze [6], or
by privacy constraints, in situations where the original data contain sensitive information [8]. There
exist many sketching algorithms, several of which are specifically designed to enable efficient approximations of the empirical frequencies of the compressed objects. We refer to the monograph of
[9] for a recent review of sketching. Building upon this literature, our paper studies the problem of
precisely quantifying the uncertainty of empirical frequency estimates obtained from sketched data
without making strong assumptions about the inner workings of the sketching procedure, which may
be complex and even unknown. The key ideas of the described solution are in principle applicable
regardless of how the data are compressed, but the exposition of this paper will focus for simplicity
on a particularly well-known sketching algorithm and some widely applied variations thereof.
1.2

The count-min sketch

The count-min sketch (CMS) of [10] is a renowned algorithm for compressing a data set of m
objects Z1 , . . . , Zm ∈ Z, with Z being a discrete (and possibly infinite) space, into a representation
with reduced memory footprint, while allowing simple approximate queries about the observed
frequency of any possible z ∈ Z. At the heart of the CMS lie d ≥ 1 different w-wide hash functions
hj : Z → [w] := {1, . . . , w}, for all j ∈ [d] := {1, . . . , d} and some integer w ≥ 1. Each hash
function maps the elements of Z into one of w possible buckets, and it is designed to ensure that
distinct values of z populate the buckets uniformly. Hash functions are typically chosen at random
from a pairwise independent family H, which ensures the probability (over the randomness in the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

