PROSPECT: Labeled Tandem Mass Spectrometry
Dataset for Machine Learning in Proteomics

Omar Shouman ∗

Wassim Gabriel∗

Victor Giurcoiu

Vitor Sternlicht

Mathias Wilhelm
Computational Mass Spectrometry
School of Life Sciences
Technical University of Munich (TUM)
Freising, Germany
{firstname.lastname}@tum.de

Abstract
Proteomics is the interdisciplinary field focusing on the large-scale study of proteins. Proteins essentially organize and execute all functions within organisms.
Today, the bottom-up analysis approach is the most commonly used workflow,
where proteins are digested into peptides and subsequently analyzed using Tandem Mass Spectrometry (MS/MS). MS-based proteomics has transformed various
fields in life sciences, such as drug discovery and biomarker identification. Today,
proteomics is entering a phase where it is helpful for clinical decision-making.
Computational methods are vital in turning large amounts of acquired raw MS
data into information and, ultimately, knowledge. Deep learning has proved its
success in multiple domains as a robust framework for supervised and unsupervised
machine learning problems. In proteomics, scientists are increasingly leveraging
the potential of deep learning to predict the properties of peptides based on their
sequence to improve their confident identification. However, a reference dataset is
missing, covering several proteomics tasks, enabling performance comparison, and
evaluating reproducibility and generalization. Here, we present a large labeled proteomics dataset spanning several tasks in the domain to address this challenge. We
focus on two common applications: peptide retention time and MS/MS spectrum
prediction. We review existing methods and task formulations from a machine
learning perspective and recommend suitable evaluation metrics and visualizations.
With an accessible dataset, we aim to lower the entry barrier and enable faster
development in machine learning for proteomics.

1

Introduction

Proteins are large multi-functional bio-molecules that are responsible for sustaining life. They
perform a vast array of functions that are not limited to providing structure for cells and enabling body
movement. Some proteins act as channels in the cell membrane and are responsible for delivering
oxygen to the body through the bloodstream. Others help build new molecules and act as catalysts to
regulate almost all chemical reactions in our cells. They also act as a line of defense in our body since
antibodies are made of proteins [1]. Finally, proteins play a vital role when developing treatments [2].
A prominent example is the development of the recent mRNA vaccines that were employed to fight
the COVID-19 pandemic, where they help trigger an immune response to the virus [3].
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

