Hiding Images in Deep Probabilistic Models

Linqi Song
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
linqi.song@cityu.edu.hk

Haoyu Chen
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
haoychen3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
Zhenxing Qian
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
zxqian@fudan.edu.cn

Xinpeng Zhang
School of Computer Science
Fudan University
zhangxinpeng@fudan.edu.cn

Kede Ma∗
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Data hiding with deep neural networks (DNNs) has experienced impressive successes in recent years. A prevailing scheme is to train an autoencoder, consisting of
an encoding network to embed (or transform) secret messages in (or into) a carrier,
and a decoding network to extract the hidden messages. This scheme may suffer
from several limitations regarding practicability, security, and embedding capacity.
In this work, we describe a different computational framework to hide images in
deep probabilistic models. Specifically, we use a DNN to model the probability
density of cover images, and hide a secret image in one particular location of
the learned distribution. As an instantiation, we adopt a SinGAN, a pyramid of
generative adversarial networks (GANs), to learn the patch distribution of one cover
image. We hide the secret image by fitting a deterministic mapping from a fixed set
of noise maps (generated by an embedding key) to the secret image during patch
distribution learning. The stego SinGAN, behaving as the original SinGAN, is
publicly communicated; only the receiver with the embedding key is able to extract
the secret image. We demonstrate the feasibility of our SinGAN approach in terms
of extraction accuracy and model security. Moreover, we show the flexibility of
the proposed method in terms of hiding multiple images for different receivers and
obfuscating the secret image.

1

Introduction

Data hiding generally refers to the process of hiding a form of secret message in another form of
cover media, while minimizing the introduced distortions to the cover media [14, 47]. For human
eavesdroppers, the measured distortion should be consistent with human judgments, penalizing errors
that are most perceptually or cognitively noticeable [55, 5]; for machine eavesdroppers, the distortion
should be “invisible” in a way that bypasses digital steganalysis tools such as StegExpose [9] and
more recent deep learning-based ones [10]. Only the informed receiver typically with a shared
embedding key (through a secure subliminal channel [50]) is able to extract the secret message. The
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

