Learning to Break the Loop: Analyzing and Mitigating
Repetitions for Neural Text Generation

Jin Xu1∗, Xiaojiang Liu4 , Jianhao Yan2 , Deng Cai3 , Huayang Li4 , Jian Li1
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
School of Engineering, Westlake University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Apple
xujin21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xiaojiang_liu@apple.com, elliottyan37@gmail.com
thisisjcykcd@gmail.com, hli46@apple.com, lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
While large-scale neural language models, such as GPT2 and BART, have achieved
impressive results on various text generation tasks, they tend to get stuck in undesirable sentence-level loops with maximization-based decoding algorithms (e.g.,
greedy search). This phenomenon is counter-intuitive since there are few consecutive sentence-level repetitions in human corpora (e.g., 0.02% in Wikitext-103). To
investigate the underlying reasons for generating consecutive sentence-level repetitions, we study the relationship between the probabilities of the repetitive tokens
and their previous repetitions in the context. Through our quantitative experiments,
we find that 1) Language models have a preference to repeat the previous sentence;
2) The sentence-level repetitions have a self-reinforcement effect: the more times
a sentence is repeated in the context, the higher the probability of continuing to
generate that sentence; 3) The sentences with higher initial probabilities usually
have a stronger self-reinforcement effect. Motivated by our findings, we propose a
simple and effective training method DITTO (PseuDo-RepetITion PenalizaTiOn),
where the model learns to penalize probabilities of sentence-level repetitions from
pseudo repetitive data. Although our method is motivated by mitigating repetitions, experiments show that DITTO not only mitigates the repetition issue without
sacrificing perplexity, but also achieves better generation quality. Extensive experiments on open-ended text generation (Wikitext-103) and text summarization
(CNN/DailyMail) demonstrate the generality and effectiveness of our method.
Code is released at https://github.com/Jxu-Thu/DITTO.

1

Introduction

Recently, large-scale Transformer-based [34] neural language models (e.g., GPT2 [29], BART [17]
and OPT [39]) have shown remarkable capability to generate text and achieved better performance
than before, such as open-ended generation [29, 5] and summarization tasks [17, 39]. However,
models with standard maximization-based decoding are known to get stuck in redundant consecutive
repetitions [13]. As shown in Figure 1, the model has a stronger preference for consecutive sentencelevel repetitions than the word- or phrase-level while human language has fewer consecutive sentencelevel repetitions, which shows a discrepancy between human language and the generated texts.
Existing approaches to mitigate repetitions can be categorized into decoding-based and training-based
methods. Decoding-based methods rectify these issues by soft or hard n-gram blocking [26, 16],
∗

The work was conducted in Apple.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

