SAPD+ : An Accelerated Stochastic Method for
Nonconvex-Concave Minimax Problems
Xuan Zhang
Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA,USA.
xxz358@psu.edu
Necdet Serhat Aybat
Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA,USA.
nsa10@psu.edu
Mert Gürbüzbalaban
Department of Management Science and Information Systems
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ, USA
mg1366@rutgers.edu

Abstract
We propose a new stochastic method SAPD+ for solving nonconvex-concave minimax problems of the form min max L(x, y) = f (x) + Φ(x, y) − g(y), where f, g
are closed convex and Φ(x, y) is a smooth function that is weakly convex in x,
(strongly) concave in y. For both strongly concave and merely concave settings,
SAPD+ achieves the best known oracle complexities of O(Lκy −4 ) and O(L3 −6 ),
respectively, without assuming compactness of the problem domain, where κy is
the condition number and L is the Lipschitz constant. We also propose SAPD+ with
variance reduction, which enjoys the best known oracle complexity of O(Lκ2y −3 )
for weakly convex-strongly concave setting. We demonstrate the efficiency of
SAPD+ on a distributionally robust learning problem with a nonconvex regularizer
and also on a multi-class classification problem in deep learning.

1

Introduction

We consider the following saddle-point (SP) problem:
min max L(x, y) , f (x) + Φ(x, y) − g(y),

x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where X and Y are, n and m dimensional Euclidean spaces, the function Φ : X × Y → R is smooth
and possibly nonconvex in x ∈ X and µy -strongly concave in y ∈ Y for some µy ≥ 0 –with the
convention that for µy = 0, Φ is merely concave (MC) in y, and the functions f and g are closed,
convex and possibly nonsmooth. In this paper, we consider a particular case of nonconvexity, i.e.,
we assume that Φ(·, y) is weakly convex (WC) for any fixed y ∈ dom g ⊂ Y. Weakly convex
functions constitute a rich class of non-convex functions and arise naturally in many practical settings
for machine learning (ML) applications [9, 35], precise definitions will be given later in Section
2. In practice, WC assumption is widely satisfied, e.g., under smoothness –see remark 1; most of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

