GraphDE: A Generative Framework for Debiased
Learning and Out-of-Distribution Detection on Graphs

Zenan Li, Qitian Wu, Fan Nie, Junchi Yan∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{emiyali, echo740, youluo2001, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of graph neural networks (GNNs) for graph representation learning, they are generally built on the (unreliable) i.i.d. assumption
across training and testing data. However, real-world graph data are universally
comprised of outliers in training set and out-of-distribution (OOD) testing samples
from unseen domains, which solicits effective models for i) debiased learning and
ii) OOD detection, towards general trustworthy purpose. In this paper, we first
mathematically formulate the two challenging problems for graph data and take
an initiative on tackling them under a unified probabilistic model. Specifically,
we model the graph generative process to characterize the distribution shifts of
graph data together with an additionally introduced latent environment variable as
an indicator. We then define a variational distribution, i.e., a recognition model,
to infer the environment during training of GNN. By instantiating the generative
models as two-component mixtures, we derive a tractable learning objective and
theoretically justify that the model can i) automatically identify and down-weight
outliers in the training procedure, and ii) induce an effective OOD detector simultaneously. Experiments on diverse datasets with different types of OOD data
prove that our model consistently outperforms strong baselines for both debiasing
and OOD detection tasks. The source code has been made publicly available at
https://github.com/Emiyalzn/GraphDE.

1

Introduction

For processing ubiquitous graph data, graph neural networks (GNNs) [17, 43] have emerged as
effective approaches for graph representation learning [12], which in turn has spanned a wide range
of applications, from drug discovery [23] to image classification [4].
Despite their success, existing GNNs are generally built on the assumption that both training and
testing data are independently sampled from the identical distribution (i.i.d.), which often does not
hold [45, 22, 49, 48]. Real-world training data is often shown universally mixed with outliers [30, 7],
which specifically may incur large gradient steps in the wrong direction [38], or be overfitted by the
model [3], thereby hurting models’ performance. Besides, testing samples from unseen domains
are also unavoidable when the model is deployed in the wild [2, 19], which may easily be classified
into a wrong class with a high probability [13]. Inevitably, graph data also involve these two
common problems. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we indeed find that vanilla GNNs perform poorly when
encountering large portion of outliers and out-of-distribution (OOD) testing samples, which solicits
effective models for i) debiased learning and ii) OOD detection, towards general trustworthy purpose.
∗

Junchi Yan is the corresponding author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

