Transferring Pre-trained Multimodal Representations
with Cross-modal Similarity Matching
Byoungjip Kim1 , Sungik Choi1 , Dasol Hwang1 , Moontae Lee1,2 , Honglak Lee1
LG AI Research1 , University of Illinois Chicago2
{bjkim, sungik.choi, dasol.hwang, moontae.lee, honglak}@lgresearch.ai

Abstract
Despite surprising performance on zero-shot transfer, pre-training a large-scale
multimodal model is often prohibitive as it requires a huge amount of data and
computing resources. In this paper, we propose a method (BeamCLIP) that can
effectively transfer the representations of a large pre-trained multimodal model
(CLIP-ViT) into a small target model (e.g., ResNet-18). For unsupervised transfer,
we introduce cross-modal similarity matching (CSM) that enables a student model
to learn the representations of a teacher model by matching the relative similarity
distribution across text prompt embeddings. To better encode the text prompts,
we design context-based prompt augmentation (CPA) that can alleviate the lexical
ambiguity of input text prompts. Our experiments show that unsupervised representation transfer of a pre-trained vision-language model enables a small ResNet-18 to
achieve a better ImageNet-1K top-1 linear probe accuracy (66.2%) than vision-only
self-supervised learning (SSL) methods (e.g., SimCLR: 51.8%, SwAV: 63.7%),
while closing the gap with supervised learning (69.8%).

1

Introduction

Learning transferable representations is crucial
for successful downstream tasks. Contrastive
learning such as SimCLR [4] and MoCo-v2 [6]
have shown notable success by forcing features
of individual classes to be clustered and sufficiently scattered [41]. But their linear probe
performances are still far behind the supervised
learning as shown in Figure 1. Recently, largescale vision and language pre-trained (VLP)
models provide highly transferable visual representations via language supervision. However,
learning VLP models from scratch is prohibitive
as it requires large amounts of training data and Figure 1: ImageNet-1K top-1 linear probe accomputing resources. For example, training curacy on ResNet-18 representations. By transCLIP [32] requires 400M paired image-text data ferring CLIP-ViT [32] vision-language represenand several hundreds of GPUs. ALIGN [22] fur- tations to ResNet-18, the BeamCLIP can learn
ther scales up to leverage alternative texts speci- better visual representations than vision-only selffied for descriptions of web images. While these supervised learning (SSL) methods in terms of the
models are often based on large Transformers linear probe accuracy.
[40], small ConvNets such as ResNet-50 [17]
and MobileNet [20] are still widely used in practice [1] and even more crucial for low-resource
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

