Simultaneous Missing Value Imputation
and Structure Learning with Groups

Pablo Morales-Alvarez∗†
University of Granada
Simon Peyton Jones†
Epic Games

Angus Lamb†
G-Research

Simon Woodhead
Eedi

Miltiadis Allamanis†
Google

Cheng Zhang
Microsoft Research

Wenbo Gong
Microsoft Research

Nick Pawlowski
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Learning structures between groups of variables from data with missing values is
an important task in the real world, yet difficult to solve. One typical scenario is
discovering the structure among topics in the education domain to identify learning
pathways. Here, the observations are student performances for questions under
each topic which contain missing values. However, most existing methods focus on
learning structures between a few individual variables from the complete data. In
this work, we propose VISL, a novel scalable structure learning approach that can
simultaneously infer structures between groups of variables under missing data and
perform missing value imputations with deep learning. Particularly, we propose a
generative model with a structured latent space and a graph neural network-based
architecture, scaling to a large number of variables. Empirically, we conduct
extensive experiments on synthetic, semi-synthetic, and real-world education data
sets. We show improved performances on both imputation and structure learning
accuracy compared to popular and recent approaches.

1

Introduction

Understanding the structural relationships among different variables provides critical insights in
many real-world applications, such as medicine, economics and education [42, 62]. Thus, learning
graphs from observed data, known as structure learning, has recently made remarkable progress
[10, 61, 63, 64].
For many applications, variables in the data can be gathered into semantically meaningful groups,
where useful insights are at group level. For example, in finance, one may be interested in how a
financial situation influences different industries (i.e. groups) instead of individual companies (i.e.
variables). Similarly, in education, the data can contain student responses to thousands of individual
questions (i.e. variables), where each question belongs to a broader topic (i.e. groups). Again, it is
insightful to find relationships between topics instead of individual questions. Moreover, real-world
data such as educational data is inherently sparse since it is not feasible to ask every question to
every student; the dimensions of the data in terms of the number of variables and the number of
observations are very high, posing a scalability challenge. Despite the progress in structure learning,
no existing method can discover group-wise relationships given large-scale partially observed data.
In this work, we present VISL (missing value imputation with structural learning), a novel approach
to simultaneously tackle group-wise structure learning and missing value imputations driven by the
∗

Department of Statistics and Operation Research, University of Granada, Spain
Work done while internship in Microsoft Research Cambridge.
Correspondence to: Cheng Zhang <Cheng.Zhang@microsoft.com>

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

