Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader for Adversarial Markov
Decision Processes with Bandit Feedback
Yan Dai
Tsinghua University
yan-dai20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Liyu Chen
University of Southern California
liyuc@usc.edu

Abstract
We consider regret minimization for Adversarial Markov Decision Processes
(AMDPs), where the loss functions are changing over time and adversarially
chosen, and the learner only observes the losses for the visited state-action pairs
(i.e., bandit feedback). While there has been a surge of studies on this problem
using Online-Mirror-Descent (OMD) methods, very little is known about the
Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader (FTPL) methods, which are usually computationally
more efficient and also easier to implement since it only requires solving an offline
planning problem. Motivated by this, we take a closer look at FTPL for learning
AMDPs, starting from the standard episodic finite-horizon setting. We find some
unique and intriguing difficulties in the analysis and propose a workaround to
eventually show that FTPL is also able to achieve near-optimal regret bounds in
this case. More importantly, we then find two significant applications: First, the
analysis of FTPL turns out to be readily generalizable to delayed bandit feedback
with order-optimal regret, while OMD methods exhibit extra difficulties (Jin et al.,
2022). Second, using FTPL, we also develop the first no-regret algorithm for learning communicating AMDPs in the infinite-horizon setting with bandit feedback
and stochastic transitions. Our algorithm is efficient assuming access to an offline
planning oracle, while even for the easier full-information setting, the only existing
algorithm (Chandrasekaran and Tewari, 2021) is computationally inefficient.

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) have long been used to model problems in reinforcement
learning, where the agent takes sequential actions in an environment, leading to transitions among
different states and observations on loss (or reward equivalently) signals. While the classical MDP
model assumes a fixed loss function, there has been increasing interest in studying regret minimization
under non-stationary or even adversarial loss functions via the Adversarial MDP (AMDP) model,
starting from the work of Even-Dar et al. (2009).
Similar to other regret minimization problems, there are typically two categories of algorithms for
AMDPs: those based on the Follow-the-Perturbed-Leader (FTPL) framework (Even-Dar et al., 2009;
Neu et al., 2010, 2012; Chandrasekaran and Tewari, 2021) and those based on the Online-MirrorDescent (OMD) or the closely related Follow-the-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) framework (Zimin
and Neu, 2013; Rosenberg and Mansour, 2019a,b; Jin et al., 2020, 2021, 2022). FTPL methods are
usually computationally more efficient and easier to implement as it only requires solving an offline
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

