Robust ϕ-Divergence MDPs

Chin Pang Ho
City University of Hong Kong
clint.ho@cityu.edu.hk

Marek Petrik
University of New Hampshire
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Wolfram Wiesemann
Imperial College London
ww@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In recent years, robust Markov decision processes (MDPs) have emerged as a
prominent modeling framework for dynamic decision problems affected by uncertainty. In contrast to classical MDPs, which only account for stochasticity by
modeling the dynamics through a stochastic process with a known transition kernel,
robust MDPs additionally account for ambiguity by optimizing in view of the most
adverse transition kernel from a prescribed ambiguity set. In this paper, we develop
a novel solution framework for robust MDPs with s-rectangular ambiguity sets that
decomposes the problem into a sequence of robust Bellman updates and simplex
projections. Exploiting the rich structure present in the simplex projections corresponding to ϕ-divergence ambiguity sets, we show that the associated s-rectangular
robust MDPs can be solved substantially faster than with state-of-the-art commercial solvers as well as a recent first-order solution scheme, thus rendering them
attractive alternatives to classical MDPs in practical applications.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDPs) are a flexible and popular framework for dynamic decisionmaking problems and reinforcement learning [39, 48]. A practical limitation of the standard MDP
model is that it assumes the model parameters, such as transition probabilities and rewards, to be
known exactly. In reinforcement learning and other applications, these parameters must be estimated
from sampled data, which introduces estimation errors. Optimal MDP solutions, referred to as policies,
are well known to be sensitive to errors and may fail catastrophically when deployed [25, 56].
Robust MDPs (RMDPs) mitigate the sensitivity of MDPs to estimation errors by computing a policy
that is optimal for the worst plausible realization of the transition probabilities. This set of plausible
transition probabilities is known as the ambiguity set. Most prior work considers ambiguity sets
that are rectangular. In this work, we focus on s-rectangular ambiguity sets, which assume that the
worst transition probabilities are chosen independently in each state [25, 56]. While several other
models of rectangularity have been studied [9, 13, 21, 28], s-rectangular ambiguity sets are popular
due to their generality and their performance both in-sample and out-of-sample [56]. However, even
though polynomial-time algorithms based on dynamic programming concepts have been developed
for s-rectangular sets, those algorithms may be too slow in practice. Solving RMDPs requires the
solution of a convex optimization problem in every step of value or policy iteration, which can
become prohibitively slow even in moderatly sized problems with 100s of states [5, 9, 14, 19].
Motivated by the difficulty of solving RMDPs, several fast algorithms have been proposed for srectangular RMDPs [5, 9, 14, 19]. The preponderance of the earlier work has focused on ambiguity
sets defined in terms of L1 - and L∞ -norms. These ambiguity sets are polyhedral, and they can be
analyzed using linear programming techniques which offer fruitful avenues to exploit the structure
inherent to those sets. However, recent statistical studies point to the superior solution quality offered
by nonlinear ambiguity sets defined in terms of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, the L2 -norm
and other metrics [17]. Linear optimization solvers are not applicable to RMDPs with s-rectangular
ambiguity sets defined in terms of non-polyhedral ambiguity sets, as the corresponding optimization
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

