Resource-Adaptive Federated Learning
with All-In-One Neural Composition

Yiqun Mei

Pengfei Guo Mo Zhou Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
{ymei7,pguo4,mzhou32,vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Conventional Federated Learning (FL) systems inherently assume a uniform processing capacity among clients for deployed models. However, diverse client
hardware often leads to varying computation resources in practice. Such system
heterogeneity results in an inevitable trade-off between model complexity and
data accessibility as a bottleneck. To avoid such a dilemma and achieve resourceadaptive federated learning, we introduce a simple yet effective mechanism, termed
All-In-One Neural Composition, to systematically support training complexityadjustable models with flexible resource adaption. It is able to efficiently construct
models at various complexities using one unified neural basis shared among clients,
instead of pruning the global model into local ones. The proposed mechanism
endows the system with unhindered access to the full range of knowledge scattered
across clients and generalizes existing pruning-based solutions by allowing soft
and learnable extraction of low footprint models. Extensive experiment results on
popular FL benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. The resulting FL system empowered by our All-In-One Neural Composition, called FLANC,
manifests consistent performance gains across diverse system/data heterogeneous
setups while keeping high efficiency in computation and communication.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning is greatly empowered by the large datasets [1, 2]. However, when data
is scattered across a vast number of edge devices, and subject to privacy regulations, deep learning
will be unrealistic. To this end, Federated Learning (FL) [3, 4] provides a decentralized solution,
enabling a number of participants to jointly train a model without exchanging any raw data. Due to
such privacy-preserving property, FL is favorable and widely adopted in many applications [5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10], including but not limited to face recognition [11], autonomous driving [12] and next-word
prediction [13].
When designing federated learning systems [14, 15, 16, 3, 17, 18], it is commonly assumed that
the local models share the same architecture as the global one. However, real-world deployments
can rarely satisfy this ideal assumption. Instead, participants in the wild often equip with diverse
devices (e.g., Internet of Things (IoT) devices, mobile phones, tablets and personal computers), which
greatly vary in computation resource budgets (including computation capacity, memory, storage,
and network bandwidth). Further, even if participants equip with identical devices, the resource
budgets may still vary due to e.g., other irrelevant programs consuming an arbitrary portion of the
resource, or reduced CPU frequency due to power-saving mode. This ubiquitous presence of system
heterogeneity becomes a major bottleneck for real-world FL applications, as it leads to an inevitable
trade-off between model complexity and data accessibility – service providers have to either sacrifice
model capacity to enable training on indigent devices, or exclude them along with their unique data.
Predictably, in such a dilemma, both choices will eventually harm the performance of the resulting
model.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

