Efficient and Near-Optimal Smoothed Online
Learning for Generalized Linear Functions
Adam Block
Department of Mathematics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
ablock@mit.edu

Max Simchowitz
CSAIL
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
msimchow@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Due to the drastic gap in complexity between sequential and batch statistical learning, recent work has studied a smoothed sequential learning setting, where Nature
is constrained to select contexts with density bounded by 1/ with respect to a
known measure µ. Unfortunately, for some function classes, there is an exponential gap between the statistically optimal regret and that which can be achieved
efficiently. In this paper, we give a computationally efficient algorithm that is
the first to enjoy the statistically optimal log(T / ) regret for realizable K-wise
linear classification. We extend our results to settings where the true classifier is
linear in an over-parameterized polynomial featurization of the contexts, as well
as to a realizable piecewise-regression setting assuming access to an appropriate
ERM oracle. Somewhat surprisingly, standard disagreement-based analyses are
insufficient to achieve regret logarithmic in 1/ . Instead, we develop a novel
characterization of the geometry of the disagreement region induced by generalized
linear classifiers. Along the way, we develop numerous technical tools of independent interest, including a general anti-concentration bound for the determinant of
certain matrix averages.

1

Introduction

In batch statistical learning, a learner faces a set of independent examples drawn from a given
distribution, and is tasked with generalizing to novel examples drawn from that same distribution.
In sequential or online learning, however, Nature may adversarially select examples to thwart the
learner’s progress and success is defined only in comparison to the best a priori predictor. Due to the
wide range of application and minimal set of assumptions, online learning has received considerable
recent attention. For concreteness, consider binary classification, where a sequence of T examples
takes the form (xt , yt ) 2 Rd ⇥ { 1, +1}. Even in the realizable setting, where there exists a true
f ? in a pre-specified class of functions F for which f ? (xt ) = yt for all t 2 {1, 2, . . . , T }, the gap
between batch and statistical learning and sequential learning can be drastic: when d = 1, the class
of linear thresholds f✓ (x) = sign(x ✓) has VC dimension one and is thus learnable in the PAC
framework [Wainwright, 2019]. A sequential adversary, however, can select xt so as to force the
linear to misclassify ⌦(T ) points [Littlestone, 1988].
To circumvent the pessimism of the sequential setting, recent works [Rakhlin et al., 2011, Haghtalab
et al., 2020, 2021, Block et al., 2022, Haghtalab et al., 2022] have studied the smoothed sequential
learning paradigm, where the adversary is constrained to choose xt at random from any probability
distribution pt with density at most 1/ with respect to a known measure µ. The most current
of these results point to a striking statistical
computational gap: whereas there exist algorithms
p
which attain regret that scales with T log(/ ), computationally efficient algorithms can only
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

