Point-M2AE: Multi-scale Masked Autoencoders
for Hierarchical Point Cloud Pre-training

Renrui Zhang1,2 , Ziyu Guo2 , Rongyao Fang1 ,
Bin Zhao , Dong Wang2 , Yu Qiao2 , Hongsheng Li1,3 , Peng GaoB2
2

1

2

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence Limited
{zhangrenrui, gaopeng}@pjlab.org.cn
hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Masked Autoencoders (MAE) have shown great potentials in self-supervised pretraining for language and 2D image transformers. However, it still remains an
open question on how to exploit masked autoencoding for learning 3D representations of irregular point clouds. In this paper, we propose Point-M2AE, a
strong Multi-scale MAE pre-training framework for hierarchical self-supervised
learning of 3D point clouds. Unlike the standard transformer in MAE, we modify the encoder and decoder into pyramid architectures to progressively model
spatial geometries and capture both fine-grained and high-level semantics of 3D
shapes. For the encoder that downsamples point tokens by stages, we design a
multi-scale masking strategy to generate consistent visible regions across scales,
and adopt a local spatial self-attention mechanism during fine-tuning to focus
on neighboring patterns. By multi-scale token propagation, the lightweight decoder gradually upsamples point tokens with complementary skip connections
from the encoder, which further promotes the reconstruction from a global-to-local
perspective. Extensive experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance
of Point-M2AE for 3D representation learning. With a frozen encoder after pretraining, Point-M2AE achieves 92.9% accuracy for linear SVM on ModelNet40,
even surpassing some fully trained methods. By fine-tuning on downstream tasks,
Point-M2AE achieves 86.43% accuracy on ScanObjectNN, +3.36% to the secondbest, and largely benefits the few-shot classification, part segmentation and 3D
object detection with the hierarchical pre-training scheme. Code is available at
https://github.com/ZrrSkywalker/Point-M2AE.

1

Introduction

Learning to represent from unlabeled data without annotations, known as self-supervised learning,
has attained great success in natural language processing [10, 32, 33, 5], computer vision [19, 7,
8, 18] and multi-modality learning [31, 50, 21]. By pre-training on the large-scale raw data, the
networks are endowed with robust representation abilities and can significantly benefit downstream
tasks with fine-tuning. Motivated by masked language modeling [32, 10], MAE [18] and some
other methods [46, 53, 3] adopt asymmetric encoder-decoder transformers [13] to apply masked
autoencoding for self-supervised learning on 2D images. They represent the input image as multiple
local patches, and randomly mask them with a high ratio to build the pretext task for reconstruction.
Specifically, the encoder aims at capturing high-level latent representations from limited visible
patches, and the lightweight decoder is forced to reconstruct the RGB values of masked patches on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

