Learning Individualized Treatment Rules with Many
Treatments: A Supervised Clustering Approach
Using Adaptive Fusion

Haixu Ma
Department of Statistics and Operations Research
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27516
haixuma@live.unc.edu

Donglin Zeng
Department of Biostatistics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27516
dzeng@email.unc.edu

Yufeng Liu
Department of Statistics and Operations Research
Department of Genetics
Department of Biostatistics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27516
yfliu@email.unc.edu

Abstract
Learning an optimal Individualized Treatment Rule (ITR) is a very important problem in precision medicine. This paper is concerned with the challenge when the
number of treatment arms is large, and some groups of treatments in the large treatment space may work similarly for the patients. Motivated by the recent development of supervised clustering, we propose a novel adaptive fusion based method
to cluster the treatments with similar treatment effects together and estimate the
optimal ITR simultaneously through a single convex optimization. The problem is
formulated as balancing loss`penalty terms with a tuning parameter, which allows
the entire solution path of the treatment clustering process to be clearly visualized
hierarchically. For computation, we propose an efﬁcient algorithm based on accelerated proximal gradient and further conduct a novel group-lasso based algorithm
for variable selection to boost the performance. Moreover, we demonstrate the
theoretical guarantee of recovering the underlying true clustering structure of the
treatments for our method. Finally, we demonstrate the superior performance of
our method via both simulations and a real data application on cancer treatment,
which may assist the decision making process for doctors.

1

Introduction

Data-driven individualized decision making problems have received a lot of attentions in precision
medicine [1, 2, 3, 4]. Due to possible signiﬁcant heterogeneity of treatment effects among individuals, it is necessary for decision makers to precisely tailor the treatment decision rules to different
subgroups of individuals rather than simply implement the traditional “one size ﬁts all” medical
procedures. The main goal of the paper is to recommend the optimal Individualized Treatment Rule
(ITR), mapping from the covariate space based on patients’ characteristics to the treatment assignment, that optimizes the expected value of a speciﬁed reward, known as the value function [5].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

