Palm up: Playing in the Latent Manifold for
Unsupervised Pretraining

Hao Liu∗
UC Berkeley

Tom Zahavy
DeepMind

Volodymyr Mnih
DeepMind

Satinder Singh
DeepMind

Abstract
Large and diverse datasets have been the cornerstones of many impressive advancements in artificial intelligence. Intelligent creatures, however, learn by interacting
with the environment, which changes the input sensory signals and the state of the
environment. In this work, we aim to bring the best of both worlds and propose
an algorithm that exhibits an exploratory behavior whilst it utilizes large diverse
datasets. Our key idea is to leverage deep generative models that are pretrained on
static datasets and introduce a dynamic model in the latent space. The transition
dynamics simply mixes an action and a random sampled latent. It then applies
an exponential moving average for temporal persistency, the resulting latent is
decoded to image using pretrained generator. We then employ an unsupervised
reinforcement learning algorithm to explore in this environment and perform unsupervised representation learning on the collected data. We further leverage the
temporal information of this data to pair data points as a natural supervision for representation learning. Our experiments suggest that the learned representations can
be successfully transferred to downstream tasks in both vision and reinforcement
learning domains.

1

Introduction

Large and diverse datasets have been the cornerstones of many impressive successes at the frontier of
artificial intelligence, such as protein folding [64, 28], image recognition [55, 13], and understanding
natural language [6, 12]. Training machine learning models on diverse datasets that cover a breadth
of human-written text and natural images often dramatically improves performance and enables
impressive generalization capabilities [16, 6, 55, 12]. These models are learned from a fixed set of
images, videos, or languages, guided by supervision that comes from ground-truth labels [13, 55],
self-supervised contrastive learning [10], or masked token prediction [6, 12] among other approaches.
In contrast, intelligent creatures learn to perform interactions that actively change the input sensory
signals and the state of the environment towards a desired configuration. For example, in psychology,
it has been shown that interaction with the environment is vital for developing flexible and generalize
intelligence [23, 74, 17]. During the first few months of interactions, infants develop meaningful
understandings about objects [67] and prefer to look at exemplars from a novel class (e.g., dogs) after
observing exemplars from a different class (e.g., cats) [54]. We hypothesis that by situating the agent
in a high semantic complexity environment, the agent can develop interesting cognition abilities.
Given the effectiveness of learning from large and diverse datasets and the significance of interactive
learning behaviors in intelligent creatures, it is therefore extremely important to connect them to build
better learning algorithms.
To bridge the gap, perhaps one straightforward solution is learning in the diverse real world [1, 53],
however, teaching a robot to interact in the physical world is both time consuming and resource
∗

This work was partially done at DeepMind. Correspondence to hao.liu@cs.berkeley.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

