Unsupervised Causal Generative
Understanding of Images

Titas Anciukevičius
Snap Inc., University of Edinburgh
titas.anciukevicius@gmail.com
Patrick Fox-Roberts
Snap Inc.

Edward Rosten
Snap Inc.

Paul Henderson
University of Glasgow

Abstract
We present a novel framework for unsupervised object-centric 3D scene understanding that generalizes robustly to out-of-distribution images. To achieve this,
we design a causal generative model reflecting the physical process by which an
image is produced, when a camera captures a scene containing multiple objects.
This model is trained to reconstruct multi-view images via a latent representation
describing the shapes, colours and positions of the 3D objects they show. It explicitly represents object instances as separate neural radiance fields, placed into
a 3D scene. We then propose an inference algorithm that can infer this latent
representation given a single out-of-distribution image as input – even when it
shows an unseen combination of components, unseen spatial compositions or a
radically new viewpoint. We conduct extensive experiments applying our approach
to test datasets that have zero probability under the training distribution. These
show that it accurately reconstructs a scene’s geometry, segments objects and infers
their positions, despite not receiving any supervision. Our approach significantly
out-performs baselines that do not capture the true causal image generation process.

1

Introduction

Most machine learning approaches make the assumption that at test time, they are applied to data
drawn from the same distribution as seen during training [14, 91, 73, 21, 33]. This means the
generalization guarantees of statistical learning theory apply [127]. However, this does not apply
to images drawn from a different distribution – recent works have shown this for images taken
from unfamiliar viewpoints [4, 1, 8], shifted by few pixels [7], and showing scenes with an unseen
composition of objects [11, 110, 114, 36, 37, 26, 70]. It has been suggested that this is because they
learn spurious shortcuts [36] to achieve low training loss, but which do not capture the true causal
relationship. However, when deployed, machine learning methods often encounter observations
drawn from a previously unseen distribution.
In this work, we consider the task of transforming a single observed image into a detailed representation of the scene it depicts, providing explicit information about its 3D structure such as object
locations, shapes and appearances. We focus on the challenging setting where at test time, we see
images depicting scenes that have zero probability in the training distribution (Fig. 1). We adopt an
unsupervised approach to learning, avoiding the need for manual annotation of object masks, 3D
positions, and similar – we require only a dataset of posed multi-view images.
Our approach is to build a generative model (Sec. 3) jointly over image pixels and the 3D world
they depict, that can be robustly inverted to infer the latent factors that gave rise to an input image
[116, 129, 22]. If such a model is to support generalization to out-of-distribution (OOD) data, it
should reflect the underlying causal model of the environment from which the data arose [102, 116].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

