Controlled Sparsity via Constrained Optimization or:
How I Learned to Stop Tuning Penalties and Love Constraints
Jose Gallego-Posada∗
Juan Ramirez
Akram Erraqabi
‡
Yoshua Bengio
Simon Lacoste-Julien‡
Mila and DIRO, Université de Montréal, Canada
‡
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
The performance of trained neural networks is robust to harsh levels of pruning.
Coupled with the ever-growing size of deep learning models, this observation has
motivated extensive research on learning sparse models. In this work, we focus
on the task of controlling the level of sparsity when performing sparse learning.
Existing methods based on sparsity-inducing penalties involve expensive trial-anderror tuning of the penalty factor, thus lacking direct control of the resulting model
sparsity. In response, we adopt a constrained formulation: using the gate mechanism proposed by Louizos et al. [31], we formulate a constrained optimization
problem where sparsification is guided by the training objective and the desired
sparsity target in an end-to-end fashion. Experiments on CIFAR-{10, 100}, TinyImageNet, and ImageNet using WideResNet and ResNet{18, 50} models validate
the effectiveness of our proposal and demonstrate that we can reliably achieve
pre-determined sparsity targets without compromising on predictive performance.

1

Introduction

Commonly used neural networks result in overparametrized models, whose performance is robust to
harsh levels of parameter pruning [18, 42, 12, 14]. Thus, regularization techniques aimed at learning
sparse models can drastically reduce the computational cost associated with the learnt model by
removing unnecessary parameters, and retain good performance in the learning task. Given the
recent research trends which explore the capabilities of ever more ambitious large-scale models
[2], developing techniques which provide reliable training of sparsified models becomes crucial for
deploying them in massively-used systems, or on resource-constrained devices.
Pruning methods aim to reduce the storage and/or computational footprint of a model by discarding
individual parameters [18, 34] or groups thereof [29, 27, 37], while inducing minimal distortion in the
model’s predictions. These methods can be further categorized based on whether the sparse model is
obtained while or after training the model (also known as in-training and post-training sparsification).
Traditional post-training methods rely on heuristic rankings of the weights or filters to be pruned,
often based on parameter magnitudes [26, 18]. Despite their simplicity, these methods usually
require retraining the weights to maintain high accuracy after pruning, and thus incur in additional
computational overhead. On the other hand, in-training methods which learn a good sparsity pattern
by augmenting the training loss with sparsity-inducing penalties [31, 27] do not perform fine-tuning,
but face challenges regarding the tuning and interpretability of the penalty hyperparameter.
In this work† , we focus on the task of learning models with controlled levels of sparsity while
performing in-training pruning. We tackle two central issues of the popular penalized method of
⃝ tuning the L0 -penalty coefficient to achieve a desired sparsity level is non
Louizos et al. [31]: 1
⃝ in the worst case the
trivial and can involve computationally wasteful trial-and-error attempts; 2
penalized method can outright fail at producing any sparsity, as documented by Gale et al. [14].
∗

Correspondence to: {gallegoj, juan.ramirez, akram.erraqabi}@mila.quebec
Our code is available at: https://github.com/gallego-posada/constrained_sparsity

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

