RegMixup: Mixup as a Regularizer Can Surprisingly
Improve Accuracy & Out-of-Distribution Robustness

Francesco Pinto∗
University of Oxford
francesco.pinto@eng.ox.ac.uk
Ser-Nam Lim
Meta AI

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford

Harry Yang
Meta AI

Puneet K. Dokania
University of Oxford & Five AI Ltd.
puneet.dokania@five.ai

Abstract
We show that the effectiveness of the well celebrated Mixup [Zhang et al., 2018]
can be further improved if instead of using it as the sole learning objective, it is
utilized as an additional regularizer to the standard cross-entropy loss. This simple
change not only improves accuracy but also significantly improves the quality
of the predictive uncertainty estimation of Mixup in most cases under various
forms of covariate shifts and out-of-distribution detection experiments. In fact,
we observe that Mixup otherwise yields much degraded performance on detecting
out-of-distribution samples possibly, as we show empirically, due to its tendency to
learn models exhibiting high-entropy throughout; making it difficult to differentiate
in-distribution samples from out-of-distribution ones. To show the efficacy of
our approach (RegMixup2 ), we provide thorough analyses and experiments on
vision datasets (ImageNet & CIFAR-10/100) and compare it with a suite of recent
approaches for reliable uncertainty estimation.

1

Introduction

In real-world machine learning applications one is interested in obtaining models that can reliably
process novel inputs. However, though deep learning models have enabled breakthroughs in multiple
fields, they are known to be unreliable when exposed to samples obtained from a distribution that
is different from the training distribution. Usually, the larger the extent of this difference between
the train and the test distributions, the more unreliable these models are. This observation has led
to a growing interest in developing deep learning models that can provide reliable predictions even
when exposed to unseen situations [Liu et al., 2020a,b, Wen et al., 2021, Lakshminarayanan et al.,
2017]. Most of these approaches either use expensive ensembles, or propose non-trivial modifications
to the neural network architectures in order to obtain reliable models. In most cases, they trade
in-distribution performance (accuracy) to perform reliably on: (1) out-of-distribution (OOD) samples;
and (2) covariate shift (CS) [Quionero-Candela et al., 2009] samples.
Towards developing practically useful and reliable models, we investigate the well known
Mixup [Zhang et al., 2018] as it is extremely popular in improving both a model’s accuracy and its
robustness [Wen et al., 2021, Hendrycks et al., 2020b]. It has already been observed that Mixup
can help in retaining good accuracy when the test inputs are affected by superficial variations that
do not affect the target label (i.e., they undergo CS) [Hendrycks et al., 2020b]. However, we find
∗
2

FP continued spending time on this project during his internship at Five AI from June 2021 to March 2022.
Code available at: https://github.com/FrancescoPinto/RegMixup

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

