QC-StyleGAN - Quality Controllable Image
Generation and Manipulation

Dat Viet Thanh Nguyen1,∗

Phong Tran1,2,∗

Anh Tuan Tran1
1

VinAI Research

2

MBZUAI

3

Tan M. Dinh1

Cuong Pham1,3

Posts & Telecommunications Institute of Technology

{v.datnvt2, v.tandm3, v.anhtt152, v.cuongpv11}@vinai.io

the.tran@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
The introduction of high-quality image generation models, particularly the StyleGAN family, provides a powerful tool to synthesize and manipulate images. However, existing models are built upon high-quality (HQ) data as desired outputs,
making them unfit for in-the-wild low-quality (LQ) images, which are common
inputs for manipulation. In this work, we bridge this gap by proposing a novel GAN
structure that allows for generating images with controllable quality. The network
can synthesize various image degradation and restore the sharp image via a quality
control code. Our proposed QC-StyleGAN can directly edit LQ images without
altering their quality by applying GAN inversion and manipulation techniques. It
also provides for free an image restoration solution that can handle various degradations, including noise, blur, compression artifacts, and their mixtures. Finally,
we demonstrate numerous other applications such as image degradation synthesis,
transfer, and interpolation.

1

Introduction

Image generation has achieved a marvelous development in recent years thanks to the introduction
of Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). StyleGAN models [1, 2, 3, 4] manage to generate
realistic-looking images with the resolution up to 1024×1024. Their synthetic images of non-existing
people/objects can fool human eyes [5, 6]. The development of such high-quality synthesis models has
also introduced a new direction to effectively solve the image manipulation tasks, which usually first fit
the input image to the model’s latent space via a GAN “inversion” technique [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13],
then apply a learned editing [14, 15, 16] on the fitted latent code for the desired change on the
generated image. Their impressive manipulation results promise various practical applications in
entertainment, design, art, and more.
While the recent GAN models, notably the StyleGAN series, show promising image editing performance, we argue that image quality is an Achilles’ heel, making it challenging for them to work on
real-world images. StyleGAN models are often trained from sharp and high-resolution images as the
desired output quality. In contrast, in-the-wild images might have various qualities depending on the
capturing and storing conditions. Many degradations could affect these images, including noises, blur,
downsampling, or compression artifacts. They make GAN inversion hard, sometimes impossible,
to fit the low-quality inputs to the high-quality image domain modelled by StyleGAN generators.
Incorrect inversions might lead to unsatisfactory editing results with obvious content mismatches.
For example, a popular StyleGAN-based image super-resolution method [17] caused a controversy
by approximating a high-resolution picture of Barack Obama as an image of a white man.
∗

authors contributed equally

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

