How to talk so AI will learn:
Instructions, descriptions, and autonomy

Theodore R. Sumers
Computer Science
Princeton University
sumers@princeton.edu

Robert D. Hawkins
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
rdhawkins@princeton.edu

Thomas L. Griffiths
Computer Science, Psychology
Princeton University
tomg@princeton.edu

Mark K. Ho
Computer Science
Princeton University
mho@princeton.edu

Dylan Hadfield-Menell
EECS, CSAIL
MIT
dhm@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
From the earliest years of our lives, humans use language to express our beliefs
and desires. Being able to talk to artificial agents about our preferences would
thus fulfill a central goal of value alignment. Yet today, we lack computational
models explaining such language use. To address this challenge, we formalize
learning from language in a contextual bandit setting and ask how a human might
communicate preferences over behaviors. We study two distinct types of language:
instructions, which provide information about the desired policy, and descriptions,
which provide information about the reward function. We show that the agent’s
degree of autonomy determines which form of language is optimal: instructions
are better in low-autonomy settings, but descriptions are better when the agent will
need to act independently. We then define a pragmatic listener agent that robustly
infers the speaker’s reward function by reasoning about how the speaker expresses
themselves. We validate our models with a behavioral experiment, demonstrating
that (1) our speaker model predicts human behavior, and (2) our pragmatic listener
successfully recovers humans’ reward functions. Finally, we show that this form
of social learning can integrate with and reduce regret in traditional reinforcement
learning. We hope these insights facilitate a shift from developing agents that obey
language to agents that learn from it.

1

Introduction

As artificial agents proliferate in society, aligning them with human values is increasingly important [1–
3]. But how can we build machines that understand what we want? Prior work has highlighted the
difficulty of specifying our desires via numerical reward functions [3–5]. Here, we explore language
as a means to communicate them. While most previous work on language input to AI systems focuses
on instructions [6–19], we study instructions alongside more abstract, descriptive language [20–25].
We examine how humans communicate about rewards and formalize learning from this input.
To consider how humans communicate about reward functions, imagine taking up mushroom foraging.
How would you learn the rewards associated with different fungi (i.e. which are delicious and which
are deadly)? In such a setting, learning from direct experience [26] is risky; most humans would
seek to learn socially instead. So how might we learn reward functions from others? Prior work
in reinforcement learning (RL) has examined a number of social learning strategies, including
passive inverse reinforcement learning (observe an expert pick mushrooms, then infer their reward
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

