V IS FIS: Visual Feature Importance Supervision
with Right-for-the-Right-Reason Objectives

Zhuofan Ying,∗ Peter Hase,∗ and Mohit Bansal
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{zfying, peter, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Many past works aim to improve visual reasoning in models by supervising feature
importance (estimated by model explanation techniques) with human annotations
such as highlights of important image regions. However, recent work has shown
that performance gains from feature importance (FI) supervision for Visual Question Answering (VQA) tasks persist even with random supervision, suggesting
that these methods do not meaningfully align model FI with human FI. In this
paper, we show that model FI supervision can meaningfully improve VQA model
accuracy as well as performance on several Right-for-the-Right-Reason (RRR)
metrics by optimizing for four key model objectives: (1) accurate predictions given
limited but sufficient information (Sufficiency); (2) max-entropy predictions given
no important information (Uncertainty); (3) invariance of predictions to changes
in unimportant features (Invariance); and (4) alignment between model FI explanations and human FI explanations (Plausibility). Our best performing method,
Visual Feature Importance Supervision (V IS FIS), outperforms strong baselines on
benchmark VQA datasets in terms of both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
accuracy. While past work suggests that the mechanism for improved accuracy is
through improved explanation plausibility, we show that this relationship depends
crucially on explanation faithfulness (whether explanations truly represent the
model’s internal reasoning). Predictions are more accurate when explanations are
plausible and faithful, and not when they are plausible but not faithful. Lastly, we
show that, surprisingly, RRR metrics are not predictive of out-of-distribution model
accuracy when controlling for a model’s in-distribution accuracy, which calls into
question the value of these metrics for evaluating model reasoning.2

1

Introduction

Many past works aim to teach models to ignore spurious features by making use of additional
information about which features in an input are important [31, 46, 61]. For example, individual
words can be annotated as (un)important in NLP tasks [46, 66], or regions of image pixels can
be highlighted by humans as extra supervision for vision tasks [11, 51]. In this broad class of
feature importance (FI) supervision methods, human annotations of important features are typically
provided for individual datapoints, and methods often use data augmentation or gradient supervision
to encourage models to rely only on important features when making predictions. Such approaches
have seen performance improvements in image classification [50, 7], text classification [35, 66, 58],
and multimodal visual question answering (VQA) tasks [47, 64, 36].
∗
2

Equal contribution.
All supporting code for experiments in this paper is available at https://github.com/zfying/visfis.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

