Tree Mover’s Distance: Bridging Graph Metrics and
Stability of Graph Neural Networks

Ching-Yao Chuang
MIT CSAIL
cychuang@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT CSAIL
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
Understanding generalization and robustness of machine learning models fundamentally relies on assuming an appropriate metric on the data space. Identifying
such a metric is particularly challenging for non-Euclidean data such as graphs.
Here, we propose a pseudometric for attributed graphs, the Tree Mover’s Distance
(TMD), and study its relation to generalization. Via a hierarchical optimal transport
problem, TMD reflects the local distribution of node attributes as well as the distribution of local computation trees, which are known to be decisive for the learning
behavior of graph neural networks (GNNs). First, we show that TMD captures
properties relevant to graph classification: a simple TMD-SVM performs competitively with standard GNNs. Second, we relate TMD to generalization of GNNs
under distribution shifts, and show that it correlates well with performance drop
under such shifts. The code is available at https://github.com/chingyaoc/TMD.

1

Introduction

Understanding generalization under distribution shifts – theoretically and empirically – relies on
an appropriate measure of divergence between data distributions. This, in turn, typically demands
a metric on the data space that indicates what kinds of data points are “close” to the training data.
While such metrics may be readily available for Euclidean spaces, they are more challenging to
determine for non-Euclidean data spaces such as graphs with attributes in Rp , which underlie graph
learning methods. In this work, we study the question of a suitable metric for message passing graph
neural networks (GNNs).
An “ideal” metric for studying input perturbations captures the invariances and inductive biases of
the model we are examining. For instance, since graph isomorphism is a difficult problem [18],
this metric is expected to be a pseudometric, i.e., will fail to distinguish certain graphs. These
“failures” should be aligned with the GNNs’ invariances. Moreover, several recent works highlight
the importance of local structures – computation trees resulting from unrolling the message passing
process – for the approximation power of GNNs and their inability to distinguish certain pairs of
graphs [2, 20, 34, 55]. Works on out-of-distribution generalization of GNNs mostly focus on specific
types of instances where a trained model may fail miserably [58, 54], without specifying the behavior
for gradual shifts in distributions. Yehudai et al. [58] show that a sufficiently large, unrestricted GNN
may predict arbitrarily on previously unseen computation trees. In practice, we may observe a more
gradual change, depending on the magnitude of change of the tree, in terms of both structure and
node attributes, and the capacity of the aggregation function. In summary, we desire a metric that
reflects the structure of computation trees and the distribution of node attributes within trees. Many
distances and kernels between graphs have been proposed [7], several based on local structures [21],
and some using structure and attributes [44]. Closest to our ideal is the Wasserstein Weisfeiler-Leman
pseudometric [46], which computes an optimal transport distance between node embeddings of two
graphs. The embeddings are computed via message passing, which aligns with the computation of
GNNs, but loses structural information within trees.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

