Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning
in Large Language Models

Jason Wei
Brian Ichter

Xuezhi Wang
Fei Xia

Dale Schuurmans
Ed H. Chi

Quoc V. Le

Maarten Bosma
Denny Zhou

Google Research, Brain Team
{jasonwei,dennyzhou}@google.com

Abstract
We explore how generating a chain of thought—a series of intermediate reasoning
steps—significantly improves the ability of large language models to perform
complex reasoning. In particular, we show how such reasoning abilities emerge
naturally in sufficiently large language models via a simple method called chain-ofthought prompting, where a few chain of thought demonstrations are provided as
exemplars in prompting.
Experiments on three large language models show that chain-of-thought prompting
improves performance on a range of arithmetic, commonsense, and symbolic
reasoning tasks. The empirical gains can be striking. For instance, prompting a
PaLM 540B with just eight chain-of-thought exemplars achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy on the GSM8K benchmark of math word problems, surpassing even
finetuned GPT-3 with a verifier.
Standard Prompting
Model Input

Chain-of-Thought Prompting
Model Input

Q: Roger has 5 tennis balls. He buys 2 more cans of
tennis balls. Each can has 3 tennis balls. How many
tennis balls does he have now?

Q: Roger has 5 tennis balls. He buys 2 more cans of
tennis balls. Each can has 3 tennis balls. How many
tennis balls does he have now?

A: The answer is 11.

A: Roger started with 5 balls. 2 cans of 3 tennis balls
each is 6 tennis balls. 5 + 6 = 11. The answer is 11.

Q: The cafeteria had 23 apples. If they used 20 to
make lunch and bought 6 more, how many apples
do they have?

Model Output

A: The answer is 27.

Q: The cafeteria had 23 apples. If they used 20 to
make lunch and bought 6 more, how many apples
do they have?
Model Output

A: The cafeteria had 23 apples originally. They used
20 to make lunch. So they had 23 - 20 = 3. They
bought 6 more apples, so they have 3 + 6 = 9. The
answer is 9.

Figure 1: Chain-of-thought prompting enables large language models to tackle complex arithmetic,
commonsense, and symbolic reasoning tasks. Chain-of-thought reasoning processes are highlighted.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

