Oscillatory Tracking of Continuous Attractor Neural
Networks Account for Phase Precession and
Procession of Hippocampal Place Cells

Tianhao Chu1,∗
chutianhao@stu.pku.edu.cn

Zilong Ji1,2,∗
zilong.ji@ucl.ac.uk

Wen-Hao Zhang3
wenhao.zhang@utsouthwestern.edu
Yuanyuan Mi5
miyuanyuan0102@163.com

Junfeng Zuo1
zuojunfeng@pku.edu.cn

Tiejun Huang4
tjhuang@pku.edu.cn
Si Wu1,†
siwu@pku.edu.cn

1, School of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking University.
2. Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London
3. Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, O’Donnell Brain Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center.
4. School of Computer Science, Peking University.
5. Center for Neurointelligence, School of Medicine, Chongqing University.
∗
: Equal contributions. † : Corresponding authors.

Abstract
Hippocampal place cells of freely moving rodents display an intriguing temporal
organization in their responses known as ‘theta phase precession’, in which individual neurons fire at progressively earlier phases in successive theta cycles as the
animal traverses the place fields. Recent experimental studies found that in addition
to phase precession, many place cells also exhibit accompanied phase procession,
but the underlying neural mechanism remains unclear. Here, we propose a neural
circuit model to elucidate the generation of both kinds of phase shift in place cells’
firing. Specifically, we consider a continuous attractor neural network (CANN)
with feedback inhibition, which is inspired by the reciprocal interaction between
the hippocampus and the medial septum. The feedback inhibition induces intrinsic
mobility of the CANN which competes with the extrinsic mobility arising from
the external drive. Their interplay generates an oscillatory tracking state, that is,
the network bump state (resembling the decoded virtual position of the animal)
sweeps back and forth around the external moving input (resembling the physical
position of the animal). We show that this oscillatory tracking naturally explains
the forward and backward sweeps of the decoded position during the animal’s
locomotion. At the single neuron level, the forward and backward sweeps account
for, respectively, theta phase precession and procession. Furthermore, by tuning the
feedback inhibition strength, we also explain the emergence of bimodal cells and
unimodal cells, with the former having co-existed phase precession and procession,
and the latter having only significant phase precession. We hope that this study
facilitates our understanding of hippocampal temporal coding and lays foundation
for unveiling their computational functions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

