DaDA: Distortion-aware Domain Adaptation for
Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation

Sujin Jang
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
s.steve.jang@samsung.com

Joohan Na
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
joohan.na@samsung.com

Dokwan Oh
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
dokwan.oh@samsung.com

Abstract
Distributional shifts in photometry and texture have been extensively studied for
unsupervised domain adaptation, but their counterparts in optical distortion have
been largely neglected. In this work, we tackle the task of unsupervised domain
adaptation for semantic image segmentation where unknown optical distortion exists between source and target images. To this end, we propose a distortion-aware
domain adaptation (DaDA) framework that boosts the unsupervised segmentation performance. We first present a relative distortion learning (RDL) approach
that is capable of modeling domain shifts in fine-grained geometric deformation
based on diffeomorphic transformation. Then, we demonstrate that applying additional global affine transformations to the diffeomorphically transformed source
images can further improve the segmentation adaptation. Besides, we find that our
distortion-aware adaptation method helps to enhance self-supervised learning by
providing higher-quality initial models and pseudo labels. To evaluate, we propose
new distortion adaptation benchmarks, where rectilinear source images and fisheye
target images are used for unsupervised domain adaptation. Extensive experimental
results highlight the effectiveness of our approach over state-of-the-art methods
under unknown relative distortion across domains. Datasets and more information
are available at https://sait-fdd.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed dramatic improvements in semantic segmentation performance based
on a massive amount of pixel-level annotations. However, applying a segmentation model learned
from the training dataset (source domain) directly to unseen test scenarios (target domain) often
leads to significant performance degradation, which is caused by the divergence of data distribution
between source and target domains. In addition, manually annotating target domain images with
pixel-wise labels is extremely expensive and taxing. To address such issues, many studies have
proposed unsupervised domain adaptation methods to transfer the knowledge learned from the labeled
source domain to the unlabeled target domain (e.g., [33, 34, 27, 26, 40]).
Existing works on unsupervised segmentation adaptation methods have predominantly investigated
domain shift problems mainly due to photometric and textural discrepancies between rectilinear
image domains (e.g., adapting synthetically generated images [29, 30] to real-world imagery [8];
or adapting images from/to different cities [7]). In contrast, domain shifts in geometric and optical
distortion have not been well explored, despite commonly appearing in many practical applications.
For example, wide-angle cameras (e.g., fisheye cameras) have been extensively used for complex
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

