Two-layer neural network on infinite-dimensional data:
global optimization guarantee in the mean-field regime

Naoki Nishikawa
University of Tokyo
nishikawa-naoki259@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Atsushi Nitanda
Kyushu Institute of Technology
RIKEN AIP
nitanda@ai.kyutech.ac.jp

Taiji Suzuki
University of Tokyo
RIKEN AIP
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Denny Wu
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
dennywu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Analysis of neural network optimization in the mean-field regime is important as
the setting allows for feature learning. Existing theory has been developed mainly
for neural networks in finite dimensions, i.e., each neuron has a finite-dimensional
parameter. However, the setting of infinite-dimensional input naturally arises in machine learning problems such as nonparametric functional data analysis and graph
classification. In this paper, we develop a new mean-field analysis of two-layer
neural network in an infinite-dimensional parameter space. We first give a generalization error bound, which shows that the regularized empirical risk minimizer
properly generalizes when the data size is sufficiently large, despite the neurons
being infinite-dimensional. Next, we present two gradient-based optimization
algorithms for infinite-dimensional mean-field networks, by extending the recently
developed particle optimization framework to the infinite-dimensional setting. We
show that the proposed algorithms converge to the (regularized) global optimal
solution, and moreover, their rates of convergence are of polynomial order in the
online setting and exponential order in the finite sample setting, respectively. To
our knowledge this is the first quantitative global optimization guarantee of neural
network on infinite-dimensional input and in the presence of feature learning.

1

Introduction

A variety of machine learning problems need to handle input from infinite-dimensional spaces. For
instance, Ling and Vieu (2018); Ferraty et al. (2007) studied non-parametric function regression
problems where the input is a function in an infinite-dimensional functional space, and Kriege et al.
(2020) studied graph classification problems using kernel method, which can be cast as a learning
problem with inputs from an infinite-dimensional reproducing kernel Hilbert space.
Among various models that deal with those infinite-dimensional input problems, neural networks are
particularly interesting due to their ability to learn features and model nonlinear data. For example,
Rossi and Conan-Guez (2005) proposed the Functional Multi-Layer Perceptron, where the input of
functional data is converted to vector form by basis expansion and then fed into a neural network;
the universal approximation and statistical consistency of the proposed model were also analyzed.
Recently, Yao et al. (2021) proposed the Adaptive Functional Neural Network, which replaces the
fixed basis functions in Rossi and Conan-Guez (2005) with adaptive bases, in order to leverage
the power of representation (feature) learning and the flexibility of deep learning. While neural
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

