Batch Multi-Fidelity Active Learning with Budget
Constraints
Shibo Li∗ , Jeff M. Phillips∗ , Xin Yu, Robert M. Kirby, and Shandian Zhe
School of Computing, University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
{shibo, jeffp, xiny, kirby, zhe}@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Learning functions with high-dimensional outputs is critical in many applications,
such as physical simulation and engineering design. However, collecting training
examples for these applications is often costly, e.g., by running numerical solvers.
The recent work (Li et al., 2022) proposes the first multi-fidelity active learning
approach for high-dimensional outputs, which can acquire examples at different
fidelities to reduce the cost while improving the learning performance. However,
this method only queries at one pair of fidelity and input at a time, and hence has a
risk to bring in strongly correlated examples to reduce the learning efficiency. In this
paper, we propose Batch Multi-Fidelity Active Learning with Budget Constraints
(BMFAL-BC), which can promote the diversity of training examples to improve
the benefit-cost ratio, while respecting a given budget constraint for batch queries.
Hence, our method can be more practically useful. Specifically, we propose a novel
batch acquisition function that measures the mutual information between a batch
of multi-fidelity queries and the target function, so as to penalize highly correlated
queries and encourages diversity. The optimization of the batch acquisition function
is challenging in that it involves a combinatorial search over many fidelities while
subject to the budget constraint. To address this challenge, we develop a weighted
greedy algorithm that can sequentially identify each (fidelity, input) pair, while
achieving a near (1 − 1/e)-approximation of the optimum. We show the advantage
of our method in several computational physics and engineering applications.

1

Introduction

Applications, such as in computational physics and engineering design, often demand we calculate
a complex mapping from low-dimensional inputs to high-dimensional outputs, such as finding the
optimal material layout (output) given the design parameters (input), and solving the solution field on
a mesh (output) given the PDE parameters (input). Computing these mappings is often very expensive,
e.g., iteratively running numerical solvers. Hence, learning a surrogate model to outright predict the
mapping, which is much faster and cheaper, is of great practical interest and importance (Kennedy
and O’Hagan, 2000; Conti and O’Hagan, 2010)
However, collecting training examples for the surrogate model becomes another bottleneck, since
each example still requires a costly computation. To alleviate this issue, Li et al. (2022) developed
DMFAL, a first deep multi-fidelity active learning algorithm, which can acquire examples at different
fidelities to reduce the cost of data collection. Low-fidelity examples are cheap to compute (e.g.,
with coarse meshes) yet inaccurate; high-fidelity examples are accurate but much more expensive
(e.g., calculated with dense grids). See Fig. 1 for an illustration. DMFAL uses an optimization-based
acquisition method to dynamically identify the input and fidelity at which to query new examples, so
as to improve the learning performance, lower the sample complexity, and reduce the cost.
∗

Equal contribution

Correspondence to: Jeff M. Phillips, Shandian Zhe.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

