Biologically-plausible backpropagation through
arbitrary timespans via local neuromodulators
Yuhan Helena Liu1,2,3,* , Stephen Smith2,4 , Stefan Mihalas1,2,3 , Eric Shea-Brown1,2,3 , and Uygar
Sümbül2,*
1

Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
2
Allen Institute for Brain Science, 615 Westlake Ave N, Seattle WA, USA
3
Computational Neuroscience Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
4
Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University, Stanford CA, USA
*
Correspondence: hyliu24@uw.edu, uygars@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
The spectacular successes of recurrent neural network models where key parameters are adjusted via backpropagation-based gradient descent have inspired much
thought as to how biological neuronal networks might solve the corresponding
synaptic credit assignment problem [1–3]. There is so far little agreement, however,
as to how biological networks could implement the necessary backpropagation
through time, given widely recognized constraints of biological synaptic network
signaling architectures. Here, we propose that extra-synaptic diffusion of local
neuromodulators such as neuropeptides may afford an effective mode of backpropagation lying within the bounds of biological plausibility. Going beyond
existing temporal truncation-based gradient approximations [4–6], our approximate gradient-based update rule, ModProp, propagates credit information through
arbitrary time steps. ModProp suggests that modulatory signals can act on receiving
cells by convolving their eligibility traces via causal, time-invariant and synapsetype-specific filter taps. Our mathematical analysis of ModProp learning, together
with simulation results on benchmark temporal tasks, demonstrate the advantage
of ModProp over existing biologically-plausible temporal credit assignment rules.
These results suggest a potential neuronal mechanism for signaling credit information related to recurrent interactions over a longer time horizon. Finally, we derive
an in-silico implementation of ModProp that could serve as a low-complexity and
causal alternative to backpropagation through time.

1

Introduction

Recurrent connectivity is a hallmark of neuronal circuits. While this feature enables rich and flexible
computation, mechanisms enabling efficient task learning in large circuits remain a central problem in
neuroscience and artificial intelligence research. Fundamentally, the problem stems from the fact that
potentially all history of all neurons, including synaptically far away ones, can affect neuronal activity
and contribute to task output. Motivated by the success of gradient descent learning, several biological
learning models approximate the exact gradient in recurrent neural networks using known biological
processes and gain insights into computational principles of how the brain might learn [4–6].
By ignoring dependencies beyond a few recurrent steps — thus severely truncating the gradient
computational graph — these existing models succeed in representing their approximate gradientbased update rule as a combination of terms that resemble known synaptic physiological processes:
"eligibility trace", which maintains a fading memory of coincidental activation of presynaptic and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

