Learning-Augmented Algorithms for Online Linear
and Semidefinite Programming

Elena Grigorescu∗
Purdue University, USA
elena-g@purdue.edu

Young-San Lin∗†
University of Melbourne, Australia
nilnamuh@gmail.com

Maoyuan Song∗§
Purdue University, USA
song683@purdue.edu

Sandeep Silwal‡‡
MIT, USA
silwal@mit.edu

Samson Zhou¶
UC Berkeley and Rice University, USA
samsonzhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Semidefinite programming (SDP) is a unifying framework that generalizes both
linear programming and quadratically-constrained quadratic programming, while
also yielding efficient solvers, both in theory and in practice. However, there
exist known impossibility results for approximating the optimal solution when constraints for covering SDPs arrive in an online fashion. In this paper, we study online
covering linear and semidefinite programs, in which the algorithm is augmented
with advice from a possibly erroneous predictor. We show that if the predictor
is accurate, we can efficiently bypass these impossibility results and achieve a
constant-factor approximation to the optimal solution, i.e., consistency. On the
other hand, if the predictor is inaccurate, under some technical conditions, we
achieve results that match both the classical optimal upper bounds and the tight
lower bounds up to constant factors, i.e., robustness.
More broadly, we introduce a framework that extends both (1) the online set
cover problem augmented with machine-learning predictors, studied by Bamas,
Maggiori, and Svensson (NeurIPS 2020), and (2) the online covering SDP problem,
initiated by Elad, Kale, and Naor (ICALP 2016). Specifically, we obtain general
online learning-augmented algorithms for covering linear programs with fractional
advice and constraints, and initiate the study of learning-augmented algorithms for
covering SDP problems. Our techniques are based on the primal-dual framework of
Buchbinder and Naor (Mathematics of Operations Research, 34, 2009) and can be
further adjusted to handle constraints where the variables lie in a bounded region,
i.e., box constraints.

1

Introduction

In the classical online model, an input is iteratively given to an algorithm that must make irrevocable
decisions at each point in time, while satisfying a number of changing constraints and optimizing a
∗

E.G, Y.L, and M.S were supported in part by NSF CCF-1910659, NSF CCF-1910411, NSF CCF-2228814,
and a Ross-Lynn Award.
†
Work done while at Purdue University, USA.
‡
Supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 1745302, NSF TRIPODS program
(award DMS-2022448), and Simons Investigator Award.
§
Supported in part by NSF CCF-2127806
¶
Work supported by a Simons Investigator Award and by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
CCF-1815840, and done in part while at Carnegie Mellon University, USA.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

