Proximal Point Imitation Learning

Angeliki Kamoutsi
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
kamoutsa@ethz.ch

Luca Viano
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
luca.viano@epfl.ch
Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
gergely.neu@gmail.com

Igor Krawczuk
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
igor.krawczuk@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
This work develops new algorithms with rigorous efficiency guarantees for infinite horizon imitation learning (IL) with linear function approximation without
restrictive coherence assumptions. We begin with the minimax formulation of the
problem and then outline how to leverage classical tools from optimization, in
particular, the proximal-point method (PPM) and dual smoothing, for online and
offline IL, respectively. Thanks to PPM, we avoid nested policy evaluation and cost
updates for online IL appearing in the prior literature. In particular, we do away
with the conventional alternating updates by the optimization of a single convex
and smooth objective over both cost and Q-functions. When solved inexactly, we
relate the optimization errors to the suboptimality of the recovered policy. As an
added bonus, by re-interpreting PPM as dual smoothing with the expert policy as a
center point, we also obtain an offline IL algorithm enjoying theoretical guarantees
in terms of required expert trajectories. Finally, we achieve convincing empirical
performance for both linear and neural network function approximation.

1

Introduction

This work is concerned with the prototypical setting of imitation learning (IL) where
1. An expert provides demonstrations of state-action pairs in an environment. The expert could
be optimal or suboptimal with respect to an unknown cost/reward function.
2. The learner chooses distance measure between its policy to be learned and the expert
empirical distribution estimated from demonstrations.
3. The learner employs an algorithm, which additionally may or may not use interactions with
the environment, to minimize the chosen distance.
In IL, the central goal of the learner is to recover a policy competitive with expert with respect to the
underlying unknown cost function. IL is important for several real world applications like driving
[62], robotics [88], and economics/finance [27] at the expense of following resources: (R1) expert
demonstrations, (R2) (optional) interactions with the environment where the expert collected the
demonstrations, and (R3) computational resources for solving the problem template.
Interestingly, while there is a vast amount of literature using optimization ideas on the IL problem
template, i.e. Lagrangian duality [51, 38, 59, 63, 64], resource guarantees are still widely missing
since the optimization literature focuses on the resource (R3) where IL literature mainly focuses on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

