Contrastive Graph Structure Learning via
Information Bottleneck for Recommendation
Chunyu Wei1∗, Jian Liang1∗ , Di Liu1 , Fei Wang2
1
Alibaba Group, China
2
Department of Population Health Sciences, Weill Cornell Medicine, USA
weicy15@icloud.com
{xuelang.lj, wendi.ld}@alibaba-inc.com
few2001@med.cornell.edu

Abstract
Graph convolution networks (GCNs) for recommendations have emerged as an
important research topic due to their ability to exploit higher-order neighbors.
Despite their success, most of them suffer from the popularity bias brought by
a small number of active users and popular items. Also, a real-world user-item
bipartite graph contains many noisy interactions, which may hamper the sensitive
GCNs. Graph contrastive learning show promising performance for solving the
above challenges in recommender systems. Most existing works typically perform
graph augmentation to create multiple views of the original graph by randomly
dropping edges/nodes or relying on predefined rules, and these augmented views
always serve as an auxiliary task by maximizing their correspondence. However,
we argue that the graph structures generated from these vanilla approaches may
be suboptimal, and maximizing their correspondence will force the representation
to capture information irrelevant for the recommendation task. Here, we propose
a Contrastive Graph Structure Learning via Information Bottleneck (CGI) for
recommendation, which adaptively learns whether to drop an edge or node to obtain
optimized graph structures in an end-to-end manner. Moreover, we innovatively
introduce the Information Bottleneck into the contrastive learning process to avoid
capturing irrelevant information among different views and help enrich the final
representation for recommendation. Extensive experiments on public datasets are
provided to show that our model significantly outperforms strong baselines. 2

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been widely deployed to alleviate information overload in diverse
scenarios including e-commerce, online news and multimedia contents, which requires high-quality
user and item representations learned from the historical interactions [7, 14, 43]. Recently, thanks
to the powerful capability in modeling graph-structured data, Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs)
provide an efficient way to integrate multi-hop neighbors into node representation learning and show
prominent performance in recommendation [37, 30, 8].
Although encouraging performance has been achieved, we argue that most GCN-based recommender
models suffer from the following two limitations, of which the impacts on the user’s exhibited
preference are presented in Fig. 1. i) Popularity Bias. Items inherently have different customer sizes,
and this imbalance can potentially lead to popularity bias [45]. In most recommender systems, the
customer size for items usually follows a long-tail distribution, which means a few items have massive
customers while the majority have few customers. Similarly, most users have few interactions. This
skewed data distribution will bias GCN-based models towards the popular users and items easily
∗
2

Equal contributions from both authors. This work is done when Chunyu Wei works as an intern at Alibaba.
The code is available on https://github.com/weicy15/CGI.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

