Using Partial Monotonicity in Submodular
Maximization
Loay Mualem
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa
Haifa 3303221, Israel
loaymua@gmail.com

Moran Feldman
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa
Haifa 3303221, Israel
moranfe@cs.haifa.ac.il

Abstract
Over the last two decades, submodular function maximization has been the
workhorse of many discrete optimization problems in machine learning applications. Traditionally, the study of submodular functions was based on binary
function properties, but recent works began to consider continuous function properties such as the submodularity ratio and the curvature. The monotonicity property
of set functions plays a central role in submodular maximization. Nevertheless, no
continuous version of this property has been suggested to date (as far as we know),
which is unfortunate since submoduar functions that are almost monotone often
arise in machine learning applications. In this work we fill this gap by defining the
monotonicity ratio, which is a continuous version of the monotonicity property. We
then show that for many standard submodular maximization algorithms one can
prove new approximation guarantees that depend on the monotonicity ratio; leading
to improved approximation ratios for the common machine learning applications
of movie recommendation, quadratic programming, image summarization and
ride-share optimization.

1

Introduction

Over the last two decades, submodular function maximization has been the workhorse of many
discrete optimization problems in machine learning applications such as data summarization [17,
19, 31, 32, 41, 50], social graph analysis [45], adversarial attacks [36], dictionary learning [15],
sequence selection [42, 51], interpreting neural networks [18] and many more. Traditionally, the
study of submodular functions was based on binary properties of functions. A function can be either
submodular or non-submodular, monotone or non-monotone, etc. Such properties are simple, but
they have an inherit weakness—if an algorithm assumes functions that have a particular property,
then it provides no guarantee for functions that violate this property, even if the violation is slight.
Given the above situation, recent works began to consider continuous versions of function properties.
Probably the most significant among these continuous versions so far are the submodularity ratio and
the curvature. The submodularity ratio (originally defined by Das and Kempe [16]) is a parameter
γ ∈ [0, 1] replacing the binary submodularity property that a set function can either have or not
have. A value of 1 corresponds to a fully submodular function, and lower values of γ represent some
violation of submodularity (the worse the violation, the lower γ). Similarly, the curvature (defined
by Conforti and Cornuéjol [13]) is a parameter c ∈ [0, 1] replacing the binary linearity property that
a set function can either have or not have. A value of 1 corresponds to a fully linear function, and
lower values of c represent some violation of linearity.
A central conceptual contribution of Das and Kempe [16] was that they were able to demonstrate
that continuous function properties further extend the usefulness of submodular maximization to new
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

