End-to-end Algorithm Synthesis with Recurrent Networks: Logical Extrapolation Without Overthinking
Arpit Bansal⇤
University of Maryland
bansal01@umd.edu
Zeyad Emam
University of Maryland

Avi Schwarzschild⇤
University of Maryland
avi1@umd.edu

Eitan Borgnia
University of Chicago
eborgnia@uchicago.edu

Furong Huang
University of Maryland

Micah Goldblum
New York University

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland

Abstract
Machine learning systems perform well on pattern matching tasks, but their ability
to perform algorithmic or logical reasoning is not well understood. One important reasoning capability is algorithmic extrapolation, in which models trained
only on small/simple reasoning problems can synthesize complex strategies for
large/complex problems at test time. Algorithmic extrapolation can be achieved
through recurrent systems, which can be iterated many times to solve difficult
reasoning problems. We observe that this approach fails to scale to highly complex
problems because behavior degenerates when many iterations are applied – an
issue we refer to as "overthinking." We propose a recall architecture that keeps an
explicit copy of the problem instance in memory so that it cannot be forgotten. We
also employ a progressive training routine that prevents the model from learning
behaviors that are specific to iteration number and instead pushes it to learn behaviors that can be repeated indefinitely. These innovations prevent the overthinking
problem, and enable recurrent systems to solve extremely hard extrapolation tasks.

Figure 1: A ‘thinking’ network trained on 9 ⇥ 9 mazes and their solutions (left) autonomously
synthesizes a scalable algorithm. By running this algorithm for longer, it reliably solves problems of
size 59 ⇥ 59 (middle), 201 ⇥ 201 (right), and much larger (appendix) without retraining. Standard
architectures, and even existing primitive thinking models, fail to tolerate this domain shift.
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

