Modular Flows: Differential Molecular Generation
Yogesh Verma, Samuel Kaski, Markus Heinonen
Aalto University
{yogesh.verma, samuel.kaski, markus.heinonen}@aalto.fi
Vikas Garg
YaiYai Ltd and Aalto University
vgarg@csail.mit.edu; vikas@yaiyai.fi

Abstract
Generating new molecules is fundamental to advancing critical applications such
as drug discovery and material synthesis. Flows can generate molecules effectively
by inverting the encoding process, however, existing flow models either require
artifactual dequantization or specific node/edge orderings, lack desiderata such
as permutation invariance, or induce discrepancy between the encoding and the
decoding steps that necessitates post hoc validity correction. We circumvent these
issues with novel continuous normalizing E(3)-equivariant flows, based on a system
of node ODEs coupled as a graph PDE, that repeatedly reconcile locally toward
globally aligned densities. Our models can be cast as message passing temporal
networks, and result in superlative performance on the tasks of density estimation
and molecular generation. In particular, our generated samples achieve state of the
art on both the standard QM9 and ZINC250K benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Generative models have rapidly become ubiquitous in
machine learning with advances from image synthesis
(Ramesh et al., 2022) to protein design (Ingraham et al.,
2019). Molecular generation (Stokes et al., 2020) has
also received significant attention owing to its promise
for discovering new drugs and materials. Searching for
valid molecules in prohibitively large discrete spaces is,
however, challenging: estimates for drug-like structures
range between 1023 and 1060 but only a tiny fraction on the order of 108 - has been synthesized (Polishchuk
et al., 2013; Merz et al., 2020). Thus, learning representations that exploit appropriate molecular inductive
biases (e.g., spatial correlations) becomes crucial.
Earlier models focused on generating sequences based
on the SMILES notation (Weininger, 1988) used in
Chemistry to describe the molecular structures as
strings. However, they were supplanted by genera- Figure 1: A toy illustration of ModFlow in action
tive models that capture valuable spatial information with a two-node graph. The two local flows - z1
such as bond strengths and dihedral angles, e.g., by and z2 - co-evolve toward a more complex joint
embedding molecular graphs via some graph neural density, both driven by the same differential f .
network (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009; Garg et al., 2020). Such models primarily include variants
of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), and Normalizing
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

