Weighted Distillation with Unlabeled Examples

Fotis Iliopoulos
Google Research
fotisi@google.com

Vasilis Kontonis
Google Research
kontonis@google.com

Cenk Baykal
Google Research
baykalc@google.com

Gaurav Menghani
Google Research
gmenghani@google.com

Khoa Trinh
Google Research
khoatrinh@google.com

Erik Vee
Google Research
erikvee@google.com

Abstract
Distillation with unlabeled examples is a popular and powerful method for training
deep neural networks in settings where the amount of labeled data is limited: A
large “teacher” neural network is trained on the labeled data available, and then it
is used to generate labels on an unlabeled dataset (typically much larger in size).
These labels are then utilized to train the smaller “student” model which will
actually be deployed. Naturally, the success of the approach depends on the quality
of the teacher’s labels, since the student could be confused if trained on inaccurate
data. This paper proposes a principled approach for addressing this issue based on
a “debiasing" reweighting of the student’s loss function tailored to the distillation
training paradigm. Our method is hyper-parameter free, data-agnostic, and simple
to implement. We demonstrate significant improvements on popular academic
datasets and we accompany our results with a theoretical analysis which rigorously
justifies the performance of our method in certain settings.

1

Introduction

In many modern applications of deep neural networks, where the amount of labeled examples for
training is limited, distillation with unlabeled examples [8, 20] has been enormously successful.
In this two-stage training paradigm a larger and more sophisticated “teacher model” — typically
non-deployable for the purposes of the application — is trained to learn from the limited amount of
available training data in the first stage. In the second stage, the teacher model is used to generate
labels on an unlabeled dataset, which is usually much larger in size than the original dataset the
teacher itself was trained on. These labels are then utilized to train the “student model”, namely
the model which will actually be deployed. Notably, distillation with unlabeled examples is the
most commonly used training-paradigm in applications where one finetunes and distills from very
large-scale foundational models such as BERT [13] and GPT-3 [5] and, additionally, it can be used to
significantly improve distillation on supervised examples only (see e.g. [47]).
While this has proven to be a very powerful approach in practice, its success depends on the quality
of labels provided by the teacher model. Indeed, often times the teacher model generates inaccurate
labels on a non-negligible portion of the unlabeled dataset, confusing the student. As deep neural
networks are susceptible to overfitting to corrupted labels [50], training the student on the teacher’s
noisy labels can lead to degradation in its generalization performance. As an example, Figure 1
depicts an instance based on CIFAR-10 where filtering out the teacher’s noisy labels is quite beneficial
for the student’s performance.
We address this shortcoming by introducing a natural “noise model” for the teacher which allows us
to modify the student’s loss function in a principled way in order to produce an unbiased estimate
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

