BinauralGrad: A Two-Stage Conditional Diffusion
Probabilistic Model for Binaural Audio Synthesis

Yichong Leng1∗ † , Zehua Chen3∗, Junliang Guo2 , Haohe Liu5 , Jiawei Chen6 , Xu Tan2
Danilo Mandic3 , Lei He4 , Xiang-Yang Li1 , Tao Qin2 , Sheng Zhao4 , Tie-Yan Liu2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Imperial College London,4 Microsoft Azure Speech,5 University of Surrey
6
South China University of Technology
1
lyc123go@mail.ustc.edu.cn,xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn
2
{junliangguo,xuta,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com
3
{zehua.chen18,d.mandic}@imperial.ac.uk
4
{helei,szhao}@microsoft.com
5
hl01486@surrey.ac.uk,6 csjiaweichen@mail.scut.edu.cn
https://github.com/microsoft/NeuralSpeech

Abstract
Binaural audio plays a significant role in constructing immersive augmented and
virtual realities. As it is expensive to record binaural audio from the real world,
synthesizing them from mono audio has attracted increasing attention. This synthesis process involves not only the basic physical warping of the mono audio,
but also room reverberations and head/ear related filtrations, which, however, are
difficult to accurately simulate in traditional digital signal processing. In this paper,
we formulate the synthesis process from a different perspective by decomposing
the binaural audio into a common part that shared by the left and right channels
as well as a specific part that differs in each channel. Accordingly, we propose
BinauralGrad, a novel two-stage framework equipped with diffusion models to
synthesize them respectively. Specifically, in the first stage, the common information of the binaural audio is generated with a single-channel diffusion model
conditioned on the mono audio, based on which the binaural audio is generated by a
two-channel diffusion model in the second stage. Combining this novel perspective
of two-stage synthesis with advanced generative models (i.e., the diffusion models),
the proposed BinauralGrad is able to generate accurate and high-fidelity binaural
audio samples. Experiment results show that on a benchmark dataset, BinauralGrad
outperforms the existing baselines by a large margin in terms of both object and
subject evaluation metrics (Wave L2: 0.128 vs. 0.157, MOS: 3.80 vs. 3.61). The
generated audio samples3 and code4 are available online.

1

Introduction

Human brains have the ability to decode spatial properties from real-world stereophonic sounds, which
helps us to locate and interact with the environment. While in artificial spaces such as augmented and
virtual reality, generating accurate binaural audio from the mono one is therefore essential to provide
∗

Equal contribution.
This work was conducted at Microsoft. Corresponding author: Xu Tan, xuta@microsoft.com
3
https://speechresearch.github.io/binauralgrad
4
https://github.com/microsoft/NeuralSpeech/tree/master/BinauralGrad

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

