Self-Supervised Visual Representation Learning
with Semantic Grouping

Xin Wen1
1

Bingchen Zhao2, 3

University of Hong Kong

2

Anlin Zheng1, 4

University of Edinburgh

Xiangyu Zhang4
3

LunarAI

4

Xiaojuan Qi1

MEGVII Technology

{wenxin, xjqi}@eee.hku.hk
zhaobc.gm@gmail.com
{zhenganlin, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of learning visual representations from unlabeled scene-centric data. Existing works have demonstrated the potential of
utilizing the underlying complex structure within scene-centric data; still, they
commonly rely on hand-crafted objectness priors or specialized pretext tasks to
build a learning framework, which may harm generalizability. Instead, we propose contrastive learning from data-driven semantic slots, namely SlotCon, for
joint semantic grouping and representation learning. The semantic grouping is
performed by assigning pixels to a set of learnable prototypes, which can adapt to
each sample by attentive pooling over the feature and form new slots. Based on the
learned data-dependent slots, a contrastive objective is employed for representation
learning, which enhances the discriminability of features, and conversely facilitates
grouping semantically coherent pixels together. Compared with previous efforts,
by simultaneously optimizing the two coupled objectives of semantic grouping
and contrastive learning, our approach bypasses the disadvantages of hand-crafted
priors and is able to learn object/group-level representations from scene-centric images. Experiments show our approach effectively decomposes complex scenes into
semantic groups for feature learning and significantly benefits downstream tasks,
including object detection, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation.
Code is available at: https://github.com/CVMI-Lab/SlotCon.

1

Introduction

Existing self-supervised approaches have demonstrated that visual representations can be learned
from unlabeled data by constructing pretexts such as transformation prediction [22], instance discrimination [70, 31], and masked image modeling [2, 30, 67], etc. Among them, approaches based
on instance discrimination [28, 6, 7, 11], which treat each image as a single class and employ a
contrastive learning objective for training, have attained remarkable success and are beneficial to
boost performance on many downstream tasks.
However, this success is largely built upon the well-curated object-centric dataset ImageNet [15],
which has a large gap with the real-world data for downstream applications, such as city scenes [13]
or crowd scenes [46]. Directly applying the instance discrimination pretext to these real-world data
by simply treating the scene as a whole overlooks its intrinsic structures (e.g., multiple objects and
complex layouts) and thus will limit the potential of pre-training with scene-centric data [61]. This
leads to our focus: learning visual representations from unlabeled scene-centric data.
Recent efforts to address this problem can be coarsely categorized into two types of research. One
stream extends the instance discrimination task to pixel level for dense representation learning [54,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

