Generalization Analysis on
Learning with a Concurrent Verifier

Masaaki Nishino, Kengo Nakamura, Norihito Yasuda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{masaaki.nishino.uh, kengo.nakamura.dx, norihito.yasuda.hn}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Machine learning technologies have been used in a wide range of practical systems.
In practical situations, it is natural to expect the input-output pairs of a machine
learning model to satisfy some requirements. However, it is difficult to obtain a
model that satisfies requirements by just learning from examples. A simple solution
is to add a module that checks whether the input-output pairs meet the requirements and then modifies the model’s outputs. Such a module, which we call a
concurrent verifier (CV), can give a certification, although how the generalizability
of the machine learning model changes using a CV is unclear. This paper gives a
generalization analysis of learning with a CV. We analyze how the learnability of a
machine learning model changes with a CV and show a condition where we can
obtain a guaranteed hypothesis using a verifier only in the inference time. We also
show that typical error bounds based on Rademacher complexity will be no larger
than that of the original model when using a CV in multi-class classification and
structured prediction settings.

1

Introduction

As machine learning technology matures, many systems have been developed that exploit machine
learning models. When developing a system that uses a machine learning model, a model with
merely small prediction error is not satisfactory due to real-field requirements. For example, an object
recognition model that is sensitive to slight noise would cause security issues [4, 26], or a model with
unexpected output would increase a system’s cost for dealing with it. Thus, we want the input-output
pairs of a machine learning model to satisfy some requirements. However, it is difficult to obtain a
model that satisfies the requirements by just learning from examples. Moreover, since the learned
models tend to be complex and the input domain tends to be quite large, it is unrealistic to certify that
every input-output pair satisfies the requirements. In addition, even if we find an input-output pair
that does not satisfy the requirements, modifying a model is difficult since we have to re-estimate it
from the training examples.
This paper considers a way to obtain a machine learning model whose input-output pairs satisfy the
required properties. We address the following assumptions for a situation where a machine learning
model is used. First, we can judge whether input-output pair (x, h(x)) satisfies the requirements,
where h : X → Y is a machine learning model or a hypothesis. As we show below, important use
cases fit this setting. Second, a machine learning model already exists whose prediction error is small
enough, although its input-output pairs are not guaranteed to satisfy the requirements. This second
assumption is also reasonable since modern machine learning models show sufficient prediction
accuracy in various tasks. Under these assumptions, a practical choice for addressing this problem
isn’t changing the machine learning model but adding a module that checks the input-output pairs of
machine learning model h. We call this module a concurrent verifier (CV). Fig. 1 shows the system
configuration of a machine learning model with a CV. The verifier checks whether the input-output
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

