OpenOOD: Benchmarking Generalized
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Jingkang Yang1 , Pengyun Wang2,3 , Dejian Zou2,3 , Zitang Zhou2,3 , Kunyuan Ding2,3 ,
Wenxuan Peng1 , Haoqi Wang4 , Guangyao Chen5 , Bo Li1 , Yiyou Sun7 , Xuefeng Du7 ,
Kaiyang Zhou1 , Wayne Zhang4 , Dan Hendrycks6 , Yixuan Li7 , Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
3
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK 4 SenseTime Research, Shenzhen, China
5
Peking University, Beijing, China 6 University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
7
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
https://github.com/Jingkang50/OpenOOD

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is vital to safety-critical machine learning
applications and has thus been extensively studied, with a plethora of methods
developed in the literature. However, the field currently lacks a unified, strictly formulated, and comprehensive benchmark, which often results in unfair comparisons
and inconclusive results. From the problem setting perspective, OOD detection
is closely related to neighboring fields including anomaly detection (AD), open
set recognition (OSR), and model uncertainty, since methods developed for one
domain are often applicable to each other. To help the community to improve
the evaluation and advance, we build a unified, well-structured codebase called
OpenOOD, which implements over 30 methods developed in relevant fields and
provides a comprehensive benchmark under the recently proposed generalized
OOD detection framework. With a comprehensive comparison of these methods,
we are gratified that the field has progressed significantly over the past few years,
where both preprocessing methods and the orthogonal post-hoc methods show
strong potential. We invite readers to use our OpenOOD codebase to develop and
contribute. The full experimental results are available in this table.

1

Introduction

Most existing machine learning (ML) models are trained on the closed-world assumption, where all
the test data is assumed to be drawn from in-distribution (ID), i.e., the same distribution as the training
data [1, 2]. However, the closed-world assumption is difficult to maintain in the real world [3]. In
practice, a deployed model will be inevitably exposed to unseen examples that deviated from the
training distribution, which are known as out-of-distribution (OOD) samples [4, 5], which can affect
ML model safety [6, 7]. While the neighborhood OOD generalization community focuses on ensuring
the robustness of models to maintain high performance on OOD samples with domain shift [8], OOD
detection, on the other hand, emphasizes the model reliability by requiring the identification of
samples with semantic shift [5]. In other words, the goal of OOD detection is to detect samples to
which the model cannot or does not want to generalize [5].
A plethora of methodologies for OOD detection has been developed in the past five years, ranging
from classification-based to density-based to distance-based methods [5]. Classification-based
Corresponding author. Contact: ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

