Maximum Common Subgraph Guided Graph
Retrieval: Late and Early Interaction Networks
Indradyumna Roy Soumen Chakrabarti Abir De
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
{indraroy15, soumen, abir}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
The graph retrieval problem is to search in a large corpus of graphs for ones that are
most similar to a query graph. A common consideration for scoring similarity is the
maximum common subgraph (MCS) between the query and corpus graphs, usually
counting the number of common edges (i.e., MCES). In some applications, it is
also desirable that the common subgraph be connected, i.e., the maximum common
connected subgraph (MCCS). Finding exact MCES and MCCS is intractable, but
may be unnecessary if ranking corpus graphs by relevance is the goal. We design
fast and trainable neural functions that approximate MCES and MCCS well. Late
interaction methods compute representations for the query and corpus graphs
separately, and compare these representations using simple similarity functions
at the last stage, leading to highly scalable systems. Early interaction methods
combine information from both graphs right from the input stages, are usually
considerably more accurate, but slower. We propose both late and early interaction
neural MCES and MCCS formulations. They are both based on a continuous
relaxation of a node alignment matrix between query and corpus nodes. For MCCS,
we propose a novel differentiable ‘gossip’ network for estimating the size of the
largest connected common subgraph. Extensive experiments with seven data sets
show that our proposals are superior among late interaction models in terms of both
accuracy and speed. Our early interaction models provide accuracy competitive
with the state of the art, at substantially greater speeds.

1

Introduction

Given a query graph, the graph retrieval problem is to search for relevant or similar response
graphs from a corpus of graphs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Depending on the application, the
notion of relevance may involve graph edit distance (GED) [12, 13, 14], the size of the maximum
common subgraph (MCS) [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], full graph or subgraph isomorphism [5, 10, 11], etc. In
this work, we focus on two variations of MCS-based relevance measures: (i) maximum common
edge subgraph (MCES) [15], which has applications in distributed computing [16, 15] and molecule
search [17, 18, 19, 20] and (ii) maximum common connected subgraph (MCCS) [21], which has
applications in keyword search over knowledge graphs [22, 23], software development [24, 25, 26],
image analysis [27, 28, 29], etc.
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in designing neural graph retrieval models [5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. However, most of them learn black box relevance models which provide suboptimal
performance in the context of MCS based retrieval (Section 4). Moreover, they do not provide
intermediate matching evidence to justify their scores and therefore, they lack interpretability. In this
context, Li et al. [5] proposed a graph matching network (GMN) [5] based on a cross-graph attention
mechanism, which works extremely well in practice (Section 4). Nevertheless, it suffers from three
key limitations, leaving considerable scope for the design of enhanced retrieval models. (i) Similar to
other graph retrieval models, it uses a general-purpose scoring layer, which renders it suboptimal in
the context of MCS based graph retrieval. (ii) As acknowledged by the authors, GMN is slow in both
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

