Quantized Training of Gradient Boosting
Decision Trees
Yu Shi1∗ Guolin Ke2∗†,
Zhuoming Chen3‡ Shuxin Zheng1 Tie-Yan Liu1
1
Microsoft Research 2 DP Technology 3 Tsinghua University
yushi2@microsoft.com, kegl@dp.tech
chen-zm19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {shuxin.zheng, tyliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant success in Gradient Boosting Decision
Trees (GBDT) for a wide range of machine learning applications. Generally, a
consensus about GBDT’s training algorithms is gradients and statistics are computed based on high-precision floating points. In this paper, we investigate an
essentially important question which has been largely ignored by the previous
literature - how many bits are needed for representing gradients in training GBDT?
To solve this mystery, we propose to quantize all the high-precision gradients in a
very simple yet effective way in the GBDT’s training algorithm. Surprisingly, both
our theoretical analysis and empirical studies show that the necessary precisions
of gradients without hurting any performance can be quite low, e.g., 2 or 3 bits.
With low-precision gradients, most arithmetic operations in GBDT training can be
replaced by integer operations of 8, 16, or 32 bits. Promisingly, these findings may
pave the way for much more efficient training of GBDT from several aspects: (1)
speeding up the computation of gradient statistics in histograms; (2) compressing
the communication cost of high-precision statistical information during distributed
training; (3) the inspiration of utilization and development of hardware architectures
which well support low-precision computation for GBDT training. Benchmarked
on CPUs, GPUs, and distributed clusters, we observe up to 2× speedup of our
simple quantization strategy compared with SOTA GBDT systems on extensive
datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness and potential of the low-precision training
of GBDT. The code will be released to the official repository of LightGBM.4

1

Introduction

Gradient Boosting Decision Trees (GBDT) is a powerful machine learning algorithm. Despite the
success of deep learning in recent years, GBDT is one of the best off-the-shelf choices of machine
learning algorithms in many real-world tasks, including online advertising [33], search ranking
[26, 14], finance prediction [29], etc. Along with carefully designed tools, including XGBoost [5],
LightGBM [17], and CatBoost [24], GBDT has shown outstanding performance in various data
science competitions [36] and industrial applications [32, 9, 28, 23].
Despite the success of GBDT, we found there is room for GBDT algorithms to fully exploit modern
computation resources. First, the training of GBDT requires arithmetic operations of high-precision
FP (Floating Point) numbers, which hinders the usage of low-precision computation resources.
Low-precision training has become a standard technique to significantly accelerate the training of
∗

Corresponding authors.
Work primarily done at Microsoft Research.
‡
Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.
4
https://github.com/Microsoft/LightGBM
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

