Zero-Shot Video Question Answering via
Frozen Bidirectional Language Models

Antoine Yang1,2 , Antoine Miech3 , Josef Sivic4 , Ivan Laptev1,2 , Cordelia Schmid1,2
Inria Paris 2 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University
3
DeepMind 4 CIIRC CTU Prague
https://antoyang.github.io/frozenbilm.html

1

Abstract
Video question answering (VideoQA) is a complex task that requires diverse multimodal data for training. Manual annotation of questions and answers for videos,
however, is tedious and prohibits scalability. To tackle this problem, recent methods
consider zero-shot settings with no manual annotation of visual question-answer.
In particular, a promising approach adapts frozen autoregressive language models
pretrained on Web-scale text-only data to multi-modal inputs. In contrast, we
here build on frozen bidirectional language models (BiLM) and show that such
an approach provides a stronger and cheaper alternative for zero-shot VideoQA.
In particular, (i) we combine visual inputs with the frozen BiLM using light
trainable modules, (ii) we train such modules using Web-scraped multi-modal
data, and finally (iii) we perform zero-shot VideoQA inference through masked
language modeling, where the masked text is the answer to a given question. Our
proposed approach, FrozenBiLM, outperforms the state of the art in zero-shot
VideoQA by a significant margin on a variety of datasets, including LSMDC-FiB,
iVQA, MSRVTT-QA, MSVD-QA, ActivityNet-QA, TGIF-FrameQA, How2QA
and TVQA. It also demonstrates competitive performance in the few-shot and
fully-supervised setting. Our code and models are publicly available at [1].

Cross-modal Training
Training
data:
Webscraped
Video + Little cute toy poodle dog
Caption running fast on the beach.

Zero-Shot VideoQA
FrozenBiLM
Pretrained
BiLM

Test
data:
Video
+
Question What is the dog doing?

FrozenBiLM
Pretrained
BiLM

Answer: Running

Figure 1: Our model FrozenBiLM builds on a pretrained and frozen bidirectional language model
(BiLM), and is trained from Web-scraped video-caption pairs. FrozenBiLM excels in the zero-shot
video question answering task without using any explicit visual question-answer supervision.

1

Introduction

Video question answering (VideoQA) is a challenging task that requires fine-grained multi-modal
understanding. State-of-the-art approaches to VideoQA [43, 107, 109] rely on large video datasets
manually annotated with question-answer pairs. Yet, collecting such annotations is time consuming,
expensive and therefore not scalable. This has motivated the development of zero-shot VideoQA
approaches [101, 102, 110], that use no visual question-answer annotation for training, see Figure 1.
4

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech Technical University in Prague.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

