Relational Proxies: Emergent Relationships as
Fine-Grained Discriminators
Abhra Chaudhuri1
Massimiliano Mancini2
Zeynep Akata2,3,4
Anjan Dutta5∗
1
2
3
University of Exeter
University of Tübingen
MPI for Informatics
4
5
MPI for Intelligent Systems
University of Surrey

Abstract
Fine-grained categories that largely share the same set of parts cannot be discriminated based on part information alone, as they mostly differ in the way the local
parts relate to the overall global structure of the object. We propose Relational Proxies, a novel approach that leverages the relational information between the global
and local views of an object for encoding its semantic label. Starting with a rigorous
formalization of the notion of distinguishability between fine-grained categories,
we prove the necessary and sufficient conditions that a model must satisfy in order
to learn the underlying decision boundaries in the fine-grained setting. We design
Relational Proxies based on our theoretical findings and evaluate it on seven challenging fine-grained benchmark datasets and achieve state-of-the-art results on all
of them, surpassing the performance of all existing works with a margin exceeding
4% in some cases. We also experimentally validate our theory on fine-grained distinguishability and obtain consistent results across multiple benchmarks. Implementation is available at https://github.com/abhrac/relational-proxies.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) primarily requires identifying category-specific, discriminative local attributes [49, 44, 21]. However, the relationship of the attributes with the global view of
the object is also known to encode semantic information [6, 5]. Such a relationship can be thought
of as the way in which local attributes combine to form the overall object. When two categories
share a large number of local attributes, this cross-view relational information becomes the only
discriminator. To illustrate this in an intuitive example, Figure 1 shows two fine-grained categories of
birds, the White-faced Plover (left and top-right) and the Kentish Plover (bottom-right). Along with
color and texture information, the two categories share a large number of local features like beak,
head, body, tail and wings. Given such constraints of largely overlapping attribute sets, relational
information like the distance between the head and the body, or the angular orientation of the legs
with respect to the body remain as the only available discriminators. We thus conjecture that the
way the global structure (view) of the object arises out of its local parts (views) must be an emergent
[30] property of the object which is implicitly encoded as the cross-view relationship. However, all
existing methods that consider both global and local information, do so in a relation-agnostic manner,
i.e., without considering cross-view relationships (we formalize relation-agnosticity in Section 3).
We hypothesize that when two categories largely share the same set of local attributes and differ
only in the way the attributes combine to generate the global view of the object, relation-agnostic
approaches do not capture the full semantic information in an input image. To prove our hypothesis,
we develop a rigorous formalization of the notion of distinguishability in the fine-grained setting.
Via our theoretical framework, we identify the necessary and sufficient conditions that a learner
must satisfy to completely learn a distribution of fine-grained categories. Specifically, we prove
∗
A. Chaudhuri is with the Department of Computer Science at the University of Exeter. M. Mancini and Z.
Akata are with the Cluster of Excellence Machine Learning at the University of Tübingen. A. Dutta is with the
Institute for People-Centred AI at the University of Surrey.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

