N ATURAL P ROVER: Grounded Mathematical Proof
Generation with Language Models
Sean Welleck1,2⇤ , Jiacheng Liu1⇤ , Ximing Lu2 , Hannaneh Hajishirzi1,2 , Yejin Choi1,2
1
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, ⇤ Equal contribution
wellecks@uw.edu

Abstract
Theorem proving in natural mathematical language – the mixture of symbolic and
natural language used by humans – plays a central role in mathematical advances
and education, and tests aspects of reasoning that are core to intelligence. Yet
it has remained underexplored with modern generative models. We study largescale language models on two new generation tasks: suggesting the next step in a
mathematical proof, and full proof generation. We develop NATURAL P ROVER, a
language model that generates proofs by conditioning on background references
(e.g. theorems and definitions that are either retrieved or human-provided), and
optionally enforces their presence with constrained decoding. On theorems from
the NATURAL P ROOFS benchmark, NATURAL P ROVER improves the quality of
next-step suggestions and generated proofs over fine-tuned GPT-3, according to
human evaluations from university-level mathematics students. NATURAL P ROVER
is capable of proving some theorems that require short (2-6 step) proofs, and
providing next-step suggestions that are rated as correct and useful over 40% of
the time, which is to our knowledge the first demonstration of these capabilities
using neural language models.1

Figure 1: NATURAL P ROVER proves Even Integer Plus 5 is Odd. At training time, NATURAL P ROVER
obtains background knowledge about references (e.g. theorems or definitions) via reference reconstruction: learning to map a reference’s title to its content. At test time, NATURAL P ROVER grounds
its generations through in-context reference constraints that are retrieved or human-provided, and
optionally enforced with stepwise constrained decoding. This theorem’s human-written proof in
ProofWiki contains an error and differs substantially from NATURAL P ROVER’s correct proof.
1

Code and data available at https://github.com/wellecks/naturalprover.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

