Robust Imitation of a Few Demonstrations with a
Backwards Model
Jung Yeon Park
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA, USA
park.jungy@northeastern.edu

Lawson L.S. Wong
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA, USA
lsw@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
Behavior cloning of expert demonstrations can speed up learning optimal policies
in a more sample-efficient way over reinforcement learning. However, the policy
cannot extrapolate well to unseen states outside of the demonstration data, creating
covariate shift (agent drifting away from demonstrations) and compounding errors.
In this work, we tackle this issue by extending the region of attraction around the
demonstrations so that the agent can learn how to get back onto the demonstrated
trajectories if it veers off-course. We train a generative backwards dynamics
model and generate short imagined trajectories from states in the demonstrations.
By imitating both demonstrations and these model rollouts, the agent learns the
demonstrated paths and how to get back onto these paths. With optimal or nearoptimal demonstrations, the learned policy will be both optimal and robust to
deviations, with a wider region of attraction. On continuous control domains, we
evaluate the robustness when starting from different initial states unseen in the
demonstration data. While both our method and other imitation learning baselines
can successfully solve the tasks for initial states in the training distribution, our
method exhibits considerably more robustness to different initial states.

1

Introduction

While reinforcement learning (RL) has shown remarkable success in many challenging domains
[21, 38, 36], tasks with sparse rewards and long horizons still remain extremely difficult to solve. In
such tasks, a positive reward is only encountered after the RL agent reaches the goal after a long
sequence of actions, meaning that it cannot learn any useful signals until this occurs (typically the
agent must reach the goal several times to learn reliably as well). Furthermore, the learning signal
decreases exponentially with the horizon, which combined with slow gradient-based updates, can
lead to catastrophic forgetting even after the agent learns to reach the goal.
Expert demonstrations can help RL agents solve difficult tasks [30, 43, 22]. These demonstrations
can be used in the supervised setting where the agent imitates the expert’s behavior, termed imitation
learning (IL). However, naive behavior cloning (BC) of the expert’s trajectories suffers from covariate
shift: the agent’s policy drifts away from the expert’s, which leads to compounding errors due to
RL’s sequential nature. Furthermore, the distribution of states given in the demonstrations often has
low-dimensional support with respect to the entire state space. As such, the agent cannot extrapolate
correctly when outside of the demonstration data. Many approaches to solve this issue have been
proposed [33, 39, 16], but such approaches require an interactive expert to query the correct actions.
Another way to use demonstrations is to combine imitation learning with reinforcement learning in a
form of learning from demonstrations (LfD) [35, 13, 9]. In this case, demonstrations do not simply
act as supervised labels and can guide the agent’s exploration, and also act as augmentations to good
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

