Uncovering the Structural Fairness in Graph
Contrastive Learning

Ruijia Wang1 , Xiao Wang1∗ , Chuan Shi1∗ , Le Song2
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
BioMap and MBZUAI
{wangruijia, xiaowang, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, songle@biomap.com

Abstract
Recent studies show that graph convolutional network (GCN) often performs worse
for low-degree nodes, exhibiting the so-called structural unfairness for graphs
with long-tailed degree distributions prevalent in the real world. Graph contrastive
learning (GCL), which marries the power of GCN and contrastive learning, has
emerged as a promising self-supervised approach for learning node representations.
How does GCL behave in terms of structural fairness? Surprisingly, we find
that representations obtained by GCL methods are already fairer to degree bias
than those learned by GCN. We theoretically show that this fairness stems from
intra-community concentration and inter-community scatter properties of GCL,
resulting in a much clear community structure to drive low-degree nodes away from
the community boundary. Based on our theoretical analysis, we further devise a
novel graph augmentation method, called GRAph contrastive learning for DEgree
bias (GRADE), which applies different strategies to low- and high-degree nodes.
Extensive experiments on various benchmarks and evaluation protocols validate
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Despite their strong expressive power in graph representation learning, recent studies reveal that the
performance of vanilla graph convolutional network (GCN) [17] exhibits a structural unfairness [25,
16], which is primarily beneficial to high-degree nodes (head nodes) but biased against low-degree
nodes (tail nodes). Such a performance disparity is alarming and causes a performance bottleneck,
given that node degrees of real-world graphs often follow a long-tailed power-law distribution [2].
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) [30, 24, 22, 38] has been a promising paradigm in graph domain,
which integrates the power of GCN and contrastive leaning [13, 5, 10]. In a nutshell, these methods
typically construct multiple views via stochastic augmentations of the input, then optimize the GCN
encoder by contrasting positive samples against negative ones. Inheriting advantages of contrastive
learning, GCL relieves graph representation learning from human annotations, and displays state-ofthe-art performance in a variety of tasks [35, 12, 39, 36].
Will GCL present the same structure unfairness as GCN? For this purpose, we conduct experiments
to surprisingly find out that GCL methods are better at maintaining structural fairness where a
smaller performance gap exists between tail nodes and head nodes than that of GCN. This finding
suggests that GCL has the potential to mitigate structural unfairness. Based on this finding, a natural
and fundamental question arises: why is graph contrastive learning fairer to degree bias? A wellinformed answer can yield profound insights into solutions to this important problem, and deepen our
understanding of the mechanism of GCL.
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

