Trajectory-guided Control Prediction for End-to-end
Autonomous Driving: A Simple yet Strong Baseline

Penghao Wu∗†
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wupenghaocraig@sjtu.edu.cn

Xiaosong Jia∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
jiaxiaosong@sjtu.edu.cn

Li Chen∗
Shanghai AI Laboratory
lichen@pjlab.org.cn

Junchi Yan†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn

Hongyang Li
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
lihongyang@pjlab.org.cn

Yu Qiao
Shanghai AI Laboratory
qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Current end-to-end autonomous driving methods either run a controller based on
a planned trajectory or perform control prediction directly, which have spanned
two separately studied lines of research. Seeing their potential mutual benefits to
each other, this paper takes the initiative to explore the combination of these two
well-developed worlds. Specifically, our integrated approach has two branches for
trajectory planning and direct control, respectively. The trajectory branch predicts
the future trajectory, while the control branch involves a novel multi-step prediction
scheme such that the relationship between current actions and future states can be
reasoned. The two branches are connected so that the control branch receives corresponding guidance from the trajectory branch at each time step. The outputs from
two branches are then fused to achieve complementary advantages. Our results are
evaluated in the closed-loop urban driving setting with challenging scenarios using
the CARLA simulator. Even with a monocular camera input, the proposed approach
ranks first on the official CARLA Leaderboard, outperforming other complex candidates with multiple sensors or fusion mechanisms by a large margin. The source
code is publicly available at https://github.com/OpenPerceptionX/TCP.

1

Introduction

End-to-end autonomous driving methods, which directly map raw sensor data to a planned trajectory
or low-level control actions, show the virtue of simplicity, conceptually avoiding the cascading error of
complex modular design and heavy hand-crafted rules. The output prediction of the model for end-toend autonomous driving generally falls into two forms: trajectory/waypoints [48, 4, 11, 46, 15, 29, 10]
and direct control actions [17, 39, 18, 42, 12, 60, 9]. However, there is still no clear conclusion as to
which of these two forms is better for all circumstances or certain scenarios.
Different from control predictions that could be directly applied to the vehicle, for methods that
plan trajectory, additional controllers such as PID controllers are usually needed as a subsequent
step to convert the planned trajectory into control signals. One attractive and potential supremacy of
trajectory-based prediction is that it actually considers a relatively longer time horizon into the future
and could be further combined with other modules (e.g., multi-agent trajectory prediction [59, 10],
∗
†

Equal Contribution. Work done when PW and XJ were interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Correspondence author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

