Provable Benefit of Multitask Representation Learning
in Reinforcement Learning

Yuan Cheng
University of Science and Technology of China
cy16@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Jing Yang
The Pennsylvania State University
yangjing@psu.edu

Songtao Feng
The Ohio State University
feng.1359@osu.edu

Hong Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China
zhangh@ustc.edu.cn

Yingbin Liang
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
As representation learning becomes a powerful technique to reduce sample complexity in reinforcement learning (RL) in practice, theoretical understanding of its
advantage is still limited. In this paper, we theoretically characterize the benefit
of representation learning under the low-rank Markov decision process (MDP)
model. We first study multitask low-rank RL (as upstream training), where all tasks
share a common representation, and propose a new multitask reward-free algorithm
called REFUEL. REFUEL learns both the transition kernel and the near-optimal
policy for each task, and outputs a well-learned representation for downstream
tasks. Our result demonstrates that multitask representation learning is provably
more sample-efficient than learning each task individually, as long as the total
number of tasks is above a certain threshold. We then study the downstream RL
in both online and offline settings, where the agent is assigned with a new task
sharing the same representation as the upstream tasks. For both online and offline
settings, we develop a sample-efficient algorithm, and show that it finds a nearoptimal policy with the suboptimality gap bounded by the sum of the estimation
error of the learned representation in upstream and a vanishing term as the number
of downstream samples becomes large. Our downstream results of online and
offline RL further capture the benefit of employing the learned representation from
upstream as opposed to learning the representation of the low-rank model directly.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical study that characterizes
the benefit of representation learning in exploration-based reward-free multitask
RL for both upstream and downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Multitask representation learning has arisen as a popular and powerful framework to deal with
data-scarce environment in supervised learning, bandits and reinforcement learning (RL) recently
(Maurer et al., 2016; Du et al., 2020; Tripuraneni et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021; Cella et al., 2022;
Lu et al., 2021; Arora et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021). The general multitask representation learning
framework consists of both upstream multiple source tasks learning and downstream target task
learning. In RL applications, in upstream, the agent is assigned with T source tasks sharing a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

