JAWS: Auditing Predictive Uncertainty Under
Covariate Shift
Drew Prinster
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211
drew@cs.jhu.edu

Anqi Liu
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211
aliu@cs.jhu.edu

Suchi Saria
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21211
ssaria@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We propose JAWS, a series of wrapper methods for distribution-free uncertainty
quantification tasks under covariate shift, centered on the core method JAW,
the JAckknife+ Weighted with data-dependent likelihood-ratio weights. JAWS
also includes computationally efficient Approximations of JAW using higherorder influence functions: JAWA. Theoretically, we show that JAW relaxes the
jackknife+’s assumption of data exchangeability to achieve the same finite-sample
coverage guarantee even under covariate shift. JAWA further approaches the JAW
guarantee in the limit of the sample size or the influence function order under
common regularity assumptions. Moreover, we propose a general approach to
repurposing predictive interval-generating methods and their guarantees to the
reverse task: estimating the probability that a prediction is erroneous, based on
user-specified error criteria such as a safe or acceptable tolerance threshold around
the true label. We then propose JAW-E and JAWA-E as the repurposed proposed
methods for this Error assessment task. Practically, JAWS outperform state-ofthe-art predictive inference baselines in a variety of biased real world data sets for
interval-generation and error-assessment predictive uncertainty auditing tasks.

1

Introduction

Auditing the uncertainty under data shift Principled quantification of predictive uncertainty is
crucial for enabling users to calibrate how much they should or should not trust a given prediction
[Thiebes et al., 2021, Ghosh et al., 2021, Tomsett et al., 2020, Bhatt et al., 2021]. Uncertainty-based
predictor auditing can be considered a type of uncertainty quantification performed post-hoc, for
example by a regulator without detailed knowledge of a predictor’s architecture and with limited
resources [Schulam and Saria, 2019]. Data shift poses a major challenge to uncertainty quantification
due to violation of the common assumption that the training and test data are exchangeable, or more
specifically independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) [Ovadia et al., 2019, Ulmer et al., 2020,
Zhou and Levine, 2021, Chan et al., 2020]. Therefore, it is essential to develop convenient tools for
users or regulators to audit the uncertainty of a given prediction even when training data is biased.
Predictor auditing: Interval generation In this work we distinguish between two types of predictive
uncertainty auditing. We describe the first type as interval generation, which refers to a common
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

