Empirical Gateaux Derivatives for Causal Inference
Michael I. Jordan⇤
Department of EECS and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Yixin Wang⇤
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
yixinw@umich.edu

Angela Zhou⇤
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
zhoua@usc.edu

Abstract
We study a constructive algorithm that approximates Gateaux derivatives for statistical functionals by finite differencing, with a focus on functionals that arise
in causal inference. We study the setting where probability distributions are not
known a priori but need to be estimated from data. These estimated distributions
lead to empirical Gateaux derivatives, and we study the relationships between empirical, numerical, and analytical Gateaux derivatives. Starting with a case study
of the interventional mean (average potential outcome), we delineate the relationship between the empirical Gateaux derivative (via finite differencing) and the
analytical Gateaux derivative. We then derive requirements on the rates of numerical approximation in perturbation and smoothing that preserve the statistical
benefits of one-step adjustments, such as rate double robustness. We further study
more complicated functionals such as dynamic treatment regimes and the linearprogramming formulation for policy optimization in infinite-horizon Markov decision processes. The ability to approximate bias adjustments in the presence of
arbitrary constraints in these more complicated settings illustrates the usefulness
of constructive approaches for Gateaux derivatives. We also find that the statistical structure of the functional (rate double robustness) can permit less conservative
rates for finite-difference approximation. This property, however, can be specific
to particular functionals; e.g., it occurs for the average potential outcome (hence
average treatment effect) but not the infinite-horizon MDP policy value.

1

Introduction

Inferential targets in causal machine learning often take the form of statistical functionals of the
data distribution. Examples include average treatment effects or average policy values for infinitehorizon offline reinforcement learning. Estimation of these statistical functionals can be vulnerable
to the first-stage bias introduced by the estimation of nuisance functions such as outcome regressions
or transition probabilities. However, by leveraging the causal structure, it is possible to derive biasadjusted estimators that weaken the need for accurate estimation of these nuisance functions. The
celebrated doubly robust estimator is one such bias adjustment, and there are general frameworks
for deriving such estimators, including semiparametric efficiency, double robustness, Neyman
orthogonality, and “debiased/double” machine learning [7, 12, 13, 35, 52, 53, 56, 62]. These
general frameworks can also be applied to more complicated functionals in longitudinal causal
⇤

Authors listed in alphabetical order.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

