Decision-Focused Learning without
Differentiable Optimization:
Learning Locally Optimized Decision Losses
Sanket Shah
Harvard University
sanketshah@g.harvard.edu

Kai Wang
Harvard University
kaiwang@g.harvard.edu

Andrew Perrault
The Ohio State University
perrault.17@osu.edu

Bryan Wilder
Carnegie Mellon University
bwilder@andrew.cmu.edu

Milind Tambe
Harvard University
milind tambe@harvard.edu

Abstract
Decision-Focused Learning (DFL) is a paradigm for tailoring a predictive model
to a downstream optimization task that uses its predictions in order to perform better on that specific task. The main technical challenge associated with DFL is that
it requires being able to differentiate through the optimization problem, which is
difficult due to discontinuous solutions and other challenges. Past work has largely
gotten around this this issue by handcrafting task-specific surrogates to the original optimization problem that provide informative gradients when differentiated
through. However, the need to handcraft surrogates for each new task limits the
usability of DFL. In addition, there are often no guarantees about the convexity of
the resulting surrogates and, as a result, training a predictive model using them can
lead to inferior local optima. In this paper, we do away with surrogates altogether
and instead learn loss functions that capture task-specific information. To the best
of our knowledge, ours is the first approach that entirely replaces the optimization
component of decision-focused learning with a loss that is automatically learned.
Our approach (a) only requires access to a black-box oracle that can solve the optimization problem and is thus generalizable, and (b) can be convex by construction
and so can be easily optimized over. We evaluate our approach on three resource
allocation problems from the literature and find that our approach outperforms
learning without taking into account task-structure in all three domains, and even
hand-crafted surrogates from the literature.

1

Introduction

Predict-then-optimize [7, 8] is a framework for using machine learning to perform decision-making.
As the name suggests, it proceeds in two stages—first, a predictive model takes as input features
and makes some predictions using them, then second, these predictions are used to parameterize an
optimization problem that outputs a decision. A large number of real-world applications involve both
prediction and optimization components and can be framed as predict-then-optimize problems—for
e.g., recommender systems in which missing user-item ratings need to be predicted [13], portfolio
optimization in which future performance needs to be predicted [17], or strategic decision-making
in which the adversary behavior needs to be predicted [14].
In addition to wide applicability, this framework also formalizes the relationship between prediction
and decision-making. This is important because such predictive models are typically learned inde36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

