Hidden Progress in Deep Learning:
SGD Learns Parities Near the Computational Limit
Boaz Barak
Harvard University

Benjamin L. Edelman
Harvard University

Sham Kakade
Harvard University

Eran Malach
Hebrew University of Jerusalem

b@boazbarak.org,
sham@seas.harvard.edu,

Surbhi Goel
Microsoft Research &
University of Pennsylvania
Cyril Zhang
Microsoft Research

bedelman@g.harvard.edu,
surbhig@cis.upenn.edu
eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il,
cyrilzhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
There is mounting evidence of emergent phenomena in the capabilities of deep
learning methods as we scale up datasets, model sizes, and training times. While
there are some accounts of how these resources modulate statistical capacity, far
less is known about their effect on the computational problem of model training.
This work conducts such an exploration through the lens of learning a k-sparse
parity of n bits, a canonical discrete search problem which is statistically easy
but computationally hard. Empirically, we find that a variety of neural networks
successfully learn sparse parities, with discontinuous phase transitions in the
training curves. On small instances, learning abruptly occurs at approximately
nO(k) iterations; this nearly matches SQ lower bounds, despite the apparent lack
of a sparse prior. Our theoretical analysis shows that these observations are not
explained by a Langevin-like mechanism, whereby SGD “stumbles in the dark”
until it finds the hidden set of features (a natural algorithm which also runs in nO(k)
time). Instead, we show that SGD gradually amplifies the sparse solution via a
Fourier gap in the population gradient, making continual progress that is invisible
to loss and error metrics.

1

Introduction

In deep learning, performance improvements are frequently observed upon simply scaling up resources (such as data, model size, and training time). While these improvements are often continuous
in terms of these resources, some of the most surprising recent advances in the field have been emergent capabilities: at a certain threshold, behavior changes qualitatively and discontinuously. Through
a statistical lens, it is well-understood that larger models, trained with more data, can fit more complex
and expressive functions. However, far less is known about the analogous computational question:
how does the scaling of these resources influence the success of gradient-based optimization?
These phase transitions cannot be explained via statistical capacity alone: they can appear even when
the amount of data remains fixed, with only model size or training time increasing. A timely example
is the emergence of reasoning and few-shot learning capabilities when scaling up language models
(Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022); Srivastava
et al. (2022) identify various tasks which language models are only able to solve if they are larger
than a critical scale. Power et al. (2022) give examples of discontinuous improvements in population
accuracy (“grokking”) when running time increases, while dataset and model sizes remain fixed.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

