Learning to Re-weight Examples with Optimal
Transport for Imbalanced Classification

Dandan Guo 1,2 , Zhuo Li3,4 , Meixi Zheng5 , He Zhao 6 , Mingyuan Zhou7 , Hongyuan Zha1,8
1
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing
3
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
5
Xidian University 6 CSIRO’s Data61 7 The University of Texas at Austin
8
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
guodandan@cuhk.edu.cn 221019088@link.cuhk.edu.cn
meixizheng1110@163.com he.zhao@ieee.org
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Imbalanced data pose challenges for deep learning based classification models. One of the most widely-used approaches for tackling imbalanced data is
re-weighting, where training samples are associated with different weights in
the loss function. Most of existing re-weighting approaches treat the example
weights as the learnable parameter and optimize the weights on the meta set,
entailing expensive bilevel optimization. In this paper, we propose a novel reweighting method based on optimal transport (OT) from a distributional point
of view. Specifically, we view the training set as an imbalanced distribution
over its samples, which is transported by OT to a balanced distribution obtained
from the meta set. The weights of the training samples are the probability mass
of the imbalanced distribution and learned by minimizing the OT distance between the two distributions. Compared with existing methods, our proposed one
disengages the dependence of the weight learning on the concerned classifier
at each iteration. Experiments on image, text and point cloud datasets demonstrate that our proposed re-weighting method has excellent performance, achieving
state-of-the-art results in many cases and providing a promising tool for addressing the imbalanced classification issue. The code has been made available at
https://github.com/DandanGuo1993/reweight-imbalance-classification-with-OT.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various applications, which is
undoubtedly inseparable from the high-quality large-scale datasets. Usually, the number of samples
for each class in these datasets are manually selected resulting in balanced datasets. However, most
real-world datasets are imbalanced, such as a few classes (a.k.a. head or majority class) occupy most
of the data while most classes (a.k.a. tail or minority class) have a few samples. A model trained
on the imbalanced training set but without considering such class imbalance would be significantly
dominated by those majority classes, and thus underperform on a balanced test dataset. This can also
be known as the long-tailed problem and exists in many domains, such as text classification [1, 2],
object detection [3] and image classification [4–6].
There are rich research lines to solve the imbalance problem, including re-sampling [7–10], class-level
or instance-level re-weighting [1, 2, 4, 11–18], meta-learning [4, 5, 15, 16, 19], two-stage methods
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

