Online Decision Mediation
Daniel Jarrett1

Alihan Hüyük1

Mihaela van der Schaar1,2,3

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
1
University of Cambridge, 2 UCLA, 3 Alan Turing Institute
[dkj25,ah2075,mv472]@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Consider learning a decision support assistant to serve as an intermediary between
(oracle) expert behavior and (imperfect) human behavior: At each time, the algorithm observes an action chosen by a fallible agent, and decides whether to accept
that agent’s decision, intervene with an alternative, or request the expert’s opinion.
For instance, in clinical diagnosis, fully-autonomous machine behavior is often beyond ethical affordances, thus real-world decision support is often limited to monitoring and forecasting. Instead, such an intermediary would strike a prudent balance
between the former (purely prescriptive) and latter (purely descriptive) approaches,
while providing an efficient interface between human mistakes and expert feedback.
In this work, we first formalize the sequential problem of online decision mediation
—that is, of simultaneously learning and evaluating mediator policies from scratch
with abstentive feedback: In each round, deferring to the oracle obviates the risk of
error, but incurs an upfront penalty, and reveals the otherwise hidden expert action
as a new training data point. Second, we motivate and propose a solution that seeks
to trade off (immediate) loss terms against (future) improvements in generalization
error; in doing so, we identify why conventional bandit algorithms may fail. Finally,
through experiments and sensitivities on a variety of datasets, we illustrate consistent gains over applicable benchmarks on performance measures with respect to
the mediator policy, the learned model, and the decision-making system as a whole.

1

Introduction

Research in data-driven decision support has burgeoned in recent years, with proposed applications
in a wide variety of domains such as finance [1], psychology [2], and medicine [3]. Most work on
machine learning for decision support falls into two categories: On one hand, descriptive approaches
deal with monitoring, forecasting, and learning interpretable parameterizations of observed human
behavior [4–8]. While such tools can help audit and debug decision-making, they play a limited role
in directly guiding human behavior. On the other hand, prescriptive approaches deal with systems
that behave autonomously, optimally, and with minimal manual control [9–12]. While such tools can
reduce the need for expert input, they are often at odds with ethical considerations—especially in highstakes settings such as healthcare [13–18]. Instead, we argue for a third: We believe machine learning
decision support has a viable role as an intermediary between (oracle) expert behavior and (imperfect)
human behavior—that is, as an “assistant”, which would strike a prudent balance between the above
two approaches, while providing an efficient interface between human mistakes and expert feedback.
Online Decision Mediation In this paper, we consider learning and evaluating mediator policies
for online decision support from scratch: At each time step, upon observing the context vector of an
incoming instance, the mediator policy decides whether to accept the human’s action, intervene with
its own output, or request the expert’s opinion—and this determines which action is ultimately taken.
Deferring to the oracle obviates the risk of error, but incurs an upfront penalty, and reveals the otherwise hidden expert action as a new training data point. As our running example, consider the task of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

