Automatic differentiation of
nonsmooth iterative algorithms
Jérôme Bolte
Toulouse School of Economics,
University of Toulouse Capitole.
Toulouse, France.

Edouard Pauwels
IRIT, CNRS, Université de Toulouse.
Institut Universitaire de France (IUF).
Toulouse, France.

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS & Université Côte d’Azur,
Laboratoire J. A. Dieudonné.
Nice, France.

Abstract
Differentiation along algorithms, i.e., piggyback propagation of derivatives, is
now routinely used to differentiate iterative solvers in differentiable programming.
Asymptotics is well understood for many smooth problems but the nondifferentiable case is hardly considered. Is there a limiting object for nonsmooth piggyback
automatic differentiation (AD)? Does it have any variational meaning and can
it be used effectively in machine learning? Is there a connection with classical
derivative? All these questions are addressed under appropriate nonexpansivity
conditions in the framework of conservative derivatives which has proved useful
in understanding nonsmooth AD. We characterize the attractor set of nonsmooth
piggyback iterations as a set-valued fixed point which remains in the conservative
framework. Among various consequences we have almost everywhere convergence of classical derivatives. Our results are illustrated on parametric convex
optimization with forward-backward, Douglas-Rachford and Alternating Direction
of Multiplier algorithms as well as the Heavy-Ball method.

Introduction

Differentiable programming. We consider a Lipschitz function
F : Rp ˆ Rm ﬁÑ Rp , representing an iterative algorithm, parameterized by ✓ P Rm , with Lipschitz initialization x0 : ✓ ﬁÑ x0 p✓q
and
xk`1 p✓q “ F pxk p✓q, ✓q “ F✓ pxk p✓qq,
(1)

where F✓ :“ F p¨, ✓q, under the assumption that xk p✓q converges
to the unique fixed point of F✓ : x̄p✓q “ fixpF✓ q. Such recursion
represent for instance algorithms to solve an optimization problem
minx hpxq (e.g. empirical risk minimization), such as gradient descent: F px, ✓q “ x ´ ✓rhpxq. But (1) could also be a fixed-point
equation such as a deep equilibrium network [5].

k Ñ `8

xk p✓q

x̄p✓q

nonsmooth
autodiff

Jxk p✓q

derivative?

Jx̄pb p✓q

limit?

1

Figure 1: We study existence and meaning of Jx̄pb as
a derivative of x̄, compatible
with automatic differentiation
of the iterates pxk p✓qqkPN .

In the last years, a paradigm shift occurred: such algorithms are
now implemented in algorithmic differentiation (AD)-friendly frameworks such as Tensorflow [1],
PyTorch [42] or JAX [13]. For a differentiable F , it is possible to compute iteratively the derivatives of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

