(Optimal) Online Bipartite Matching with Degree
Information
Anders Aamand
MIT
aamand@mit.edu

Justin Y. Chen
MIT
justc@mit.edu

Piotr Indyk
MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Abstract
We propose a model for online graph problems where algorithms are given access
to an oracle that predicts (e.g., based on modeling assumptions or on past data) the
degrees of nodes in the graph. Within this model, we study the classic problem
of online bipartite matching, and a natural greedy matching algorithm called
MinPredictedDegree, which uses predictions of the degrees of offline nodes. For
the bipartite version of a stochastic graph model due to Chung, Lu, and Vu where the
expected values of the offline degrees are known and used as predictions, we show
that MinPredictedDegree stochastically dominates any other online algorithm, i.e.,
it is optimal for graphs drawn from this model. Since the “symmetric” version of
the model, where all online nodes are identical, is a special case of the well-studied
“known i.i.d. model”, it follows that the competitive ratio of MinPredictedDegree
on such inputs is at least 0.7299. For the special case of graphs with power
law degree distributions, we show that MinPredictedDegree frequently produces
matchings almost as large as the true maximum matching on such graphs. We
complement these results with an extensive empirical evaluation showing that
MinPredictedDegree compares favorably to state-of-the-art online algorithms for
online matching.

1

Introduction

Online algorithms are algorithms that process their inputs “on the fly”, making irrevocable decisions
based only on the data seen so far. Since they do not make any assumptions about the future, they are
versatile and work even for adversarial inputs. Unfortunately, by focusing on the worst case, their
performance in “typical” cases can be sub-optimal. As a result there has been a large body of research
studying various relaxations of the worst-case model, where some extra information about the inputs,
or the distribution they are selected from, is available [1].
Motivated by the developments in machine learning, over the last few years, many papers have
studied online algorithms with predictions [47]. Such algorithms are equipped with a predictor that,
when invoked, provides an (imperfect) prediction of some features of the future part of the input,
which is then used by the algorithm to improve its performance. The specific information provided
by such predictors is problem-dependent. For graph problems studied in this paper, predictions could
include: the list of edges incident to a given vertex [33], the weight of an edge adjacent to a given
node in an optimal solution [4], or vertex weights that guide a proportional allocation scheme [36].
In this paper we focus on online graph problems, and propose a model where an algorithm is equipped
with a “degree predictor”, i.e., an oracle that, given any vertex, predicts the degree of that vertex
in the full graph (containing yet-unseen edges). This predictor has multiple appealing features.
First it is simple, natural, and easy to interpret. Second, it is useful: vertex degree information is
employed in many heuristic and approximation algorithms for graph optimization, for problems such
as maximum independent set [24] or maximum matching [53]. Third (as demonstrated in Section 7)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

