Near-Optimal Correlation Clustering with Privacy

Vincent Cohen-Addad
Google Research
cohenaddad@google.com

Chenglin Fan
Pennsylvania State University
fanchenglin@gmail.com

Silvio Lattanzi
Google Research
silviol@google.com

Slobodan Mitrović
UC Davis
smitrovic@ucdavis.edu

Ashkan Norouzi-Fard
Google Research
ashkannorouzi@google.com

Nikos Parotsidis
Google Research
nikosp@google.com

Jakub Tarnawski
Microsoft Research
jakub.tarnawski@microsoft.com

Abstract
Correlation clustering is a central problem in unsupervised learning, with applications spanning community detection, duplicate detection, automated labeling and
many more. In the correlation clustering problem one receives as input a set of
nodes and for each node a list of co-clustering preferences, and the goal is to output
a clustering that minimizes the disagreement with the specified nodes’ preferences.
In this paper, we introduce a simple and computationally efficient algorithm for the
correlation clustering problem with provable privacy guarantees. Our additive error
is stronger than those obtained in prior work and is optimal up to polylogarithmic
factors for fixed privacy parameters.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a central problem in unsupervised machine learning. The goal of clustering is to partition
a set of input objects so that similar objects are assigned to the same part while dissimilar objects are
assigned to different parts of the partition. Clustering has been extensively studied throughout the
years and many different formulations of the problem are known. In this paper we study the classic
correlation clustering problem in the context of differential privacy.
In the correlation clustering problem [BBC04] one gets a graph whose vertices are the objects to be
clustered and whose edges represent clustering preferences between the objects. More specifically,
the input of the problem is a graph with positive and negative labels (and possibly with non-negative
weights) on the edges, where positive edges represent similarities between vertices and negative
edges represent dissimilarities. Then the correlation clustering objective asks to minimize the
sum of (the weights of) positive edges across clusters plus the sum of (the weights) of negative
edges within clusters. Thanks to its simple and elegant formulation, the problem has received
much attention and it is used to model several practical applications including finding clustering
ensembles [BGU13], duplicate detection [ARS09], community mining [CSX12], disambiguation
tasks [KCMNT08], automated labelling [AHK+ 09, CKP08] and many more. In this paper we focus
on the most studied version of the problem where all edges have unit weight. In this case the
best known algorithm [CALN22] has an approximation guarantee of 1.994, which improves over
a 2.06-approximation due to [CMSY15] and a 2.5-approximation due to [ACN08]. Furthermore,
when the number of clusters is upper-bounded by k, a polynomial-time approximation scheme is
known [GG05]. In the weighted case a O(log n)-approximation is known [DEFI06], and improving
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

