Robust Imitation via
Mirror Descent Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Dong-Sig Han, Hyunseo Kim, Hyundo Lee, Je-Hwan Ryu, Byoung-Tak Zhang
Artificial Intelligence Institute, Seoul National University
{dshan, hskim, hdlee, jhryu, btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, adversarial imitation learning has shown a scalable reward acquisition
method for inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) problems. However, estimated
reward signals often become uncertain and fail to train a reliable statistical model
since the existing methods tend to solve hard optimization problems directly.
Inspired by a first-order optimization method called mirror descent, this paper
proposes to predict a sequence of reward functions, which are iterative solutions
for a constrained convex problem. IRL solutions derived by mirror descent are
tolerant to the uncertainty incurred by target density estimation since the amount
of reward learning is regulated with respect to local geometric constraints. We
prove that the proposed mirror descent update rule ensures robust minimization of
a Bregman divergence in terms of a rigorous regret bound of O(1/T ) for step sizes
{ηt }Tt=1 . Our IRL method was applied on top of an adversarial framework, and it
outperformed existing adversarial methods in an extensive suite of benchmarks.

1

Introduction

One crucial requirement of practical imitation learning methods is robustness, often described
as learning expert behavior for a finite number of demonstrations, overcoming various realistic
challenges [1]. In real-world problems such as motor control tasks, the demonstration size can
be insufficient to create a precise model of an expert [2], and even in some cases, demonstrations
can be noisy or suboptimal to solve the problem [3]. For such challenging scenarios, imitation
learning algorithms inevitably struggle with unreliable statistical models; thus, the way of handling
the uncertainty of estimated cost functions dramatically affects imitation performance. Therefore, a
thorough analysis of addressing these issues is required to construct a robust algorithm.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is an algorithm for learning ground-truth rewards from expert
demonstrations where the expert acts optimally with respect to an unknown reward function [4, 5].
Traditional IRL studies solve the imitation problem based on iterative algorithms [6, 7], alternating
between the reward estimation process and a reinforcement learning (RL) [8] algorithm. In contrast,
newer studies of adversarial imitation learning (AIL) [9, 10] rather suggest learning reward functions
of a certain form “directly,” by using adversarial learning objectives [11] and nonlinear discriminative
neural networks [10]. Compared to classical approaches, the AIL methods have shown great success
on control benchmarks in terms of scalability for challenging control tasks [12].
Technically, it is well known that AIL formulates a divergence minimization problem with its
discriminative signals, which incorporates fine-tuned estimations of the target densities [13]. Through
the lens of differential geometries, the limitation of AIL naturally comes from the implication
that minimizing the divergence does not guarantee unbiased progression due to constraints of the
underlying space [14]. In order to ensure further stability, we argue that an IRL algorithm’s progress
needs to be regulated, yielding gradual updates with respect to local geometries of policy distributions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

