projUNN: efficient method for training deep networks
with unitary matrices

Bobak T. Kiani
MIT
bkiani@mit.edu

Randall Balestriero
Meta AI, FAIR
rbalestriero@fb.com

Yann LeCun
NYU & Meta AI, FAIR
yann@fb.com

Seth Lloyd
MIT & Turing Inc.
slloyd@mit.edu

Abstract
In learning with recurrent or very deep feed-forward networks, employing unitary
matrices in each layer can be very effective at maintaining long-range stability.
However, restricting network parameters to be unitary typically comes at the cost
of expensive parameterizations or increased training runtime. We propose instead
an efficient method based on rank-k updates – or their rank-k approximation – that
maintains performance at a nearly optimal training runtime. We introduce two
variants of this method, named Direct (projUNN-D) and Tangent (projUNN-T) projected Unitary Neural Networks, that can parameterize full N -dimensional unitary
or orthogonal matrices with a training runtime scaling as O(kN 2 ). Our method
either projects low-rank gradients onto the closest unitary matrix (projUNN-T) or
transports unitary matrices in the direction of the low-rank gradient (projUNN-D).
Even in the fastest setting (k = 1), projUNN is able to train a model’s unitary
parameters to reach comparable performances against baseline implementations.
In recurrent neural network settings, projUNN closely matches or exceeds benchmarked results from prior unitary neural networks. Finally, we preliminarily explore
projUNN in training orthogonal convolutional neural networks, which are currently
unable to outperform state of the art models but can potentially enhance stability
and robustness at large depth.

1

Introduction

Learning in neural networks can often be unstable when networks are very deep or inputs are long
sequences of data [5, 83]. For example, vanilla recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have recurrent
states that are evolved via repeated application of a linear transformation followed by a pointwise
nonlinearity, which can become unstable when eigenvalues of the linear transformation are not of
magnitude one. Unitary matrices, which have eigenvalues of magnitude one, can naturally avoid this
issue and have been used as a means to overcome these so-called vanishing and exploding gradients
[5, 44]. More recently, unitary convolutional layers have been similarly constructed to help build
more stable deep networks that are norm-preserving in their transformations [58, 72].
In the RNN setting, prior algorithms to apply n × n unitary matrices in RNNs have parameterized
matrices into layers of unitary or orthogonal transformations or parameterized the Lie algebra of
the unitary or orthogonal group (see Table 1). In the layer-wise setting, unitarity is enforced for
all values of parameters, but many layers are required to form a composition that can recreate any
desired unitary, i.e., fully parameterizing an n × n unitary requires O(n) layers. By parameterizing
the Lie algebra [56, 41], algorithms perform better on common benchmarks but have the drawback
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

