ELIGN: Expectation Alignment
as a Multi-Agent Intrinsic Reward

Zixian Ma1 , Rose E. Wang1 , Li Fei-Fei1 , Michael Bernstein1 , Ranjay Krishna1,2
Stanford University1 , University of Washington2
{zixianma,rewang,feifeili,msb,ranjaykrishna}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Modern multi-agent reinforcement learning frameworks rely on centralized training
and reward shaping to perform well. However, centralized training and dense
rewards are not readily available in the real world. Current multi-agent algorithms
struggle to learn in the alternative setup of decentralized training or sparse rewards.
To address these issues, we propose a self-supervised intrinsic reward ELIGN expectation alignment - inspired by the self-organization principle in Zoology.
Similar to how animals collaborate in a decentralized manner with those in their
vicinity, agents trained with expectation alignment learn behaviors that match their
neighbors’ expectations. This allows the agents to learn collaborative behaviors
without any external reward or centralized training. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our approach across 6 tasks in the multi-agent particle and the complex Google
Research football environments, comparing ELIGN to sparse and curiosity-based
intrinsic rewards. When the number of agents increases, ELIGN scales well in all
multi-agent tasks except for one where agents have different capabilities. We show
that agent coordination improves through expectation alignment because agents
learn to divide tasks amongst themselves, break coordination symmetries, and
confuse adversaries. These results identify tasks where expectation alignment is a
more useful strategy than curiosity-driven exploration for multi-agent coordination,
enabling agents to do zero-shot coordination.

1

Introduction

Many real world AI applications can be formulated as multi-agent systems, including autonomous
vehicles (Cao et al., 2012), resource management (Ying & Dayong, 2005), traffic control (Sunehag
et al., 2017), robot swarms (Swamy et al., 2020), and multi-player video games (Berner et al., 2019).
Agents must adapt their behaviors to each other in order to coordinate successfully in these systems.
However, adaptive coordination algorithms are challenging to develop because each agent is not privy
to other agents’ intentions and their future behaviors (Foerster et al., 2017).
These challenges are more acute in decentralized training under partial observability than centralized
training or full observability. In the real world, agents act under partial observability and learn in a
decentralized manner: they do not learn collaborative behaviors with a single centralized algorithm
with a complete knowledge of the environment (Iqbal & Sha, 2019; Liu et al., 2020). Unfortunately,
the most successful multi-agent algorithms train agents with a centralized critic, assuming access to
all agents’ observations and actions (Foerster et al., 2018; Rashid et al., 2018; Sunehag et al., 2017;
Lowe et al., 2017). The most successful multi-agent algorithms for decentralized training and partial
observability assume task-specific reward shaping (Jain et al., 2020; Iqbal & Sha, 2019), which is
expensive to generate. These algorithms struggle to learn with sparse reward structure.
Consider a cooperative navigation task, where N agents aim to simultaneously occupy N goal
locations. A centralized algorithm with full observability is capable of optimally assigning the nearest
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

