Understanding and Extending Subgraph GNNs by
Rethinking Their Symmetries

Fabrizio Frasca∗
Imperial College London & Twitter
ffrasca@twitter.com

Beatrice Bevilacqua∗
Purdue University
bbevilac@purdue.edu

Michael M. Bronstein
University of Oxford & Twitter
mbronstein@twitter.com

Haggai Maron
NVIDIA Research
hmaron@nvidia.com

Abstract
Subgraph GNNs are a recent class of expressive Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
which model graphs as collections of subgraphs. So far, the design space of
possible Subgraph GNN architectures as well as their basic theoretical properties
are still largely unexplored. In this paper, we study the most prominent form of
subgraph methods, which employs node-based subgraph selection policies such as
ego-networks or node marking and deletion. We address two central questions: (1)
What is the upper-bound of the expressive power of these methods? and (2) What
is the family of equivariant message passing layers on these sets of subgraphs?.
Our first step in answering these questions is a novel symmetry analysis which
shows that modelling the symmetries of node-based subgraph collections requires
a significantly smaller symmetry group than the one adopted in previous works.
This analysis is then used to establish a link between Subgraph GNNs and Invariant
Graph Networks (IGNs). We answer the questions above by first bounding the
expressive power of subgraph methods by 3-WL, and then proposing a general
family of message-passing layers for subgraph methods that generalises all previous
node-based Subgraph GNNs. Finally, we design a novel Subgraph GNN dubbed
SUN, which theoretically unifies previous architectures while providing better
empirical performance on multiple benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) are arguably the most commonly used version of
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). The limited expressive power of MPNNs [36, 55] has led to
a plethora of works aimed at designing expressive GNNs while maintaining the simplicity and
scalability of MPNNs [11, 39, 49, 30]. Several recent studies have proposed a new class of such
architectures [14, 59, 7, 61, 43, 42], dubbed Subgraph GNNs, which apply MPNNs to collections
(‘bags’) of subgraphs extracted from the original input graph and then aggregate the resulting
representations. Subgraphs are selected according to a predefined policy; in the most popular ones,
each subgraph is tied to a specific node in the original graph, for example by deleting it or extracting
its local ego-network. Subgraph GNNs have demonstrated outstanding empirical performance, with
state-of-the-art results on popular benchmarks like the ZINC molecular property prediction [61, 7].
While offering great promise, it is fair to say that we still lack a full understanding of Subgraph
GNNs. Firstly, on the theoretical side, it is known that subgraph methods are strictly stronger than
∗

Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

