Sequential Information Design:
Learning to Persuade in the Dark
Martino Bernasconi⇤
Politecnico di Milano

Matteo Castiglioni⇤
Politecnico di Milano

Nicola Gatti⇤
Politecnico di Milano

Alberto Marchesi⇤
Politecnico di Milano

Francesco Trovò⇤
Politecnico di Milano

Abstract
We study a repeated information design problem faced by an informed sender who
tries to influence the behavior of a self-interested receiver. We consider settings
where the receiver faces a sequential decision making (SDM) problem. At each
round, the sender observes the realizations of random events in the SDM problem.
This begets the challenge of how to incrementally disclose such information to
the receiver to persuade them to follow (desirable) action recommendations. We
study the case in which the sender does not know random events probabilities, and,
thus, they have to gradually learn them while persuading the receiver. We start by
providing a non-trivial polytopal approximation of the set of sender’s persuasive
information structures. This is crucial to design efficient learning algorithms. Next,
we prove a negative result: no learning algorithm can be persuasive. Thus, we
relax persuasiveness requirements by focusing on algorithms that guarantee that
the receiver’s regret in following recommendations grows sub-linearly. In the
full-feedback setting—where the sender
observes all random events realizations—,
p
we provide an algorithm with Õ( T ) regret for both the sender and the receiver.
Instead, in the bandit-feedback setting—where the sender only observes the realizations of random events actually occurring in the SDM problem—, we design an al↵
gorithm that, given an ↵ 2 [1/2, 1] as input, ensures Õ(T ↵ ) and Õ(T max{↵,1 2 } )
regrets, for the sender and the receiver respectively. This result is complemented
by a lower bound showing that such a regrets trade-off is essentially tight.

1

Introduction

Bayesian persuasion [Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011] (a.k.a. information design) is the problem
faced by an informed sender who wants to influence the behavior of a self-interested receiver via the
provision of payoff-relevant information. This captures the problem of “who gets to know what”,
which is fundamental in all economic interactions. Thus, Bayesian persuasion is ubiquitous in realworld problems, such as, e.g., online advertising [Bro Miltersen and Sheffet, 2012], voting [Alonso
and Câmara, 2016, Castiglioni et al., 2020a, Castiglioni and Gatti, 2021], traffic routing [Bhaskar
et al., 2016, Castiglioni et al., 2021a], security [Rabinovich et al., 2015, Xu et al., 2016], and
marketing [Babichenko and Barman, 2017, Candogan, 2019].
We study Bayesian persuasion in settings where the receiver plays in a sequential decision making
(SDM) problem. An SDM problem is characterized by a tree structure made by: decision nodes, where
the receiver takes actions, and chance nodes, in which partially observable random events occur. The
sender perfectly observes the realizations of random events, and their goal is to incrementally disclose
⇤

Email:{martino.bernasconideluca,matteo.castiglioni,alberto.marchesi,nicola.gatti,francesco1.trovo}@polimi.it

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

