Online Neural Sequence Detection with Hierarchical
Dirichlet Point Process
Weihan Li1,3 , Yu Qi2,3,∗ , Gang Pan3,1,∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
The Affiliated Mental Health Center & Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital,
the MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration,
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China
3
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
weihanli@zju.edu.cn, qiyu@zju.edu.cn, gpan@zju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Neural sequence detection plays a vital role in neuroscience research. Recent
impressive works utilize convolutive nonnegative matrix factorization and NeymanScott process to solve this problem. However, they still face two limitations. Firstly,
they accommodate the entire dataset into memory and perform iterative updates
of multiple passes, which can be inefficient when the dataset is large or grows
frequently. Secondly, they rely on the prior knowledge of the number of sequence
types, which can be impractical with data when the future situation is unknown. To
tackle these limitations, we propose a hierarchical Dirichlet point process model
for efficient neural sequence detection. Instead of computing the entire data, our
model can sequentially detect sequences in an online unsupervised manner with
Particle filters. Besides, the Dirichlet prior enables our model to automatically
introduce new sequence types on the fly as needed, thus avoiding specifying the
number of types in advance. We manifest these advantages on synthetic data and
neural recordings from songbird higher vocal center and rodent hippocampus.

1

Introduction

Neural sequences are a set of sequential firing neurons repeatedly occurring over time, and they play
crucial roles in understanding the brain activities of working memory [6, 10], motor production [9],
and memory replay [4]. However, in general, it’s hard to directly observe neural sequences from
high-dimensional neural recordings due to the unsorted neurons. Besides, methods that use linear
dimensionality reduction of neural populations may be inappropriate to handle such sequences since
they form a high-dimensional structure and cannot be efficiently summarized by a low-dimensional
representation [15, 23]. Finally, the relationship between neural sequences and behavior is not always
so regular and predictable [30]. Thus an unsupervised method to identify neural sequences is required.
While recent works [15, 20, 28] have made a great process in neural sequence detection, they
have two drawbacks when it comes to the contexts of online learning. Firstly, they are ill-suited
to accommodate new data or handle large datasets. Many real-world neural recordings involve
many hours’ or days’ signals that sometimes may be hard to accommodate entirely in the memory.
Furthermore, the inference algorithms of these works (e.g., coordinate descent, Gibbs sampling, etc.)
maintain the entire data and perform iterative updates of multiple passes, which may be a waste of
both computational and storage resources. Secondly, these works require the number of sequence
types to be specified in advance, which is inappropriate when a future situation is unknown.
∗

Corresponding authors: Yu Qi and Gang Pan

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

