Deep Model Reassembly

Xingyi Yang1

Daquan Zhou1,2 Songhua Liu1 Jingwen Ye1 Xinchao Wang1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Bytedance
{xyang,daquan.zhou,songhua.liu}@u.nus.edu, {jingweny,xinchao}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we explore a novel knowledge-transfer task, termed as Deep
Model Reassembly (DeRy), for general-purpose model reuse. Given a collection
of heterogeneous models pre-trained from distinct sources and with diverse
architectures, the goal of DeRy, as its name implies, is to first dissect each
model into distinctive building blocks, and then selectively reassemble the derived
blocks to produce customized networks under both the hardware resource and
performance constraints. Such ambitious nature of DeRy inevitably imposes
significant challenges, including, in the first place, the feasibility of its solution. We
strive to showcase that, through a dedicated paradigm proposed in this paper, DeRy
can be made not only possibly but practically efficient. Specifically, we conduct
the partitions of all pre-trained networks jointly via a cover set optimization,
and derive a number of equivalence set, within each of which the network
blocks are treated as functionally equivalent and hence interchangeable. The
equivalence sets learned in this way, in turn, enable picking and assembling blocks
to customize networks subject to certain constraints, which is achieved via solving
an integer program backed up with a training-free proxy to estimate the task
performance. The reassembled models, give rise to gratifying performances with
the user-specified constraints satisfied. We demonstrate that on ImageNet, the best
reassemble model achieves 78.6% top-1 accuracy without fine-tuning, which could
be further elevated to 83.2% with end-to-end training. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Adamdad/DeRy.

1

Introduction

The unprecedented advances of deep learning and its pervasive impact across various domains are
partially attributed to, among many other factors, the numerous pre-trained models released online.
Thanks to the generosity of our community, models of diverse architectures specializing in the same
or distinct tasks can be readily downloaded and executed in a plug-and-play manner, which, in turn,
largely alleviates the model reproducing effort. The sheer number of pre-trained models also enables
extensive knowledge transfer tasks, such as knowledge distillation, in which the pre-trained models
can be reused to produce lightweight or multi-task students.
In this paper, we explore a novel knowledge transfer task, which we coin as Deep Model
Reassembly (DeRy). Unlike most prior tasks that largely focus on reusing pre-trained models as
a whole, DeRy, as the name implies, goes deeper into the building blocks of pre-trained networks.
Specifically, given a collection of such pre-trained heterogeneous models or Model Zoo, DeRy attempts
to first dissect the pre-trained models into building blocks and then reassemble the building blocks
to tailor models subject to users’ specifications, like the computational constraints of the derived
network. As such, apart from the flexibility for model customization, DeRy is expected to aggregate
knowledge from heterogeneous models without increasing computation cost, thereby preserving or
even enhancing the downstream performances.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

