Fast Bayesian Estimation of Point Process Intensity
as Function of Covariates
Hideaki Kim
Taichi Asami
Hiroyuki Toda∗
NTT Human Informatics Laboratories
NTT Corporation
{hideaki.kin.cn, taichi.asami.ka}@hco.ntt.co.jp, hirotoda@acm.org

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the Bayesian estimation of point process intensity as a
function of covariates. We propose a novel augmentation of permanental process called augmented permanental process, a doubly-stochastic point process
that uses a Gaussian process on covariate space to describe the Bayesian a priori uncertainty present in the square root of intensity, and derive a fast Bayesian
estimation algorithm that scales linearly with data size without relying on either
domain discretization or Markov Chain Monte Carlo computation. The proposed
algorithm is based on a non-trivial ﬁnding that the representer theorem, one of
the most desirable mathematical property for machine learning problems, holds
for the augmented permanental process, which provides us with many signiﬁcant
computational advantages. We evaluate our algorithm on synthetic and real-world
data, and show that it outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of predictive
accuracy while being substantially faster than a conventional Bayesian method.

1

Introduction

Point processes are widely-used statistical tools to analyze point patterns observed on temporal,
spatial, and spatio-temporal domains. They have a wide ranging list of applications in neuroscience
[9], ﬁnance [6], epidemiology [14], ecology [41], and others.
The essential task in point processes is to estimate from event data an intensity function, that is, an
instantaneous probability of events occurring at each point in the observation domain. Generally,
there are two kinds of scenarios in the estimation task: one is to estimate intensities as functions of
every point in the observation domain; the other is to estimate intensities as functions of covariates
with the assumption that covariates are given at every point in the observation domain. For example,
in ecological applications where the event points are the locations of trees, the former estimates the
value of intensity at each geographical point (longitude and latitude), while the latter estimates the
intensity as function of spatial covariates such as slope, elevation, and humidity, each of which varies
across the geographical domain. The latter scenario has greater practical importance because it enables us to investigate factors that may be causing events. But unfortunately, it has been overlooked
in the recent machine learning community. This paper focuses on using the function of covariates to
solve the estimation problem of intensity.
The simplest and most classical model used to estimate intensities as functions of covariates is the
Cox proportional hazards model [8, 43, 10] (or the log-linear model), which forms the logarithm of
the intensity function as a linear combination of covariates. Although this parametric model is very
easy to handle, it fails to address the nonlinear dependence of point patterns on covariates, which is
often the case in real-world data. To rectify this limitation, two nonparametric approaches have been
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
∗

Current afﬁliation is Yokohama City University.

