Transformer Memory as a
Differentiable Search Index
Yi Tay∗, Vinh Q. Tran∗ , Mostafa Dehghani, Jianmo Ni, Dara Bahri, Harsh Mehta
Zhen Qin, Kai Hui, Zhe Zhao, Jai Gupta, Tal Schuster
William W. Cohen, Donald Metzler
Google Research
{yitay,vqtran,metzler}@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we demonstrate that information retrieval can be accomplished with
a single Transformer, in which all information about the corpus is encoded in
the parameters of the model. To this end, we introduce the Differentiable Search
Index (DSI), a new paradigm that learns a text-to-text model that maps string
queries directly to relevant docids; in other words, a DSI model answers queries
directly using only its parameters, dramatically simplifying the whole retrieval
process. We study variations in how documents and their identifiers are represented,
variations in training procedures, and the interplay between models and corpus
sizes. Experiments demonstrate that given appropriate design choices, DSI significantly outperforms strong baselines such as dual encoder models. Moreover, DSI
demonstrates strong generalization capabilities, outperforming a BM25 baseline in
a zero-shot setup.

1

Introduction

Information retrieval (IR) systems map a user query q ∈ Q to a ranked list of relevant documents
{d1 , . . . , dn } ⊆ D, typically represented by integers or short strings called document identifiers
(docids). The most widely used IR approaches are based on pipelined retrieve-then-rank strategies.
For retrieval, approaches based on inverted indexes or nearest neighbor search are common where
contrastive learning based dual encoders (DEs) (Gillick et al., 2018; Karpukhin et al., 2020; Ni et al.,
2021) are the present state-of-the-art.
This paper proposes an alternative architecture, wherein a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) learning
system (Sutskever et al., 2014) is used to directly map a query q to a relevant docid j ∈ Y. This
proposal is shown in the bottom half of Figure 1, for a sequence-to-sequence encoder-decoder
architecture.
We call this proposed architecture a differentiable search index (DSI), and implement it with a
large pre-trained Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) model, building on the recent success of large
generative language models (LMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2018;
Thoppilan et al., 2022; Du et al., 2021). In this proposed architecture, all information of the corpus is
encoded within the parameters of the Transformer language model.
At inference time, the trained model takes as input a text query q and outputs a docid j. If desired,
beam search can be used to produce a ranked list of potentially-relevant docids. As we show, this
process can work surprisingly well when trained properly. In our experiments it can consistently
outperform DE baselines, sometimes drastically: for a base-sized T5 model, Hits@1 on the smallest
corpus is improved by more than 20 points, from 12.4% for a DE to 33.9% for DSI; and on a corpus
∗

Co-leads.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022), New Orleans, LA, USA.

