Beyond Not-Forgetting: Continual Learning with
Backward Knowledge Transfer

Sen Lin
School of ECEE
Arizona State University
slin70@asu.edu
Deliang Fan
School of ECEE
Arizona State University
dfan@asu.edu

Li Yang
School of ECEE
Arizona State University
lyang166@asu.edu
Junshan Zhang
Department of ECE
University of California, Davis
jazh@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
By learning a sequence of tasks continually, an agent in continual learning (CL) can
improve the learning performance of both a new task and ‘old’ tasks by leveraging
the forward knowledge transfer and the backward knowledge transfer, respectively.
However, most existing CL methods focus on addressing catastrophic forgetting in
neural networks by minimizing the modification of the learnt model for old tasks.
This inevitably limits the backward knowledge transfer from the new task to the
old tasks, because judicious model updates could possibly improve the learning
performance of the old tasks as well. To tackle this problem, we first theoretically
analyze the conditions under which updating the learnt model of old tasks could
be beneficial for CL and also lead to backward knowledge transfer, based on the
gradient projection onto the input subspaces of old tasks. Building on the theoretical
analysis, we next develop a ContinUal learning method with Backward knowlEdge
tRansfer (CUBER), for a fixed capacity neural network without data replay. In
particular, CUBER first characterizes the task correlation to identify the positively
correlated old tasks in a layer-wise manner, and then selectively modifies the learnt
model of the old tasks when learning the new task. Experimental studies show that
CUBER can even achieve positive backward knowledge transfer on several existing
CL benchmarks for the first time without data replay, where the related baselines
still suffer from catastrophic forgetting (negative backward knowledge transfer).
The superior performance of CUBER on the backward knowledge transfer also
leads to higher accuracy accordingly.

1

Introduction

One ultimate goal of artificial intelligence is to build an agent that can continually learn a sequence
of different tasks, so as to echo the remarkable learning capability of human beings during their
lifespan. With more tasks being learnt, the agent is expected to be able to learn a new task more
easily by leveraging the accumulated knowledge from old tasks (forward knowledge transfer), and
also further improve the learning performance of old tasks based on the gained knowledge of related
new tasks (backward knowledge transfer). Such a learning paradigm is known as continual learning
(CL) [5, 23], which has recently attracted much attention.
Most existing CL methods focus on addressing the catastrophic forgetting problem [20], i.e., the
neural network may easily forget the knowledge of old tasks when learning a new task. The main
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

