Learning Articulated Rigid Body Dynamics with
Lagrangian Graph Neural Network
Ravinder Bhattoo
Department of Civil Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
cez177518@iitd.ac.in

Sayan Ranu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Yardi School of Articial Intelligence
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
sayanranu@iitd.ac.in

N. M. Anoop Krishnan
Department of Civil Engineering
Yardi School of Articial Intelligence
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
krishnan@iitd.ac.in

Abstract
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian neural networks (L NNs and H NNs, respectively)
encode strong inductive biases that allow them to outperform other models of
physical systems signicantly. However, these models have, thus far, mostly been
limited to simple systems such as pendulums and springs or a single rigid body such
as a gyroscope or a rigid rotor. Here, we present a Lagrangian graph neural network
(L GNN) that can learn the dynamics of articulated rigid bodies by exploiting their
topology. We demonstrate the performance of L GNN by learning the dynamics
of ropes, chains, and trusses with the bars modeled as rigid bodies. L GNN also
exhibits generalizability—L GNN trained on chains with a few segments exhibits
generalizability to simulate a chain with large number of links and arbitrary link
length. We also show that the L GNN can simulate unseen hybrid systems including
bars and chains, on which they have not been trained on. Specically, we show that
the L GNN can be used to model the dynamics of complex real-world structures
such as the stability of tensegrity structures. Finally, we discuss the non-diagonal
nature of the mass matrix and its ability to generalize in complex systems.

1 Introduction and Related Works
Movements of a robotic arm, rolling ball, or falling chain can be characterized by rigid body
motion [1, 2]. Understanding the dynamics of the motion is crucial in several applications including
robotics, human-robot interaction, planning, and computer graphics [3, 1]. Traditionally, the rigid
body mechanics is studied in the framework of classical mechanics, which relies on either forcebased or energy-based approaches [4]. Force-based approaches involve the computation of all the
unknown forces based on the equations of equilibrium and hence is cumbersome for large structures.
Energy-based approaches present an elegant formalism which involve the computation of a scalar
quantity representing the state of a system, namely, Lagrangian (L = T − V), which is the difference
between the kinetic (T (q, q̇)) and potential (V(q)) energies, or Hamiltonian (H = T + V), which
represents the total energy of the system. This scalar quantity can, in turn, be used to predict the
dynamics of the system. However, the functional form governing this scalar quantity may not be
The code is available at https://github.com/M3RG-IITD/rigid_body_dynamics_graph
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

