NeoRL: A Near Real-World Benchmark for
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Rong-Jun Qin1,2,∗∗, Xingyuan Zhang2,∗ , Songyi Gao2,∗ ,
Xiong-Hui Chen1,2 , Zewen Li2 , Weinan Zhang3 , Yang Yu1,2,⋄
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Polixir Technologies
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims at learning effective policies from historical data without extra environment interactions. During our experience of
applying offline RL, we noticed that previous offline RL benchmarks commonly
involve significant reality gaps, which we have identified include rich and overly
exploratory datasets, degraded baseline, and missing policy validation. In many
real-world situations, to ensure system safety, running an overly exploratory policy
to collect various data is prohibited, thus only a narrow data distribution is available.
The resulting policy is regarded as effective if it is better than the working behavior
policy; the policy model can be deployed only if it has been well validated, rather
than accomplished the training. In this paper, we present a Near real-world offline
RL benchmark, named NeoRL, to reflect these properties. NeoRL datasets are
collected with a more conservative strategy. Moreover, NeoRL contains the offline
training and offline validation pipeline before the online test, corresponding to
real-world situations. We then evaluate recent state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms
on NeoRL. The empirical results demonstrate that some offline RL algorithms
are less competitive to the behavior cloning and the deterministic behavior policy,
implying that they may be less effective in real-world tasks than in the previous
benchmarks. We also disclose that current offline policy evaluation methods could
hardly select the best policy. We hope this work will shed some light on future
research and deploying RL in real-world systems.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown impressive ability in simulated environments [1, 2]. However,
current RL algorithms are hard to apply in real-world applications when there is no fast and cheap
simulator. Such simulators provide virtual worlds for training RL agents by trial-and-errors which
can incur huge losses in the real world. Instead, real-world systems often log data produced by an
existing behavior policy, which we call the working behavior policy or working policy. A recent trend
to alleviate the real-world trial-and-error costs is offline RL (also batch RL) [3], which aims to learn
effective polices from pre-collected datasets. Thus, offline RL has the potential to refine the existing
working policy with offline datasets produced by the working policy. To facilitate the development
of offline RL approaches, benchmarks have been constructed involving datasets and protocols for
evaluation [4, 5, 6]. RL Unplugged [4] uses datasets from the buffer of online training. D4RL [5]
provides a diversity of datasets, including random, mixed medium datasets with replay buffer data
or data collected by the expert policy, and datasets collected by humans and a planner. While it
is a great contribution of these benchmarks to enable common playgrounds to test and compare
∗

These authors contribute equally. ⋄ Correspondence to Yang Yu <yuy@polixir.ai>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

