Near-Optimal Sample Complexity Bounds
for Constrained MDPs
Sharan Vaswani∗
Simon Fraser University
vaswani.sharan@gmail.com

Lin F. Yang∗
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Csaba Szepesvári
Amii, University of Alberta, DeepMind
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
In contrast to the advances in characterizing the sample complexity for solving
Markov decision processes (MDPs), the optimal statistical complexity for solving
constrained MDPs (CMDPs) remains unknown. We resolve this question by
providing minimax upper and lower bounds on the sample complexity for learning
near-optimal policies in a discounted CMDP with access to a generative model
(simulator). In particular, we design a model-based algorithm that addresses two
settings: (i) relaxed feasibility, where small constraint violations are allowed, and
(ii) strict feasibility, where the output policy is required to satisfy the constraint. For
(i), we prove that
 our algorithm
 returns an ε-optimal policy with probability 1 − δ,
SA log(1/δ)
by making Õ (1−γ)3 ε2
queries to the generative model, thus matching the
sample-complexity for unconstrained MDPs. For (ii), weshow that the algorithm’s
log(1/δ)
sample complexity is upper-bounded by Õ SA
(1−γ)5 ε2 ζ 2 where ζ is the problemdependent Slater constant that characterizes the size of the feasible region. Finally,
we prove a matching lower-bound for the strict feasibility setting, thus obtaining
the first near minimax optimal bounds for discounted CMDPs. Our results show
that learning CMDPs is as easy as MDPs when small constraint violations are
allowed, but inherently more difficult when we demand zero constraint violation.

1

Introduction

Common reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms focus on optimizing an unconstrained objective, and
have found applications in games such as Atari [23] or Go [28], robot manipulation tasks [29, 37] or
clinical trials [26]. However, many applications require the planning agent to satisfy constraints – for
example, in wireless sensor networks [10] where there is a constraint on average power consumption.
More generally, in the constrained Markov decision processes (CMDP) framework, the goal is to find
a policy that maximizes the value associated with a reward function subject to the policy achieving
a return (for a second reward function) that exceeds an apriori determined threshold [3]. There has
been substantial work addressing the planning problem to find a near-optimal policy in a known
CMDP [8, 7, 30, 24, 1, 35]. However, since the CMDP is unknown in most practical applications, we
consider the problem of finding a near-optimal policy in this more challenging setting.
There have been multiple recent approaches to obtain a near-optimal policy in CMDPs in the
regret-minimization or PAC-RL settings [13, 38, 9, 19, 31, 22, 36, 12, 15, 16, 11]. These works
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

