Object Scene Representation Transformer
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Daniel Duckworth⇤ , Aravindh Mahendran⇤ , Sjoerd van Steenkiste⇤ ,
Filip Pavetić, Mario Lučić, Leonidas J. Guibas, Klaus Greff, Thomas Kipf⇤
Google Research

Abstract
A compositional understanding of the world in terms of objects and their geometry in 3D space is considered a cornerstone of human cognition. Facilitating the
learning of such a representation in neural networks holds promise for substantially
improving labeled data efficiency. As a key step in this direction, we make progress
on the problem of learning 3D-consistent decompositions of complex scenes into
individual objects in an unsupervised fashion. We introduce Object Scene Representation Transformer (OSRT), a 3D-centric model in which individual object
representations naturally emerge through novel view synthesis. OSRT scales to
significantly more complex scenes with larger diversity of objects and backgrounds
than existing methods. At the same time, it is multiple orders of magnitude faster at
compositional rendering thanks to its light field parametrization and the novel Slot
Mixer decoder. We believe this work will not only accelerate future architecture
exploration and scaling efforts, but it will also serve as a useful tool for both
object-centric as well as neural scene representation learning communities.

1

Introduction

As humans, we interact with a physical world that is composed of macroscopic objects1 situated in
3D environments. The development of an object-centric, geometric understanding of the world is
considered a cornerstone of human cognition [32]: we perceive scenes in terms of discrete objects
and their parts, and our understanding of 3D scene geometry is essential for reasoning about relations
between objects and for skillfully interacting with them.
Replicating these capabilities in machine learning models has been a major focus in computer
vision and related fields [12, 22, 34], yet the classical paradigm of supervised learning poses several
challenges: explicit supervision requires carefully annotated data at a large scale, and is subject to
obstacles such as rare or novel object categories. Further, obtaining accurate ground-truth 3D scene
and object geometry is challenging and expensive. Learning about compositional geometry merely by
observing scenes and occasionally interacting with them—in the simplest case by moving a camera
through a scene—without relying on direct supervision is an attractive alternative.
As objects in the physical world are situated in 3D space, there has been a growing interest in
combining recent advances in 3D neural rendering [25] and representation learning [7, 20] with
object-centric inductive biases to jointly learn to represent objects and their 3D geometry without
direct supervision [26, 33, 40]. A particularly promising setting for learning both about objects and
3D scene geometry from RGB supervision alone is that of novel view synthesis (NVS), where the
task is to predict a scene’s appearance from unobserved view points. This task not only encourages a
model to learn a geometrically-consistent representation of a scene, but has the potential to serve as
an additional inductive bias for discovering objects without supervision.
Website: osrt-paper.github.io. Correspondence: osrt@msajjadi.com. ⇤ Equal technical contribution.
We use the term ‘object’ in a very broad sense, capturing other physical entities such as embodied agents.

1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

