Unsupervised Multi-object Segmentation
by Predicting Probable Motion Patterns

Laurynas Karazija∗ , Subhabrata Choudhury∗ ,
Iro Laina, Christian Rupprecht, Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
{laurynas,subha,iro,chrisr,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a new approach to learn to segment multiple image objects without
manual supervision. The method can extract objects form still images, but uses
videos for supervision. While prior works have considered motion for segmentation, a key insight is that, while motion can be used to identify objects, not
all objects are necessarily in motion: the absence of motion does not imply the
absence of objects. Hence, our model learns to predict image regions that are
likely to contain motion patterns characteristic of objects moving rigidly. It does
not predict specific motion, which cannot be done unambiguously from a still
image, but a distribution of possible motions, which includes the possibility that
an object does not move at all. We demonstrate the advantage of this approach
over its deterministic counterpart and show state-of-the-art unsupervised object
segmentation performance on simulated and real-world benchmarks, surpassing
methods that use motion even at test time. As our approach is applicable to variety
of network architectures that segment the scenes, we also apply it to existing image
reconstruction-based models showing drastic improvement. Project page and code:
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/ppmp.

1

Introduction

Humans have an innate ability to segment individual objects in a picture, but learning this capability
with an algorithm usually relies on manual supervision. In this paper, we consider the problem of
learning to segment objects from visual data only — without externally provided labels. Algorithms
for this task usually assume that objects are seen in different configurations and in front of different
backgrounds. They then exploit cues such as the visual consistency and the co-occurrence of
characteristic object parts to learn to discover and segment individual object instances.
Most such methods use still images as input and train with a reconstruction objective [19, 23, 37].
They work well on simple synthetic scenes, but they struggle in scenes with more complex visual
appearance [27]. This has motivated the development of algorithms that use videos as input and
can thus observe the motion of the objects as evidence of their presence. A common way of using
motion for unsupervised learning is to seek for a compact representation to reconstruct the video
itself [24, 26, 33, 53]. Effectively, such methods seek for a compressed representation of appearance,
but do not sidestep entirely the difficult task of modeling it. This has motivated authors to look instead
at reconstructing the video’s optical flow [28, 57]. In fact, the optical flow measures the motion of the
objects directly and is much simpler to model than the objects’ appearance.
∗

Authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

