Denoising Diffusion Restoration Models

Bahjat Kawar
Department of Computer Science
Technion, Haifa, Israel
bahjat.kawar@cs.technion.ac.il

Michael Elad
Department of Computer Science
Technion, Haifa, Israel
elad@cs.technion.ac.il

Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford, California, USA
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Jiaming Song
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California, USA
jiamings@nvidia.com

Abstract
Many interesting tasks in image restoration can be cast as linear inverse problems. A recent family of approaches for solving these problems uses stochastic
algorithms that sample from the posterior distribution of natural images given
the measurements. However, efficient solutions often require problem-specific
supervised training to model the posterior, whereas unsupervised methods that
are not problem-specific typically rely on inefficient iterative methods. This work
addresses these issues by introducing Denoising Diffusion Restoration Models
(DDRM), an efficient, unsupervised posterior sampling method. Motivated by
variational inference, DDRM takes advantage of a pre-trained denoising diffusion
generative model for solving any linear inverse problem. We demonstrate DDRM’s
versatility on several image datasets for super-resolution, deblurring, inpainting,
and colorization under various amounts of measurement noise. DDRM outperforms the current leading unsupervised methods on the diverse ImageNet dataset
in reconstruction quality, perceptual quality, and runtime, being 5× faster than
the nearest competitor. DDRM also generalizes well for natural images out of the
distribution of the observed ImageNet training set.1

1

Introduction

Many problems in image processing, including super-resolution [31, 17], deblurring [28, 48], inpainting [55], colorization [29, 58], and compressive sensing [1], are instances of linear inverse problems,
where the goal is to recover an image from potentially noisy measurements given through a known
linear degradation model. For a specific degradation model, image restoration can be addressed
through end-to-end supervised training of neural networks, using pairs of original and degraded images [14, 58, 41]. However, real-world applications such as medical imaging often require flexibility
to cope with multiple, possibly infinite, degradation models [46]. Here, unsupervised approaches
based on learned priors [36], where the degradation model is only known and used during inference,
may be more desirable since they can adapt to the given problem without re-training [51]. By
learning sound assumptions over the underlying structure of images (e.g., priors, proximal operators
or denoisers), unsupervised approaches can achieve effective restoration without training on specific
degradation models [51, 40].
Under this unsupervised setting, priors based on deep neural networks have demonstrated impressive
empirical results in various image restoration tasks [40, 50, 43, 38, 15]. To recover the signal,
1

Project website: https://ddrm-ml.github.io/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

