Forecasting Human Trajectory from Scene History

Mancheng Meng1,2 Ziyan Wu2 Terrence Chen2 Xiran Cai1
Xiang Sean Zhou2 Fan Yang2∗ Dinggang Shen1,2
1
2
ShanghaiTech University
United Imaging Intelligence
{mengmch,caixr,dgshen}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
{ziyan.wu,terrence.chen,sean.zhou,fan.yang03}@uii-ai.com

Abstract
Predicting the future trajectory of a person remains a challenging problem, due to
randomness and subjectivity of human movement. However, the moving patterns
of human in a constrained scenario typically conform to a limited number of
regularities to a certain extent, because of the scenario restrictions (e.g., floor plan,
roads, and obstacles) and person-person or person-object interactivity. Thus, an
individual person in this scenario should follow one of the regularities as well. In
other words, a person’s subsequent trajectory has likely been traveled by others.
Based on this hypothesis, we propose to forecast a person’s future trajectory by
learning from the implicit scene regularities. We call the regularities, inherently
derived from the past dynamics of the people and the environment in the scene,
scene history. We categorize scene history information into two types: historical
group trajectory and individual-surroundings interaction. To exploit these two
types of information for trajectory prediction, we propose a novel framework Scene
History Excavating Network (SHENet), where the scene history is leveraged in
a simple yet effective approach. In particular, we design two components: the
group trajectory bank module to extract representative group trajectories as the
candidate for future path, and the cross-modal interaction module to model the
interaction between individual past trajectory and its surroundings for trajectory
refinement. In addition, to mitigate the uncertainty in ground-truth trajectory,
caused by the aforementioned randomness and subjectivity of human movement,
we propose to include smoothness into the training process and evaluation metrics.
We conduct extensive evaluations to validate the efficacy of our proposed framework
on ETH, UCY, as well as a new, challenging benchmark dataset PAV, demonstrating
superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at:
https://github.com/MaKaRuiNah/SHENet

1

Introduction

Human trajectory prediction (HTP) aims to predict a target person’s future path from a video clip
[5, 9, 19, 20]. This is critical for intelligent transportation, as it enables vehicle to perceive the status
of pedestrian in advance so that it can avoid potential collision. Surveillance systems with HTP
capability can assist security officers to predict the possible escape path of suspects. Although much
work has been done in recent years [1, 9, 12, 14, 18, 35], very few are reliable and generalizable
enough to be applied in real-world scenarios, primarily due to two challenges of the task: randomness
and subjectivity of human movement. However, in the constrained real world scenarios, the challenges
are not absolutely intractable. As shown in Figure 1, given previously-captured video in this scene,
the target person’s future trajectory (red box) becomes more predictable as the moving pattern of
human typically complies with several underlying regularities in this scenario, which the target person
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

