High-Order Pooling for Graph Neural Networks
with Tensor Decomposition
Chenqing Hua1,4⇤
Guillaume Rabusseau2,4,5,6
Jian Tang3,4,6
1
2
3
McGill University; Université de Montréal; HEC Montréal;
4
Mila; 5 DIRO; 6 CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are attracting growing attention due to their effectiveness and flexibility in modeling a variety of graph-structured data. Exiting GNN
architectures usually adopt simple pooling operations (e.g., sum, average, max)
when aggregating messages from a local neighborhood for updating node representation or pooling node representations from the entire graph to compute the graph
representation. Though simple and effective, these linear operations do not model
high-order non-linear interactions among nodes. We propose the Tensorized Graph
Neural Network (tGNN), a highly expressive GNN architecture relying on tensor
decomposition to model high-order non-linear node interactions. tGNN leverages
the symmetric CP decomposition to efficiently parameterize permutation-invariant
multilinear maps for modeling node interactions. Theoretical and empirical
analysis on both node and graph classification tasks show the superiority of tGNN
over competitive baselines. In particular, tGNN achieves the most solid results on
two OGB node classification datasets and one OGB graph classification dataset.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) generalize traditional neural network architectures for data in the
Euclidean domain to data in non-Euclidean domains [26, 45, 34, 35]. As graphs are very general and
flexible data structures and are ubiquitous in the real world, GNNs are now widely used in a variety
of domains and applications such as social network analysis [20], recommender systems [49], graph
reasoning [55], and drug discovery [42].
Indeed, many GNN architectures (e.g., GCN [26], GAT [45], MPNN [16]) have been proposed. The
essential idea of all these architectures is to iteratively update node representations by aggregating
the information from their neighbors through multiple rounds of neural message passing. The final
node representations can be used for downstream tasks such as node classification or link prediction.
For graph classification, an additional readout layer is used to combine all the node representations to
calculate the entire graph representation. In general, an effective aggregation (or pooling) function is
required to aggregate the information at the level of both local neighborhoods and the entire graph. In
practice, some simple aggregation functions are usually used such as sum, mean, and max. Though
simple and effective in some applications, the expressiveness of these functions is limited as they
only model linear combinations of node features, which can limit their effectiveness in some cases.
A recent work, principled neighborhood aggregation (PNA) [13], aims to design a more flexible
aggregation function by combining multiple simple aggregation functions, each of which is associated
with a learnable weight. However, the practical capacity of PNA is still limited by simply combining
multiple simple aggregation functions. A more expressive solution would be to model high-order
non-linear interactions when aggregating node features. However, explicitly modeling high-order
⇤

Correspondence to: Chenqing Hua <chenqing.hua@mail.mcgill.ca>

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

