Theseus:
A Library for Differentiable Nonlinear Optimization
Luis Pineda1 , Taosha Fan1 , Maurizio Monge2 , Shobha Venkataraman1 ,
Paloma Sodhi1 , Ricky T. Q. Chen1 , Joseph Ortiz1 , Daniel DeTone2 , Austin Wang1 ,
Stuart Anderson1 , Jing Dong2 , Brandon Amos1 , Mustafa Mukadam1
1

Meta AI, 2 Reality Labs Research

Abstract
We present Theseus, an efficient application-agnostic open source library for differentiable nonlinear least squares (DNLS) optimization built on PyTorch, providing
a common framework for end-to-end structured learning in robotics and vision.
Existing DNLS implementations are application specific and do not always incorporate many ingredients important for efficiency. Theseus is application-agnostic,
as we illustrate with several example applications that are built using the same
underlying differentiable components, such as second-order optimizers, standard
costs functions, and Lie groups. For efficiency, Theseus incorporates support for
sparse solvers, automatic vectorization, batching, GPU acceleration, and gradient
computation with implicit differentiation and direct loss minimization. We do
extensive performance evaluation in a set of applications, demonstrating significant efficiency gains and better scalability when these features are incorporated.
Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/theseus-ai/

1

Introduction

Reconciling traditional approaches with deep learning to leverage their complementary strengths is a
common thread in a large body of recent work in robotics. In particular, an emerging trend is to differentiate through nonlinear least squares (NLS) [1] which is a second-order optimization formulation
at the heart of many problems in robotics [2–7] and vision [8–13]. Optimization layers as inductive
priors in neural models have been explored in machine learning with convex optimization [14, 15]
and in meta learning with gradient descent [16, 17] based first-order optimization.
Differentiable nonlinear least squares (DNLS) provides a general scheme to encode inductive priors,
as the objective function can be partly parameterized by neural models and partly with engineered
domain-specific differentiable models. Here, as illustrated in Fig. 1, input tensors define a sum
of weighted squares objective function and output tensors are minima of that objective. Such
implicit layers [18] are in contrast to typical (explicit) layers that take input tensors through a linear
transformation and some element-wise nonlinear activation function.

Figure 1: Theseus enables building custom, efficient DNLS layers that support end-to-end structured learning.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

