Learning dynamics of deep linear networks with
multiple pathways

Jianghong Shi
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
jhshi@uw.edu

Eric Shea-Brown
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
etsb@uw.edu

Michael A. Buice
Allen Institute MindScope Program
Seattle, WA 98109
michaelbu@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
Not only have deep networks become standard in machine learning, they are increasingly of interest in neuroscience as models of cortical computation that capture
relationships between structural and functional properties. In addition they are a
useful target of theoretical research into the properties of network computation.
Deep networks typically have a serial or approximately serial organization across
layers, and this is often mirrored in models that purport to represent computation
in mammalian brains. There are, however, multiple examples of parallel pathways
in mammalian brains. In some cases, such as the mouse, the entire visual system
appears arranged in a largely parallel, rather than serial fashion. While these pathways may be formed by differing cost functions that drive different computations,
here we present a new mathematical analysis of learning dynamics in networks
that have parallel computational pathways driven by the same cost function. We
use the approximation of deep linear networks with large hidden layer sizes to
show that, as the depth of the parallel pathways increases, different features of the
training set (defined by the singular values of the input-output correlation) will
typically concentrate in one of the pathways. This result is derived analytically and
demonstrated with numerical simulation with both linear and non-linear networks.
Thus, rather than sharing stimulus and task features across multiple pathways,
parallel network architectures learn to produce sharply diversified representations
with specialized and specific pathways, a mechanism which may hold important
consequences for codes in both biological and artificial systems.

1

Introduction

Deep networks are increasingly used as models of cortical computation, particularly of the visual
pathway. Indeed, the earliest convolutional neural network was a model of the mammalian visual
system [6] and the use of CNNs to model the visual pathway has continued [14, 21, 22, 3, 2]. These
models are usually serial models of the primate ventral stream that describe the computation of that
system as being closely related to object recognition. However, processing of visual information
in the primate is associated with (at least) two parallel pathways, the “ventral” (or “what”) and the
“dorsal” (or “where") pathways [4, 7, 10]. In the mouse visual system, anatomical analysis also
suggests that there are parallel pathways [8, 19, 20], although the specific functional role of these
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

