VICE: Variational Interpretable Concept Embeddings

Lukas Muttenthaler∗
Machine Learning Group
Technische Universität Berlin
BIFOLD†
Berlin, Germany

Charles Y. Zheng
Machine Learning Team, FMRI Facility
National Institute of Mental Health
Bethesda, MD, USA

Patrick McClure‡
Department of Computer Science
Naval Postgraduate School
Monterey, CA, USA

Martin N. Hebart
Vision and Computational Cognition Group
MPI for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences
Leipzig, Germany

Robert A. Vandermeulen
Machine Learning Group
Technische Universität Berlin
BIFOLD†
Berlin, Germany
Francisco Pereira
Machine Learning Team, FMRI Facility
National Institute of Mental Health
Bethesda, MD, USA

Abstract
A central goal in the cognitive sciences is the development of numerical models
for mental representations of object concepts. This paper introduces Variational
Interpretable Concept Embeddings (VICE), an approximate Bayesian method for
embedding object concepts in a vector space using data collected from humans
in a triplet odd-one-out task. VICE uses variational inference to obtain sparse,
non-negative representations of object concepts with uncertainty estimates for the
embedding values. These estimates are used to automatically select the dimensions
that best explain the data. We derive a PAC learning bound for VICE that can be
used to estimate generalization performance or determine a sufficient sample size
for experimental design. VICE rivals or outperforms its predecessor, SPoSE, at
predicting human behavior in the triplet odd-one-out task. Furthermore, VICE’s
object representations are more reproducible and consistent across random initializations, highlighting the unique advantage of using VICE for deriving interpretable
embeddings from human behavior.

1

Introduction

Human knowledge about object concepts encompasses many types of information, including function
or purpose, visual appearance, encyclopedic facts, or taxonomic characteristics. A central question
in cognitive science concerns the representation of this knowledge and its use across different
tasks. One approach to this question is inductive and lets subjects list properties for hundreds to
thousands of objects [28, 10, 6, 20], yielding large lists of responses about different types of properties.
Specifically, objects are represented as vectors of binary properties. While this approach is agnostic to
downstream prediction tasks, it may be biased since subjects may leave out important features and/or
∗

Also affiliated with the Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data, Germany.
‡
Work was partially done while affiliated with the National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

