Fine-Tuning Pre-Trained Language Models Effectively
by Optimizing Subnetworks Adaptively

Haojie Zhang1 , Ge Li1∗, Jia Li1 , Zhongjin Zhang1 , Yuqi Zhu1 , Zhi Jin1
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University),
Ministry of Education; Institute of Software, EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China
zhanghaojie@stu.pku.edu.cn, lige@pku.edu.cn
lijia@stu.pku.edu.cn, zjz123@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhuyuqi97@gmail.com, zhijin@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained language models have achieved impressive results on a
wide range of downstream tasks recently. However, fine-tuning an extremely
large-scale pre-trained language model on limited target datasets is often plagued
by overfitting and representation degradation. In this paper, we propose a Dynamic Parameter Selection (DPS) algorithm for the large-scale pre-trained models
during fine-tuning, which adaptively selects a more promising subnetwork to perform staging updates based on gradients of back-propagation. Experiments on
the GLUE benchmark show that DPS outperforms previous fine-tuning methods in terms of overall performance and stability, and consistently achieves better results with variable pre-trained language models. In addition, DPS brings
a large magnitude of improvement in out-of-domain transferring experiments
and low-resource scenarios, which shows that it can maintain stable general contextual features and reduce the representation collapse. We release our code at
https://github.com/ZhangHaojie077/DPS.

1

Introduction

The paradigm of pre-training on a large-scale unlabeled corpus and fine-tuning on task-specific
datasets has led to a remarkable breakthrough in the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
[Devlin et al., 2018, Raffel et al., 2019, Clark et al., 2020, He et al., 2021]. While the great success has
been achieved on various downstream tasks, previous research has pointed out that such approaches
are still facing two limitations: ❶ Fine-tuning instability. With the same hyper-parameters, different
restarts will lead to huge differences in the performance of pre-trained language models, especially on
small datasets [Phang et al., 2018, Dodge et al., 2020, Lee et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2021, Mosbach
et al., 2021]. ❷ Poor generalizability. Limited by the size of the downstream datasets, aggressive finetuning can lead to catastrophic forgetting and overfitting, which causes the model to perform poorly
when transferring to out-of-domain data or other related tasks [Mahabadi et al., 2021, Aghajanyan
et al., 2021, Xu et al., 2021]. Therefore, it remains a challenging topic to adapt large-scale pre-trained
models to various scenarios while maintaining their stability and generalizability to the fullest.
Optimizing a subnetwork of pre-trained models has been proved to be an effective approach to
improve stability or mitigate overfitting, such as Mixout [Lee et al., 2020] and CHILD-TUNINGD
[Xu et al., 2021]. Mixout utilizes pre-trained weights to randomly replace some parameters with a
probability of p and updates only the subnetwork composed of the parameters without replacement.
CHILD-TUNINGD computes the importance of parameters based on all training samples’ gradients
before training and chooses an unchanged subnetwork composed of important parameters for updating.
* Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

