Adversarial Robustness is at Odds with Lazy Training

Yunjuan Wang
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, 21218
ywang509@jhu.edu

Enayat Ullah
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, 21218
enayat@jhu.edu

Poorya Mianjy
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, 21218
mianjy@jhu.edu

Raman Arora
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Recent works show that adversarial examples exist for random neural networks [Daniely and Shacham, 2020] and that these examples can be found using a
single step of gradient ascent [Bubeck et al., 2021]. In this work, we extend this
line of work to “lazy training” of neural networks – a dominant model in deep
learning theory in which neural networks are provably efficiently learnable. We
show that over-parametrized neural networks that are guaranteed to generalize well
and enjoy strong computational guarantees remain vulnerable to attacks generated
using a single step of gradient ascent.

1

Introduction

Despite the tremendous success of deep learning, recent works have demonstrated that neural networks
are extremely susceptible to attacks. One such vulnerability is due to arbitrary adversarial corruption
of data at the time of prediction, commonly referred to as inference-time attacks [Biggio et al.,
2013, Szegedy et al., 2014]. Such attacks are catastrophically powerful, especially in settings where
adversaries can directly access the model parameters. By adding crafted imperceptible perturbations
on the natural input, such attacks are easily realized across various domains, including in computer
vision where an autonomous driving car may misclassify traffic signs [Sitawarin et al., 2018], in
natural language processing where automatic speech recognition misinterprets the meaning of a
sentence [Schönherr et al., 2019], among many others.
The potential threat of adversarial examples has led to serious concerns regarding the security and
trustworthiness of neural network-based models that are increasingly being deployed in real-world
systems. It is crucial, therefore, to understand why trained neural networks classify clean data with
high accuracy yet remain extraordinarily fragile due to strategically induced perturbations.
One of the earliest works to describe adversarial examples was that of Szegedy et al. [2014], motivated
by the need for networks that not only generalize well but are also robust to small perturbations
of its input. This was followed by a body of works that finds adversarial examples using various
methods [Goodfellow et al., 2015, Papernot et al., 2016, Madry et al., 2018, Carlini and Wagner,
2017a,b]. Although lots of defense algorithms have been designed, most of them are quickly defeated
by stronger attacks [Carlini and Wagner, 2017a, Carlini et al., 2019, Tramèr et al., 2020]. Much of
the prior work has focused on this empirical “arms race” between adversarial defenses and attacks;
yet, a deep theoretical understanding of why adversarial examples exist has been somewhat limited.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

