When to Intervene: Learning Optimal Intervention
Policies for Critical Events
Niranjan Damera Venkata ∗
Digital and Transformation Organization
HP Inc., Chennai, India
niranjan.damera.venkata@hp.com

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
Dept. of CSA and RBCCPS
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
chiru@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Providing a timely intervention before the onset of a critical event, such as a system
failure, is of importance in many industrial settings. Before the onset of the critical
event, systems typically exhibit behavioral changes which often manifest as stochastic co-variate observations which may be leveraged to trigger intervention. In this
paper, for the first time, we formulate the problem of finding an optimally timed
intervention (OTI) policy as minimizing the expected residual time to event, subject
to a constraint on the probability of missing the event. Existing machine learning
approaches to intervention on critical events focus on predicting event occurrence
within a pre-defined window (a classification problem) or predicting time-to-event
(a regression problem). Interventions are then triggered by setting model thresholds.
These are heuristic-driven, lacking guarantees regarding optimality. To model the
evolution of system behavior, we introduce the concept of a hazard rate process.
We show that the OTI problem is equivalent to an optimal stopping problem on the
associated hazard rate process. This key link has not been explored in literature.
Under Markovian assumptions on the hazard rate process, we show that an OTI
policy at any time can be analytically determined from the conditional hazard
rate function at that time. Further, we show that our theory includes, as a special
case, the important class of neural hazard rate processes generated by recurrent
neural networks (RNNs). To model such processes, we propose a dynamic deep
recurrent survival analysis (DDRSA) architecture, introducing an RNN encoder
into the static DRSA setting. Finally, we demonstrate RNN-based OTI policies
with experiments and show that they outperform popular intervention methods.

1

Introduction

We consider a problem that involves the monitoring of observations from a discrete-time stochastic
process with the goal of intervening to prevent the costly occurrence of a critical event in the future. A
critical event is missed when intervention is not triggered before the critical event occurs. Intervening
too soon, before the critical event occurs, also incurs cost. In general, delaying an intervention
in order to be more confident of the intervention decision leads to an increased probability of
missing the event. The general goal is the design of algorithms that can be used to trigger a timely
intervention. The objective is to intervene as late as possible, by minimizing residual time-to-event
subject to a constraint on the probability of missing the event. We term this problem the Optimally
Timed Intervention problem (OTI Problem). Note that we are concerned only with the timing of an
intervention, not with its effectiveness in mitigating the occurrence of the critical event.
∗

Niranjan Damera Venkata was with the Artificial Intelligence and Emerging Compute Lab (AIECL) at HP
Labs during part of this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

