WT-MVSNet: Window-based Transformers for
Multi-view Stereo
Jinli Liao 1,2∗ Yikang Ding 1∗ Yoli Shavit 3
Jia Guo 2
1

Dihe Huang 1

Shihao Ren 1,2

Wensen Feng 2† Kai Zhang 1,4†

Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Technologies 3 Bar-Ilan University
4
Research Institute of Tsinghua, Pearl River Delta

Abstract
Recently, Transformers have been shown to enhance the performance of multi-view
stereo by enabling long-range feature interaction. In this work, we propose Windowbased Transformers (WT) for local feature matching and global feature aggregation
in multi-view stereo. We introduce a Window-based Epipolar Transformer (WET)
which reduces matching redundancy by using epipolar constraints. Since pointto-line matching is sensitive to erroneous camera pose and calibration, we match
windows near the epipolar lines. A second Shifted WT is employed for aggregating
global information within cost volume. We present a novel Cost Transformer
(CT) to replace 3D convolutions for cost volume regularization. In order to better
constrain the estimated depth maps from multiple views, we further design a novel
geometric consistency loss (Geo Loss) which punishes unreliable areas where
multi-view consistency is not satisfied. Our WT multi-view stereo method (WTMVSNet) achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple datasets and ranks
1st on Tanks and Temples benchmark.

1

Introduction

Multi-view stereo (MVS) estimates depth maps of multi-view calibrated images in order to perform
dense 3D reconstruction. MVS solutions aim to find correspondences between pixels in a reference
image and epipolar lines in source images in order to estimate consistent depth values. Recently,
Transformers were proposed for enabling long-range feature matching between reference and source
images [3], achieving impressive reconstruction quality. However, matching each pixel in reference
and source images without epipolar geometry constraints incurs matching redundancy. A recent effort
to perform attention-based matching along the epipolar lines of source images [32], suffers instead
from sensitivity to inaccurate camera pose and calibration, which can in turn results to erroneous
matching. Another key step in contemporary learned MVS methods is the regularization of cost
volume, generated by stacking cost maps associated with respective depth hypotheses. Typically,
3D CNNs are employed along the feature channels to estimate a probability function over different
depth values [7, 33]. Recently, shifted window Transformers were shown to enable local feature
aggregation while maintaining long-range cross interaction, surpassing CNNs across different vision
tasks [4, 11, 12, 14, 15]. Interestingly, while learned MVS methods aim to estimate the likelihood
of depth hypotheses from multi-view feature consistency, they calculate the absolute error between
ground truth and predicted depth expectation without geometrical consistency supervision [2, 7, 33].
In this work, we propose Window-based Transformers (WT) to address both local feature matching
and global feature aggregation. In order to introduce epipolar constraints into attention-based feature
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

