Untargeted Backdoor Watermark: Towards Harmless
and Stealthy Dataset Copyright Protection
Yiming Li1,⇤, Yang Bai2,⇤ , Yong Jiang1 , Yong Yang3 , Shu-Tao Xia1 , Bo Li4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
Tencent Security Zhuque Lab, China
3
Tencent Security Platform Department, China
4
The Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
li-ym18@mails.tinghua.edu.cn; {mavisbai,coolcyang}@tencent.com;
{jiangy,xiast}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; lbo@illinois.edu
1

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated their superiority in practice.
Arguably, the rapid development of DNNs is largely benefited from high-quality
(open-sourced) datasets, based on which researchers and developers can easily
evaluate and improve their learning methods. Since the data collection is usually
time-consuming or even expensive, how to protect their copyrights is of great
significance and worth further exploration. In this paper, we revisit dataset ownership verification. We find that existing verification methods introduced new
security risks in DNNs trained on the protected dataset, due to the targeted nature
of poison-only backdoor watermarks. To alleviate this problem, in this work, we
explore the untargeted backdoor watermarking scheme, where the abnormal model
behaviors are not deterministic. Specifically, we introduce two dispersibilities
and prove their correlation, based on which we design the untargeted backdoor
watermark under both poisoned-label and clean-label settings. We also discuss how
to use the proposed untargeted backdoor watermark for dataset ownership verification. Experiments on benchmark datasets verify the effectiveness of our methods
and their resistance to existing backdoor defenses. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/THUYimingLi/Untargeted_Backdoor_Watermark.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely and successfully deployed in many applications, for
their effectiveness and efficiency. Arguably, the existence of high-quality open-sourced datasets (e.g.,
CIFAR-10 [1] and ImageNet [2]) is one of the key factors for the prosperity of DNNs. Researchers
and developers can easily evaluate and improve their methods based on them. However, these datasets
may probably be used for commercial purposes without authorization rather than only the educational
or academic goals, due to their high accessibility.
Currently, there were some classical methods for data protection, including encryption, data watermarking, and defenses against data leakage. However, these methods cannot be used to protect the
copyrights of open-sourced datasets, since they either hinder the dataset accessibility or functionality
(e.g., encryption), require manipulating the training process (e.g., differential privacy), or even have
no effect in this case. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one method [3, 4] designed for
protecting open-sourced datasets. Specifically, it first adopted poison-only backdoor attacks [5] to
watermark the unprotected dataset and then conducted ownership verification by verifying whether
the suspicious model has specific targeted backdoor behaviors (as shown in Figure 1).
⇤

The first two authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence to: Yang Bai and Shu-Tao Xia.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

