DReS-FL: Dropout-Resilient Secure Federated
Learning for Non-IID Clients via Secret Data Sharing

Jiawei Shao‡ , Yuchang Sun‡ , Songze Li‡§ , Jun Zhang‡
‡
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
§
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{jiawei.shao,yuchang.sun}@connect.ust.hk, {songzeli,eejzhang}@ust.hk

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) strives to enable privacy-preserving training of machine
learning models without centrally collecting clients’ private data. Despite its advantages, the local datasets across clients in FL are non-independent and identically
distributed (non-IID), and the data-owning clients may drop out of the training
process arbitrarily. These characteristics will significantly degrade the training performance. Therefore, we propose a Dropout-Resilient Secure Federated Learning
(DReS-FL) framework based on Lagrange coded computing (LCC) to tackle both
the non-IID and dropout problems. The key idea is to utilize Lagrange coding
to secretly share the private datasets among clients so that each client receives
an encoded version of the global dataset1 , and the local gradient computation
over this dataset is unbiased. To correctly decode the gradient at the server, the
gradient function has to be a polynomial in a finite field, and thus we construct
polynomial integer neural networks (PINNs) to enable our framework. Theoretical
analysis shows that DReS-FL is resilient to client dropouts and provides strong
privacy guarantees. Furthermore, we experimentally demonstrate that DReS-FL
consistently leads to significant performance gains over baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [1] is a machine learning framework in which a central server coordinates
a large number of clients to collaboratively train a shared model. The key idea of FL is to train
the model locally by individual clients and aggregate updates globally by the server. The main
target is to provide privacy protection for clients’ local samples and solve the “data islands” problem.
However, as local data are typically non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID), the model
divergence during the local update may lead to unstable and slow convergence [2, 3, 4]. With many
clients involved in the training, some of the clients could drop out of the training process unexpectedly
(due to poor connectivity, battery level, etc), and it will cause detrimental model performance [5].
Thus, effective mechanisms are needed to tackle the non-IID data distribution and client dropouts,
while preserving the privacy of local datasets, which motivates this work.
To alleviate the non-IID problem, existing methods typically follow algorithm-based approaches
[2, 6, 7, 8, 9] and add regularization terms to mitigate the model divergence. However, these methods
are not dropout-resilient evidenced by the empirical results in [10]. This can be explained by the
greatly varying data distributions among different rounds. Another fold of strategy for dealing with
the non-IID problem is data-centric approach [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21], which
generates extra training samples to construct a more balanced data distribution for each client. The
common practices are to share the synthesized samples [13, 14, 15, 16] or GAN-based augmented
1

In the context of this paper, we use the global dataset to denote the concatenation of the clients’ datasets.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

