MOVE: Unsupervised Movable Object
Segmentation and Detection

Adam Bielski
University of Bern
adam.bielski@unibe.ch

Paolo Favaro
University of Bern
paolo.favaro@unibe.ch

Abstract
We introduce MOVE, a novel method to segment objects without any form of
supervision. MOVE exploits the fact that foreground objects can be shifted locally
relative to their initial position and result in realistic (undistorted) new images. This
property allows us to train a segmentation model on a dataset of images without
annotation and to achieve state of the art (SotA) performance on several evaluation
datasets for unsupervised salient object detection and segmentation. In unsupervised single object discovery, MOVE gives an average CorLoc improvement of
7.2% over the SotA, and in unsupervised class-agnostic object detection it gives
a relative AP improvement of 53% on average. Our approach is built on top of
self-supervised features (e.g. from DINO or MAE), an inpainting network (based
on the Masked AutoEncoder) and adversarial training.

1

Introduction

Image segmentation and object detection are today mature and essential components in vision-based
systems with applications in a wide range of fields including automotive [1], agriculture [2], and
medicine [3], just to name a few. A major challenge in building and deploying such components
at scale is that they require costly and time-consuming human annotation. This has motivated
efforts in self-supervised learning (SSL) [4–6]. The aim of SSL is to learn general-purpose image
representations from large unlabeled datasets that can be fine-tuned to different downstream tasks
with small annotated datasets. While SSL methods have also been fine-tuned for image segmentation
since their inception, it is only with the recent state of the art (SotA) methods, such as DINO [4] and
Dense Contrastive Learning [6], that a clear and strong link to object segmentation has been observed.
This has led to several methods for salient object detection built on top of SSL features [7–12].
Most prior work based on SSL features defines some form of clustering by either using attention
maps [7–9] or similarity graphs [10–12]. In this work, we take a quite different direction. Rather
than directly clustering the features, we train a network to map them to a segmentation mask. As
supervision signal we use the movability of objects, i.e., whether they can be locally shifted in a
realistic manner. We call our method MOVE. This property holds for objects in the foreground,
as they occlude all other objects in the scene. This basic idea has already been exploited in prior
work with relative success [13–19]. Nonetheless, here we introduce a novel formulation based
on movability that yields a significant performance boost across several datasets for salient object
detection.
In our approach, it is not necessary to move objects far from their initial location or to other images
[14, 16] and thus we do not have to handle the context mismatch. It is also not necessary to
employ models to generate entire scenes [15, 20], which can be challenging to train. Our working
principle exploits observations also made by [17–19]. They point out that the correct mask maximizes
the inpainting error both for the background and the foreground. However, rather than using the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

