Evaluating Latent Space Robustness and Uncertainty
of EEG-ML Models under Realistic Distribution Shifts
Neeraj Wagh1∗, Jionghao Wei1 , Samarth Rawal1 , Brent Berry2 , Yogatheesan Varatharajah1,2∗
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Mayo Clinic

Abstract
The recent availability of large datasets in bio-medicine has inspired the development of representation learning methods for multiple healthcare applications.
Despite advances in predictive performance, the clinical utility of such methods is
limited when exposed to real-world data. This study develops model diagnostic
measures to detect potential pitfalls before deployment without assuming access
to external data. Specifically, we focus on modeling realistic data shifts in electrophysiological signals (EEGs) via data transforms and extend the conventional
task-based evaluations with analyses of a) the model’s latent space and b) predictive
uncertainty under these transforms. We conduct experiments on multiple EEG feature encoders and two clinically relevant downstream tasks using publicly available
large-scale clinical EEGs. Within this experimental setting, our results suggest that
measures of latent space integrity and model uncertainty under the proposed data
shifts may help anticipate performance degradation during deployment.

1

Introduction

The availability of large datasets in bio-medicine has inspired the development of deep representation learning methods for diagnostic applications in multiple health domains, such as cardiology,
neurology, and radiology. However, there are increasing examples of failures of such systems during real-world deployment, partly due to dataset or distribution shifts in the deployment setting
(1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6). Currently, the most common approach undertaken to evaluate healthcare machine
learning (ML) models is analyzing task performance in a held-out test dataset. The recent advances in
covariate-shift detection and adaptation approaches (7; 8; 9; 10; 11) have not been widely adopted in
the healthcare ML community because they do not reflect the unique health-data-related challenges.
As such, the practical value of many healthcare ML models remains unclear at present without
additional assessments of model resilience in deployment settings (12). This gap reflects a major
hurdle in translating healthcare ML models that are required to perform consistently under varying
noise characteristics, diverse acquisition protocols, and multiple sites and populations. Hence, there is
a critical need to evaluate the robustness of healthcare ML models to such shifts prior to deployment.
In this paper, we focus on a particular area of healthcare ML pertaining to learning representations of
physiological signals such as electroencephalograms (EEGs). EEGs are commonly used to diagnose
various neurological, psychiatric, and sleep disorders, as well as in applications involving brainmachine interfaces. Deep representation learning of raw EEG signals has recently gained popularity
because of the availability of large-scale EEG datasets (13) and has shown promise in improving the
labor-intensive and error-prone manual process undertaken in clinical EEG reviews (14). Various
approaches have been proposed, including fully-supervised deep feature encoders (15; 16; 17), selfsupervised encoders (18; 19; 20), and traditional feature-based encoders using power spectral features
(21). However, many of those approaches struggle to generalize to previously unseen real-world data,
i.e., data acquired from different populations, institutions, or devices (22; 23).
∗

Corresponding authors:

{nwagh2, varatha2}@illinois.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

