Gradient-Free Methods for Deterministic and
Stochastic Nonsmooth Nonconvex Optimization

Tianyi Lin Zeyu Zheng Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
{darren_lin,zyzheng}@berkeley.edu, jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Nonsmooth nonconvex optimization problems broadly emerge in machine learning
and business decision making, whereas two core challenges impede the development of efficient solution methods with finite-time convergence guarantee: the lack
of computationally tractable optimality criterion and the lack of computationally
powerful oracles. The contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, we establish
the relationship between the celebrated Goldstein subdifferential [46] and uniform
smoothing, thereby providing the basis and intuition for the design of gradient-free
methods that guarantee the finite-time convergence to a set of Goldstein stationary
points. Second, we propose the gradient-free method (GFM) and stochastic GFM
for solving a class of nonsmooth nonconvex optimization problems and prove that
both of them can return a (δ, )-Goldstein stationary point of a Lipschitz function
f at an expected convergence rate at O(d3/2 δ −1 −4 ) where d is the problem dimension. Two-phase versions of GFM and SGFM are also proposed and proven to
achieve improved large-deviation results. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of 2-SGFM on training ReLU neural networks with the M INST dataset.

1

Introduction

Many of the recent real-world success stories of machine learning have involved nonconvex optimization formulations, with the design of models and algorithms often being heuristic and intuitive.
Thus a gap has arisen between theory and practice. Attempts have been made to fill this gap for
different learning methodologies, including the training of multi-layer neural networks [25], orthogonal tensor decomposition [41], M-estimators [63, 64], synchronization and MaxCut [6, 66], smooth
semidefinite programming [15], matrix sensing and completion [10, 42], robust principal component
analysis (RPCA) [43] and phase retrieval [82, 79, 64]. For an overview of nonconvex optimization
formulations and the relevant ML applications, we refer to a recent survey [51].
It is generally intractable to compute an approximate global minimum [69] or to verify whether a point
is a local minimum or a high-order saddle point [67]. Fortunately, the notion of approximate stationary
point gives a reasonable optimality criterion when the objective function f is smooth; the goal here is
to find a point x ∈ Rd such that k∇f (x)k ≤ . Recent years have seen rapid algorithmic development
through the lens of nonasymptotic convergence rates to -stationary points [70, 44, 45, 20, 21, 53].
Another line of work establishes algorithm-independent lower bounds [22, 23, 3, 4].
Relative to its smooth counterpart, the investigation of nonsmooth optimization is relatively scarce,
particularly in the nonconvex setting, both in terms of efficient algorithms and finite-time convergence
guarantees. Yet, over several decades, nonsmooth nonconvex optimization formulations have found
applications in many fields. A typical example is the training multi-layer neural networks with ReLU
neurons, for which the piecewise linear activation functions induce nonsmoothness. Another example
arises in controlling financial risk for asset portfolios or optimizing customer satisfaction in service
systems or supply chain systems. Here, the nonsmoothness arises from the payoffs of financial
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

