Escaping Saddle Points for Effective Generalization on
Class-Imbalanced Data
Harsh Rangwani∗
Sumukh K Aithal∗
Mayank Mishra
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India
{harshr@iisc.ac.in, sumukhaithal6@gmail.com,
mayankmishra@iisc.ac.in, venky@iisc.ac.in}

Abstract
Real-world datasets exhibit imbalances of varying types and degrees. Several
techniques based on re-weighting and margin adjustment of loss are often used
to enhance the performance of neural networks, particularly on minority classes.
In this work, we analyze the class-imbalanced learning problem by examining
the loss landscape of neural networks trained with re-weighting and margin based
techniques. Specifically, we examine the spectral density of Hessian of class-wise
loss, through which we observe that the network weights converges to a saddle
point in the loss landscapes of minority classes. Following this observation, we
also find that optimization methods designed to escape from saddle points can
be effectively used to improve generalization on minority classes. We further
theoretically and empirically demonstrate that Sharpness-Aware Minimization
(SAM), a recent technique that encourages convergence to a flat minima, can be
effectively used to escape saddle points for minority classes. Using SAM results in
a 6.2% increase in accuracy on the minority classes over the state-of-the-art Vector
Scaling Loss, leading to an overall average increase of 4% across imbalanced
datasets. The code is available at https://github.com/val-iisc/Saddle-LongTail.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a lot of progress in visual recognition thanks to the availability of wellcurated datasets [30, 39], which are artificially balanced in terms of the frequency of samples across
classes. However, modern real-world datasets are often imbalanced (i.e. long-tailed etc.) [29, 42, 43]
and suffer from various kinds of distribution shifts. Overparameterized models like deep neural
networks usually overfit classes with a high frequency of samples ignoring the minority (tail)
ones [7, 43]. In such scenarios, when evaluated for metrics that focus on performance on minority
data, these models perform poorly. These metrics are an essential and practical criterion for evaluating
models in various domains like fairness [12], medical imaging [48] etc.
Many approaches designed for improving the generalization performance of models trained on
imbalanced data, are based on the re-weighting of loss [14]. The relative weights for samples of
each class are determined, such that the expected loss closely approximates the testing criterion
objective [9]. In recent years, re-weighting techniques such as Deferred Re-Weighting (DRW) [9], and
Vector Scaling (VS) Loss [28] have been introduced, which improve over the classical re-weighting
method of weighting the loss of each class sample proportionally to the inverse of class frequency.
However, even these improved re-weighting techniques lead to overfitting on the samples of tail
classes. Also, it has been shown that use of re-weighted loss for training deep networks converges to
final solutions similar to the un-weighted loss case, rendering it to be ineffective [8].
∗

Equal Contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

