GlanceNets: Interpretable, Leak-proof
Concept-based Models

Emanuele Marconato
Department of Computer Science
University of Pisa & University of Trento
Pisa, Italy
emanuele.marconato@unitn.it

Andrea Passerini
Department of Computer Science
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
andrea.passerini@unitn.it

Stefano Teso
Department of Computer Science
University of Trento
Trento, Italy
stefano.teso@unitn.it

Abstract
There is growing interest in concept-based models (CBMs) that combine highperformance and interpretability by acquiring and reasoning with a vocabulary of
high-level concepts. A key requirement is that the concepts be interpretable. Existing CBMs tackle this desideratum using a variety of heuristics based on unclear
notions of interpretability, and fail to acquire concepts with the intended semantics. We address this by providing a clear definition of interpretability in terms of
alignment between the model’s representation and an underlying data generation
process, and introduce GlanceNets, a new CBM that exploits techniques from disentangled representation learning and open-set recognition to achieve alignment, thus
improving the interpretability of the learned concepts. We show that GlanceNets,
paired with concept-level supervision, achieve better alignment than state-of-the-art
approaches while preventing spurious concepts from unintentionally affecting its
predictions. The code is available at https://github.com/ema-marconato/glancenet.

1

Introduction

Concept-based models (CBMs) are an increasingly popular family of classifiers that combine the
transparency of white-box models with the flexibility and accuracy of regular neural nets [1–5]. At
their core, all CBMs acquire a vocabulary of concepts capturing high-level, task-relevant properties
of the data, and use it to compute predictions and produce faithful explanations of their decisions [6].
The central issue in CBMs is how to ensure that the concepts are semantically meaningful and
interpretable for (sufficiently expert and motivated) human stakeholders. Current approaches struggle
with this. One reason is that the notion of interpretability is notoriously challenging to pin down,
and therefore existing CBMs rely on different heuristics—such as encouraging the concepts to be
sparse [1], orthonormal to each other [5], or match the contents of concrete examples [3]—with
unclear properties and incompatible goals. A second, equally important issue is concept leakage,
whereby the learned concepts end up encoding spurious information about unrelated aspects of the
data, making it hard to assign them clear semantics [7]. Notably, even concept-level supervision is
insufficient to prevent leakage [8].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

