Is Integer Arithmetic Enough for Deep Learning
Training?
Alireza Ghaffari1 Marzieh S. Tahaei1 Mohammadreza Tayaranian1
Masoud Asgharian2 Vahid Partovi Nia1
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Montreal Research Center
2
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University
{alireza.ghaffari, marzieh.tahaei, mohammadreza.tayaranian}@huawei.com
vahid.partovinia@huawei.com masoud.asgharian2@mcgill.ca

Abstract
The ever-increasing computational complexity of deep learning models makes their
training and deployment difficult on various cloud and edge platforms. Replacing
floating-point arithmetic with low-bit integer arithmetic is a promising approach
to save energy, memory footprint, and latency of deep learning models. As such,
quantization has attracted the attention of researchers in recent years. However,
using integer numbers to form a fully functional integer training pipeline including
forward pass, back-propagation, and stochastic gradient descent is not studied
in detail. Our empirical and mathematical results reveal that integer arithmetic
seems to be enough to train deep learning models. Unlike recent proposals, instead
of quantization, we directly switch the number representation of computations.
Our novel training method forms a fully integer training pipeline that does not
change the trajectory of the loss and accuracy compared to floating-point, nor does
it need any special hyper-parameter tuning, distribution adjustment, or gradient
clipping. Our experimental results show that our proposed method is effective in a
wide variety of tasks such as classification (including vision transformers), object
detection, and semantic segmentation.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep learning models have evolved to deliver acceptable performance in many areas such
as computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition. However, the number
of parameters and computational complexity of most deep learning applications have increased
significantly. This ever-increasing computational complexity makes the deployment of deep neural
networks harder on edge devices. Furthermore, the energy required to train a deep learning model
increases proportionately with computational complexity. Thus, the training cost of these large and
complex models also increases significantly on the high-end cloud servers. Although, quantization
techniques are commonly used to accelerate inference of deep learning models, here we target a
fully integer training pipeline (i.e. forward propagation, back-propagation and SGD). Unlike recent
proposals in quantized back-propagation, we directly change the number representation of floatingpoint values. Furthermore, we show empirically and theoretically that our proposed integer training
methodology is effective in training deep learning models with integer-only arithmetic.
Despite the fact that accelerated training using integer back-propagation seems intriguing, there
are some challenges associated with integer gradient computation. For example, (i) gradients must
be scaled correctly in order to be adapted to the limited dynamic range of the integer number (e.g.
int8: [ 128, 127]). (ii) The numerical error of the gradient must be unbiased in order to preserve
the convergence trajectory of the training algorithm. A small numerical error can be accumulated
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

