Invariance-Aware Randomized Smoothing Certificates

Jan Schuchardt
Technical University of Munich
j.schuchardt@tum.de

Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich
s.guennemann@tum.de

Abstract
Building models that comply with the invariances inherent to different domains,
such as invariance under translation or rotation, is a key aspect of applying machine
learning to real world problems like molecular property prediction, medical imaging, protein folding or LiDAR classification. For the first time, we study how the
invariances of a model can be leveraged to provably guarantee the robustness of its
predictions. We propose a gray-box approach, enhancing the powerful black-box
randomized smoothing technique with white-box knowledge about invariances.
First, we develop gray-box certificates based on group orbits, which can be applied
to arbitrary models with invariance under permutation and Euclidean isometries.
Then, we derive provably tight gray-box certificates. We experimentally demonstrate that the provably tight certificates can offer much stronger guarantees, but
that in practical scenarios the orbit-based method is a good approximation.

1

Introduction

It is well-established that machine learning models are susceptible to adversarial attacks [1–4]. Even
without malevolent actors, adversarial attacks can be considered worst case scenarios in environments
with noisy, erroneous or otherwise corrupted data, thus necessitating robust machine learning methods.
Invariance is a central design principle that has so far received little dedicated attention in the realm
of adversarially robust machine learning. Over the past decades, there has been ongoing research
into developing machine learning models that comply with the invariances inherent to different data
types and tasks. Prominent recent examples include Deep Sets [5], PointNet [6], Group Equivariant
CNNs [7], Spherical CNNs [8] and Graph Convolutional Networks [9], but the study of invariant
models significantly precedes the surge in popularity of deep learning methods [10–15].
For the first time, we explore the following question: Can a-priori knowledge about invariances
be leveraged in deriving provable guarantees for a model’s robustness to adversarial attacks?
Going by a loose categorization of prior work, we could adopt one of two possible approaches for our
exploration: A white-box or black-box one. White-box certificates (e.g. [16–23]) analyze a model’s
internals, such at its weights and non-linearities, to provably guarantee that a prediction does not
change under adversarial attack. Black box certificates – specifically randomized smoothing [24–26]
– use statistical methods to provide provable guarantees that hold for all models sharing the same
prediction probabilities under a random input distribution, irrespective of their internals.
We opt for a randomized smoothing approach, as it allows us to focus on the interplay between
invariances and robustness, rather than the specific means of implementing these invariances. By
combining white-box knowledge about invariances with black-box knowledge about prediction
probabilities we obtain gray-box certificates. We first derive a gray-box certificate that follows a
post-processing paradigm: It takes an existing black-box certificate and augments the certified region
using information about the model’s invariances. This orbit-based certificate serves as a baseline
for the provably tight gray-box certificates we derive in subsequent sections.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

