Cross-modal Learning for Image-Guided Point Cloud
Shape Completion
Emanuele Aiello˚
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
emanuele.aiello@polito.it

Diego Valsesia
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
diego.valsesia@polito.it

Enrico Magli
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
enrico.magli@polito.it

Abstract
In this paper we explore the recent topic of point cloud completion, guided by an
auxiliary image. We show how it is possible to effectively combine the information from the two modalities in a localized latent space, thus avoiding the need
for complex point cloud reconstruction methods from single views used by the
state-of-the-art. We also investigate a novel weakly-supervised setting where the
auxiliary image provides a supervisory signal to the training process by using a
differentiable renderer on the completed point cloud to measure fidelity in the
image space. Experiments show significant improvements over state-of-the-art
supervised methods for both unimodal and multimodal completion. We also show
the effectiveness of the weakly-supervised approach which outperforms a number
of supervised methods and is competitive with the latest supervised models only
exploiting point cloud information.

1

Introduction

The rise in popularity of 3D sensing technologies such as depth cameras, laser scanners, LiDARs,
etc. is making the processing of point cloud data ever more important. The acquisitions produced by
those instruments are often incomplete due to occlusions by objects in the environment, reflections,
and viewing angles. This limits the exploitability of those data in tasks like scene understanding [1],
robotic vision [2], autonomous driving [3] and many more. Completing a point cloud from partial
observations is a challenging ill-posed inverse problem that requires strong prior knowledge about
shapes to be effectively regularized.
At the same time, we know that humans are very proficient at mapping the visual concepts learnt
from 2D images to understand the 3D world, and are able to successfully infer the shape of partial
3D objects from their 2D experiences. It is thus sensible to expect that point cloud completion
techniques can benefit from 2D images to better characterize the 3D shape to be completed. Indeed,
several applications of interest in robotic vision can take advantage of multimodal data where the 3D
acquisitions of a depth-sensing instrument are paired with images from an RGB camera. It is also
worth noting that the two modalities may be acquired from different vantage points, either thanks to
disparities in the acquisition geometry or because the vantage point has changed with the passing
of time. This makes it clear that the two modalities may carry complementary information and
effectively fusing it is key to unlock better completion performance. Nevertheless, the literature on
the topic of point cloud completion [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] has largely focused on the single-modality
˚

Code of the project: https://github.com/diegovalsesia/XMFnet

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

