TabNAS: Rejection Sampling for
Neural Architecture Search on Tabular Datasets
Chengrun Yang1 , Gabriel Bender1 , Hanxiao Liu1 , Pieter-Jan Kindermans1 ,
Madeleine Udell2 , Yifeng Lu1 , Quoc V. Le1 , Da Huang1
{chengrun, gbender, hanxiaol, pikinder}@google.com,
udell@stanford.edu, {yifenglu, qvl, dahua}@google.com
1

Google Research, Brain Team 2 Stanford University

Abstract
The best neural architecture for a given machine learning problem depends on
many factors: not only the complexity and structure of the dataset, but also on
resource constraints including latency, compute, energy consumption, etc. Neural
architecture search (NAS) for tabular datasets is an important but under-explored
problem. Previous NAS algorithms designed for image search spaces incorporate resource constraints directly into the reinforcement learning (RL) rewards.
However, for NAS on tabular datasets, this protocol often discovers suboptimal
architectures. This paper develops TabNAS, a new and more effective approach to
handle resource constraints in tabular NAS using an RL controller motivated by
the idea of rejection sampling. TabNAS immediately discards any architecture that
violates the resource constraints without training or learning from that architecture.
TabNAS uses a Monte-Carlo-based correction to the RL policy gradient update to
account for this extra filtering step. Results on several tabular datasets demonstrate
the superiority of TabNAS over previous reward-shaping methods: it finds better
models that obey the constraints.

1

Introduction

To make a machine learning model better, one can scale it up. But larger networks are more expensive
as measured by inference time, memory, energy, etc, and these costs limit the application of large
models: training is slow and expensive, and inference is often too slow to satisfy user requirements.
Many applications of machine learning in industry use tabular data, e.g., in finance, advertising and
medicine. It was only recently that deep learning has achieved parity with classical tree-based models
in these domains [9, 11]. For vision, optimizing models for practical deployment often relies on
Neural Architecture Search (NAS). Most NAS literature targets convolutional networks on vision
benchmarks [14, 5, 10, 19]. Despite the practical importance of tabular data, however, NAS research
on this topic is quite limited [8, 7]. (See Appendix A for a more comprehensive literature review.)
Weight-sharing reduces the cost of NAS by training a SuperNet that is the superset of all candidate
architectures [2]. This trained SuperNet is then used to estimate the quality of each candidate
architecture or child network by allowing activations in only a subset of the components of the
SuperNet and evaluating the model. Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown to efficiently find the
most promising child networks [16, 5, 3] for vision problems.
In our experiments, we show that a direct application of approaches designed for vision to tabular
data often fails. For example, the TuNAS [3] approach from vision struggles to find the optimal
architectures for tabular datasets (see experiments). The failure is caused by the interaction of the
search space and the factorized RL controller. To understand why, consider the following toy example
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

