DDXPlus: A New Dataset For Automatic Medical
Diagnosis

Arsène Fansi Tchango ∗,‡ , Rishab Goel ∗,† , Zhi Wen ‡ , Julien Martel § , Joumana Ghosn ‡
‡
Mila-Quebec AI Institute
{arsene.fansi.tchango,zhi.wen,joumana.ghosn}@mila.quebec
†
rgoel0112@gmail.com
§
Work done while at Dialogue Health Technologies Inc.
julien@datadoc.ca

Abstract
There has been a rapidly growing interest in Automatic Symptom Detection (ASD)
and Automatic Diagnosis (AD) systems in the machine learning research literature,
aiming to assist doctors in telemedicine services. These systems are designed
to interact with patients, collect evidence about their symptoms and relevant antecedents, and possibly make predictions about the underlying diseases. Doctors
would review the interactions, including the evidence and the predictions, collect
if necessary additional information from patients, before deciding on next steps.
Despite recent progress in this area, an important piece of doctors’ interactions with
patients is missing in the design of these systems, namely the differential diagnosis.
Its absence is largely due to the lack of datasets that include such information
for models to train on. In this work, we present a large-scale synthetic dataset
of roughly 1.3 million patients that includes a differential diagnosis, along with
the ground truth pathology, symptoms and antecedents for each patient. Unlike
existing datasets which only contain binary symptoms and antecedents, this dataset
also contains categorical and multi-choice symptoms and antecedents useful for
efficient data collection. Moreover, some symptoms are organized in a hierarchy,
making it possible to design systems able to interact with patients in a logical way.
As a proof-of-concept, we extend two existing AD and ASD systems to incorporate
the differential diagnosis, and provide empirical evidence that using differentials
as training signals is essential for the efficiency of such systems or for helping
doctors better understand the reasoning of those systems. The dataset is available
at https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/DDXPlus_Dataset/20043374.

1

Introduction

In a clinical conversation between a doctor and a patient, the patient usually initiates the discussion
by specifying an initial set of symptoms they are experiencing. The doctor then iteratively inquires
about additional symptoms and antecedents (describing the patient’s medical history and potential
risk factors), and considers, throughout the interaction, a differential diagnosis, i.e., a short list of
plausible diseases the patient might be suffering from (Henderson et al., 2012; Guyatt et al., 2002;
Rhoads et al., 2017), which is refined based on the patient’s responses. During this multi-step process,
the doctor tries to collect all relevant information to narrow down the differential diagnosis. Once
the differential diagnosis is finalized, the doctor can ask the patient to undergo medical exams to
eliminate most pathologies included in it and confirm the one(s) the patient is suffering from, or can
decide to directly prescribe a treatment to the patient.
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

