Posterior Matching for Arbitrary Conditioning

Junier B. Oliva
Department of Computer Science
UNC at Chapel Hill
joliva@cs.unc.edu

Ryan R. Strauss
Department of Computer Science
UNC at Chapel Hill
rrs@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Arbitrary conditioning is an important problem in unsupervised learning, where we
seek to model the conditional densities p(xu | xo ) that underly some data, for all
possible non-intersecting subsets o, u ⊂ {1, . . . , d}. However, the vast majority of
density estimation only focuses on modeling the joint distribution p(x), in which
important conditional dependencies between features are opaque. We propose a
simple and general framework, coined Posterior Matching, that enables Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) to perform arbitrary conditioning, without modification to
the VAE itself. Posterior Matching applies to the numerous existing VAE-based
approaches to joint density estimation, thereby circumventing the specialized
models required by previous approaches to arbitrary conditioning. We find that
Posterior Matching is comparable or superior to current state-of-the-art methods for
a variety of tasks with an assortment of VAEs (e.g. discrete, hierarchical, VaDE).

1

Introduction

Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [21] are a widely adopted class of generative model that have been
successfully employed in numerous areas [4, 15, 26, 33, 16]. Much of their appeal stems from their
ability to probabilistically represent complex data in terms of lower-dimensional latent codes.
Like most other generative models, VAEs are typically designed to model the joint data distribution,
which communicates likelihoods for particular configurations of all features at once. This can be
useful for some tasks, such as generating images, but the joint distribution is limited by its inability
to explicitly convey the conditional dependencies between features. In many cases, conditional
distributions, which provide the likelihood of an event given some known information, are more
relevant and useful. Conditionals can be obtained in theory by marginalizing the joint distribution,
but in practice, this is generally not analytically available and is expensive to approximate.
Easily assessing the conditional distribution over any subset of features is important for tasks where
decisions and predictions must be made over a varied set of possible information. For example, some
medical applications may require reasoning over: the distribution of blood pressure given age and
weight; or the distribution of heart-rate and blood-oxygen level given age, blood pressure, and BMI;
etc. For flexibility and scalability, it is desirable for a single model to provide all such conditionals
at inference time. More formally, this task is known as arbitrary conditioning, where the goal is
to model the conditional density p(xu | xo ) for any arbitrary subsets of unobserved features xu
and observed features xo . In this work, we show, by way of a simple and general framework, that
traditional VAEs can perform arbitrary conditioning, without modification to the VAE model itself.
Our approach, which we call Posterior Matching, is to model the distribution p(z | xo ) that is induced
by some VAE, where z is the latent code. In other words, we consider the distribution of latent codes
given partially observed features. We do this by having a neural network output an approximate
partially observed posterior q(z | xo ). In order to train this network, we develop a straightforward
maximum likelihood estimation objective and show that it is equivalent to maximizing p(xu | xo ),
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

