Geometric Order Learning for Rank Estimation

Seon-Ho Lee

Nyeong-Ho Shin
Chang-Su Kim
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University
seonholee@mcl.korea.ac.kr, nhshin@mcl.korea.ac.kr, changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel approach to rank estimation, called geometric order learning (GOL), is
proposed in this paper. First, we construct an embedding space, in which the direction and distance between objects represent order and metric relations between
their ranks, by enforcing two geometric constraints: the order constraint compels
objects to be sorted according to their ranks, while the metric constraint makes
the distance between objects reflect their rank difference. Then, we perform the
simple k nearest neighbor (k-NN) search in the embedding space to estimate the
rank of a test object. Moreover, to assess the quality of embedding spaces for
rank estimation, we propose a metric called discriminative ratio for ranking (DRR).
Extensive experiments on facial age estimation, historical color image (HCI) classification, and aesthetic score regression demonstrate that GOL constructs effective
embedding spaces and thus yields excellent rank estimation performances. The
source codes are available at https://github.com/seon92/GOL

1

Introduction

In rank estimation, we estimate the rank (or ordered class) of an object. It is different from ordinary
classification, for its classes are arranged in a natural order. For example, in movie rating, classes
can be ordered from ‘outstanding’ to ‘very good,’ ‘satisfactory,’ ‘unsatisfactory,’ and ‘poor.’ Rank
estimation is a fundamental problem and, e.g., used for various computer vision tasks including facial
age estimation (Shin et al., 2022), aesthetic quality assessment (Schifanella et al., 2015), and HCI
classification (Palermo et al., 2012).
For rank estimation, many techniques (Li et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2018) adopt the ordinal regression
framework, which employs a classifier or a regressor to predict the rank of an object directly. However,
they may fail to yield reliable estimates, for there is no clear distinction between ranks in many cases.
For instance, in facial age estimation, the aging process — causing variations in facial shapes, sizes,
and texture — has large individual differences due to factors such as genes, diet, and lifestyle.
To address this issue, comparison-based algorithms (Lim et al., 2020; Lee & Kim, 2021; Li et al.,
2014; Nguyen et al., 2018) have been proposed. Instead of predicting the rank directly, they learn a
binary relation between objects, such as order or metric (Hrbacek & Jech, 1984). These relations
provide useful information for rank estimation: an order indicates the relative priority between objects
x and y, while a metric informs of the distance between them.
In order learning (Lim et al., 2020; Lee & Kim, 2021), a comparator is learned to classify the
relationship between x and y into one of three cases: x is ‘greater than,’ ‘similar to,’ or ‘smaller than’
y. Then, they estimate the rank of a test object by comparing it with multiple reference objects with
known ranks. This approach is based on the idea that it is easier to predict ordering relationships
between objects than to estimate the absolute ranks; telling the older one between two people is easier
than estimating their exact ages. However, order learning disregards how much x is different from y.
In other words, it ignores metric information.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

