Dynamic Pricing with Monotonicity Constraint
Under Unknown Parametric Demand Model
Su Jia, Andrew Li, R. Ravi
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
{sjia1,aali1,ravi}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider a Continuum-Armed Bandit problem with an additional monotonicity
constraint (or “markdown” constraint) on the actions selected. This problem faithfully models a natural revenue management problem, called “markdown pricing”,
where the objective is to adaptively reduce the price over a finite horizon to maximize the expected revenues. Chen ([3]) and Jia et al ([9]) recently showed a tight
T 3/4 regret bound over T rounds under minimal assumptions of unimodality and
Lipschitzness in the reward function. This bound shows that markdown pricing is
strictly harder than unconstrained dynamic pricing (i.e., without the monotonicity
constraint), which admits T 2/3 regret under the same assumptions ([11]). However,
in practice, demand functions are usually assumed to have certain functional forms
(e.g. linear or exponential), rendering the demand learning easier and suggesting
better regret bounds. In this work we introduce a concept, markdown dimension,
that measures the complexity of a parametric family, and present optimal regret
bounds that improve upon the previous T 3/4 bound under this framework.

1

Introduction

Dynamic pricing under unknown demand arises naturally for the sale of new products, where
the demand function is not available in advance. The seller in this case has to learn the demand
function over time and hence faces a learning-vs-earning trade-off. This problem is therefore usually
formulated as a Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) model. Although bandit problems have been well
understood theoretically, in practice, however, we rarely see retailers implement such policies. This
is a largely because some practical constraints which can potentially cause customer dissatisfaction
are overlooked. For example, a price increase may sometimes create a manipulative image of the
retailer and negatively impact their ratings. For example, [13] analyzed the online menu prices of
a set of restaurants and concluded that “on average, a 1% price increase leads to 3-5% decrease in
online ratings”. Therefore, retailers sometimes implicitly face a monotonicity constraint (which we
call “markdown constraint”), which requires that the prices selected be non-increasing. A pricing
policy that satisfies such a constraint is usually referred to as markdown pricing policy.
Thus motivated, in this work, we consider the markdown pricing problem with unknown demand,
under various assumptions. Although unconstrained dynamic pricing under unknown demand has
been extensively studied, little is known about markdown pricing under unknown demand. Recently,
[3] and [9] independently showed that unimodality and Lipschitzness in the revenue function (defined
as the product of the price and the mean demand) are necessary to achieve sublinear regret. In this
setting, any reasonable policy must reduce the price at a moderate rate and stop only when there
is sufficient evidence for overshooting the optimal price. By selecting suitable parameters, [3, 9]
showed that the above policy is indeed optimal, achieving a tight T 3/4 regret bound.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

