SAPipe: Staleness-Aware Pipeline for Data-Parallel
DNN Training

Yangrui Chen
The University of Hong Kong
yrchen@cs.hku.hk

Cong Xie
ByteDance
cong.xie@bytedance.com

Meng Ma
ByteDance
meng.ma@bytedance.com

Juncheng Gu
ByteDance
juncheng.gu@bytedance.com

Yanghua Peng
ByteDance
pengyanghua.yanghua@bytedance.com
Chuan Wu
The University of Hong Kong
cwu@cs.hku.hk

Haibin Lin
ByteDance
haibin.lin@bytedance.com
Yibo Zhu
ByteDance
zhuyibo@bytedance.com

Abstract
Data parallelism across multiple machines is widely adopted for accelerating distributed deep learning, but it is hard to achieve linear speedup due to the heavy
communication. In this paper, we propose SAPipe, a performant system that
pushes the training speed of data parallelism to its fullest extent. By introducing
partial staleness, the communication overlaps the computation with minimal staleness in SAPipe. To mitigate additional problems incurred by staleness, SAPipe
adopts staleness compensation techniques including weight prediction and delay
compensation with provably lower error bounds. Additionally, SAPipe presents
an algorithm-system co-design with runtime optimization to minimize system
overhead for the staleness training pipeline and staleness compensation. We have
implemented SAPipe in the BytePS framework, compatible to both TensorFlow
and PyTorch. Our experiments show that SAPipe achieves up to 157% speedups
over BytePS (non-stale), and outperforms PipeSGD in accuracy by up to 13.7%.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved ground-breaking performance on a wide range of
domains, such as computer vision (CV) [10, 17] and natural language processing (NLP) [29, 7].
Meanwhile, the model sizes and data volumes have grown exponentially, making DNN training
time-consuming and resource-intensive. The most common approach to accelerate DNN training is to
use data parallelism, scaling DNN training across multiple devices. Despite the substantial speedup,
distributed machine learning systems with data parallelism often cannot fully utilize the computation
resources and achieve linear scaling (i.e., GPU number times single-GPU training speed), due to
non-negligible communication overhead [31, 2, 23, 13].
Many recent studies have been devoted to developing communication acceleration techniques. Some
works reduce communication traffic using gradient compression [2] or mixed-precision training [21],
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

