3D Concept Grounding on Neural Fields

Yining Hong
University of California, Los Angeles

Yilun Du
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Chunru Lin
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL

Chuang Gan
UMass Amherst and MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenging problem of 3D concept grounding (i.e. segmenting and learning visual concepts) by looking at RGBD images and reasoning
about paired questions and answers. Existing visual reasoning approaches typically
utilize supervised methods to extract 2D segmentation masks on which concepts are
grounded. In contrast, humans are capable of grounding concepts on the underlying
3D representation of images. However, traditionally inferred 3D representations
(e.g., point clouds, voxelgrids and meshes) cannot capture continuous 3D features
flexibly, thus making it challenging to ground concepts to 3D regions based on the
language description of the object being referred to. To address both issues, we
propose to leverage the continuous, differentiable nature of neural fields to segment
and learn concepts. Specifically, each 3D coordinate in a scene is represented
as a high dimensional descriptor. Concept grounding can then be performed by
computing the similarity between the descriptor vector of a 3D coordinate and
the vector embedding of a language concept, which enables segmentations and
concept learning to be jointly learned on neural fields in a differentiable fashion.
As a result, both 3D semantic and instance segmentations can emerge directly from
question answering supervision using a set of defined neural operators on top of
neural fields (e.g., filtering and counting). Experimental results on our collected
PART N ET-R EASONING dataset show that our proposed framework outperforms
unsupervised / language-mediated segmentation models on semantic and instance
segmentation tasks, as well as outperforms existing models on the challenging 3D
aware visual reasoning tasks. Furthermore, our framework can generalize well to
unseen shape categories and real scans* .

1

Introduction

Visual reasoning, the ability to utilize compositional operators to perform complex visual question
answering tasks (e.g., counting, comparing and logical reasoning), has become a challenging problem
these years since they go beyond pattern recognition and bias exploitation [19, 22, 2]. Consider
an image of a table pictured in Figure 1. We wish to construct a method that is able to accurately
ground the concepts and reason about the image such as the number of legs the pictured table has.
Existing works typically address this problem by utilizing a supervised segmentation model for legs,
and then applying a count operator on extracted segmentation masks [28]. However, as illustrated in
Figure 1, in many visual reasoning problems, the correct answer depends on a very small portion of
* Project page: http://3d-cg.csail.mit.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

