Diversified Recommendations for Agents with
Adaptive Preferences

Arpit Agarwal∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
arpit.agarwal@columbia.edu

William Brown†
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
w.brown@columbia.edu

Abstract
When an Agent visits a platform recommending a menu of content to select from,
their choice of item depends not only on immutable preferences, but also on their
prior engagements with the platform. The Recommender’s primary objective is
typically to encourage content consumption which optimizes some reward, such
as ad revenue, but they often additionally aim to ensure that a sufficiently wide
variety of content is consumed by the Agent over time. We formalize this problem
as an adversarial bandit task. At each step, the Recommender presents a menu of
k (out of n) items to the Agent, who selects one item in the menu according to
their unknown preference model, which maps their history of past items to relative
selection probabilities. The Recommender then observes the Agent’s selected item
and receives bandit feedback of the item’s (adversarial) reward. In addition to
optimizing reward from the selected items at each step, the Recommender must
also ensure that the total distribution of chosen items has sufficiently high entropy.
We define a class of preference models which are locally learnable, i.e. behavior
over the entire domain can be estimated by only observing behavior in a small
region; this includes models representable by bounded-degree polynomials as well
as functions with a sparse Fourier basis. For this class, we give an algorithm for the
Recommender which obtains Õ(T 3/4 ) regret against all item distributions satisfying two conditions: they are sufficiently diversified, and they are instantaneously
realizable at any history by some distribution over menus. We show that these
conditions are closely connected: all sufficiently high-entropy distributions are
instantaneously realizable at any history of selected items. We also give a set of
negative results justifying our assumptions, in the form of a runtime lower bound
for non-local learning and linear regret lower bounds for alternate benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Suppose you manage an online platform that repeatedly provides menus of recommended content
to visitors, such as sets of videos to watch or items to purchase, aiming to display options which
agents will engage favorably with and yield you high rewards (in the form of ad revenue, watch time,
purchases, or other metrics). In many settings, the preferences of agents are not fixed a priori, but
rather can change as a function of their consumption patterns—the deeper one goes down a content
“rabbit hole”, the further one might be likely to keep going. This “rabbit hole” effect can lead to
(unforeseen) loss of revenue for the platform, as advertisers may later decide that they are not willing
to pay as much for this “rabbit hole” content as they would for other content. The scope of negative
∗
†

http://www.columbia.edu/ aa4931/
wibrown.github.io

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

