Characterization of Excess Risk for Locally Strongly
Convex Population Risk

Mingyang Yi1,2,3∗, Ruoyu Wang1,2∗ , Zhi-Ming Ma1,2
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{yimingyang17, wangruoyu17}@mails.ucas.edu.cn
mazm@amt.ac.cn

Abstract
We establish upper bounds for the expected excess risk of models trained by
proper iterative algorithms which approximate the local minima. Unlike the results
built upon the strong globally strongly convexity or global growth conditions
e.g., PL-inequality, we only require the population risk to be locally strongly
convex around its local minima. Concretely, our bound under convex problems
is of order Õ(1/n). For non-convex problems with d model parameters such that
d/n is smaller than a threshold independent of n, the order of Õ(1/n) can be
maintained if the empirical risk has no spurious local minima with high probability.
√
Moreover, the bound for non-convex problem becomes Õ(1/ n) without such
assumption. Our results are derived via algorithmic stability and characterization
of the empirical risk’s landscape. Compared with the existing algorithmic stability
based results, our bounds are dimensional insensitive and without restrictions on
the algorithm’s implementation, learning rate, and the number of iterations. Our
bounds underscore that with locally strongly convex population risk, the models
trained by any proper iterative algorithm can generalize well, even for non-convex
problems, and d is large.

1

Introduction

The core problem in machine learning is obtaining a model that generalizes well on unseen test data.
The excess risk decides the model’s performance on these unseen data, and it can be decomposed
into optimization and generalization errors. The tool of algorithmic stability [9, 10] has been proven
to be a suitable tool for exploring the excess risk. Roughly speaking, the output of a stable algorithm
is robust to a slight change in the algorithm’s input, i.e., training set. The output of a stable algorithm
has been proved to have controlled excess risk in [9], and the result has been further developed
under some specific algorithms [32, 79, 14, 16, 50, 20] e.g., stochastic gradient descent [61] (SGD).
However, these results have some limitations. The results in [79, 14, 50, 47] are obtained under the
assumption of either global strong convexity or global growth conditions (PL-inequality [42]). On
the other hand, the results in [32, 20] are only applicable to a specific algorithm, i.e., SGD, and their
bounds of generalization error diverge across training which is inconsistent with the observation that
“train longer, generalize better” [34].
To improve these, we provide a unified analysis of the expected excess risk for a generic class of
iterative algorithms without any strong global conditions, i.e., global strong convexity or global
growth conditions in [79, 14, 50]. Concretely, we substitute the strong global conditions with weaker
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

