Where do Models go Wrong? Parameter-Space
Saliency Maps for Explainability

Roman Levin∗†
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Washington
rilevin@uw.edu

Manli Shu∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
manlis@cs.umd.edu

Eitan Borgnia∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
eborgnia2@gmail.com

Furong Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
furongh@cs.umd.edu

Micah Goldblum
Center for Data Science
New York University
goldblum@nyu.edu

Tom Goldstein
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Conventional saliency maps highlight input features to which neural network
predictions are highly sensitive. We take a different approach to saliency, in
which we identify and analyze the network parameters, rather than inputs, which
are responsible for erroneous decisions. We first verify that identified salient
parameters are indeed responsible for misclassification by showing that turning
these parameters off improves predictions on the associated samples, more than
turning off the same number of random or least salient parameters. We further
validate the link between salient parameters and network misclassification errors
by observing that fine-tuning a small number of the most salient parameters on a
single sample results in error correction on other samples which were misclassified
for similar reasons – nearest neighbors in the saliency space. After validating our
parameter-space saliency maps, we demonstrate that samples which cause similar
parameters to malfunction are semantically similar. Further, we introduce an
input-space saliency counterpart which reveals how image features cause specific
network components to malfunction.

1

Introduction

With the widespread deployment of deep neural networks in high-stakes applications such as medical
imaging [20], credit score assessment [49], and facial recognition [10], practitioners need to understand why their models make the decisions they do. In fact, “right to explanation” legislation in the
European Union and the United States dictates that relevant public and private organizations must be
able to justify the decisions their algorithms make [46, 14]. Diagnosing the causes of system failures
is particularly crucial for understanding the flaws and limitations of models we intend to employ.
∗
†

Equal contribution
This work was completed prior to the author joining Amazon

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

