Meta-Reward-Net: Implicitly Differentiable Reward
Learning for Preference-based Reinforcement
Learning
Runze Liu1,2 , Fengshuo Bai3 , Yali Du4,† , Yaodong Yang1,5,†
1
Institute for AI, Peking University, 2 Shandong University
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science
4
King’s College London, 5 Beijing Institute for General AI
†
: Corresponding to yali.du@kcl.ac.uk, yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Setting up a well-designed reward function has been challenging for many reinforcement learning applications. Preference-based reinforcement learning (PbRL)
provides a new framework that avoids reward engineering by leveraging human
preferences (i.e., preferring apples over oranges) as the reward signal. Therefore,
improving the efficacy of data usage for preference data becomes critical. In this
work, we propose Meta-Reward-Net (MRN), a data-efficient PbRL framework
that incorporates bi-level optimization for both reward and policy learning. The
key idea of MRN is to adopt the performance of the Q-function as the learning
target. Based on this, MRN learns the Q-function and the policy in the inner level
while updating the reward function adaptively according to the performance of the
Q-function on the preference data in the outer level. Our experiments on robotic
simulated manipulation tasks and locomotion tasks demonstrate that MRN outperforms prior methods in the case of few preference labels and significantly improves
data efficiency, achieving state-of-the-art in preference-based RL. Ablation studies
further demonstrate that MRN learns a more accurate Q-function compared to
prior work and shows obvious advantages when only a small amount of human
feedback is available. The source code and videos of this project are released at
https://sites.google.com/view/meta-reward-net1 .

1

Introduction

In recent years, reinforcement learning has achieved great success in solving complex sequential
decision-making tasks, such as gaming AI [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], autonomous driving [6, 7], robotic manipulation [8, 9], order dispatching [10], population biology [11], quantitative finance [12], automation
system [13, 14, 15], etc. For common decision making tasks, the goal of the agent is to maximize
the cumulative reward. However, one central challenge to reinforcement learning is how to design
reward functions. On the one hand, the quality of the designed reward function largely depends on the
problem solver’s understanding of task objective, operation logic, and related background knowledge.
Even excellent engineers still need plenty of time to try different methods in complex RL tasks. On
the other hand, there is a problem that the agent might hack the reward function. In policy learning,
the agent utilizes the defect of the reward function to maximize the cumulative reward instead of
solving the expected task. Besides, in human-involved scenarios, the objective of the agent is to
maximize happiness of humans, making it hard to specify a reward function.
1

Work done as a research intern at Peking University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

