Contextual Bandits with Knapsacks
for a Conversion Model
Zhen Li
BNP Paribas, 16 boulevard des Italiens, 75009 Paris, France
zhen.li@bnpparibas.com
Gilles Stoltz
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de mathématiques d’Orsay, 91405, Orsay, France
gilles.stoltz@universite-paris-saclay.fr
HEC Paris, 1 rue de la Libération, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France
stoltz@hec.fr

Abstract
We consider contextual bandits with knapsacks, with an underlying structure
between rewards generated and cost vectors suffered. We do so motivated by
sales with commercial discounts. At each round, given the stochastic i.i.d. context
xt and the arm picked at (corresponding, e.g., to a discount level), a customer
conversion may be obtained, in which case a reward r(a, xt ) is gained and vector
costs c(at , xt ) are suffered (corresponding, e.g., to losses of earnings). Otherwise,
in the absence of a conversion, the reward and costs are null. The reward and
costs achieved are thus coupled through the binary variable measuring conversion
or the absence thereof. This underlying structure between rewards and costs is
different from the linear structures considered by Agrawal and Devanur [2016] (but
we show that the techniques introduced in the present article may also be applied
to the case of these linear structures). The adaptive policies exhibited solve at each
round a linear program based on upper-confidence estimates of the probabilities of
conversion given a and x. This kind√
of policy is most natural and achieves a regret
bound of the typical order (OPT/B) T , where B is the total budget allowed, OPT
is the optimal expected reward achievable by a static policy, and T is the number
of rounds.

1

Introduction and Literature Review

We consider the framework of stochastic multi-armed bandits, which has been extensively studied
since the early works by Thompson [1933] and Robbins [1952]. Two recent (and complementary)
surveys summarizing the latest research in the field were written by Lattimore and Szepesvári [2020]
and Slivkins [2019]. On the one hand, we are particularly interested in the setting of contextual
stochastic multi-armed bandits, preferably with some structural assumptions on the dependency
between rewards and contexts: linear models (again, a rich literature, see, among many others,
Chu et al. [2011] and Abbasi-Yadkori et al. [2011], whose work marked a turning point), and, for
[0, 1]-valued rewards, logistic models (Filippi et al. [2010] and Faury et al. [2020]). On the other
hand, we are also particularly interested in stochastic multi-armed bandits with knapsacks, i.e., with
cumulative vector-cost constraints to be abided by on top of maximizing the accumulated rewards.
The setting was introduced by Badanidiyuru et al. [2013, 2018] and a comprehensive summary of the
results achieved since then may be found in Slivkins [2019, Chapter 10]. The intersection of these
two frameworks of interest is called contextual bandits with knapsacks [CBwK] and is the focus of
the present article.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

