A PAC-Bayesian Generalization Bound for
Equivariant Networks
Arash Behboodi⇤
Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam†
behboodi@qti.qualcomm.com

Gabriele Cesa⇤
Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam†
AMLab, University of Amsterdam
gcesa@qti.qualcomm.com

Taco Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam†
tacos@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Equivariant networks capture the inductive bias about the symmetry of the learning
task by building those symmetries into the model. In this paper, we study how
equivariance relates to generalization error utilizing PAC Bayesian analysis for
equivariant networks, where the transformation laws of feature spaces are determined by group representations. By using perturbation analysis of equivariant
networks in Fourier domain for each layer, we derive norm-based PAC-Bayesian
generalization bounds. The bound characterizes the impact of group size, and multiplicity and degree of irreducible representations on the generalization error and
thereby provide a guideline for selecting them. In general, the bound indicates that
using larger group size in the model improves the generalization error substantiated
by extensive numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Equivariant networks are widely believed to enjoy better generalization properties than their fullyconnected counterparts by including an inductive bias about the invariance of the task. A canonical
example is a convolutional layer for which the translation of the input image (over R2 ) leads to
translation of convolutional features. This construction can be generalized to actions of other groups
including rotation and permutation. Intuitively, the inductive bias about invariance and equivariance
helps to focus on features that matter for the task, and thereby help the generalization. Recently, many
works provide theoretical support for this claim mainly for general equivariant and invariant models.
In this work, however, we focus on a class of equivariant neural networks built using representation
theoretic tools. As in Shawe-Taylor and Wood [1996], Cohen and Welling [2016b], Weiler et al.
[2018a], this approach can build general equivariant networks using irreducible representations of a
group. An open question is about how to design feature spaces and combine representations. Besides,
the question of impact of these choices on generalization remain. On the other hand, while it is rather
well understood how to build a G equivariant model when G is finite, the choice of the group G to
consider is not always obvious. Indeed, using a subgroup H < G smaller than G is usually sufficient
to achieve significant improvements over a non-equivariant baseline. Moreover, the symmetries G
of the data are often continuous, which means G-equivariance can not be built into the model using
a group convolution design as in Cohen and Welling [2016a]. In such cases, the most successful
⇤
†

equal contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

