Alternating Mirror Descent
for Constrained Min-Max Games
Andre Wibisono
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
andre.wibisono@yale.edu

Molei Tao
Department of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
mtao@gatech.edu

Georgios Piliouras
Engineering Systems and Design
Singapore University of Technology and Design
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper we study two-player bilinear zero-sum games with constrained strategy
spaces. An instance of natural occurrences of such constraints is when mixed
strategies are used, which correspond to a probability simplex constraint. We
propose and analyze the alternating mirror descent algorithm, in which each player
takes turns to take action following the mirror descent algorithm for constrained
optimization. We interpret alternating mirror descent as an alternating discretization
of a skew-gradient flow in the dual space, and use tools from convex optimization
and modified energy function to establish an O(K 2/3 ) bound on its average
regret after K iterations. This quantitatively verifies the algorithm’s better behavior
than the simultaneous version of mirror descent algorithm, which is known to
diverge and yields an O(K 1/2 ) average regret bound. In the special case of
an unconstrained setting, our results recover the behavior of alternating gradient
descent algorithm for zero-sum games which was studied in [2].

1

Introduction

Multi-agent systems are ubiquitous in many applications and have gained increasing importance in
practice, from the classical problems in economics and game theory, to the modern applications in
machine learning, in particular via the emergence of learning strategies that can be formulated as minmax games, such as the generative adversarial networks (GANs), robust optimization, reinforcement
learning, and many others [11, 16, 23, 27]. In multi-agent systems, interaction between the agents
can exhibit nontrivial global behavior, even when each agent individually follows a simple action
such as a greedy, optimization-driven strategy [7, 8, 1]. This emergence of complex behavior has
been recognized as one source of difficulties in understanding and controlling the global behavior of
multi-agent game dynamics [24, 15].
Even in the basic setting of unconstrained two-player zero-sum game with bilinear payoffs, this
emergence of non-trivial behavior already presents some difficulties. It is now well-known that if
each player follows a classical greedy strategy, such as gradient descent, and if they make their
actions simultaneously, then their joint trajectories diverge away from equilibrium and lead to
increasing regret; however, the average iterates still converge to the equilibrium and yield a vanishing
average regret with decreasing step size [6, 3, 7]. This behavior challenges our intuition and is in
marked contrast to the case of single-agent optimization, in which greedy strategies are guaranteed to
converge. This leads to variations of the greedy strategy to correct the diverging behavior and help
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

