Federated Learning from Pre-Trained Models:
A Contrastive Learning Approach

1

Yue Tan1 , Guodong Long1 , Jie Ma1 , Lu Liu2 , Tianyi Zhou3,4 , Jing Jiang1
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney
2
Google Research, 3 University of Washington, 4 University of Maryland
yue.tan@student.uts.edu.au, guodong.long@uts.edu.au
jie.ma-5@student.uts.edu.au, lu.liu.cs@icloud.com
tianyizh@uw.edu, jing.jiang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm that allows decentralized clients to learn collaboratively without sharing their private data. However,
excessive computation and communication demands pose challenges to current
FL frameworks, especially when training large-scale models. To prevent these
issues from hindering the deployment of FL systems, we propose a lightweight
framework where clients jointly learn to fuse the representations generated by
multiple fixed pre-trained models rather than training a large-scale model from
scratch. This leads us to a more practical FL problem by considering how to capture
more client-specific and class-relevant information from the pre-trained models
and jointly improve each client’s ability to exploit those off-the-shelf models. In
this work, we design a Federated Prototype-wise Contrastive Learning (FedPCL)
approach which shares knowledge across clients through their class prototypes
and builds client-specific representations in a prototype-wise contrastive manner.
Sharing prototypes rather than learnable model parameters allows each client to
fuse the representations in a personalized way while keeping the shared knowledge
in a compact form for efficient communication. We perform a thorough evaluation
of the proposed FedPCL in the lightweight framework, measuring and visualizing
its ability to fuse various pre-trained models on popular FL datasets.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a promising field of machine learning that allows multiple clients to train
together without sharing their private data [1]. Vanilla FL aims to train a single global model over
all participating clients by periodically synchronizing their model parameters. However, the learned
model usually does not perform well on all clients due to the statistical heterogeneity among local
datasets [2, 3, 4]. Personalized federated learning (PFL) is proposed to solve this problem by training a
personalized model for each client. Recent studies on PFL leverage various techniques to enable more
common underlying information shared across different clients [5, 6, 7]. So far, FL and PFL have
been widely used in computer vision [8], natural language processing [9], graph data mining [10, 11],
and some practical applications, e.g., healthcare [12], finance [13], mobile Internet [14, 15], etc.
However, the models in real-world applications are usually large-scale neural networks which incur
high computation costs and require high communication bandwidth when trained from scratch. This
can make it infeasible to train such models in some practical FL scenarios, e.g., low-resource devicebased federated learning. To alleviate the above issues, we propose a lightweight FL framework that
uses multiple fixed pre-trained backbones as the encoder, followed by learnable layers to fuse the representations generated by the backbones for each client. The proposed framework is capable of fusing
the representations generated by pre-trained models with various architectures or obtained from vari36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

