Error Correction Code Transformer
Yoni Choukroun
Tel Aviv University
choukroun.yoni@gmail.com

Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University
liorwolf@gmail.com

Abstract
Error correction code is a major part of the physical communication layer, ensuring
the reliable transfer of data over noisy channels. Recently, neural decoders were
shown to outperform classical decoding techniques. However, the existing neural
approaches present strong overfitting, due to the exponential training complexity,
or a restrictive inductive bias, due to reliance on Belief Propagation. Recently,
Transformers have become methods of choice in many applications, thanks to
their ability to represent complex interactions between elements. In this work, we
propose to extend for the first time the Transformer architecture to the soft decoding of linear codes at arbitrary block lengths. We encode each channel’s output
dimension to a high dimension for better representation of the bits’ information
to be processed separately. The element-wise processing allows the analysis of
channel output reliability, while the algebraic code and the interaction between
the bits are inserted into the model via an adapted masked self-attention module.
The proposed approach demonstrates the power and flexibility of Transformers and
outperforms existing state-of-the-art neural decoders by large margins, at a fraction
of their time complexity.

1

Introduction

Reliable digital communication is of major importance in the modern information age and involves the
design of codes to be robustly decoded under noisy transmission channels. While optimal decoding
is defined by the NP-hard maximum likelihood rule, the efficient decoding of algebraic block codes
is an open problem. Recently, powerful learning-based techniques have been introduced to this field.
At present, deep learning models that implement parameterized versions of the legacy Belief Propagation (BP) decoders are dominant [19, 20, 18, 21, 4]. This approach is appealing, since the exponential
size of the input space is reduced by ensuring that certain symmetry conditions are met. In this case,
it is sufficient to train the network on a noisy version of the zero codeword. However, this approach
remains extremely restrictive, due to the strong inductive bias induced by the Tanner graph.
Model-free decoders [23, 10, 13] employ variants of generic neural networks and may potentially
benefit from the application of powerful architectures that have emerged in recent years in various
fields. However, such decoders suffer from the curse of dimensionality, since the training grows
exponentially with the number of information bits [31]. A major challenge of model-free decoders,
therefore, is the difficulty of the network in learning the code and identifying its most reliable
components, especially for the basic multi-layer perceptron architectures suggested in the literature.
In this work, we propose a model-free decoder built upon the Transformer architecture [29]. As
far as we can ascertain, this is the first adaptation of Transformers to error correction codes. Our
Transformer employs a high-dimensional scaled element-wise embedding of the input which can
be seen as positional and reliability encoding. Our decoder employs an adapted-mask self-attention
mechanism, in which the interaction between bits follows the code’s parity check matrix, enabling
the incorporation of domain knowledge into the model.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

