CoPur: Certifiably Robust Collaborative Inference via
Feature Purification
Jing Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
jil292@illinois.edu

Chulin Xie
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
chulinx2@illinois.edu

Oluwasanmi O Koyejo
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
& Stanford University & Google Research
sanmi@stanford.edu

Bo Li
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
lbo@illinois.edu

Abstract
Collaborative inference leverages diverse features provided by different agents
(e.g., sensors) for more accurate inference. A common setup is where each agent
sends its embedded features instead of the raw data to the Fusion Center (FC)
for joint prediction. In this setting, we consider inference phase attacks when
a small fraction of agents is compromised. The compromised agent either does
not send embedded features to the FC or sends arbitrary embedded features. To
address this, we propose a certifiably robust COllaborative inference framework via
feature PURification (CoPur), by leveraging the block-sparse nature of adversarial
perturbations on the feature vector, as well as redundancy across the embedded
features (by assuming the overall features lie on an underlying lower dimensional
manifold). We theoretically show that the proposed feature purification method
can robustly recover the true feature vector, despite adversarial corruptions and/or
incomplete observations. We also propose and test an untargeted distributed
feature-flipping attack, which is agnostic to the model, training data, label, as
well as features held by other agents, and is shown to be effective in attacking
state-of-the-art defenses. Experiments on ExtraSensory and NUS-WIDE datasets
show that CoPur significantly outperforms existing defenses in terms of robustness
against targeted and untargeted adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Collaborative inference is an increasingly popular distributed prediction strategy that leverages diverse
features provided by different agents (e.g., sensors) for more accurate inference. For example, in
context-aware music recommendation, the app may wish to recommend more appropriate music based
on the user’s behavioral context (e.g., sleeping, running) (Vaizman et al., 2017). Here, it can leverage
diverse sensors from the user’s smart phone and smart watch, e.g., phone accelerometer, gyroscope,
watch accelerometer, location, audio, phone states (e.g., wifi, ringing mode), and environment sensing
(e.g., light). Thus, by combining information across sensors, much more accurate predictions can be
made. In this work, we study the scenario where Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices send embedded
features (instead of the raw data) to a Fusion Center (FC) for collaborative inference. The IoT devices
do not communicate with each other and may hold quite different raw data (e.g., image, acoustic,
Lidar data, etc). Nevertheless, as a result of distributed inference, the system is vulnerable to attack,
where a subset of sensors are corrupted by an adversary at inference time, e.g., due to the lack of
effective security mechanisms, connection errors, sensor failures, among other issues – this is also a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

