Learning to Follow Instructions in Text-Based Games

Mathieu Tuli, Andrew C. Li, Pashootan Vaezipoor, Toryn Q. Klassen† ,
Scott Sanner, Sheila A. McIlraith†
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada
†
Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society, Toronto, Canada
{mathieutuli,andrewli,pashootan,toryn,sheila}@cs.toronto.edu
ssanner@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Text-based games present a unique class of sequential decision making problem in
which agents interact with a partially observable, simulated environment via actions
and observations conveyed through natural language. Such observations typically
include instructions that, in a reinforcement learning (RL) setting, can directly or
indirectly guide a player towards completing reward-worthy tasks. In this work, we
study the ability of RL agents to follow such instructions. We conduct experiments
that show that the performance of state-of-the-art text-based game agents is largely
unaffected by the presence or absence of such instructions, and that these agents
are typically unable to execute tasks to completion. To further study and address
the task of instruction following, we equip RL agents with an internal structured
representation of natural language instructions in the form of Linear Temporal
Logic (LTL), a formal language that is increasingly used for temporally extended
reward specification in RL. Our framework both supports and highlights the benefit
of understanding the temporal semantics of instructions and in measuring progress
towards achievement of such a temporally extended behaviour. Experiments with
500+ games in TextWorld demonstrate the superior performance of our approach.

1

Introduction

Building AI agents that can understand natural language is an important and longstanding problem
in AI. In recent years, instrumented text-based game (TBG) engines have served as compelling
environments for studying a variety of tasks related to language understanding, affordance extraction,
memory, and sequential decision making (e.g., Côté et al., 2018; Adhikari et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2022). They provide a simulated, partially observable environment where an agent can navigate and
interact with environment objects, receiving observations and administering commands via natural
language. TextWorld (Côté et al., 2018) is a TBG learning environment for training reinforcement
learning (RL) agents. Successful play requires language understanding, effective navigation, memory,
and an ability to follow instructions embedded within the text. Instructions may or may not be directly
bound to reward but can guide an RL agent towards completing tasks and collecting reward.
In this paper we study instruction following in text-based games and propose an approach that
advances the previous state of the art. To this end, we employ the state-of-the-art model-free TBG
RL agent called GATA (Graph Aided Transformer Agent) (Adhikari et al., 2020) that operates in
the TextWorld environment. GATA has made significant advances in performance by augmenting
TBG agents with long-term memory – a critical component of effective game play. Despite GATA’s
improvement over previous baselines, our experiments (see Figure 1) show that GATA performance
is largely unaffected by the presence or absence of instructions, leading us to conclude that GATA is
not effectively following instructions. We also find that while GATA agents are able to garner reward,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

