Object-Category Aware Reinforcement Learning

Qi Yi1,2,3 Rui Zhang2,3 Shaohui Peng2,3,4 Jiaming Guo2,3,4
Xing Hu2 Zidong Du2,3 Xishan Zhang2,3 Qi Guo2 Yunji Chen2,4 †
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
3
Cambricon Technologies 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
yiqi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhangrui, pengshaohui18z, guojiaming18s,
huxing, duzidong, zhangxishan, guoqi, cyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Object-oriented reinforcement learning (OORL) is a promising way to improve the
sample efficiency and generalization ability over standard RL. Recent works that
try to solve OORL tasks without additional feature engineering mainly focus on
learning the object representations and then solving tasks via reasoning based on
these object representations. However, none of these works tries to explicitly model
the inherent similarity between different object instances of the same category.
Objects of the same category should share similar functionalities; therefore, the
category is the most critical property of an object. Following this insight, we propose a novel framework named Object-Category Aware Reinforcement Learning
(OCARL), which utilizes the category information of objects to facilitate both
perception and reasoning. OCARL consists of three parts: (1) Category-Aware
Unsupervised Object Discovery (UOD), which discovers the objects as well as their
corresponding categories; (2) Object-Category Aware Perception, which encodes
the category information and is also robust to the incompleteness of (1) at the
same time; (3) Object-Centric Modular Reasoning, which adopts multiple independent and object-category-specific networks when reasoning based on objects.
Our experiments show that OCARL can improve both the sample efficiency and
generalization in the OORL domain.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved impressive progress in recent years, such as results in
Atari [24] and Go [28] in which RL agents even perform better than human beings. Despite its
successes, conventional RL is also known to be of low sample efficiency [8] and poor generalization
ability [2]. Object-oriented RL (OORL) [10; 6; 23; 17; 39] is a promising way to deal with these
limitations. Inspired by studies in cognitive science [25] that objects are the basic units of recognizing
the world, OORL focuses on learning the invariance of objects’ functionalities in different scenarios
to achieve better generalization ability.
In OORL, the agent’s observation is a set of object representations, and the task can be solved via
reasoning based on these objects. Most previous works [10; 17; 6] in OORL employ hand-crafted
object features given in advance, which require human expertise and result in low generality, limiting
the applications of these methods. Recent works [39; 38; 37] try to broaden the scope of OORL’s
applications by avoiding using additional feature engineering. Their works can be divided into either
top-down approaches [39] which purely rely on reward signals to ground representations to objects,
or bottom-up approaches [38; 37] which utilize unsupervised object discovery (UOD) technologies
to provide structural object representations.
† Corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

