Conformalized Fairness via Quantile Regression

Meichen Liu1 , Lei Ding1 , Dengdeng Yu2 , Wulong Liu3 ,
Linglong Kong1∗, Bei Jiang1∗
1
Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, University of Alberta
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Texas at Arlington
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab Canada
{meichen1,lding1,lkong,bei1}@ualberta.ca
{dengdeng.yu}@uta.edu
{liuwulong}@huawei.com

Abstract
Algorithmic fairness has received increased attention in socially sensitive domains.
While rich literature on mean fairness has been established, research on quantile
fairness remains sparse but vital. To fulfill great needs and advocate the significance
of quantile fairness, we propose a novel framework to learn a real-valued quantile
function under the fairness requirement of Demographic Parity with respect to sensitive attributes, such as race or gender, and thereby derive a reliable fair prediction
interval. Using optimal transport and functional synchronization techniques, we
establish theoretical guarantees of distribution-free coverage and exact fairness for
the induced prediction interval constructed by fair quantiles. A hands-on pipeline
is provided to incorporate flexible quantile regressions with an efficient fairness
adjustment post-processing algorithm. We demonstrate the superior empirical
performance of this approach on several benchmark datasets. Our results show
the model’s ability to uncover the mechanism underlying the fairness-accuracy
trade-off in a wide range of societal and medical applications.

1

Introduction

We are increasingly leaning on machine learning systems to tackle human problems. A primary
objective is to develop intelligent algorithms that can automatically produce accurate decisions which
also enjoy equitable properties, as unintended social bias has been identified as a rising concern in
various fields [13, 18, 14].
As a means of providing quantitative measures of fairness, a number of metrics have been proposed.
These metrics can be categorized into three broad categories: group fairness [3], individual fairness
[25], and causality-based fairness [31]. In contrast to causality-based fairness that requires domain
knowledge to develop a fair causal structure and individual fairness that seeks equality only between
similar individuals, group fairness does not require any prior knowledge and seeks equality for groups
as a whole [6]. Among the metrics defined for group fairness such as equalized odds [9, 29] and
predictive rate parity [10], demographic parity (DP) is generic since it does not allow prediction
results in aggregate to depend on sensitive attributes [1, 21, 12, 39]. In particular, an algorithm is said
to satisfy DP if its prediction is independent of any given sensitive attribute [1].
There have been a number of studies on algorithmic fairness concerning DP [1, 11, 12, 21, 32, 39].
In the context regression analysis, much attention have been paid on conditional mean inferences
[1, 11, 12, 32], few are concerned with conditional quantiles [37, 39]. As real-world data often
exhibit heterogeneity, contain extreme outliers, or do not meet satisfactory distributional assumptions,
∗

Co-Corresponding Authors

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

