Benign Underfitting of Stochastic Gradient Descent

Tomer Koren
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Roi Livni
Department of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Yishay Mansour
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University and Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Uri Sherman
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
urisherman@mail.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We study to what extent may stochastic gradient descent (SGD) be understood
as a “conventional” learning rule that achieves generalization performance by
obtaining a good fit to training data. We consider the fundamental stochastic
convex optimization framework, where (one pass, without-replacement)
SGD is
√
classically known to minimize the population risk at rate 𝑂 (1/ 𝑛), and prove that,
surprisingly, there exist problem instances where the SGD solution exhibits both
empirical risk and generalization gap of Ω (1). Consequently, it turns out that SGD
is not algorithmically stable in any sense, and its generalization ability cannot be
explained by uniform convergence or any other currently known generalization
bound technique for that matter (other than that of its classical analysis). We then
continue to analyze the closely related with-replacement SGD, for which we show
that an analogous phenomenon does not occur and prove that its population risk
does in fact converge at the optimal rate. Finally, we interpret our main results in the
context of without-replacement SGD for finite-sum convex optimization problems,
and derive upper and lower bounds for the multi-epoch regime that significantly
improve upon previously known results.

1

Introduction

Conventional wisdom in statistical learning revolves around what is traditionally known as the
bias-variance dilemma; the classical theory stipulates the quality of fit to the training data be in
a trade-off with model complexity, aiming for a sweet spot where training error is small but yet
representative of performance on independent test data.
This perspective is reflected in the vast majority of generalization bound techniques offered by
contemporary learning theory. Uniform convergence approaches [36, 4] seek capacity control over
the model function class, and employ uniform laws of large numbers to argue convergence of sample
averages to their respective expectations. Algorithmic stability [9, 32] on the other hand, builds
on controlling sensitivity of the learning algorithm to small changes in its input, and provides
algorithm dependent bounds. Nevertheless, despite the conceptual and technical differences between
these two methods, both ultimately produce risk bounds by controlling the training error, and the
generalization gap. The same is true for many other techniques, including sample compression [17, 2],
PAC-Bayes [18, 12], and information theoretic generalization bounds [29, 37, 24], to name a few.
In recent years it has become clear there are other, substantially different, ways to manage the
fit vs. complexity trade-off, that are in a sense incompatible with traditional generalization bound
techniques. Evidently, heavily over-parameterized deep neural networks may be trained to perfectly
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

