CASA: Category-agnostic Skeletal Animal
Reconstruction
Yuefan Wu1∗ Zeyuan Chen1∗ Shaowei Liu2 Zhongzheng Ren2 Shenlong Wang2
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
https://Iven-Wu.github.io/CASA
Input

Output

Re-animation

CASA

Monocular video
(unknown animal)

Shape

Skeleton

Rigging

Novel pose

Figure 1: Given a monocular video with an animal from unknown category, CASA jointly infers the
articulated skeletal shape and rigging through optimization, which can be animated into novel poses.

Abstract
Recovering the skeletal shape of an animal from a monocular video is a longstanding challenge. Prevailing animal reconstruction methods often adopt a control-point
driven animation model and optimize bone transforms individually without considering skeletal topology, yielding unsatisfactory shape and articulation. In contrast,
humans can easily infer the articulation structure of an unknown animal by associating it with a seen articulated character in their memory. Inspired by this
fact, we present CASA, a novel Category-Agnostic Skeletal Animal reconstruction
method consisting of two major components: a video-to-shape retrieval process
and a neural inverse graphics framework. During inference, CASA first retrieves
an articulated shape from a 3D character assets bank so that the input video scores
highly with the rendered image, according to a pretrained language-vision model.
CASA then integrates the retrieved character into an inverse graphics framework
and jointly infers the shape deformation, skeleton structure, and skinning weights
through optimization. Experiments validate the efficacy of CASA regarding shape
reconstruction and articulation. We further demonstrate that the resulting skeletalanimated characters can be used for re-animation.

1

Introduction

Recovering the shape, articulation, and dynamics of animals from images and videos is a longstanding task in computer vision and graphics. Achieving this goal will enable numerous future
applications for 3D modeling and reanimation of animals. Nevertheless, accurately reasoning about
the geometry and kinematics of animals in the wild remains an ambitious problem for three reasons:
1) partial visibility of the captured animal, 2) variability of shape across different categories, and 3)
ambiguity of unknown kinematics. Take the camel in Fig. 1 as an example – to faithfully model it
requires: 1) hallucinating the unobserved (e.g., occluded, back-side) region, 2) recovering its unique
shape and scale, and 3) predicting its kinematic structure.
Remarkable progress has been made in addressing the aforementioned challenges by either exploiting
richer sensor configurations (e.g., multi-view cameras [11, 17] or depth sensors [41, 42, 50]), or by
∗

Indicates equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

