ZSON: Zero-Shot Object-Goal Navigation using
Multimodal Goal Embeddings

Arjun Majumdar∗, Gunjan Aggarwal∗, Bhavika Devnani, Judy Hoffman, Dhruv Batra
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
We present a scalable approach for learning open-world object-goal navigation
(ObjectNav) – the task of asking a virtual robot (agent) to find any instance of
an object in an unexplored environment (e.g., “find a sink”). Our approach is
entirely zero-shot – i.e., it does not require ObjectNav rewards or demonstrations
of any kind. Instead, we train on the image-goal navigation (ImageNav) task, in
which agents find the location where a picture (i.e., goal image) was captured.
Specifically, we encode goal images into a multimodal, semantic embedding space
to enable training semantic-goal navigation (SemanticNav) agents at scale in
unannotated 3D environments (e.g., HM3D). After training, SemanticNav agents
can be instructed to find objects described in free-form natural language (e.g.,
“sink,” “bathroom sink,” etc.) by projecting language goals into the same multimodal, semantic embedding space. As a result, our approach enables open-world
ObjectNav. We extensively evaluate our agents on three ObjectNav datasets
(Gibson, HM3D, and MP3D) and observe absolute improvements in success of
4.2% - 20.0% over existing zero-shot methods. For reference, these gains are
similar or better than the 5% improvement in success between the Habitat 2020
and 2021 ObjectNav challenge winners. In an open-world setting, we discover
that our agents can generalize to compound instructions with a room explicitly
mentioned (e.g., “Find a kitchen sink”) and when the target room can be inferred
(e.g., “Find a sink and a stove”).

1

Introduction

Imagine asking a home assistant robot to find a “flat-head screwdriver” or the “medicine case near
the bathroom sink.” Building such assistive agents is a problem of deep scientific and societal value.
To study this problem systematically, the embodied AI community has rallied around a problem called
object-goal navigation ( ObjectNav) [1]. Given the name of an object (e.g., “chair”), ObjectNav
involves exploring a 3D environment to find any instance of the object. The last few years have
witnessed the development of new environments [2–6], annotated 3D scans [7–9], datasets of human
demonstrations [10], and approaches for ObjectNav [11–16], cumulatively leading to strong progress.
For instance, the entries in the annual Habitat challenge [17] have jumped from 6% success (DD-PPO
baseline in 2020) to 53% success (top entry in ongoing 2022 Habitat Challenge public leaderboard).
While this progress is exciting, we believe that a subtle but insidious assumption has snuck into this
line of work: the closed-world assumption. We started by discussing an open-world scenario where
a person may describe any object in language (e.g., “flat-head screwdriver”), but ObjectNav is
currently formulated over a closed predetermined vocabulary of object categories (“chair”, “bed”,
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

