Accelerating Sparse Convolution with Column
Vector-Wise Sparsity

Yijun Tan1,2 Kai Han3 Kang Zhao3 Xianzhi Yu3 Zidong Du1 Yunji Chen1,2 Yunhe Wang3,∗ Jun Yao3
1
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
tanyj1998@gmail.com, {kai.han,yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Weight sparsity is a promising approach to reducing the model size and computation
cost of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Nevertheless, non-zero weights
often distribute randomly in sparse CNN models, introducing enormous difficulty
in obtaining actual speedup on common hardware (e.g., GPU) over their dense
counterparts. Existing acceleration solutions either require hardware modifications
for irregular memory access support or rely on a partially structured sparsity pattern.
Neither of these methods is capable of achieving fruitful speedup on convolution
layers.
In this work, we propose an algorithm-software co-designed sparse convolution
based on a novel out-vector-wise (OVW) sparse pattern. Building on the insight
that vertical vector integrity can preserve continuous memory access in IM2COL,
the OVW pattern treats a V × 1 vector as unit. To reduce the error caused by
sparsity, we propose an equivalent transformation process, i.e., clustering-based
channel permutation, to gather similar rows together. Experimental evaluations
demonstrate that our method achieves a 1.7× and 3.2× speedup over the SOTA
solution and the dense convolution of ResNet50 on NVIDIA V100 at 75% sparsity,
respectively, with only negligible accuracy loss. Moreover, compared to the SOTA
solution that achieves speedups only on data with 60% sparsity or more, our method
begins to obtain speedups on data with only 10% sparsity.

1

Introduction

Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have yielded astonishing results in many important
domains such as vision [8], and language [18]. With CNN algorithm developing rapidly, CNN models’
storage and computing overhead grow exponentially. To significantly reduce both the computations
and memory access, weight sparsity has been adopted as a promising approach to improve hardware
efficiency.
Despite the success in reducing computations and data access, unconstrained, fine-grained sparsity
fails to bring practical speedups on common GPUs. This is because unstructured sparsity generally
induces tremendous access conflicts and load unbalances, which lowers GPU’s performance. For
example, on NVIDIA V100, the sparse matrix multiplication performs not faster than the dense
matrix multiplication until the sparsity ratio is over 95% [17, 3].
Unfortunately, existing solutions either require hardware modifications or only partially address the
problem by being constrained with structured, coarse-grained sparsity, resulting in high accuracy
loss. The former is to leverage the sparse matrix-matrix multiplication (e.g., SPMM) operation
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

