S3GC: Scalable Self-Supervised Graph Clustering
Fnu Devvrit⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
devvrit.03@gmail.com

Aditya Sinha†
Google Research
Bengaluru, India, 560016
sinhaaditya@google.com

Inderjit Dhillon
Google & Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
isd@google.com

Prateek Jain
Google Research
Bengaluru, India, 560016
prajain@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of clustering graphs with additional side-information of node
features. The problem is extensively studied, and several existing methods exploit
Graph Neural Networks to learn node representations [29]. However, most of the
existing methods focus on generic representations instead of their cluster-ability or
do not scale to large scale graph datasets. In this work, we propose S3 GC which
uses contrastive learning along with Graph Neural Networks and node features
to learn clusterable features. We empirically demonstrate that S3 GC is able to
learn the correct cluster structure even when graph information or node features
are individually not informative enough to learn correct clusters. Finally, using
extensive evaluation on a variety of benchmarks, we demonstrate that S3 GC is able
to significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods in terms of clustering accuracy
– with as much as 5% gain in NMI – while being scalable to graphs of size 100M.

1

Introduction

Graphs are commonplace data structures to store information about entities/users, and have been
investigated for decades [5, 15, 54, 31, 8, 57]. In modern ML systems, the entities/nodes are often
equipped with vector embeddings from different sources. For example, authors are nodes in a citation
graph and can be equipped with embeddings of the title/content of the authored papers [16, 41] as
relevant side information. Owing to the utlility of graphs in large-scale systems, tremendous progress
has been made in the domain of supervised learning from graphs and node features, with Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) headlining the state-of-the-art methods [28, 19, 52]. However, typical realworld ML workflows start with unsupervised data analysis to better understand the data and design
supervised methods accordingly. In fact, many times clustering is a key tool to ensure scalability to
web-scale data [26]. Furthermore, even independent of supervised learning, clustering the graph data
with node features is critical for a variety of real-world applications like recommendation, routing,
triaging [6, 2, 32] etc.
Effective graph clustering methods should be scalable, especially with respect to the number of
nodes, which can be in millions even for a moderate-scale system[57]. Furthermore, in the presence
of side-information, the system should be able to use both the views – node features and graph
information – of the data “effectively". For example, the method should be more accurate than
single-view methods that either consider only the graph information [27] or only the node feature
⇤
†

work done while the author was an intern at Google Research
Now at University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

