Neur2SP: Neural Two-Stage Stochastic Programming

Justin Dumouchelle∗
Rahul Patel∗
Elias B. Khalil†
Merve Bodur
Department of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto

Abstract
Stochastic Programming is a powerful modeling framework for decision-making
under uncertainty. In this work, we tackle two-stage stochastic programs (2SPs),
the most widely used class of stochastic programming models. Solving 2SPs
exactly requires optimizing over an expected value function that is computationally
intractable. Having a mixed-integer linear program (MIP) or a nonlinear program
(NLP) in the second stage further aggravates the intractability, even when specialized algorithms that exploit problem structure are employed. Finding high-quality
(first-stage) solutions – without leveraging problem structure – can be crucial in
such settings. We develop Neur2SP, a new method that approximates the expected
value function via a neural network to obtain a surrogate model that can be solved
more efficiently than the traditional extensive formulation approach. Neur2SP
makes no assumptions about the problem structure, in particular about the secondstage problem, and can be implemented using an off-the-shelf MIP solver. Our
extensive computational experiments on four benchmark 2SP problem classes with
different structures (containing MIP and NLP second-stage problems) demonstrate
the efficiency (time) and efficacy (solution quality) of Neur2SP. In under 1.66 seconds, Neur2SP finds high-quality solutions across all problems even as the number
of scenarios increases, an ideal property that is difficult to have for traditional 2SP
solution techniques. Namely, the most generic baseline method typically requires
minutes to hours to find solutions of comparable quality.

1

Introduction

Mathematical programming consists of a gamut of tools to solve optimization problems. Under
perfect information, i.e., when all the data is deterministic and known, many of these problems can
be solved as a linear program (LP) or mixed-integer linear program (MIP). However, in many cases,
there is a need to deal with problems with partial information. Stochastic programming is one such
framework that allows us to incorporate uncertainty into decision-making.
In this work, we focus our attention on Two-stage Stochastic Programs (2SPs). A 2SP involves two
sets of decisions, namely the first-stage and second-stage (recourse) decisions, to be made before
and after the uncertainty is realized, respectively. Given the (joint) probability distribution of the
random parameters of the problem, the most common objective of 2SP is to optimize the expected
value of the decisions. For example, in a two-stage stochastic facility location problem, first-stage
decisions consist of which facilities should be built whereas second-stage decisions involve assigning
customers to open facilities to meet their stochastic demand, and the overall objective is to minimize
the sum of the cost of the first-stage decisions and the expected cost of the second-stage decisions.
2SPs are usually solved via Sample Average Approximation (SAA), which limits the future uncertainty to a finite set of possible realizations (scenarios). The SAA approximation of a 2SP is a
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author: khalil@mie.utoronto.ca.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

