Rethinking Generalization in Few-Shot Classification

Markus Hiller∗1
2

Rongkai Ma∗2

Mehrtash Harandi2

Tom Drummond1

1
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University
markus.hiller@student.unimelb.edu.au
{rongkai.ma, mehrtash.harandi}@monash.edu
tom.drummond@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Single image-level annotations only correctly describe an often small subset of an
image’s content, particularly when complex real-world scenes are depicted. While
this might be acceptable in many classification scenarios, it poses a significant
challenge for applications where the set of classes differs significantly between
training and test time. In this paper, we take a closer look at the implications
in the context of few-shot learning. Splitting the input samples into patches and
encoding these via the help of Vision Transformers allows us to establish semantic
correspondences between local regions across images and independent of their
respective class. The most informative patch embeddings for the task at hand are
then determined as a function of the support set via online optimization at inference
time, additionally providing visual interpretability of ‘what matters most’ in the
image. We build on recent advances in unsupervised training of networks via
masked image modelling to overcome the lack of fine-grained labels and learn the
more general statistical structure of the data while avoiding negative image-level
annotation influence, aka supervision collapse. Experimental results show the
competitiveness of our approach, achieving new state-of-the-art results on four
popular few-shot classification benchmarks for 5-shot and 1-shot scenarios.

1

Introduction

Images depicting real-world scenes are usually comprised of several different entities, e.g., a family
walking their dog in a park surrounded by trees, or a person patting their dog (Figure 1). Nevertheless,
popular computer vision datasets like ImageNet [39] assign a single image-level annotation to classify
their entire content. Hence, such a label only correctly applies to an often small subset of the actual
image. As a result, models trained on such data via gradient-based methods learn to ignore all
seemingly irrelevant information, particularly entities that occur across differently labelled images.
While this might be acceptable for conventional classification methods that encounter a diverse
number of training examples for all classes they are expected to distinguish, it poses a major but
often overlooked challenge for applications where the set of classes differs between training and test
time. One such affected area is few-shot learning (FSL) where approaches are expected to correctly
classify entirely new classes at test time that have never been encountered during training, just by
being provided with a few (e.g., one or five) samples for each of these new categories. During test
time, entities that have not been part of the set of training classes and have possibly been perceived as
irrelevant might very well be part of the set of test classes – yet, the method was taught to ignore these.
Similarly, a method might overemphasize the importance of certain image patterns learned during
training that are however of no relevance for the test classes, resulting in supervision collapse [9].
∗

Joint first authorship

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

