A Universal Error Measure for Input Predictions
Applied to Online Graph Problems

Giulia Bernardini
University of Trieste, Italy
giulia.bernardini@units.it

Alexander Lindermayr
University of Bremen, Germany
linderal@uni-bremen.de

Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela
La Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
alberto@diag.uniroma1.it

Nicole Megow
University of Bremen, Germany
nicole.megow@uni-bremen.de

Leen Stougie
CWI and Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Leen.Stougie@cwi.nl

Michelle Sweering
CWI, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Michelle.Sweering@cwi.nl

Abstract
We introduce a novel measure for quantifying the error in input predictions. The
error is based on a minimum-cost hyperedge cover in a suitably defined hypergraph
and provides a general template which we apply to online graph problems. The
measure captures errors due to absent predicted requests as well as unpredicted
actual requests; hence, predicted and actual inputs can be of arbitrary size. We
achieve refined performance guarantees for previously studied network design
problems in the online-list model, such as Steiner tree and facility location. Further,
we initiate the study of learning-augmented algorithms for online routing problems,
such as the online traveling salesperson problem and the online dial-a-ride problem,
where (transportation) requests arrive over time (online-time model). We provide a
general algorithmic framework and we give error-dependent performance bounds
that improve upon known worst-case barriers, when given accurate predictions, at
the cost of slightly increased worst-case bounds when given predictions of arbitrary
quality.

1

Introduction

We develop a novel measure for quantifying the error in input predictions and apply it to derive
error-dependent performance guarantees of algorithms for online metric graph problems. Online
graph problems are among the most fundamental online optimization problems, where an initially
unknown input is revealed incrementally. The two main paradigms for the incremental information
release are the online-time model and the online-list model. In the online-time model, initially
unknown requests are revealed over time and can be served any time, whereas in the online-list model,
requests are revealed one-by-one and must be served immediately before the next request appears. In
this work, we address specifically the following online routing and network design problems.
Online-time routing problems In the classical Online Traveling Salesperson Problem (O LTSP) and
Online Dial-a-Ride Problem (O L DARP), a server can move at unit speed in a given metric space.
Transportation requests appear online over time, each defining a start and end point in the metric
space (in the TSP both points are equal). The task is to determine a tour to serve all requests (in
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

