The Neural Covariance SDE: Shaped Inﬁnite
Depth-and-Width Networks at Initialization

Mufan (Bill) Li
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Mihai Nica
University of Guelph,
Vector Institute

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Abstract
The logit outputs of a feedforward neural network at initialization are conditionally Gaussian, given a random covariance matrix deﬁned by the penultimate layer.
In this work, we study the distribution of this random matrix. Recent work has
shown that shaping the activation function as network depth grows large is necessary for this covariance matrix to be non-degenerate. However, the current inﬁnitewidth-style understanding of this shaping method is unsatisfactory for large depth:
inﬁnite-width analyses ignore the microscopic ﬂuctuations from layer to layer, but
these ﬂuctuations accumulate over many layers.
To overcome this shortcoming, we study the random covariance matrix in the
shaped inﬁnite-depth-and-width limit. We identify the precise scaling of the activation function necessary to arrive at a non-trivial limit, and show that the random
covariance matrix is governed by a stochastic differential equation (SDE) that we
call the Neural Covariance SDE. Using simulations, we show that the SDE closely
matches the distribution of the random covariance matrix of ﬁnite networks. Additionally, we recover an if-and-only-if condition for exploding and vanishing norms
of large shaped networks based on the activation function.

1

Introduction

Of the many milestones in deep learning theory, the precise characterization of the inﬁnite-width
limit of neural networks at initialization as a Gaussian process with a non-random covariance matrix [1, 2] was a turning point. The so-called Neural Network Gaussian process (NNGP) theory
laid the mathematical foundation to study various limiting training dynamics under gradient descent
[3–12]. The Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) limit formed the foundation for a rush of theoretical
work, including advances in our understanding of generalization for wide networks [13–15]. Besides the NTK limit, the inﬁnite-width mean-ﬁeld limit was developed [16–19], where the different
parameterization demonstrates beneﬁts for feature learning and hyperparameter tuning [20–22].
Fundamentally, the inﬁnite-width paradigm derives results from the assumption that the depth of the
network is held ﬁxed while the widths of all layers grow to inﬁnity. Unfortunately, this assumption
can be problematic for modeling real-world networks, as the microscopic ﬂuctuations from layer to
layer are neglected in this limit (see Figure 1). In particular, inﬁnite-width predictions are shown to
be poor approximations of real networks unless the depth is much less than the width [23, 24].
Impressive achievements of deep networks with billions of parameters crystallize the importance of
understanding extremely large, deep neural networks (DNNs). An alternative to the inﬁnite-width
paradigm is the inﬁnite-depth-and-width paradigm. In this setting, both the network depth d and the
width n of each layer are simultaneously scaled to inﬁnity, while their relative ratio d/n remains
ﬁxed [23, 25–29]. Recent work also explores using d/n as an effective perturbation parameter [30–
Correspondence: mufan.li@mail.utoronto.ca; nicam@uoguelph.ca; daniel.roy@utoronto.ca.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

