Efficiently Factorizing Boolean Matrices
using Proximal Gradient Descent
Sebastian Dalleiger

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
sebastian.dalleiger@cispa.de

Jilles Vreeken

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
jv@cispa.de

Abstract
Addressing the interpretability problem of NMF on Boolean data, Boolean Matrix
Factorization (BMF) uses Boolean algebra to decompose the input into low-rank
Boolean factor matrices. These matrices are highly interpretable and very useful
in practice, but they come at the high computational cost of solving an NP-hard
combinatorial optimization problem. To reduce the computational burden, we
propose to relax BMF continuously using a novel elastic-binary regularizer, from
which we derive a proximal gradient algorithm. Through an extensive set of
experiments, we demonstrate that our method works well in practice: On synthetic
data, we show that it converges quickly, recovers the ground truth precisely, and
estimates the simulated rank exactly. On real-world data, we improve upon the state
of the art in recall, loss, and runtime, and a case study from the medical domain
confirms that our results are easily interpretable and semantically meaningful.

1

Introduction

Discovering groups in data and expressing them in terms of common concepts is a central problem in
many scientific domains and business applications, including cancer genomics [23], neuroscience
[13], and recommender systems [18]. This problem is often addressed using variants of matrix
factorization, a family of methods that decompose the target matrix into a set of typically lowrank factor matrices whose product approximates the input well. Prominent examples of matrix
factorization are Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) [10], Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
[10], and Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) [31, 21, 22]. These methods differ in how they
constrain the matrices involved: SVD and PCA require orthogonal factors, while NMF constrains the
target matrix and the factors to be nonnegative.
SVD, PCA, and NMF achieve interpretable results—unless the data is Boolean, which is ubiquitous in
the real world. In this case, their results are hard to interpret directly because the input domain differs
from the output domain, such that post-processing is required to extract useful information. Boolean
Matrix Factorization (BMF) addresses this problem by seeking two low-rank Boolean factor matrices
whose Boolean product is close to the Boolean target matrix [24]. The output matrices, now lying in
the same domain as the input, are interpretable and useful, but they come at the computational cost of
solving an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem [30, 24, 25]. To make BMF applicable in
practice, we need efficient approximation algorithms.
There are many ways to approximate BMF—for example, by exploiting its underlying combinatorial
or spatial structure [24, 6, 5], using probabilistic inference [37, 35, 36], or solving the related BiClustering problem [28, 29]. Although these approaches achieve impressive results, they fall short
when the input data is large and noisy. Hence, we take a different approach to overcome BMF’s
computational barrier. Starting from an NMF-like optimization problem, we derive a continuous
relaxation of the original BMF formulation that allows intermediate solutions to be real-valued.
Inspired by the elastic-net regularizer [43], we introduce the novel elastic binary (E LB) regularizer to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

