Estimating and Explaining Model Performance When
Both Covariates and Labels Shift

1

Lingjiao Chen1 , Matei Zaharia1 , James Zou1,2
Department of Computer Sciences, 2 Department of Biomedical Data Science
Stanford University

Abstract
Deployed machine learning (ML) models often encounter new user data that differs
from their training data. Therefore, estimating how well a given model might
perform on the new data is an important step toward reliable ML applications.
This is very challenging, however, as the data distribution can change in flexible
ways, and we may not have any labels on the new data, which is often the case
in monitoring settings. In this paper, we propose a new distribution shift model,
Sparse Joint Shift (SJS), which considers the joint shift of both labels and a few
features. This unifies and generalizes several existing shift models including label
shift and sparse covariate shift, where only marginal feature or label distribution
shifts are considered. We describe mathematical conditions under which SJS is
identifiable. We further propose SEES, an algorithmic framework to characterize
the distribution shift under SJS and to estimate a model’s performance on new
data without any labels. We conduct extensive experiments on several real-world
datasets with various ML models. Across different datasets and distribution shifts,
SEES achieves significant (up to an order of magnitude) shift estimation error
improvements over existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Deployed machine learning (ML) models often face new data different from their training data. For
example, mismatch of deployment-development data in geographical locations [21], demographic
features [16], and label balance [20] is widely observed and known to affect model performance.
Thus, estimating and explaining how a model’s performance changes on the new data is an important
step toward reliable ML applications.
Estimating and explaining performance shift is challenging for several reasons, however. One major
challenge is that the data distribution might shift in flexible ways. Another obstacle is that we
often do not have labels on the new data, especially in ML monitoring applications. Without any
assumption on the distribution shift, it’s impossible to estimate how well the model would perform on
the unlabeled new data. Previous work often assumes (i) label shift [22], where feature distributions
conditional on the labels are fixed, or (ii) covariate shift [32], where label distributions conditional
on features stay the same. However, we often do not know whether the real data shift is limited to
label or covariate shift, and naively applying estimation methods designed for one shift may produce
inaccurate assessments [26]. Moreover, labels and features may shift simultaneously in practice,
invalidating these common assumptions.
To tackle the above challenges, here we propose a new distribution shift model, Sparse Joint Shift
(SJS), to consider the joint shift of both labels and a few features. SJS assumes labels and a few
features shift, but the remaining features’ distribution conditional on the shifted features and labels
is fixed. This unifies and generalizes sparse covariate shift and label shift: both of them are SJS,
but some SJS is not label or sparse covariate shift (Figure 1). We describe mathematical conditions
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

