ComMU: Dataset for Combinatorial Music Generation
Lee Hyun∗ †
Pozalabs
hyun@pozalabs.com

Hyolim Kang
Yonsei Univ.
hyolimkang@yonsei.ac.kr
Kwanho Park
Pozalabs
kwanho@pozalabs.com

Taehyun Kim∗
Pozalabs, Yonsei Univ.
taehyun@pozalabs.com
kimth0101@yonsei.ac.kr
Minjoo Ki
Yonsei Univ.
minjoo@yonsei.ac.kr

Sharang Han
Pozalabs
sharang@pozalabs.com

Hyeonchan Hwang
Pozalabs
hyeonchan@pozalabs.com
Seon Joo Kim
Pozalabs, Yonsei Univ.
seonjoo@pozalabs.com
seonjookim@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Commercial adoption of automatic music composition requires the capability of
generating diverse and high-quality music suitable for the desired context (e.g.,
music for romantic movies, action games, restaurants, etc.). In this paper, we
introduce combinatorial music generation, a new task to create varying background
music based on given conditions. Combinatorial music generation creates short
samples of music with rich musical metadata, and combines them to produce a
complete music. In addition, we introduce ComMU, the first symbolic music
dataset consisting of short music samples and their corresponding 12 musical
metadata for combinatorial music generation. Notable properties of ComMU
are that (1) dataset is manually constructed by professional composers with an
objective guideline that induces regularity, and (2) it has 12 musical metadata that
embraces composers’ intentions. Our results show that we can generate diverse
high-quality music only with metadata, and that our unique metadata such as
track-role and extended chord quality improves the capacity of the automatic
composition. We highly recommend watching our video before reading the paper
(https://pozalabs.github.io/ComMU/).

1

Introduction

Although musical composition is a creative process, algorithmic approaches for automatic music
composition have been continuously studied [1, 2]. Recently, deep learning has shown great potential
in composition. Bretan et al. [3] and Jaques et al. [4] have introduced deep sequence models into
generating music sequences. After the seminal works, prior works [5–8] have proposed conditional
music generation with initial sequences and musical metadata using language models. Such deep
models have improved the quality of the composition and can create authentic music.
While the models continue to improve and generate authentic music, creating music on a commercially
usable level still remains as an issue. Popular music is mostly a homophony in the sense that one track
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Work done at Pozalabs, now at POSTECH EE

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

