ETAB: A Benchmark Suite for Visual Representation
Learning in Echocardiography

Ahmed M. Alaa
UC Berkeley and UCSF
Berkeley, CA
amalaa@berkeley.edu

Anthony Philippakis
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
Cambridge, MA

David Sontag
MIT CSAIL and IMES
Cambridge, MA
dsontag@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Echocardiography is one of the most commonly used diagnostic imaging modalities
in cardiology. Application of deep learning models to echocardiograms can enable
automated identification of cardiac structures, estimation of cardiac function, and
prediction of clinical outcomes. However, a major hindrance to realizing the full
potential of deep learning is the lack of large-scale, fully curated and annotated data
sets required for supervised training. High-quality pre-trained representations that
can transfer useful visual features of echocardiograms to downstream tasks can help
adapt deep learning models to new setups using fewer examples. In this paper, we
design a suite of benchmarks that can be used to pre-train and evaluate echocardiographic representations with respect to various clinically-relevant tasks using
publicly accessible data sets. In addition, we develop a unified evaluation protocol—
which we call the echocardiographic task adaptation benchmark (ETAB)—that
measures how well a visual representation of echocardiograms generalizes to common downstream tasks of interest. We use our benchmarking framework to evaluate
state-of-the-art vision modeling pipelines. We envision that our standardized, publicly accessible benchmarks would encourage future research and expedite progress
in applying deep learning to high-impact problems in cardiovascular medicine.
EchoNet

CAMUS

Unity

TMED

Transfer learning
benchmark

Dataset

Source task
Dataset: EchoNet
View: AP4CH

PLAX/AP4CH views

AP4CH/AP2CH views

PLAX/AP4CH views

PLAS/PSAX views

Learned
representation

Target task

Annotations

Views

Task: LV segmentation

Dataset: CAMUS
View: AP2CH

Left ventricle traces

Myocardial traces

LV measurements

View annotations

Task: Myocardial
segmentation

Figure 1: Visual task adaptation for echocardiography. Using multiple open- and public-access echocardiogram data sets, we develop a suite of benchmarks for representation and transfer learning in echocardiography.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

