A Spectral Approach to Item Response Theory

Duc Nguyen

Anderson Y. Zhang

Department of Computer and Information Science

Department of Statistics and Data Science

University of Pennsylvania

University of Pennsylvania

mdnguyen@seas.upenn.edu

ayz@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
The Rasch model is one of the most fundamental models in item response theory
and has wide-ranging applications from education testing to recommendation
systems. In a universe with n users and m items, the Rasch model assumes that
the binary response Xli ∈ {0, 1} of a user l with parameter θl∗ to an item i with
parameter βi∗ (e.g., a user likes a movie, a student correctly solves a problem) is
distributed as P(Xli = 1) = 1/(1 + exp (−(θl∗ − βi∗ ))). In this paper, we propose
a new item estimation algorithm for this celebrated model (i.e., to estimate β ∗ ).
The core of our algorithm is the computation of the stationary distribution of a
Markov chain defined on an item-item graph. We complement our algorithmic
contributions with finite-sample error guarantees, the first of their kind in the
literature, showing that our algorithm is consistent and enjoys favorable optimality
properties. We discuss practical modifications to accelerate and robustify the
algorithm that practitioners can adopt. Experiments on synthetic and real-life
datasets, ranging from small education testing datasets to large recommendation
systems datasets show that our algorithm is scalable, accurate, and competitive
with the most commonly used methods in the literature.

1

Introduction

Item response theory (IRT) is the study of the relationship between latent characteristics (a student’s
ability versus a test’s difficulty or a user’s taste versus a movie’s features) and the manifestations
of these characteristics (a student’s performance on a test or a user’s rating of a movie). Originally
developed by the psychometric community [45, 51], item response theory has been applied to diverse
settings such as education testing [37], crowdsourcing [54], recommendation systems [12], finance
[50] and marketing research [10].
One of the most fundamental models in IRT is the Rasch model [45]. It models the binary response
Xli ∈ {0, 1} of user l with latent parameter θl∗ ∈ R to item i with latent parameter βi∗ ∈ R by
P(Xli = 1) =

1
.
1 + exp (−(θl∗ − βi∗ ))

(1)

For example, in education testing, θl∗ corresponds to the ability of student l, βi∗ the difficulty of
problem i and Xli = 1 if the student correctly solves the problem. Binary response data has grown
abundantly in modern domains: Netflix famously switched from a 5-star rating system to a binary
like/dislike feedback system, data on students’ engagement and performance grows significantly as
education moves online during the pandemic.
Traditionally, the goal of estimation under the Rasch model is to recover the item parameters β ∗ . In
education testing, an estimate of the item parameters can be used to calibrate scores across different
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

