Learning on the Edge: Online Learning with
Stochastic Feedback Graphs

Emmanuel Esposito∗
Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
& Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy
emmanuel@emmanuelesposito.it

Federico Fusco∗
Dept. of Computer, Control
and Management Engineering
Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy
fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it

Dirk van der Hoeven∗
Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
dirk@dirkvanderhoeven.com

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Dept. of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Abstract
The framework of feedback graphs is a generalization of sequential decisionmaking with bandit or full information feedback. In this work, we study
an extension where the directed feedback graph is stochastic, following
a distribution similar to the classical Erdős-Rényi model. Specifically, in
each round every edge in the graph is either realized or not with a distinct probability
for each edge. We prove nearly optimal regret bounds of
p

order min minε (αε /ε)T , minε (δε /ε)1/3 T 2/3 (ignoring logarithmic factors), where αε and δε are graph-theoretic quantities measured on the
support of the stochastic feedback graph G with edge probabilities thresholded at ε. Our result, which holds without any preliminary knowledge
about G, requires the learner to observe only the realized out-neighborhood
of the chosen action. When the learner is allowed to observe the realization
of the entire graph (but only the losses in the out-neighborhood of the
chosen action), we derive a more efficient algorithm featuring a dependence
on weighted versions of the independence and weak domination numbers
that exhibits improved bounds for some special cases.

1

Introduction

In this work we study an online learning framework for decision-making with partial feedback.
In each decision round, the learner chooses an action in a fixed set and is charged a loss.
In our setting, the loss of any action in all decision rounds is preliminarily chosen by an
adversary, but the feedback received by the learner at the end of each round t is stochastic.
More specifically, the loss of each action i (including It , the one selected by the learner at
round t) is independently observed with a certain probability p(It , i), where the probabilities
p(i, j) for all pairs i, j are fixed but unknown.
This feedback model can be viewed as a stochastic version of the feedback graph model for
online learning [Mannor and Shamir, 2011], where the feedback received by the learner at
the end of each round is determined by a directed graph defined over the set of actions.
In this model, the learner deterministically observes the losses of all the actions in the
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

