Generalizing Bayesian Optimization with
Decision-theoretic Entropies
Willie Neiswanger⇤ , Lantao Yu⇤ , Shengjia Zhao, Chenlin Meng, Stefano Ermon
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
{neiswanger,lantaoyu,sjzhao,chenlin,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular method for efficiently inferring optima of
an expensive black-box function via a sequence of queries. Existing informationtheoretic BO procedures aim to make queries that most reduce the uncertainty
about optima, where the uncertainty is captured by Shannon entropy. However,
an optimal measure of uncertainty would, ideally, factor in how we intend to use
the inferred quantity in some downstream procedure. In this paper, we instead
consider a generalization of Shannon entropy from work in statistical decision
theory [13, 39], which contains a broad class of uncertainty measures parameterized
by a problem-specific loss function corresponding to a downstream task. We first
show that special cases of this entropy lead to popular acquisition functions used in
BO procedures such as knowledge gradient, expected improvement, and entropy
search. We then show how alternative choices for the loss yield a flexible family
of acquisition functions that can be customized for use in novel optimization
settings. Additionally, we develop gradient-based methods to efficiently optimize
our proposed family of acquisition functions, and demonstrate strong empirical
performance on a diverse set of sequential decision making tasks, including variants
of top-k optimization, multi-level set estimation, and sequence search2 .

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular method for efficient global optimization of an expensive
black-box function, which leverages a probabilistic model to judiciously choose a sequence of
function queries. In BO, there are a few key paradigms that motivate existing methodologies. One
paradigm is decision-theoretic BO, which includes methods such as knowledge gradient [16] and
expected improvement [33, 25]. At each iteration of BO, these methods aim to make a query that
maximally increases the expected value, under the posterior, of a final estimate of the optima (sometimes referred to as a terminal action). Another common paradigm is based on maximal uncertainty
reduction and includes information-based BO methods such as the family of entropy search methods
[22, 24, 47, 35]. At each iteration of BO, these methods aim to make a query that most reduces the
uncertainty, under the posterior, about a quantity of interest (such as the location of the optima).
In the uncertainty-reduction paradigm, the information-based methods have predominantly used
Shannon entropy as the measure of uncertainty. While Shannon entropy is one measure of uncertainty
that we could aim to reduce at each iteration of BO, it is not the only measure, and it is not necessarily
the most ideal measure for every optimization task. For instance, an optimal uncertainty function
would, ideally, factor in how we intend to use the final uncertainty about an inferred quantity in some
downstream procedure.
⇤

2

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
For additional details, see the project website: https://willieneis.github.io/hes-website

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

