Stability and Generalization for Markov Chain
Stochastic Gradient Methods
Puyu Wang1 Yunwen Lei2 Yiming Ying3 Ding-Xuan Zhou4
Liu Bie Ju Centre for Mathematical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong
2
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
3
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, State University of New York at Albany
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Sydney
puyuwang@cityu.edu.hk, y.lei@hbam.ac.uk,
yying@albany.edu, dingxuan.zhou@sydney.edu.au
1

Abstract
Recently there is a large amount of work devoted to the study of Markov chain
stochastic gradient methods (MC-SGMs) which mainly focus on their convergence
analysis for solving minimization problems. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive generalization analysis of MC-SGMs for both minimization and minimax
problems through the lens of algorithmic stability in the framework of statistical
learning theory. For empirical risk minimization (ERM) problems, we establish the
optimal excess population risk bounds for both smooth and non-smooth cases by
introducing on-average argument stability. For minimax problems, we develop a
quantitative connection between on-average argument stability and generalization
error which extends the existing results for uniform stability [38]. We further develop the first nearly optimal convergence rates for convex-concave problems both
in expectation and with high probability, which, combined with our stability results,
show that the optimal generalization bounds can be attained for both smooth and
non-smooth cases. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first generalization
analysis of SGMs when the gradients are sampled from a Markov process.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient methods (SGMs) have been the workhorse behind the success of many machine
learning (ML) algorithms due to their simplicity and high efficiency. As opposed to the deterministic
(full) gradient methods, SGMs only require a small batch of random example(s) to update the model
parameters at each iteration, making them amenable for solving large-scale problems.
There are mainly two notable types of SGMs which are inherent for different learning problems. In
particular, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is widely used for solving the empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem and the theoretical convergence has been extensively studied [e.g.,
5, 17, 21, 37, 42, 43, 53, 57, 73, 80, 82, 86]. Concomitantly, the minimax problems instantiate
many ML problems such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [2, 30], AUC maximization
[29, 45, 81], and algorithmic fairness [16, 41, 52, 51]. Stochastic gradient descent ascent (SGDA) is
an off-the-shelf algorithm for solving minimax problems. The convergence of SGDA and its variants
is also widely studied in the literature [e.g., 44, 49, 54, 56].
On the other important front, the ultimate goal of learning is to achieve good generalization from the
training data to the unknown test data. Along this line, generalization analysis of SGMs has attracted
considerable attention using the algorithmic stability approach [11, 24]. In particular, stability and
generalization of SGD have been studied using the uniform argument stability [6, 7, 13, 32, 36]
The corresponding author is Yiming Ying.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

