Operator Splitting Value Iteration

Amin Rakhsha1,2

Andrew Wang1,2

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh3

Amir-massoud Farahmand2,1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
2
Vector Institute 3 Google Research

Abstract
We introduce new planning and reinforcement learning algorithms for discounted
MDPs that utilize an approximate model of the environment to accelerate the
convergence of the value function. Inspired by the splitting approach in numerical
linear algebra, we introduce Operator Splitting Value Iteration (OS-VI) for both
Policy Evaluation and Control problems. OS-VI achieves a much faster convergence rate when the model is accurate enough. We also introduce a sample-based
version of the algorithm called OS-Dyna. Unlike the traditional Dyna architecture, OS-Dyna still converges to the correct value function in presence of model
approximation error.

1

Introduction

Consider a planning problem for a discounted MDP with dynamics P. Suppose that we have
access to an approximate model P̂ ≈ P as well. For example, P might be a high-fidelity, but
slow, simulator, and P̂ is a lower-fidelity, but fast, simulator. Or in the context of model-based
reinforcement learning (MBRL), P is the unknown dynamics of a real-world system, from which we
can only acquire expensive samples, and P̂ is a learned model, from which samples can be cheaply
acquired. Can we use this approximate model P̂ to accelerate the computation of the value function
of a policy π (Policy Evaluation (PE) problem) or the optimal value function (Control problem)?
The Value Iteration (VI) algorithm and its approximate variant are fundamental algorithms in Dynamic Programming that can find the (approximate) value of a policy or the optimal value function.
They are also the backbone of many reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms such as Temporal
Difference Learning [Sutton, 1988], Fitted Value Iteration [Gordon, 1995, Ernst et al., 2005, Munos
and Szepesvári, 2008], and Deep Q Network [Mnih et al., 2015]. Value Iteration, however, can be
slow when the discount factor is close to 1, as its convergence rate is O(γ k ). Moreover, even though
we could use VI using P̂ instead of P to avoid expensive queries to P, the obtained value function
would converge to a solution different from the value function of the original MDP.
This paper proposes an algorithm called Operator Splitting Value Iteration (OS-VI) that benefits from
an approximate model P̂ to potentially accelerate the convergence of the value function sequence to
the value function with respect to (w.r.t.) the true model P (Section 3). This algorithm is for both
PE (Section 3.1) and Control (Section 3.2) problems. The acceleration is not uniform though, and
depends on how close P̂ is to P (Section 4).
A key inspiration behind OS-VI is the (matrix) splitting approach in the numerical linear algebra,
which is used to iteratively solve large linear systems of equations [Varga, 2000, Saad, 2003, Golub
and Van Loan, 2013]. With a proper choice of splitting, one may change the convergence rate of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

