Geodesic Graph Neural Network for Efficient Graph
Representation Learning

Lecheng Kong
Washington University in St. Louis
jerry.kong@wustl.edu

Yixin Chen
Washington University in St. Louis
ychen25@wustl.edu

Muhan Zhang
Peking University
muhan@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently been applied to graph learning tasks
and achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) results. However, many competitive methods
run GNNs multiple times with subgraph extraction and customized labeling to
capture information that is hard for normal GNNs to learn. Such operations are timeconsuming and do not scale to large graphs. In this paper, we propose an efficient
GNN framework called Geodesic GNN (GDGNN) that requires only one GNN run
and injects conditional relationships between nodes into the model without labeling.
This strategy effectively reduces the runtime of subgraph methods. Specifically,
we view the shortest paths between two nodes as the spatial graph context of
the neighborhood around them. The GNN embeddings of nodes on the shortest
paths are used to generate geodesic representations. Conditioned on the geodesic
representations, GDGNN can generate node, link, and graph representations that
carry much richer structural information than plain GNNs. We theoretically prove
that GDGNN is more powerful than plain GNNs. We present experimental results
to show that GDGNN achieves highly competitive performance with SOTA GNN
models on various graph learning tasks while taking significantly less time.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Network (GNN) is a type of neural network that learns from relational data. With the
emergence of large-scale network data, it can be applied to solve many real-world problems, including
recommender systems [44], protein structure modeling [15], and knowledge graph completion [2].
The growing and versatile nature of graph data pose great challenges to GNN algorithms both in their
performance and their efficiency.
GNNs use message passing to propagate features between connected nodes in the graph, and the
nodes aggregate their received messages to generate representations that encode the graph structure
and feature information around them. These representations can be combined to form multi-node
structural representations. Because GNNs are efficient and have great generalizability, they are widely
employed in node-level, edge-level, and graph-level tasks. A part of the power of GNNs comes from
the fact that they resemble the process of the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) algorithm
[22]. The algorithm encodes subtrees rooted from each node through an iterative node coloring
process, and if two nodes have the same color, they have the same rooted subtree and should have very
similar surrounding graph structures. However, as pointed out by Xu et al. [45], GNN’s expressive
power is also upper-bounded by the 1-WL test. Specifically, GNN is not able to differentiate nodes
that have exactly the same subtrees but have different substructures. For example, consider the graph
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

