Algorithms with Prediction Portfolios

Michael Dinitz
Johns Hopkins University
mdinitz@cs.jhu.edu

Sungjin Im
UC Merced
sim3@ucmerced.edu

Benjamin Moseley
Carnegie Mellon University
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu

Thomas Lavastida∗
University of Texas at Dallas
thomas.lavastida@utdallas.edu
Sergei Vassilvitskii
Google Research
sergeiv@google.com

Abstract
The research area of algorithms with predictions has seen recent success showing
how to incorporate machine learning into algorithm design to improve performance
when the predictions are correct, while retaining worst-case guarantees when they
are not. Most previous work has assumed that the algorithm has access to a single
predictor. However, in practice, there are many machine learning methods available,
often with incomparable generalization guarantees, making it hard to pick the best
method a priori. In this work we consider scenarios where multiple predictors are
available to the algorithm and the question is how to best utilize them.
Ideally, we would like the algorithm’s performance to depend on the quality of the
best predictor. However, utilizing more predictions comes with a cost, since we now
have to identify which prediction is the best. We study the use of multiple predictors
for a number of fundamental problems, including matching, load balancing, and
non-clairvoyant scheduling, which have been well-studied in the single predictor
setting. For each of these problems we introduce new algorithms that take advantage
of multiple predictors, and prove bounds on the resulting performance.

1

Introduction

An exciting recent line of research attempts to go beyond traditional worst-case analysis of algorithms
by equipping algorithms with machine-learned predictions. The hope is that these predictions
allow the algorithm to circumvent worst case lower bounds when the predictions are good, and
approximately match them otherwise. The precise definitions and guarantees vary with different
settings, but there have been significant successes in applying this framework for many different
algorithmic problems, ranging from general online problems to classical graph algorithms (see
Section 1.2 for a more detailed discussion of related work, and [33] for a survey). In all of these
settings it turns out to be possible to define a “prediction” where the “quality” of the algorithm
(competitive ratio, running time, etc.) depends the “error” of the prediction. Moreover, in at least
some of these settings, it has been further shown that this prediction is actually learnable with a small
number of samples, usually via standard ERM methods [18].
Previous work has shown the power of accurate predictions, and there are numerous examples
showing improved performance in both theory and practice. However, developing accurate predictors
remains an art, and a single predictor may not capture all of the subtleties of the instance space.
Recently, researchers have turned to working with portfolios of predictors: instead of training a single
model, train multiple models, with the hope that one of them will give good guarantees.
∗

Work was done while the author was at Carnegie Mellon University.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

