Zonotope Domains for Lagrangian Neural Network
Verification
Matt Jordan∗
UT Austin
mjordan@cs.utexas.edu

Jonathan Hayase∗
University of Washington
jhayase@cs.washington.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
UT Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Sewoong Oh
University of Washington
sewoong@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Neural network verification aims to provide provable bounds for the output of a
neural network for a given input range. Notable prior works in this domain have
either generated bounds using abstract domains, which preserve some dependency
between intermediate neurons in the network; or framed verification as an optimization problem and solved a relaxation using Lagrangian methods. A key drawback
of the latter technique is that each neuron is treated independently, thereby ignoring
important neuron interactions. We provide an approach that merges these two
threads and uses zonotopes within a Lagrangian decomposition. Crucially, we can
decompose the problem of verifying a deep neural network into the verification of
many 2-layer neural networks. While each of these problems is provably hard, we
provide efficient relaxation methods that are amenable to efficient dual ascent procedures. Our technique yields bounds that improve upon both linear programming
and Lagrangian-based verification techniques in both time and bound tightness.

1

Introduction

With the growing prevalence of machine learning in real-world applications, the brittleness of deep
learning systems poses an even greater threat. It is well-known that deep neural networks are
vulnerable to adversarial examples, where a minor change in the input to a network can cause a major
change in the output [1]. There is a long history of defense techniques being proposed to improve
the robustness of a network, only to be completely broken shortly thereafter [2]. This has inspired
researchers to focus instead on neural network verification, which, for a given network and a range of
input, aims to verify whether a certain property is satisfied for every input in that range. A typical
adversarial attack seeks to minimize the output of a scalar-valued network subject to certain input
constraints. Verification provides lower bounds on the minimum output value achievable by such an
adversary. Concretely, for a scalar-valued network f and input range X , verification provides lower
bounds to the problem minx∈X f (x).
As observed in [3], prior works in verification can be broadly categorized into primal and dual
views. In the primal view, convex relaxations are applied to attain, for every intermediate layer of the
network, a convex superset of the true attainable range. For example, if f = fL ◦ · · · ◦ f1 , convex
sets Z k are obtained such that {fk ◦ · · · ◦ f1 (x) | x ∈ X } ⊆ Z k for k ∈ {1, . . . , L}.
∗

Equal contribution
Github Repo: https://github.com/revbucket/dual-verification

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

