Probabilistic Transformer:
Modelling Ambiguities and Distributions
for RNA Folding and Molecule Design

1

Jörg K.H. Franke1 , Frederic Runge1 , Frank Hutter1,2
Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, Germany
2
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
{frankej,runget,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Our world is ambiguous and this is reflected in the data we use to train our
algorithms. This is particularly true when we try to model natural processes where
collected data is affected by noisy measurements and differences in measurement
techniques. Sometimes, the process itself is ambiguous, such as in the case of RNA
folding, where the same nucleotide sequence can fold into different structures. This
suggests that a predictive model should have similar probabilistic characteristics to
match the data it models. Therefore, we propose a hierarchical latent distribution
to enhance one of the most successful deep learning models, the Transformer, to
accommodate ambiguities and data distributions. We show the benefits of our
approach (1) on a synthetic task that captures the ability to learn a hidden data
distribution, (2) with state-of-the-art results in RNA folding that reveal advantages
on highly ambiguous data, and (3) demonstrating its generative capabilities on
property-based molecule design by implicitly learning the underlying distributions
and outperforming existing work.

1

Introduction

Transformer models [1] are the architecture of choice for many applications. Next to a wide range
of NLP applications, such as language modelling [2, 3, 4] and machine translation [1, 5], they are
also very effective in other disciplines, such as computer vision [6, 7], biology [8, 9], and chemistry
[10, 11]. An additional challenging application for which transformers are promising is RNA folding,
where the goal is to model a secondary structure (represented in dot-bracket notation [12]) based on
a given sequence of nucleotides. RNA data is highly ambiguous since it is collected with different
techniques, resolutions, protocols, and even contains natural ambiguities since there exist multiple
structures for the same RNA sequence in the cell [13, 14] and the same structure can be caused by
multiple sequences. Similar to RNA structures, molecules can be represented as sequences by using
the simple molecular line entry system (SMILES) [15] and transformers arise as the architecture of
choice in the flourishing field of molecule design [11, 16].
Although Transformers have outstanding performance, the deterministic core of the architecture could
harm performance in real-world applications like RNA folding. If collected data contains noisy labels
or ambiguous samples, a vanilla Transformer model can only express uncertainties in the softmax
output but not in the latent space. When sampling, sequential interdependencies can only be modelled
in a decoder setting but not in an encoder-only setting. We address these limitations by proposing
a Probabilistic Transformer1 (ProbTransformer) that models a hierarchical latent distribution and
performs sampling in the latent space. The ProbTransformer can represent ambiguities in these
1

Source code is available at github.com/automl/ProbTransformer

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

