Learning Dissipative Dynamics in Chaotic Systems
Zongyi Li⇤
Caltech
zongyili@caltech.edu

Miguel Liu-Schiaffini⇤
Caltech
mliuschi@caltech.edu

Nikola Kovachki
NVIDIA
nkovachki@nvidia.com

Burigede Liu
University of Cambridge
bl377@eng.cam.ac.uk

Kamyar Azizzadenesheli
NVIDIA
kamyara@nvidia.com

Kaushik Bhattacharya
Caltech
bhatta@caltech.edu

Andrew Stuart
Caltech
astuart@caltech.edu

Anima Anandkumar
Caltech
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
Chaotic systems are notoriously challenging to predict because of their sensitivity to
perturbations and errors due to time stepping. Despite this unpredictable behavior,
for many dissipative systems the statistics of the long term trajectories are governed
by an invariant measure supported on a set, known as the global attractor; for many
problems this set is finite dimensional, even if the state space is infinite dimensional.
For Markovian systems, the statistical properties of long-term trajectories are
uniquely determined by the solution operator that maps the evolution of the system
over arbitrary positive time increments. In this work, we propose a machine
learning framework to learn the underlying solution operator for dissipative chaotic
systems, showing that the resulting learned operator accurately captures short-time
trajectories and long-time statistical behavior. Using this framework, we are able
to predict various statistics of the invariant measure for the turbulent Kolmogorov
Flow dynamics with Reynolds numbers up to 5000.

1

Introduction

Machine learning methods for chaotic systems. Chaotic systems are characterized by strong
instabilities. Small perturbations to the system, such as the initialization, lead to errors which
accumulate during time-evolution, due to positive Lyapunov exponents. Such instability makes
chaotic systems challenging, both for mathematical analysis and numerical simulation. Because of
the intrinsic instability, it is infeasible for any method to capture the exact trajectory of a chaotic
system for long periods. Therefore, prior works mainly focus on fitting recurrent neural networks
(RNN) on extremely short trajectories or learning a step-wise projection from a randomly generated
evolution using reservoir computing (RC) [1–5]. Another approach to this problem is to work in the
space of probability densities propagated by, or invariant under, the dynamics [6, 7], the FrobeniusPerron approach; a second, related, approach is to consider the adjoint of this picture and study
the propagation of functionals on the state space of the system, the Koopman operator approach
[8, 9]. However, even when the state space is finite dimensional, the Frobenius-Perron and Koopman
approaches require approximation of a linear operator on a function space; when the state space
is infinite-dimensional approximation of this operator is particularly challenging. These previous
⇤
Equal contribution
The code is available at https://github.com/neural-operator/markov_neural_operator

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

