Relational Reasoning via Set Transformers:
Provable Efficiency and Applications to MARL

Fengzhuo Zhang1

Boyi Liu2

Kaixin Wang1 Vincent Y. F. Tan1 Zhuoran Yang3
Zhaoran Wang2
1
National University of Singapore 2 Northwestern University 3 Yale University
{fzzhang, kaixin.wang}@u.nus.edu, boyiliu2018@u.northwestern.edu,
vtan@nus.edu.sg, zhuoranyang.work@gmail.com, zhaoranwang@gmail.com

Abstract
The cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) with permutation
invariant agents framework has achieved tremendous empirical successes in realworld applications. Unfortunately, the theoretical understanding of this MARL
problem is lacking due to the curse of many agents and the limited exploration
of the relational reasoning in existing works. In this paper, we verify that the
transformer implements complex relational reasoning, and we propose and analyze
model-free and model-based offline MARL algorithms with the transformer approximators. We prove that the suboptimality gaps of the model-free and model-based
algorithms are independent of and logarithmic in the number of agents respectively,
which mitigates the curse of many agents. These results are consequences of a
novel generalization error bound of the transformer and a novel analysis of the
Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) of the system dynamics with the transformer. Our model-based algorithm is the first provably efficient MARL algorithm
that explicitly exploits the permutation invariance of the agents. Our improved
generalization bound may be of independent interest and is applicable to other
regression problems related to the transformer beyond MARL.

1

Introduction

Cooperative MARL algorithms have achieved tremendous successes across a wide range of realworld applications including robotics [1, 2], games [3, 4], and finance [5]. In most of these works,
the permutation invariance of the agents is embedded into the problem setup, and the successes of
these works hinge on leveraging this property. However, the theoretical understanding of why the
permutation invariant MARL has been so successful is lacking due to the following two reasons.
First, the size of the state-action space grows exponentially with the number of agents; this is known
as “the curse of many agents” [6, 7]. The exponentially large state-action space prohibits the learning
of value functions and policies due to the curse of dimensionality. Second, although the mean-field
approximation is widely adopted to mitigate the curse of many agents [6, 8], this approximation fails
to capture the complex interplay between the agents. In the mean-field approximation, the influence
of all the other agents on a fixed agent is captured only through the empirical distribution of the local
states and/or local actions [6, 8]. This induces a restricted class of function approximators, which
nullifies the possibly complicated relational structure of the agents, and thus fails to incorporate
the complex interaction between agents. Therefore, designing provably efficient MARL algorithms
that incorporate the efficient relational reasoning and break the curse of many agents remains an
interesting and meaningful question.
In this paper, we regard transformer networks as the representation learning module to incorporate
relational reasoning among the agents. In particular, we focus on the offline MARL problem with
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

