Learning Probabilistic Models from Generator Latent
Spaces with Hat EBM
Mitch Hill
OPPO US Research Center
mitch.hill@innopeaktech.com

Erik Nijkamp
Salesforce Research
erik.nijkamp@salesforce.com

Jonathan Mitchell
University of California, Los Angeles
jcmitchell@ucla.edu

Bo Pang
Salesforce Research
b.pang@salesforce.com

Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles
sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This work proposes a method for using any generator network as the foundation of
an Energy-Based Model (EBM). Our formulation posits that observed images are
the sum of unobserved latent variables passed through the generator network and a
residual random variable that spans the gap between the generator output and the
image manifold. One can then define an EBM that includes the generator as part
of its forward pass, which we call the Hat EBM. The model can be trained without inferring the latent variables of the observed data or calculating the generator
Jacobian determinant. This enables explicit probabilistic modeling of the output distribution of any type of generator network. Experiments show strong performance
of the proposed method on (1) unconditional ImageNet synthesis at 128×128 resolution, (2) refining the output of existing generators, and (3) learning EBMs that
incorporate non-probabilistic generators. Code and pretrained models to reproduce
our results are available at https://github.com/point0bar1/hat-ebm.

1

Introduction

Generator networks [20, 12] which transform a latent distribution to a complex observed distribution
(e.g., images, videos) are found across different deep generative models. One limitation of generator
networks is the difficulty of obtaining an explicit representation of the probability distribution defined
by the output of the network after transformation of the latent space. For generators from Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12, 32] and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [20, 33] where the
latent states corresponding to realistic images follow a trivial distribution (e.g., isotropic Gaussian), the
difficulty of obtaining image space probabilities lies in calculating the log determinant of the generator
Jacobian which is needed to perform density change-of-variables. For other generator models such as
a deterministic autoencoder, there might not be a natural way to generate probabilistic samples from
the latent space that correspond to realistic images. When the latent space has smaller dimension
than the image space, there is further difficulty in describing the generator image distribution since
the distribution measure must be confined to the manifold of the generator output.
This work proposes a method for using a generator network as the foundation for an Energy-Based
Model (EBM). The generator network is concatenated with a hat network that takes an image input
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

