The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Fully-Connected
Layers for Low-Data Regimes

Peter Kocsis
Technical University of Munich
peter.kocsis@tum.de
Peter Súkeník
Technical University of Munich
peter.sukenik@trojsten.sk

Guillem Brasó
Technical University of Munich
guillem.braso@tum.de

Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich
niessner@tum.de

Laura Leal-Taixé
Technical University of Munich
leal.taixe@tum.de

Ismail Elezi
Technical University of Munich
ismail.elezi@tum.de

peter-kocsis.github.io/LowDataGeneralization/

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks were the standard for solving many computer vision
tasks until recently, when Transformers of MLP-based architectures have started to
show competitive performance. These architectures typically have a vast number
of weights and need to be trained on massive datasets; hence, they are not suitable
for their use in low-data regimes. In this work, we propose a simple yet effective
framework to improve generalization from small amounts of data. We augment
modern CNNs with fully-connected (FC) layers and show the massive impact this
architectural change has in low-data regimes. We further present an online joint
knowledge-distillation method to utilize the extra FC layers at train time but avoid
them during test time. This allows us to improve the generalization of a CNN-based
model without any increase in the number of weights at test time. We perform
classification experiments for a large range of network backbones and several
standard datasets on supervised learning and active learning. Our experiments
significantly outperform the networks without fully-connected layers, reaching a
relative improvement of up to 16% validation accuracy in the supervised setting
without adding any extra parameters during inference.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1, 2] have been the dominant architecture in the field of
computer vision. Traditionally, CNNs consisted of convolutional (often called cross-correlation) and
pooling layers, followed by several fully-connected layers [3–5]. The need for fully-connected layers
was challenged in an influential paper [6], and recent modern CNN architectures [7–11] discarded
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

