The price of unfairness in linear bandits with biased
feedback
Solenne Gaucher
Département de Mathématiques d’Orsay, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
solenne.gaucher@math.u-psud.fr
Alexandra Carpentier
Institut für Mathematik, Universität Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany
carpentier@uni-potsdam.de
Christophe Giraud
Département de Mathématiques d’Orsay, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France
christophe.giraud@universite-paris-saclay.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of fair sequential decision making with biased
linear bandit feedback. At each round, a player selects an action described by a
covariate and by a sensitive attribute. The perceived reward is a linear combination
of the covariates of the chosen action, but the player only observes a biased
evaluation of this reward, depending on the sensitive attribute. To characterize the
difficulty of this problem, we design a phased elimination algorithm that corrects
the unfair evaluations, and establish upper bounds on its regret. We show that the
1/3
worst-case regret is smaller than O(⇤ log(T )1/3 T 2/3 ), where ⇤ is an explicit
geometrical constant characterizing the difficulty of bias estimation. We prove
lower bounds on the worst-case regret for some sets of actions showing that this
rate is tight up to a possible sub-logarithmic factor. We also derive gap-dependent
upper bounds on the regret, and matching lower bounds for some problem instance.
Interestingly, these results reveal a transition between a regime where the problem
is as difficult as its unbiased counterpart, and a regime where it can be much harder.

1

Introduction

Artificial intelligence is increasingly used in a wide range of decision making scenarii with higher and
higher stakes, with application in online advertisement [31], credit [3], health care [11], education
[28] and job interviews [35], in the hope of improving accuracy and efficiency. Recent works have
shown that the decisions made by algorithms can be dangerously biased against certain categories of
people, and have endeavored to mitigate this behavior [22, 14, 6, 27]. Studies have underlined that
the main cause of algorithmic unfairness is the presence of bias in the training set [27], which led to
the development of methods aiming to guarantee the fairness of the algorithms. This paper, in lines
with these works, addresses the problem of online decision making under biased feedback.
Linear bandits have become a very popular tool in online decision making problems, when side
information on the actions is available in the form of covariates. In the present paper, we consider a
variant of this problem, where the agent only has access to an unfair assessment of the action taken,
that is systematically biased against a group of actions. For example, examiners may be prejudiced
against people from a minority group, and give them lower grades; similarly, algorithms trained on
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

