A Gradient Sampling Method
With Complexity Guarantees for Lipschitz Functions
in High and Low Dimensions∗

Damek Davis
Cornell University
dsd95@cornell.edu

Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy
University of Washington, Seattle
ddrusv@uw.edu

Yin Tat Lee
University of Washington, Seattle
yintat@uw.edu

Swati Padmanabhan
University of Washington, Seattle
pswati@uw.edu

Guanghao Ye
Massachussetts Institute of Technology
ghye@mit.edu

Abstract
Zhang, Lin, Jegelka, Sra, and Jadbabaie [1] introduce a method for minimizing
Lipschitz functions with an efficiency guarantee of O(ε−4 ). Their method is
a novel modification of Goldstein’s classical subgradient method. Their work,
however, makes use of a nonstandard subgradient oracle model and requires the
function to be directionally differentiable. Our first contribution in this paper is
to show that both of these assumptions can be dropped by simply adding a small
random perturbation in each step of their algorithm. The resulting method works
on any Lipschitz function whose value and gradient can be evaluated at points of
differentiability. Our second contribution is a new cutting plane algorithm that
achieves better efficiency in low dimensions: O(dε−3 ) for Lipschitz functions and
O(dε−2 ) for those that are weakly convex.

1

Introduction

The subgradient method [2] is a classical procedure for minimizing a nonsmooth Lipschitz function
f on Rd . Starting from an initial iterate x0 , the method computes
xt+1 = xt − αt vt where vt ∈ ∂f (xt ).

(1)

Here, the positive sequence {αt }t≥0 is user-specified, and the set ∂f is the Clarke subdifferential [3,
4],
n
o
∂f (x) = conv lim ∇f (xi ) : xi → x, xi ∈ dom(∇f ) .
i→∞

In classical circumstances, the subdifferential reduces to familiar objects: for example, when f is
C 1 -smooth at x, the subdifferential ∂f (x) comprises of only the gradient ∇f (x), while for convex
functions, it reduces to the subdifferential in the sense of convex analysis.
For functions f that are weakly convex — a broad class of functions first introduced in English
in [5] — the limit points x̄ of the subgradient method are known to be first-order critical, meaning
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

