Truncated proposals for scalable and hassle-free
simulation-based inference
Michael Deistler
University of Tübingen
michael.deistler@uni-tuebingen.de

Pedro J Gonçalves⇤
University of Tübingen
pedro.goncalves@uni-tuebingen.de

Jakob H Macke⇤
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
jakob.macke@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Simulation-based inference (SBI) solves statistical inverse problems by repeatedly
running a stochastic simulator and inferring posterior distributions from modelsimulations. To improve simulation efficiency, several inference methods take a
sequential approach and iteratively adapt the proposal distributions from which
model simulations are generated. However, many of these sequential methods are
difficult to use in practice, both because the resulting optimisation problems can be
challenging and efficient diagnostic tools are lacking. To overcome these issues,
we present Truncated Sequential Neural Posterior Estimation (TSNPE). TSNPE
performs sequential inference with truncated proposals, sidestepping the optimisation issues of alternative approaches. In addition, TSNPE allows to efficiently
perform coverage tests that can scale to complex models with many parameters.
We demonstrate that TSNPE performs on par with previous methods on established
benchmark tasks. We then apply TSNPE to two challenging problems from neuroscience and show that TSNPE can successfully obtain the posterior distributions,
whereas previous methods fail. Overall, our results demonstrate that TSNPE is
an efficient, accurate, and robust inference method that can scale to challenging
scientific models.

1

Introduction

Computational models are an important tool to understand physical processes underlying empirically
observed phenomena. These models, often implemented as numerical simulators, incorporate
mechanistic knowledge about the physical process underlying data generation, and thereby provide an
interpretable model of empirical observations. In many cases, several parameters of the simulator have
to be inferred from data, e.g., with Bayesian inference. However, performing Bayesian inference in
these models can be difficult: Running the simulator may be computationally expensive, evaluating the
likelihood-function might be computationally infeasible, and the model might not be differentiable. In
order to overcome these limitations, Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) methods [Beaumont
et al., 2002, 2009], synthetic likelihood approaches [Wood, 2010], and neural network-based methods
[e.g., Papamakarios and Murray, 2016, Hermans et al., 2020, Thomas et al., 2022] have been
developed.
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

