Subspace Recovery from Heterogeneous Data with
Non-isotropic Noise

John Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Vitaly Feldman
Apple
vitaly.edu@gmail.com

Lunjia Hu
Stanford University
lunjia@stanford.edu

Kunal Talwar
Apple
kunal@kunaltalwar.org

Abstract
Recovering linear subspaces from data is a fundamental and important task in
statistics and machine learning. Motivated by heterogeneity in Federated Learning
settings, we study a basic formulation of this problem: the principal component
analysis (PCA), with a focus on dealing with irregular noise. Our data come from n
users with user i contributing data samples from a d-dimensional distribution with
mean µi . Our goal is to recover the linear subspace shared by µ1 , . . . , µn using
the data points from all users, where every data point from user i is formed by
adding an independent mean-zero noise vector to µi . If we only have one data point
from every user, subspace recovery is information-theoretically impossible when
the covariance matrices of the noise vectors can be non-spherical, necessitating
additional restrictive assumptions in previous work. We avoid these assumptions
by leveraging at least two data points from each user, which allows us to design
an efficiently-computable estimator under non-spherical and user-dependent noise.
We prove an upper bound for the estimation error of our estimator in general
scenarios where the number of data points and amount of noise can vary across
users, and prove an information-theoretic error lower bound that not only matches
the upper bound up to a constant factor, but also holds even for spherical Gaussian
noise. This implies that our estimator does not introduce additional estimation
error (up to a constant factor) due to irregularity in the noise. We show additional
results for a linear regression problem in a similar setup.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of learning low-dimensional structure amongst data distributions, given multiple
samples from each distribution. This problem arises naturally in settings such as federated learning,
where we want to learn from data coming from a set of individuals, each of which has samples
from their own distribution. These distributions however are related to each other, and in this work,
we consider the setting when these distributions have means lying in a low-dimensional subspace.
The goal is to learn this subspace, even when the distributions may have different (and potentially
non-spherical) variances. This heterogeneity can manifest itself in practice as differing number of
samples per user, or the variance differing across individuals, possibly depending on their mean.
Recovery of the subspace containing the means can in turn help better estimate individual means.
In other words, this can allow for learning good estimator for all individual means, by leveraging
information from all the individuals.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

