Learning Contrastive Embedding
in Low-Dimensional Space

Shuo Chen† , Chen Gong§ , Jun Li§ , Jian Yang§ , Gang Niu† , Masashi Sugiyama‡

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) pretrains feature embeddings to scatter instances in the
feature space so that the training data can be well discriminated. Most existing
CL techniques usually encourage learning such feature embeddings in the highdimensional space to maximize the instance discrimination. However, this practice
may lead to undesired results where the scattering instances are sparsely distributed
in the high-dimensional feature space, making it difficult to capture the underlying
similarity between pairwise instances. To this end, we propose a novel framework
called contrastive learning with low-dimensional reconstruction (CLLR), which
adopts a regularized projection layer to reduce the dimensionality of the feature
embedding. In CLLR, we build the sparse / low-rank regularizer to adaptively
reconstruct a low-dimensional projection space while preserving the basic objective
for instance discrimination, and thus successfully learning contrastive embeddings
that alleviate the above issue. Theoretically, we prove a tighter error bound for
CLLR; empirically, the superiority of CLLR is demonstrated across multiple
domains. Both theoretical and experimental results emphasize the significance of
learning low-dimensional contrastive embeddings.

1

Introduction

Recently, unsupervised learning approaches have been greatly promoted by the contrastive learning
(CL), which shows encouraging performance compared to fully supervised approaches [8, 21]. CL
pretrains deep neural networks with unlabeled instances, and the learned feature embeddings can be
directly used to extract features from the raw data [35]. Thereby, CL has been successfully applied in
many downstream recognition tasks such as classification [42], retrieval [41], and clustering [3].
As an unsupervised learning problem setting where the human annotation is not available, CL
approaches usually consider building the pseudo supervision in their learning objectives [36, 19], and
thus CL is also regarded as a self-supervised learning approach. Originally, the pseudo supervision
of CL is to push away each pair of instances to scatter data points in the feature space, by which all
instances in the training data can be well discriminated (i.e., the instance discrimination) [14, 40].
This original design has been empirically validated to be particularly effective in the representation
learning [28, 6], and has also been theoretically proved to approximate an unbiased supervised
learning objective [32, 11]. Many recent efforts have increasingly focused on two different directions
to further improve the performance of CL. The first one is to introduce plentiful data-augmentation
†

S. Chen and G. Niu are with RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Japan (Email: {shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp, gang.niu.ml@gmail.com}).
§
C. Gong, J. Li, and J. Yang are with the PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for HighDimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for
Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
China (E-mail: {junli, chen.gong, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn).
‡
M. Sugiyama is with RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Japan; and also with the
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Japan (E-mail: sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

