Decentralized Gossip-Based Stochastic Bilevel
Optimization over Communication Networks
Shuoguang Yang
IEDA, HKUST
yangsg@ust.hk

Xuezhou Zhang
Princeton University
xz7392@princeton.edu

Mengdi Wang
Princeton University
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization have gained growing interests, with numerous applications
being found in meta learning, minimax games, reinforcement learning, and nested
composition optimization. This paper studies the problem of decentralized distributed stochastic bilevel optimization over a network where each agent can only
communicate with its neighbors, and gives examples from multi-task, multi-agent
learning and federated learning. In this paper, we propose a gossip-based decentralized bilevel learning algorithm that allows networked agents to solve both the
inner and outer optimization problems in a single timescale and share information
e 1 2 ) perthrough network propagation. We show that our algorithm enjoys the O(
K✏
1
O( K✏
)
agent sample complexity for general nonconvex bilevel optimization and e
for Polyak-Łojasiewicz objectives, achieving a speedup that scales linearly with
the network size K. The sample complexities are optimal in both ✏ and K. We test
our algorithm on the examples of hyperparameter tuning and decentralized reinforcement learning. Simulated experiments confirmed that our algorithm achieves
the state-of-the-art training efficiency and test accuracy.

1

Introduction

In recent years, stochastic bilevel optimization (SBO) has attracted increasing attention from the
machine learning community. It has been found to provide favorable solutions to a variety of
problems, such as meta learning and hyperparameter optimization (Franceschi et al., 2018; Snell et al.,
2017; Bertinetto et al., 2018), composition optimization (Wang and Liu, 2016), two-player games
(Von Stackelberg and Von, 1952), reinforcement learning and imitation learning (Arora et al., 2020;
Hong et al., 2020). While the majority of the above mentioned work focuses on algorithm designs in
the classic centralized setting, such problems often arise in distributed/federated applications, where
agents are unwilling to share data but rather perform local updates and communicate with neighbors.
Theories and algorithms for distributed stochastic bilevel optimization are less developed.
Consider the decentralized learning setting where the data are distributed over K agents K =
{1, 2, · · · , K} over a communication network. Each agent can only communicate with its neighbors
over the network. One example is federated learning which is often concerned with a single-servermulti-user system, where agents communicate with a central server to solve a task cooperatively (Lan
and Zhou, 2018; Ge et al., 2018). Another example is the sensor network, where sensors are fully
decentralized and can only communicate with nearby neighbors (Taj and Cavallaro, 2011).
We consider the following decentralized stochastic bilevel optimization (DSBO) problem,
)
(
)
(
K
K
1 X k
1 X k
?
?
min F (x) =
f (x, y (x)) , s.t. y (x) = argmin
g x, y) ,
K
K
x2Rdx
y2Rdy
k=1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

k=1

(1)

