Causality Preserving Chaotic Transformation and
Classification using Neurochaos Learning

Harikrishnan N. B.
Department of Computer Science & Information Systems and APPCAIR
BITS Pilani K. K. Birla Goa Campus, India
harikrishnannb@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in
Aditi Kathpalia
Department of Complex Systems
Institute of Computer Science of the Czech Academy of Sciences
Prague, Czech Republic
kathpalia@cs.cas.cz
Nithin Nagaraj
Consciousness Studies Programme
National Institute of Advanced Studies
Bengaluru, 560012, Karnataka, India
nithin@nias.res.in

Abstract
Discovering cause and effect variables from observational data is an important but
challenging problem in science and engineering. In this work, a recently proposed
brain inspired learning algorithm namely-Neurochaos Learning (NL) is used for the
classification of cause and effect time series generated using coupled autoregressive
processes, coupled 1D chaotic skew tent maps, coupled 1D chaotic logistic maps
and a real-world prey-predator system. In the case of coupled skew tent maps,
the proposed method consistently outperforms a five layer Deep Neural Network
(DNN) and Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) architecture for unidirectional
coupling coefficient values ranging from 0.1 to 0.7. Further, we investigate the
preservation of causality in the feature extracted space of NL using Granger Causality for coupled autoregressive processes and Compression-Complexity Causality
for coupled chaotic systems and real-world prey-predator dataset. Unlike DNN,
LSTM and 1D Convolutional Neural Network, it is found that NL preserves the
inherent causal structures present in the input timeseries data. These findings are
promising for the theory and applications of causal machine learning and open up
the possibility to explore the potential of NL for more sophisticated causal learning
tasks.

1

Introduction

Despite the success of Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) algorithms in the field of
natural language processing [1], computer vision [2], speech recognition [3], these algorithms face
difficulty in interpretability and trustworthiness. One of the main reasons for this is the fact that they
are merely discovering associations between ‘input’ and ‘output’ in the name of ‘learning’. However,
discovering associations alone is insufficient as an explanation to aid in the decision making process.
Decision-making in everyday human existence relies heavily on reasoning and causal inference.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

