I NS N ET: An Efficient, Flexible, and Performant
Insertion-based Text Generation Model
Sidi Lu, Tao Meng, Nanyun Peng
University of California, Los Angeles
{sidilu, tmeng, violetpeng}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose I NS N ET, an expressive insertion-based text generator with efficient
training and flexible decoding (parallel or sequential). Unlike most existing
insertion-based text generation works that require re-encoding of the context after
each insertion operation and thus are inefficient to train, I NS N ET only requires one
pass of context encoding for the entire sequence during training by introducing a
novel insertion-oriented position encoding and a light-weighted slot representation
strategy to enable computation sharing. Furthermore, we propose an algorithm
I NS N ET-Dinic to better determine the parallelization of insertion operations that
provides a controllable switch between parallel and sequential decoding, making
it flexible to handle more parallelizable tasks such as machine translation with
efficient decoding, or less parallelizable tasks such as open-domain text generation
to guarantee high-quality outputs. Experiments on two lexically constrained
text generation datasets and three machine translation datasets demonstrate I N S N ET ’s advantages over previous insertion-based methods in terms of training
speed, inference efficiency, and generation quality.

1

Introduction

Insertion-based text generation that formulates the generation process as a sequence of token insertion
operations has received increasing attention in recent years. There are two major advantages of
insertion-based generation over the prevalent left-to-right auto-regressive paradigm: 1) It reduces the
decoding cost to sub-linear w.r.t. the sequence length with parallel decoding (Stern et al., 2019; Gu
et al., 2019b), and 2) the flexible insertion orders may better recover/utilize the underlying linguistic
structures of languages (Welleck et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2019a).
However, this new paradigm of text generation brings unique challenges, mostly in the training
efficiency. Unlike left-to-right auto-regressive decoders which monotonically expand the context,
the insertion operations complicate the position information of each token as the context expands.
Concretely, as is shown in Figure 1, the absolute position of a token in a sequence constantly changes
along with the insertion operations. As a result, a naive implementation of insertion-based models
(e.g., Stern et al. (2019); Gu et al. (2019b)) needs to re-encode the context with updated positional
information for each token as the insertions proceed, yielding inefficient training with O(n) times of
context re-encoding (with n indicating the sequence length).
To tackle this problem, previous insertion-based generation models such as Insertion Transformer
(InsT) (Stern et al., 2019) and Levenshtein Transformer (LevT) (Gu et al., 2019b) propose parallel
token insertion to reduce the insertion/re-encoding steps from O(n) to Θ(log n) for both training and
inference. However, while it works well for machine translation, such parallel insertion falls short
on high-entropy generation tasks such as open-domain dialogue systems(Li et al., 2017a), creative
generation such as stories (Yao et al., 2019; Goldfarb-Tarrant et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022), poetry
(Manurung et al., 2000; Tian and Peng, 2022), and humor generation (Hempelmann, 2008; He et al.,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

