Uni-Perceiver-MoE: Learning Sparse Generalist
Models with Conditional MoEs
Jinguo Zhu1,3∗† , Xizhou Zhu2,3∗ , Wenhai Wang3 , Xiaohua Wang1 ,
Hongsheng Li4 , Xiaogang Wang4 , Jifeng Dai5,3B
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 SenseTime Research 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 Tsinghua University

Abstract
To build an artificial neural network like the biological intelligence system, recent
works have unified numerous tasks into a generalist model, which can process various tasks with shared parameters and do not have any task-specific modules. While
generalist models achieve promising results on various benchmarks, they have performance degradation on some tasks compared with task-specialized models. In this
work, we find that interference among different tasks and modalities is the main factor to this phenomenon. To mitigate such interference, we introduce the Conditional
Mixture-of-Experts (Conditional MoEs) to generalist models. Routing strategies
under different levels of conditions are proposed to take both the training/inference
cost and generalization ability into account. By incorporating the proposed Conditional MoEs, the recently proposed generalist model Uni-Perceiver can effectively
mitigate the interference across tasks and modalities, and achieves state-of-the-art
results on a series of downstream tasks via prompt tuning on 1% of downstream
data. Moreover, the introduction of Conditional MoEs still holds the generalization
ability of generalist models to conduct zero-shot inference on new tasks, e.g., videotext retrieval and video caption. Code and pre-trained generalist models are publicly
released at https://github.com/fundamentalvision/Uni-Perceiver.

1

Introduction

Generalist models that handle multiple modalities and numerous tasks have been long pursued by
the machine learning community. However, previous researches [65, 89, 71] focus on developing
specialized models with task-specific modules. When these models are applied to new tasks, the
specifically-designed components need to be redesigned on demand and fine-tuned on sufficient
downstream data. As a result, their model size increases with the number of diverse downstream
tasks, conflicting with the goal of generalist models.
Recently, some pioneers [93, 79, 3, 84, 86, 62] have made preliminary attempts to build generalist
models by modeling various tasks into a unified formulation. With the unified modeling, large-scale
pre-training on various datasets enables the generalist models to process different downstream tasks
using shared parameters. These generalist models not only achieve competitive performance on
pre-training tasks [79, 3, 84, 86], but also can perform zero-shot inference on novel tasks without
introducing additional parameters [93, 62].
However, compared to specialized models with specific parameters for each task, generalist models
with shared parameters would suffer from the task-interference issue — different tasks with shared
parameters may conflict with each other [88]. The same issue is also observed in multilingual NLP
B

∗
Equal contribution. † This work is done when Jinguo Zhu is an intern at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Corresponding to Jifeng Dai <daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

