Online Reinforcement Learning
for Mixed Policy Scopes

Junzhe Zhang
CausalAI Lab
Columbia University
junzhez@cs.columbia.edu

Elias Bareinboim
CausalAI Lab
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Combination therapy refers to the use of multiple treatments – such as surgery,
medication, and behavioral therapy - to cure a single disease, and has become a
cornerstone for treating various conditions including cancer, HIV, and depression.
All possible combinations of treatments lead to a collection of treatment regimens
(i.e., policies) with mixed scopes, or what physicians could observe and which
actions they should take depending on the context. In this paper, we investigate the
online reinforcement learning setting for optimizing the policy space with mixed
scopes. In particular, we develop novel online algorithms that achieve sublinear
regret compared to an optimal agent deployed in the environment. The regret bound
has a dependency on the maximal cardinality of the induced state-action space
associated with mixed scopes. We further introduce a canonical representation for
an arbitrary subset of interventional distributions given a causal diagram, which
leads to a non-trivial, minimal representation of the model parameters.

1

Introduction

The problem of policy learning is concerned with choosing actions based on the state of the environment with the goal of optimizing a certain measure of performance. Existing policy learning methods
could be generally categorized into online learning and offline learning. Online reinforcement
learning (RL) learns optimal policies by conducting sequential experimentation, while repeatedly
adjusting the policy that is currently deployed based on the observed outcomes up to a certain point in
time. Effective online algorithms have been developed for various canonical environments, including
multi-armed bandits [26, 13, 1, 14], Markov decision processes (MDPs) [30, 11, 34], and partially
observable MDP [9, 3]. On the other hand, off-policy learning focuses on the offline setting with
the goal of evaluating the effectiveness of candidate policies from history data collected following a
different behavior policy [24, 32, 33]. More generally, the discipline of causal inference (CI) offers
focuses a compelling set of tools and a formal language for offline learning. It allows the agent to
draw conclusions about new policies from a combination of observations and knowledge about the
data-generating mechanisms. Several methods and graphical criteria have been proposed [23, 29, 4].
By and large, almost all methods described above concerns optimizing over a parametric space
of policies with a fixed state-action space, which are called the policy scope. That is, the set of
actions and observed states are pre-specified a priori. However, in many practical applications, this
is possibly somewhat stringent, and the agent has to optimize over candidate policies with varying
state-action spaces; these are called mixed scopes. For concreteness, consider the causal model in
Fig. 1a that describes possible treatments for alcohol use disorder [19]. Based on the condition of
alcohol dependant patients Z, the physician may prescribe a medication X1 to maximize the total
days of abstinence Y . An alternative treatment is to prescribe a behavioral therapy X2 , which alters
the social environment W of the patient, and, in turn, changes the pattern of alcohol use. The goal
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

