Bridging the Gap from Asymmetry Tricks to
Decorrelation Principles in Non-contrastive
Self-supervised Learning

Kang-Jun Liu1 Masanori Suganuma1 Takayuki Okatani1,2
1
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University
2
RIKEN Center for AIP
{kjliu, suganuma, okatani}@vision.is.tohoku.ac.jp

Abstract
Recent non-contrastive methods for self-supervised representation learning show
promising performance. While they are attractive since they do not need negative
samples, it necessitates some mechanism to avoid collapsing into a trivial solution.
Currently, there are two approaches to collapse prevention. One uses an asymmetric
architecture on a joint embedding of input, e.g., BYOL and SimSiam, and the
other imposes decorrelation criteria on the same joint embedding, e.g., BarlowTwins and VICReg. The latter methods have theoretical support from information
theory as to why they can learn good representation. However, it is not fully
understood why the former performs equally well. In this paper, focusing on
BYOL/SimSiam, which uses the stop-gradient and a predictor as asymmetric
tricks, we present a novel interpretation of these tricks; they implicitly impose a
constraint that encourages feature decorrelation similar to Barlow-Twins/VICReg.
We then present a novel non-contrastive method, which replaces the stop-gradient
in BYOL/SimSiam with the derived constraint; the method empirically shows
comparable performance to the above SOTA methods in the standard benchmark
test using ImageNet. This result builds a bridge from BYOL/SimSiam to the
decorrelation-based methods, contributing to demystifying their secrets. Source
code is available at https://github.com/KJ-rc/bridging-the-gap.

1

Introduction

Recently, many methods have been proposed for self-supervised learning of visual representation [1–
6, 8–10, 12, 16] They share a fundamental idea: to learn a visual representation of images invariant
to a range of image transformations maintaining their semantics. This idea is implemented as the
optimization of an objective that the joint embeddings of different views of an input image, e.g.,
different image subregions cut from a single image and subjected to additional data augmentation,
should be close to each other.
The methods are categorized into contrastive and non-contrastive methods. The latter needs only
positive samples (i.e., different views of the same images), whereas the former also needs negative
samples (i.e., different images). Therefore, although it stabilizes learning, contrastive methods tend
to need large memory [4] or additional measures (e.g., a momentum encoder [12]) to alleviate it. On
the other hand, the non-contrastive methods are potentially more efficient. However, their objective
has a trivial solution: to map all inputs into a single point in the feature space. Thus, non-contrastive
methods need additional measures to prevent this feature collapse.
To do so, BYOL/SimSiam [6, 10] employs asymmetric structure into the joint embeddings, i.e., stopgradient and a predictor; see Fig. 2(a). The predictor is a subnetwork placed on top of one of the two
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

