A Simple Decentralized Cross-Entropy Method
Zichen Zhang1,⇤ Jun Jin2 Martin Jagersand1 Jun Luo2,† Dale Schuurmans1,†
University of Alberta 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab † equal advising
{zichen2,mj7,daes}@ualberta.ca {jun.jin1,jun.luo1}@huawei.com
1

Abstract
Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) is commonly used for planning in model-based
reinforcement learning (MBRL) where a centralized approach is typically utilized
to update the sampling distribution based on only the top-k operations’ results on
samples. In this paper, we show that such a centralized approach makes CEM
vulnerable to local optima, thus impairing its sample efficiency. To tackle this
issue, we propose Decentralized CEM (DecentCEM), a simple but effective
improvement over classical CEM, by using an ensemble of CEM instances running
independently from one another, and each performing a local improvement of its
own sampling distribution. We provide both theoretical and empirical analysis to
demonstrate the effectiveness of this simple decentralized approach. We empirically
show that, compared to the classical centralized approach using either a single or
even a mixture of Gaussian distributions, our DecentCEM finds the global optimum
much more consistently thus improves the sample efficiency. Furthermore, we
plug in our DecentCEM in the planning problem of MBRL, and evaluate our
approach in several continuous control environments, with comparison to the stateof-art CEM based MBRL approaches (PETS and POPLIN). Results show sample
efficiency improvement by simply replacing the classical CEM module with our
DecentCEM module, while only sacrificing a reasonable amount of computational
cost. Lastly, we conduct ablation studies for more in-depth analysis. Code is
available at https://github.com/vincentzhang/decentCEM.

1

Introduction

Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) uses a model as a proxy of the environment for planning
actions in multiple steps. This paper studies planning in MBRL with a specific focus on the CrossEntropy Method (CEM) [De Boer et al., 2005, Mannor et al., 2003], which is popular in MBRL due
to its ease of use and strong empirical performance [Chua et al., 2018, Hafner et al., 2019, Wang and
Ba, 2020, Zhang et al., 2021, Yang et al., 2020]. CEM is a stochastic, derivative-free optimization
method. It uses a sampling distribution to generate imaginary trajectories of environment-agent
interactions with the model. These trajectories are then ranked based on their returns computed from
the rewards given by the model. The sampling distribution is updated to increase the likelihood of
producing the top-k trajectories with higher returns. These steps are iterated and eventually yield an
improved distribution over the action sequences to guide the action execution in the real environment.
Despite the strong empirical performance of CEM for planning, it is prone to two problems: (1) lower
sample efficiency as the dimensionality of solution space increases, and (2) the Gaussian distribution
that is commonly used for sampling may cause the optimization to get stuck in local optima of
multi-modal solution spaces commonly seen in real-world problems. Previous works addressing
these problems either add gradient-based updates of the samples to optimize the parameters of CEM,
⇤

Work partially done during Zichen’s internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

