Mean Estimation with User-level Privacy under Data
Heterogeneity
Rachel Cummings⇤
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
rac2239@columbia.edu
Audra McMillan
Apple
Cupertino, CA 95014
audra.mcmillan@apple.com

Vitaly Feldman
Apple
Cupertino, CA 95014

Kunal Talwar
Apple
Cupertino, CA 95014
ktalwar@apple.com

Abstract
A key challenge in many modern data analysis tasks is that user data is heterogeneous. Different users may possess vastly different numbers of data points. More
importantly, it cannot be assumed that all users sample from the same underlying
distribution. This is true, for example in language data, where different speech
styles result in data heterogeneity. In this work we propose a simple model of
heterogeneous user data that differs in both distribution and quantity of data, and we
provide a method for estimating the population-level mean while preserving userlevel differential privacy. We demonstrate asymptotic optimality of our estimator
and also prove general lower bounds on the error achievable in our problem.

1

Introduction

Many practical problems in statistical data analysis and machine learning deal with the setting in
which each user generates multiple data points. In such settings the distribution of each user’s data
may be (somewhat) different and, furthermore, users may possess vastly different numbers of samples.
This issue is one the key challenges in federated learning [20] leading to considerable interest in
models and algorithms that address the issue.
As an example, consider the task of next-word prediction for a keyboard. Different users typing on a
keyboard may have different styles of writing, leading to different distributions. There are aspects of
the language that are common to all users, and likely additional aspects of style that are common to
large groups of users. Thus while each user has their own data distribution, there are commonalities
to all the distributions, and additional commonalities amongst distributions corresponding to subsets
of users. Modeling and learning such relationships between users’ distributions is crucial for building
a better global model, as well as for personalizing models for users.
The focus of this work is on differentially private algorithms for such settings. We assume that there
is an unknown global meta-distribution D. For each user i, a personal data distribution Di is chosen
randomly from D (for example, by sampling a set of parameters that define Di ). Each user then
receives some number ki of i.i.d. samples from Di . The goal is to solve an analysis task relative
to D, with an eye towards better modeling of each Di even when ki is small. This abstract setting
⇤

Part of this work was completed while the author was at Apple.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

