Selective compression learning of latent
representations for variable-rate image compression

1

Jooyoung Lee1,2 , Seyoon Jeong2 , Munchurl Kim1∗
School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Korea
2
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Korea
umpu@kaist.ac.kr, jsy@etri.re.kr, mkimee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, many neural network-based image compression methods have shown
promising results superior to the existing tool-based conventional codecs. However,
most of them are often trained as separate models for different target bit rates,
thus increasing the model complexity. Therefore, several studies have been conducted for learned compression that supports variable rates with single models,
but they require additional network modules, layers, or inputs that often lead to
complexity overhead, or do not provide sufficient coding efficiency. In this paper,
we firstly propose a selective compression method that partially encodes the latent
representations in a fully generalized manner for deep learning-based variable-rate
image compression. The proposed method adaptively determines essential representation elements for compression of different target quality levels. For this, we
first generate a 3D importance map as the nature of input content to represent the
underlying importance of the representation elements. The 3D importance map is
then adjusted for different target quality levels using importance adjustment curves.
The adjusted 3D importance map is finally converted into a 3D binary mask to
determine the essential representation elements for compression. The proposed
method can be easily integrated with the existing compression models with a negligible amount of overhead increase. Our method can also enable continuously
variable-rate compression via simple interpolation of the importance adjustment
curves among different quality levels. The extensive experimental results show that
the proposed method can achieve comparable compression efficiency as those of
the separately trained reference compression models and can reduce decoding time
owing to the selective compression. The sample codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/JooyoungLeeETRI/SCR.

1

Introduction

Recently, neural network (NN)-based image compression methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13] have been actively studied and shown superior performance in terms of PSNR BD-rate to
those of the conventional tool-based compression methods, such as BPG [14] and JPEG2000 [15]. A
few recent methods [11, 12] achieved comparable results with respect to the state-of-the-arts codec,
called H.266 Intra-coding [16]. However, since most of the previous deep learning-based models
are trained separately for different target compression levels, several models with a large number of
parameters are required to support various compression levels. To address this issue, recently several
methods [1, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22], which use conditional transform or adaptive quantization, have
been proposed. However, most of them require additional network modules, layers, or inputs that
may cause complexity overhead. In this paper, a novel ‘selective compression of representations’
(SCR) method is presented, which performs entropy coding only for the partially selected latent
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

