Elucidating the Design Space of Diffusion-Based
Generative Models
Tero Karras
NVIDIA
tkarras@nvidia.com

Miika Aittala
NVIDIA
maittala@nvidia.com

Timo Aila
NVIDIA
taila@nvidia.com

Samuli Laine
NVIDIA
slaine@nvidia.com

Abstract
We argue that the theory and practice of diffusion-based generative models are
currently unnecessarily convoluted and seek to remedy the situation by presenting
a design space that clearly separates the concrete design choices. This lets us
identify several changes to both the sampling and training processes, as well as
preconditioning of the score networks. Together, our improvements yield new
state-of-the-art FID of 1.79 for CIFAR-10 in a class-conditional setting and 1.97 in
an unconditional setting, with much faster sampling (35 network evaluations per
image) than prior designs. To further demonstrate their modular nature, we show
that our design changes dramatically improve both the efficiency and quality obtainable with pre-trained score networks from previous work, including improving
the FID of a previously trained ImageNet-64 model from 2.07 to near-SOTA 1.55,
and after re-training with our proposed improvements to a new SOTA of 1.36.

1

Introduction

Diffusion-based generative models [45] have emerged as a powerful new framework for neural image
synthesis, in both unconditional [16, 36, 48] and conditional [17, 35, 36, 38, 39, 41, 42, 48] settings,
even surpassing the quality of GANs [13] in certain situations [9]. They are also rapidly finding use
in other domains such as audio [27, 37] and video [19] generation, image segmentation [4, 54] and
language translation [34]. As such, there is great interest in applying these models and improving
them further in terms of image/distribution quality, training cost, and generation speed.
The literature on these models is dense on theory, and derivations of sampling schedule, training
dynamics, noise level parameterization, etc., tend to be based as directly as possible on theoretical
frameworks, which ensures that the models are on a solid theoretical footing. However, this approach
has a danger of obscuring the available design space — a proposed model may appear as a tightly
coupled package where no individual component can be modified without breaking the entire system.
As our first contribution, we take a look at the theory behind these models from a practical standpoint,
focusing more on the “tangible” objects and algorithms that appear in the training and sampling
phases, and less on the statistical processes from which they might be derived. The goal is to obtain
better insights into how these components are linked together and what degrees of freedom are
available in the design of the overall system. We focus on the broad class of models where a neural
network is used to model the score [22] of a noise level dependent marginal distribution of the training
data corrupted by Gaussian noise. Thus, our work is in the context of denoising score matching [51].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

