SegViT: Semantic Segmentation with Plain Vision
Transformers
Bowen Zhang1∗ , Zhi Tian2∗, Quan Tang4 , Xiangxiang Chu2 ,
Xiaolin Wei2 , Chunhua Shen3 , Yifan Liu1
1

3

2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Meituan Inc.
4
Zhejiang University, China
South China University of Technology, China

Abstract
We explore the capability of plain Vision Transformers (ViTs) for semantic segmentation and propose the SegViT. Previous ViT-based segmentation networks
usually learn a pixel-level representation from the output of the ViT. Differently, we
make use of the fundamental component—attention mechanism, to generate masks
for semantic segmentation. Specifically, we propose the Attention-to-Mask (ATM)
module, in which the similarity maps between a set of learnable class tokens and
the spatial feature maps are transferred to the segmentation masks. Experiments
show that our proposed SegViT using the ATM module outperforms its counterparts using the plain ViT backbone on the ADE20K dataset and achieves new
state-of-the-art performance on COCO-Stuff-10K and PASCAL-Context datasets.
Furthermore, to reduce the computational cost of the ViT backbone, we propose
query-based down-sampling (QD) and query-based up-sampling (QU) to build a
Shrunk structure. With the proposed Shrunk structure, the model can save up to
40% computations while maintaining competitive performance.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a dense prediction task in computer vision that requires pixel-level classification of an input image. Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) [1] are widely used in recent
state-of-the-art methods. This paradigm includes a deep convolutional neural network as the encoder/backbone and a segmentation-oriented decoder to provide dense predictions. A 1×1 convolutional layer is usually applied to a representative feature map to obtain the pixel level predictions.
To achieve higher performance, previous works [2–4] focus on enriching the context information or
fusing multi-scale information. However, the correlations among spatial locations are hard to model
explicitly in FCNs due to the limited receptive field.
Recently, Vision Transformers (ViT) [5], which make use of the spatial attention mechanism are
introduced to the field of computer vision. Unlike typical convolution-based backbones, the ViT has
a plain and non-hierarchical architecture that keeps the resolution of the feature maps all the way
through. The lack of the down-sampling process (excluding tokenizing the image) brings differences
to the architecture to do the semantic segmentation task using ViT backbone. Various semantic
segmentation methods [6–8] based on ViT backbones have achieved promising performance due to
the powerful representation learned from the pre-trained backbones. However, the potential of the
attention mechanism is not fully explored.
Different from previous per-pixel classification paradigm [6–8], we consider learning a meaningful
class token and then finding local patches with higher similarity to it. To achieve this goal, we propose
∗

The first two authors contributed equally. CS is the corresponding author, e-mail: chunhua@me.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

