Not All Bits have Equal Value:
Heterogeneous Precisions via Trainable Noise

Pedro Savarese
TTI-Chicago
savarese@ttic.edu

Xin Yuan
University of Chicago
yuanx@uchicago.edu

Yanjing Li
University of Chicago
yanjingl@uchicago.edu

Michael Maire
University of Chicago
mmaire@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of training deep networks while quantizing parameters and
activations into low-precision numeric representations, a setting central to reducing
energy consumption and inference time of deployed models. We propose a method
that learns different precisions, as measured by bits in numeric representations,
for different weights in a neural network, yielding a heterogeneous allocation
of bits across parameters. Learning precisions occurs alongside learning weight
values, using a strategy derived from a novel framework wherein the intractability
of optimizing discrete precisions is approximated by training per-parameter noise
magnitudes. We broaden this framework to also encompass learning precisions for
hidden state activations, simultaneously with weight precisions and values. Our
approach exposes the objective of constructing a low-precision inference-efficient
model to the entirety of the training process. Experiments show that it finds highly
heterogeneous precision assignments for CNNs trained on CIFAR and ImageNet,
improving upon previous state-of-the-art quantization methods. Our improvements
extend to the challenging scenario of learning reduced-precision GANs.

1

Introduction

Scaling up the size of deep neural networks offers returns to accuracy in tasks across a range of
application areas, including computer vision and natural language processing. Expanding network
depth from tens of layers [23, 44] to a hundred [13, 52] revolutionized image classification and
object detection [9, 14]. Following the 340M parameter BERT model [4], the size of state-of-the-art
language models has increased by multiple orders of magnitude: GPT-2 with 1.5B [40], GPT-3 with
175B, and recently Megatron-Turing with 530B parameters [45] – more than a 1000-fold increase in
size over BERT. Larger models increase the computational cost of inference, posing challenges to
their deployment in real-world applications.
To ameliorate these costs, multiple research avenues have explored methods for constructing more
compact deep networks while preserving accuracy comparable to larger models. These include, e.g.,
architectural building blocks with sparser connectivity [17, 37, 54, 16] or efficient dimensionality
reduction stages [20]. Another category of approaches shrinks larger models via pruning [11, 31, 29,
8, 24, 43], reducing precision [12, 19, 51], or binarization [18, 41, 35, 38]. Parallel efforts on neural
architecture search [57, 36, 27, 32, 28, 49] optimize coarser aspects of model structure by automating
exploration of hyperparameters governing network size and configuration of layers.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

