Chromatic Correlation Clustering, Revisited

Qing Xiu
School of Computer Science and Technology
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research
University of Science and Technology of China
xiuq@mail.ustc.edu.cn
Jing Tang
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
jingtang@ust.hk

Kai Han∗
School of Computer Science and Technology
Soochow University
hankai@suda.edu.cn

Shuang Cui
School of Computer Science and Technology
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research
University of Science and Technology of China
lakers@mail.ustc.edu.cn

He Huang∗
School of Computer Science and Technology
Soochow University
huangh@suda.edu.cn

Abstract
Chromatic Correlation Clustering (CCC) (introduced by Bonchi et al. [6]) is a
natural generalization of the celebrated Correlation Clustering (CC) problem. It
models objects with categorical pairwise relationships by an edge-colored graph,
and has many applications in data mining, social networks and bioinformatics. We
show that there exists a 2.5-approximation to the CCC problem based on a Linear
Programming (LP) approach, thus improving the best-known approximation ratio
of 3 achieved by Klodt et al. [25]. We also present an efficient heuristic algorithm
for CCC leveraging a greedy clustering strategy, and conduct extensive experiments
to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Clustering is the task of partitioning a set of objects into groups according to their relationships. One
of the most important clustering problems is Correlation Clustering (CC), which has attracted great
interests in recent years (e.g., [2, 10]). In the CC problem, the input instance is an undirected complete
graph with each edge labeled as either similar or dissimilar, and the goal is to partition the graph
nodes into an arbitrary number of clusters such that the number of disagreements is minimized, where
a “disagreement” occurs if a dissimilar edge links two nodes in the same cluster or a similar edge links
two nodes in different clusters. However, CC only models binary relationships, which is insufficient
in many applications. For example, the relationships in a social network could have multiple types
such as colleague, schoolmate, and family. To address this issue, Bonchi et al. [6] generalize the CC
problem to the Chromatic Correlation Clustering (CCC) problem, where an edge-colored graph is
used to model the multi-type relationships in practice, i.e., each edge is associated with one color
and each color represents a type of relationship. The goal of CCC is to partition the graph nodes into
several clusters and assign a color to each cluster to minimize the number of disagreements, where a
disagreement happens in any case other than that two non-adjacent nodes belong to different clusters
∗

Corresponding author: Kai Han <hankai@suda.edu.cn> and He Huang <huangh@suda.edu.cn>

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

