Exploring Length Generalization in Large Language Models

Cem Anil ∗ 1, 3 , Yuhuai Wu2 , Anders Andreassen1 , Aitor Lewkowycz1
Vedant Misra1 , Vinay Ramasesh1 , Ambrose Slone1 , Guy Gur-Ari1 ,
Ethan Dyer1 , Behnam Neyshabur1
1
Google Research, Blueshift Team
2
Google Research
3
University of Toronto, Vector Institute

Abstract
The ability to extrapolate from short problem instances to longer ones is an important form of out-of-distribution generalization in reasoning tasks, and is crucial
when learning from datasets where longer problem instances are rare. These
include theorem proving, solving quantitative mathematics problems, and reading/summarizing novels. In this paper, we run careful empirical studies exploring the
length generalization capabilities of transformer-based language models. We first
establish that naively finetuning transformers on length generalization tasks shows
significant generalization deficiencies independent of model scale. We then show
that combining pretrained large language models’ in-context learning abilities with
scratchpad prompting (asking the model to output solution steps before producing
an answer) results in a dramatic improvement in length generalization. We run
careful failure analyses on each of the learning modalities and identify common
sources of mistakes that highlight opportunities in equipping language models with
the ability to generalize to longer problems.

1

Introduction

Many natural problems, such as theorem proving and program synthesis, have a notion of length that
strongly correlates with the difficulty of the task. However, in these domains, the number of available
problems typically drops rapidly as a function of problem length (e.g. Figure 2). Hence, it is desirable
to learn from examples of shorter lengths to generalize to longer ones or at least reduce the number
of samples required for longer examples. We refer to this type of problem as length generalization.
Recent work on large language models (LLMs) has shown consistent improvement in their performance by scaling model and dataset size. However, such models are still incapable of length
generalization. For example, [1] shows that even though scale helps with solving arithmetic problems,
scale alone is likely insufficient for learning to solve instances of arbitrary lengths. This implies that
models fail to learn the general algorithms that would enable this kind of generalization. Indeed,
Razeghi et al. [2] showed that the performance of LLMs on mathematical calculations correlates
with term frequency in the training data. This suggests that LLMs might have gained their current
performance from surface-level memorization instead of learning to apply the correct algorithm.
A recent line of work proposes to use a scratchpad, or chain-of-thought reasoning, when prompting
LLMs [3, 4, 5] on multi-step tasks. Breaking down tasks into multiple small steps and presenting
these steps to the model leads to improved performance across a variety of reasoning tasks including
word problems, arithmetic, and code execution.
We perform a systematic study of length generalization with transformer-based large language models.
We consider problems in which learning an algorithm can in principle enable a model to extrapolate
∗

Work done while interning at Google Research, Blueshift Team.
anilcem@cs.toronto.edu, yuhuai@google.com, neyshabur@google.com.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

Correspondence to:

