Learning from Future: A Novel Self-Training
Framework for Semantic Segmentation

Ye Du1,2 Yujun Shen3 Haochen Wang4 Jingjing Fei5 Wei Li5
Liwei Wu5 Rui Zhao5,6 Zehua Fu1,2 Qingjie Liu1,2∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 SenseTime Research†
6
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{duyee, zehua_fu, qingjie.liu}@buaa.edu.cn shenyujun0302@gmail.com
wanghaochen2022@ia.ac.cn {feijingjing1, liwei1, wuliwei, zhaorui}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Self-training has shown great potential in semi-supervised learning. Its core idea is
to use the model learned on labeled data to generate pseudo-labels for unlabeled
samples, and in turn teach itself. To obtain valid supervision, active attempts
typically employ a momentum teacher for pseudo-label prediction yet observe
the confirmation bias issue, where the incorrect predictions may provide wrong
supervision signals and get accumulated in the training process. The primary cause
of such a drawback is that the prevailing self-training framework acts as guiding the
current state with previous knowledge, because the teacher is updated with the past
student only. To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel self-training strategy,
which allows the model to learn from the future. Concretely, at each training step,
we first virtually optimize the student (i.e., caching the gradients without applying
them to the model weights), then update the teacher with the virtual future student,
and finally ask the teacher to produce pseudo-labels for the current student as the
guidance. In this way, we manage to improve the quality of pseudo-labels and thus
boost the performance. We also develop two variants of our future-self-training
(FST) framework through peeping at the future both deeply (FST-D) and widely
(FST-W). Taking the tasks of unsupervised domain adaptive semantic segmentation
and semi-supervised semantic segmentation as the instances, we experimentally
demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our approach under a wide range
of settings. Code is available at https://github.com/usr922/FST.

1

Introduction

Improving the labeling efficiency of deep learning algorithms is vital in practice since acquiring
high-quality annotations could consume great effort. Self-training (ST) offers a promising solution to
alleviate this issue by learning with limited labeled data and large-scale unlabeled data [47, 24]. The
key thought is to learn a model on labeled samples and use it to generate pseudo-labels for unlabeled
samples to teach the model itself. In general, a teacher network that maintains an exponential moving
average (EMA) of the student (i.e., the model to learn) weights is used for pseudo-label prediction, as
shown in Fig. 1a. Intuitively, such a training strategy relies on the previous student states to supervise
∗
†

Corresponding Author.
This work is done when Ye Du and Haochen Wang are interns at SenseTime Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

