Pre-Trained Model Reusability Evaluation for
Small-Data Transfer Learning
Yao-Xiang Ding
State Key Lab for CAD&CG
Zhejiang University
yxding@zju.edu.cn

Xi-Zhu Wu
National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University
wuxz@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Kun Zhou
State Key Lab for CAD&CG
Zhejiang University
kunzhou@acm.org

Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University
zhouzh@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We study model reusability evaluation (MRE) for source pre-trained models: evaluating their transfer learning performance to new target tasks. In special, we focus
on the setting under which the target training datasets are small, making it difficult to produce reliable MRE scores using them. Under this situation, we propose
synergistic learning for building the task-model metric, which can be realized by
collecting a set of pre-trained models and asking a group of data providers to participate. We provide theoretical guarantees to show that the learned task-model
metric distances can serve as trustworthy MRE scores, and propose synergistic
learning algorithms and models for general learning tasks. Experiments show that
the MRE models learned by synergistic learning can generate significantly more
reliable MRE scores than existing approaches for small-data transfer learning.

1

Introduction

Reusing pre-trained models have played essential roles in modern learning pipelines for decreasing
training cost, alleviating the requirement of big datasets, and reducing the danger of catastrophic
forgetting. The growing number of pre-trained models promotes the birth of large pre-trained model
zoos, making it closer towards the future learnware market [Zhou and Tan, 2022]. When selecting a
model from these model zoos for doing model transfer, one has to do model reusability evaluation
(MRE) first: evaluating the transfer learning performance of the models to the target task and identifying the best model. The role of MRE is crucial since no matter how good the transfer learning
strategy is, incorrect MRE would still lead to the danger of negative transfer. MRE has received
growing attention in recent years [Achille et al., 2019, Tran et al., 2019, Nguyen et al., 2020, Wu
et al., 2020, Ding and Zhou, 2020, You et al., 2021]. But most existing studies focus on large-data
MRE, under which the target dataset is sufficiently large.
In this work, we focus on small-data MRE, under which the target training datasets are small.
Reusing pre-trained models is essential under the small-data scenario since learning from scratch
is difficult. Unfortunately, large-data MRE approaches are usually invalid for small data since they
usually focus more on simplicity and efficiency, but not generalization and robustness, which are
essential for small-data MRE. It is indeed challenging to obtain reliable MRE results under the
small-data scenario due to the fundamental burden set by the laws of statistics.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

