A Probabilistic Graph Coupling View of
Dimension Reduction
Hugues Van Assel
UMPA
ENS Lyon
hugues.van_assel@ens-lyon.fr

Thibault Espinasse
Institut Camille Jordan Lyon 1
Inria Dracula
espinasse@math.univ-lyon1.fr

Julien Chiquet
AgroParisTech
INRAE
julien.chiquet@inrae.fr

Franck Picard
LBMC, CNRS
ENS Lyon
franck.picard@ens-lyon.fr

Abstract
Most popular dimension reduction (DR) methods like t-SNE and UMAP are
based on minimizing a cost between input and latent pairwise similarities.
Though widely used, these approaches lack clear probabilistic foundations
to enable a full understanding of their properties and limitations. To that
extent, we introduce a unifying statistical framework based on the coupling
of hidden graphs using cross entropy. These graphs induce a Markov random
field dependency structure among the observations in both input and latent
spaces. We show that existing pairwise similarity DR methods can be
retrieved from our framework with particular choices of priors for the graphs.
Moreover this reveals that these methods relying on shift-invariant kernels
suffer from a statistical degeneracy that explains poor performances in
conserving coarse-grain dependencies. New links are drawn with PCA which
appears as a non-degenerate graph coupling model.

1

Introduction

Dimensionality reduction (DR) is of central importance when dealing with high-dimensional
data [15]. It mitigates the curse of dimensionality, allowing for greater statistical flexibility
and less computational complexity. DR also enables visualization that can be of great
practical interest for understanding and interpreting the structure of large datasets. Most
seminal approaches include Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [31], multidimensional
scaling [23] and more broadly kernel eigenmaps methods such as Isomap [4], Laplacian
eigenmaps [5] and diffusion maps [12]. These methods share the definition of a pairwise
similarity kernel that assigns a high value to close neighbors and the resolution of a spectral
problem. They are well understood and unified in the kernel PCA framework [16].
In the past decade, the field has witnessed a major shift with the emergence of a new class
of methods. They are also based on pairwise similarities but these are not converted into
inner products. Instead, they define pairwise similarity functions in both input and latent
spaces and optimize a cost between the two. Among such methods, the Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (SNE) algorithm [18], its heavy-tailed symmetrized version t-SNE [38] or more
recent approaches like LargeVis [36] and UMAP [30] are arguably the most used in practice.
These will be referred to as SNE-like or neighbor embedding methods in what follows. They
are increasingly popular and now considered as the state-of-art techniques in many fields
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

