BagFlip: A Certified Defense against Data Poisoning

arXiv:2205.13634v2 [cs.LG] 16 Oct 2022

Yuhao Zhang
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yuhaoz@cs.wisc.edu

Aws Albarghouthi
University of Wisconsin-Madison
aws@cs.wisc.edu

Loris D’Antoni
University of Wisconsin-Madison
loris@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models are vulnerable to data-poisoning attacks, in which an
attacker maliciously modifies the training set to change the prediction of a learned
model. In a trigger-less attack, the attacker can modify the training set but not
the test inputs, while in a backdoor attack the attacker can also modify test inputs.
Existing model-agnostic defense approaches either cannot handle backdoor attacks
or do not provide effective certificates (i.e., a proof of a defense). We present
BagFlip, a model-agnostic certified approach that can effectively defend against
both trigger-less and backdoor attacks. We evaluate BagFlip on image classification
and malware detection datasets. BagFlip is equal to or more effective than the
state-of-the-art approaches for trigger-less attacks and more effective than the
state-of-the-art approaches for backdoor attacks.

1

Introduction

Recent works have shown that machine learning models are vulnerable to data-poisoning attacks,
where the attackers maliciously modify the training set to influence the prediction of the victim model
as they desire. In a trigger-less attack [42, 31, 24, 3, 1, 11], the attacker can modify the training set
but not the test inputs, while in a backdoor attack [29, 34, 41, 30, 5, 21, 25, 27] the attacker can also
modify test inputs. Effective attack approaches have been proposed for various domains such as
image recognition [12], sentiment analysis [25], and malware detection [30].
Consider the malware detection setting. An attacker can modify the training data by adding a special
signature—e.g., a line of code—to a set of benign programs. The idea is to make the learned model
correlate the presence of the signature with benign programs. Then, the attacker can sneak a piece
of malware past the model by including the signature, fooling the model into thinking it is a benign
program. Indeed, it has been shown that if the model is trained on a dataset with only a few poisoned
examples, a backdoor signature can be installed in the learned model [30, 27]. Thus, data-poisoning
attacks are of great concern to the safety and security of machine learning models and systems,
particularly as training data is gathered from different sources, e.g., via web scraping.
Ideally, a defense against data poisoning should fulfill the following desiderata: (1) Construct effective
certificates (proofs) of the defense. (2) Defend against both trigger-less and backdoor attacks. (3)
Be model-agnostic. It is quite challenging to fulfill all three desiderata; indeed, existing techniques
are forced to make tradeoffs. For instance, empirical approaches [10, 40, 20, 26, 36, 13, 33, 9] cannot
construct certificates and are likely to be bypassed by new attack approaches [32, 37, 16]. Some
certified approaches [39, 35] provide ineffective certificates for both trigger-less and backdoor attacks.
Some certified approaches [15, 19, 4, 28, 22, 38] provide effective certificates for trigger-less attacks
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

