Non-Monotonic Latent Alignments for CTC-Based
Non-Autoregressive Machine Translation
Chenze Shao1,2 , Yang Feng1,2⇤
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
shaochenze18z@ict.ac.cn, fengyang@ict.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Non-autoregressive translation (NAT) models are typically trained with the crossentropy loss, which forces the model outputs to be aligned verbatim with the
target sentence and will highly penalize small shifts in word positions. Latent
alignment models relax the explicit alignment by marginalizing out all monotonic
latent alignments with the CTC loss. However, they cannot handle non-monotonic
alignments, which is non-negligible as there is typically global word reordering
in machine translation. In this work, we explore non-monotonic latent alignments
for NAT. We extend the alignment space to non-monotonic alignments to allow
for the global word reordering and further consider all alignments that overlap
with the target sentence. We non-monotonically match the alignments to the target
sentence and train the latent alignment model to maximize the F1 score of nonmonotonic matching. Extensive experiments on major WMT benchmarks show
that our method substantially improves the translation performance of CTC-based
models. Our best model achieves 30.06 BLEU on WMT14 En-De with only oneiteration decoding, closing the gap between non-autoregressive and autoregressive
models.2

1

Introduction

Non-autoregressive translation (NAT) models achieve significant decoding speedup in neural machine
translation [NMT, 1, 47] by generating target words simultaneously [17]. This advantage usually
comes at the cost of translation quality due to the mismatch of training objectives. NAT models are
typically trained with the cross-entropy loss, which forces the model outputs to be aligned verbatim
with the target sentence and will highly penalize small shifts in word positions. The explicit alignment
required by the cross-entropy loss cannot be guaranteed due to the multi-modality problem that
there exist many possible translations for the same sentence [17], making the cross-entropy loss
intrinsically mismatched with NAT.
As the cross-entropy loss can not evaluate NAT outputs properly, many efforts have been devoted
to designing better training objectives for NAT [29, 40–42, 38, 13, 36, 9, 43]. Among them, latent
alignment models [29, 36] relax the alignment restriction by marginalizing out all monotonic latent
alignments with the connectionist temporal classification loss [CTC, 15], which receive much attention
for the ability to generate variable length translation.
Latent alignment models generally make a strong monotonic assumption on the mapping between
model output and the target sentence. As illustrated in Figure 1a, the monotonic assumption holds in
⇤

2

Corresponding author: Yang Feng
Source code: https://github.com/ictnlp/NMLA-NAT.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

