PKD: General Distillation Framework for Object
Detectors via Pearson Correlation Coefficient
Yifan Zhang1 ∗
Jianfei Gao2
Anda Cheng1,3
1,3
1
Ke Cheng
Jian Cheng
NLPR & AIRIA, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences1
Shanghai AI Laboratory2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences3
caoweihan2020@ia.ac.cn
{yfzhang, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
gaojianfei@pjlab.org.cn
{chenganda, chengke}2017@ia.ac.cn
Weihan Cao1,3

Abstract
Knowledge distillation(KD) is a widely-used technique to train compact models in
object detection. However, there is still a lack of study on how to distill between
heterogeneous detectors. In this paper, we empirically find that better FPN features from a heterogeneous teacher detector can help the student although their
detection heads and label assignments are different. However, directly aligning the
feature maps to distill detectors suffers from two problems. First, the difference in
feature magnitude between the teacher and the student could enforce overly strict
constraints on the student. Second, the FPN stages and channels with large feature
magnitude from the teacher model could dominate the gradient of distillation loss,
which will overwhelm the effects of other features in KD and introduce much
noise. To address the above issues, we propose to imitate features with Pearson
Correlation Coefficient to focus on the relational information from the teacher
and relax constraints on the magnitude of the features. Our method consistently
outperforms the existing detection KD methods and works for both homogeneous
and heterogeneous student-teacher pairs. Furthermore, it converges faster. With a
powerful MaskRCNN-Swin detector as the teacher, ResNet-50 based RetinaNet
and FCOS achieve 41.5% and 43.9% mAP on COCO2017, which are 4.1% and
4.8% higher than the baseline, respectively. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmrazor.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation(KD) is a widely-used technique to train compact models in object detection.
However, there is still a lack of study on how to distill between heterogeneous detectors. Most previous
works [40, 35, 10, 20, 13] rely on detector-specific designs and can only be applied to homogeneous
detectors. [44, 50] conduct experiments on detectors with heterogeneous backbones, but detectors
with heterogeneous detection heads and different label assignments are always omitted. Object
detection is developing rapidly and algorithms with better performance are proposed continuously.
Nevertheless, it is not easy to change detectors frequently in terms of stability in practical applications.
Furthermore, in some scenarios, only detectors with a specific architecture can be deployed due to
hardware limitations (e.g., two-stage detectors are hard to deploy), while most powerful teachers
belong to different categories. Thus, it is promising if knowledge distillation can be conducted
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

