Perfect Sampling from Pairwise Comparisons

Dimitris Fotakis
NTUA
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr

Alkis Kalavasis
NTUA
kalavasisalkis@mail.ntua.gr

Christos Tzamos
UW Madison
tzamos@wisc.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study how to efficiently obtain perfect samples from a discrete
distribution D given access only to pairwise comparisons of elements of its support.
Specifically, we assume access to samples (x, S), where S is drawn from a distribution over sets Q (indicating the elements being compared), and x is drawn from
the conditional distribution DS (indicating the winner of the comparison) and aim
to output a clean sample y distributed according to D. We mainly focus on the case
of pairwise comparisons where all sets S have size 2. We design a Markov chain
whose stationary distribution coincides with D and give an algorithm to obtain
exact samples using the technique of Coupling from the Past. However, the sample
complexity of this algorithm depends on the structure of the distribution D and
can be even exponential in the support of D in many natural scenarios. Our main
contribution is to provide an efficient exact sampling algorithm whose complexity
does not depend on the structure of D. To this end, we give a parametric Markov
chain that mixes significantly faster given a good approximation to the stationary
distribution. We can obtain such an approximation using an efficient learning from
pairwise comparisons algorithm (Shah et al., JMLR 17, 2016). Our technique
for speeding up sampling from a Markov chain whose stationary distribution is
approximately known is simple, general and possibly of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning questions dealing with pairwise comparisons (PCs) constitute a fundamental and
broad research area with multiple real-world applications [SBB+ 16, Kaz11, LOAF12, SBGW16,
FH10, WJJ13]. For instance, the preference of a consumer to choose one product over another
constitutes a pairwise comparison between the two products. The two bedrocks of modern ML
applications are inference/learning and sampling. The area of learning from pairwise comparisons
has a vast amount of work [RA14, SBGW16, DKNS01, NOS12, Hun04, JLYY11, APA18, LSR21,
HOX14, SBB+ 16, VY16, NOS17, VYZ20]. In this problem, there exist n alternatives and an
n
unknown
P weight vector D ∈ R where D(i) is the weight of the i-th element with D(i) ≥ 0
and i∈[n] D(i) = 1, i.e., D is a probability distribution over [n]. Roughly speaking, the learner
observes pairwise comparisons (or more generally k-wise comparisons) of the form (w, {u, v}) ∈
[n] × [n]2 that compare the alternatives u 6= v and w equals either u or v indicating the winner
of the comparison. The most fundamental distribution over pairwise comparisons is the BTL
model [BT52, Luc59] where the probability that the learner observes w = u when the items u, v
are compared is D(u)/(D(u) + D(v)). The learner’s goal is mainly to estimate the underlying
distribution D using a small number of pairwise comparisons.
In this work, we focus on questions concerning sampling, the second bedrock of modern ML. In fact,
we will deal with a fundamental area of the sampling literature, namely perfect sampling. In contrast
to approximate sampling, perfect (or exact) sampling from a probabilistic model requires an exact
sample from this model. Problems in this vein of research lie in the intersection of computer science
and probability theory and have been extensively studied [PW96, PW98, Hub04, Hub16, FGY19,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

