Low-rank Optimal Transport:
Approximation, Statistics and Debiasing
Meyer Scetbon
CREST, ENSAE
meyer.scetbon@ensae.fr

Marco Cuturi
Apple and CREST, ENSAE
cuturi@apple.com

Abstract
The matching principles behind optimal transport (OT) play an increasingly important role in machine learning, a trend which can be observed when OT is used to
disambiguate datasets in applications (e.g. single-cell genomics) or used to improve
more complex methods (e.g. balanced attention in transformers or self-supervised
learning). To scale to more challenging problems, there is a growing consensus that
OT requires solvers that can operate on millions, not thousands, of points. The lowrank optimal transport (LOT) approach advocated in Scetbon et al. [2021] holds
several promises in that regard, and was shown to complement more established
entropic regularization approaches, being able to insert itself in more complex
pipelines, such as quadratic OT. LOT restricts the search for low-cost couplings to
those that have a low-nonnegative rank, yielding linear time algorithms in cases
of interest. However, these promises can only be fulfilled if the LOT approach
is seen as a legitimate contender to entropic regularization when compared on
properties of interest, where the scorecard typically includes theoretical properties
(statistical complexity and relation to other methods) or practical aspects (debiasing,
hyperparameter tuning, initialization). We target each of these areas in this paper
in order to cement the impact of low-rank approaches in computational OT.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) is used across data-science to put in correspondence different sets of observations. These observations may come directly from datasets, or, in more advanced applications, depict
intermediate layered representations of data. OT theory provides a single grammar to describe and
solve increasingly complex matching problems (linear, quadratic, regularized, unbalanced, etc...),
making it gain a stake in various areas of science such as as single-cell biology Schiebinger et al.
[2019], Yang et al. [2020], Demetci et al. [2020], imaging Schmitz et al. [2018], Heitz et al. [2020],
Zheng et al. [2020] or neuroscience Janati et al. [2020], Koundal et al. [2020].
Regularized approaches to OT. Solving OT problems at scale poses, however, formidable challenges. The most obvious among them is computational: the Kantorovich [1942] problem on discrete
measures of size n is a linear program that requires O(n3 log n) operations to be solved. A second
and equally important challenge lies in the estimation of OT in high-dimensional settings, since it
suffers from the curse-of-dimensionality Fournier and Guillin [2015]. The advent of regularized
approaches, such as entropic regularization [Cuturi, 2013], has pushed these boundaries thanks for
faster algorithms [Scetbon and Cuturi, 2020, Chizat et al., 2020, Clason et al., 2021] and improved
statistical aspects [Genevay et al., 2018a]. Despite these clear strengths, regularized OT solvers
remain, however, costly as they typically scale quadratically in the number of observations.
Scaling up OT using low-rank couplings. While it is always intuitively possible to reduce the
size of measures (e.g. using k-means) prior to solving an OT between them, a promising line of
work proposes to combine both [Forrow et al., 2019, Scetbon et al., 2021, 2022]. Conceptually, these
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

