Signal Recovery with Non-Expansive
Generative Network Priors
Jorio Cocola ⇤
Harvard University
jcocola@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We study compressive sensing with a deep generative network prior. Initial theoretical guarantees for efficient recovery from compressed linear measurements have
been developed for signals in the range of a ReLU network with Gaussian weights
and logarithmic expansivity: that is when each layer is larger than the previous one
by a logarithmic factor. It was later shown that constant expansivity is sufficient for
recovery. It has remained open whether the expansivity can be relaxed, allowing
for networks with contractive layers (as often the case of real generators). In this
work we answer this question, proving that a signal in the range of a Gaussian
generative network can be recovered from few linear measurements provided that
the width of the layers is proportional to the input layer size (up to log factors). This
condition allows the generative network to have contractive layers. Our result is
based on showing that Gaussian matrices satisfy a matrix concentration inequality
which we term Range Restricted Weight Distribution Condition (R2WDC) and
which weakens the Weight Distribution Condition (WDC) upon which previous
theoretical guarantees were based. The WDC has also been used to analyze other
signal recovery problems with generative network priors. By replacing the WDC
with the R2WDC, we are able to extend previous results for signal recovery with
expansive generative network priors to non-expansive ones. We discuss these
extensions for phase retrieval, denoising, and spiked matrix recovery.

1

Introduction

The compressed sensing problem consists in estimating a signal y? 2 Rn from (possibly) noisy linear
measurements
b = Ay? + ⌘
where A 2 Rm⇥n is the measurements matrix, m < n and ⌘ 2 Rm is the noise.

To overcome the ill-posedness of the problem, structural priors on the unknown signal y? need to
be enforced. One now classical approach assumes that the target signal y? is sparse with respect
to a given basis. In the last 20 years, efficient reconstruction algorithms have been developed that
provably estimate s-sparse signals in Rn from m = O(s log n) random measurements [5, 12].

Another approach recently put forward, leverages trained generative networks. These networks
are trained, in an unsupervised manner, to generate samples from a target distribution of signals.
Assuming y? belongs to the same distribution used to train a generative network G : Rk ! Rn with
k ⌧ n, an estimate of y? can be found by searching the input x̂ (“latent code”) of G that minimizes
⇤

Work done while at Northeastern University

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

