Imitating Past Successes can be Very Suboptimal

Benjamin Eysenbachα Soumith Udathaα Sergey Levineβ Ruslan Salakhutdinovα
α
β
Carnegie Mellon University
UC Berkeley
beysenba@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Prior work has proposed a simple strategy for reinforcement learning (RL): label
experience with the outcomes achieved in that experience, and then imitate the
relabeled experience. These outcome-conditioned imitation learning methods are
appealing because of their simplicity, strong performance, and close ties with
supervised learning. However, it remains unclear how these methods relate to the
standard RL objective, reward maximization. In this paper, we formally relate
outcome-conditioned imitation learning to reward maximization, drawing a precise
relationship between the learned policy and Q-values and explaining the close
connections between these methods and prior EM-based policy search methods.
This analysis shows that existing outcome-conditioned imitation learning methods
do not necessarily improve the policy, but a simple modification results in a method
that does guarantee policy improvement, under some assumptions.

1

Introduction

Recent work has proposed methods for reducing reinforcement learning (RL) to a supervised learning
problem using hindsight relabeling [1, 5, 9, 11, 25, 31]. These approaches label each state action
pair with an outcome that happened in the future (e.g., reaching a goal), and then learn a conditional
policy by treating that action as optimal for making that outcome happen. While most prior work
defines outcomes as reaching goal states [5, 9, 25, 28, 31, 37], some work defines outcomes in terms
of rewards [3, 14, 30], language [19, 23], or sets of reward functions [7, 16]. We will refer to these
methods as outcome-conditioned behavioral cloning (OCBC).
OCBC methods are appealing because of their simplicity and strong performance [3, 6, 9]. Their
implementation mirrors standard supervised learning problems. These methods do not require
learning a value function and can be implemented without any reference to a reward function. Thus,
OCBC methods might be preferred over more standard RL algorithms, which are typically challenging
to implement correctly and tune [10].
However, these OCBC methods face a major challenge: it remains unclear whether the learned policy
is actually optimizing any control objective. Does OCBC correspond to maximizing some reward
function? If not, can it be mended such that it does perform reward maximization? Understanding
the theoretical underpinnings of OCBC is important for determining how to correctly apply this
seemingly-appealing class of methods. It is important for diagnosing why existing implementations
can fail to solve some tasks [13, 25], and is important for predicting when these methods will work
effectively. Relating OCBC to reward maximization may provide guidance on how to choose tasks
and relabeling strategies to maximize a desired reward function.
The aim of this paper is to understand how OCBC methods relate to reward maximization. The
key idea in our analysis is to decompose OCBC methods into a two-step procedure: the first step
corresponds to averaging together experience collected when attempting many tasks, while the second
step reweights the combined experience by task-specific reward functions. This averaging step is
equivalent to taking a convex combination of the initial task-conditioned policies, and this averaging
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

