Improving Zero-shot
Generalization in Offline Reinforcement Learning
using Generalized Similarity Functions
Bogdan Mazoure⇤
McGill University, Quebec AI Institute
bogdan.mazoure@mail.mcgill.ca
Ofir Nachum
Google Brain

Ilya Kostrikov
UC Berkeley

Jonathan Tompson
Google Brain

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) agents are widely used for solving complex sequential
decision making tasks, but still exhibit difficulty in generalizing to scenarios not
seen during training. While prior online approaches demonstrated that using
additional signals beyond the reward function can lead to better generalization
capabilities in RL agents, i.e., using self-supervised learning (SSL), they struggle in
the offline RL setting, i.e., learning from a static dataset. We show that performance
of online algorithms for generalization in RL can be hindered in the offline setting
due to poor estimation of similarity between observations. We propose a new
theoretically-motivated framework called Generalized Similarity Functions (GSF),
which uses contrastive learning to train an offline RL agent to aggregate observations
based on the similarity of their expected future behavior, where we quantify this
similarity using generalized value functions. We show that GSF is general enough
to recover existing SSL objectives while also improving zero-shot generalization
performance on two pixel-based offline RL benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful framework for solving complex tasks that require a
sequence of decisions. The RL paradigm has allowed for major breakthroughs in various fields, e.g.
outperforming humans on video games [1, 2], controlling stratospheric balloons [3] and learning
reward functions from robot manipulation videos [4]. More recently, RL agents have been tested
in a generalization setting, i.e. in which training involves a finite number of related tasks sampled
from some distribution, with a potentially distinct sampling distribution during test time [5, 6, 7].
The main issue for designing generalizable agents is the lack of on-policy data from tasks not seen
during training: it is impossible to enumerate all variants of a real-world environment during training
and hence the agent must extrapolate from a (limited) training task collection onto a broader set of
problems. Since the learning agent is given no training data from test-time tasks, this problem is
referred to as zero-shot generalization. In our work, we are interested in the problem of zero-shot
generalization where the difference between tasks is predominantly due to perceptually distinct
observations. An example of this setting is any environment with distractor features [8, 9], i.e. features
with no dependence on the reward signal nor the agent’s decisions. This generalization setting has
recently received much attention [10, 11, 12], due to its particular relevance to real-world scenarios,
for example deploying the same autonomous driving agent at day or at night.
⇤

Work done while at Google Brain.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

