D2NeRF: Self-Supervised Decoupling of Dynamic and
Static Objects from a Monocular Video

Tianhao Wu
University of Cambridge

Fangcheng Zhong
University of Cambridge

Forrester Cole
Google Research

Andrea Tagliasacchi
Google Research
Simon Fraser University

Cengiz Oztireli
Google Research
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Given a monocular video, segmenting and decoupling dynamic objects while recovering the static environment is a widely studied problem in machine intelligence.
Existing solutions usually approach this problem in the image domain, limiting
their performance and understanding of the environment. We introduce Decoupled
Dynamic Neural Radiance Field (D2 NeRF), a self-supervised approach that takes
a monocular video and learns a 3D scene representation which decouples moving
objects, including their shadows, from the static background. Our method represents the moving objects and the static background by two separate neural radiance
fields with only one allowing for temporal changes. A naive implementation of
this approach leads to the dynamic component taking over the static one as the
representation of the former is inherently more general and prone to overfitting.
To this end, we propose a novel loss to promote correct separation of phenomena.
We further propose a shadow field network to detect and decouple dynamically
moving shadows. We introduce a new dataset containing various dynamic objects
and shadows and demonstrate that our method can achieve better performance than
state-of-the-art approaches in decoupling dynamic and static 3D objects, occlusion
and shadow removal, and image segmentation for moving objects. Project page:
d2nerf.github.io

1

Introduction

Reasoning about motion is a fundamental task in machine vision which facilitates intelligent interactions with the 3D environment for applications such as robotics and autonomous driving. Given
a monocular RGB video captured from a moving casual camera, we consider the problem of disentangling the camera from object motion, and simultaneously recovering a 3D model of the static
environment.
While decomposition of scenes in the image domain has been addressed in the literature, the use
of 2D priors and inpainting technique lacks 3D understanding, leading to sub-optimal results. We
approach this problem in 3D, aiming to reconstruct a decoupled 3D scene representation that allows
for synthesizing the dynamic and static objects separately in a free-view and time-varying fashion.
Compared to the task of static scene reconstruction [32], modeling a scene with time-dependent
effects is a severely ill-posed problem. Existing works seek for robust solutions by incorporating
additional supervision such as multi-view capture [25], optical flow [10], or depth [60], but they treat
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

