Spending Thinking Time Wisely: Accelerating MCTS
with Virtual Expansions

⇤

Weirui Ye⇤ Pieter Abbeel† Yang Gao ⇤‡§
Tsinghua University, † UC Berkeley, § Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
One of the most important AI research questions is to trade off computation versus
performance since “perfect rationality" exists in theory but is impossible to achieve
in practice. Recently, Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) has attracted considerable
attention due to the significant performance improvement in various challenging
domains. However, the expensive time cost during search severely restricts its
scope for applications. This paper proposes the Virtual MCTS (V-MCTS), a variant
of MCTS that spends more search time on harder states and less search time on
simpler states adaptively. We give theoretical bounds of the proposed method and
evaluate the performance and computations on 9 ⇥ 9 Go board games and Atari
games. Experiments show that our method can achieve comparable performances to
the original search algorithm while requiring less than 50% search time on average.
We believe that this approach is a viable alternative for tasks under limited time and
resources. The code is available at https://github.com/YeWR/V-MCTS.git.

1

Introduction

When artificial intelligence was first studied in the 1950s, researchers have sought to find the solution
to the question “How to build an agent with perfect rationality". The term “perfect rationality"
[7, 24, 26] here refers to the decision made with infinite amounts of computations. However, one can
only solve small-scale problems without considering the practical computation time since classical
search algorithms usually exhibit exponential running time. Therefore, recent AI research would no
longer seek to achieve “perfect rationality", but instead carefully trade-off computation versus the
level of rationality. People have developed computational models like “bounded optimality" to model
these settings [26]. The increasing level of rationality under the same computational budget has given
us a lot of AI successes. Algorithms include the Monte-Carlo sampling algorithms, the variational
inference algorithms, and using DNNs as universal function approximators [9, 8, 13, 30, 17].
Recently, MCTS-based RL algorithms have achieved much success, mainly on board games. The
most notable achievement is that AlphaGo beats Hui Fan in 2015 [30]. It is the first time a computer
program beat a human professional Go player. Afterward, AlphaGo beats two top-ranking human
players, Lee Sedol in 2016 and Jie Ke in 2017, the latter of which ranked first worldwide at the
time. Later, MCTS-based RL algorithms were further extended to other board games and Atari
games [27]. EfficientZero [34] significantly improves the sample efficiency of MCTS-based RL
algorithms, shedding light on its future applications in the real world like robotics and self-driving.
Despite the impressive performance of MCTS-based RL algorithms, they require massive amounts of
computation to train and evaluate. For example, MuZero [27] used 1000 TPUs trained for 12 hours
to learn the game of Go, and for a single Atari game, it needs 40 TPUs to train 12 hours. Compared
⇤

ywr20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gaoyangiiis@tsinghua.edu.cn
pabbeel@berkeley.edu
‡
Corresponding author
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

