Equivariant Networks for Zero-Shot Coordination
Darius Muglich
University of Oxford
dariusm1997@yahoo.com

Christian Schroeder de Witt
FLAIR, University of Oxford
cs@robots.ox.ac.uk

Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

Elise van der Pol
Microsoft Research AI4Science
evanderpol@microsoft.com

Jakob Foerster
FLAIR, University of Oxford
jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Successful coordination in Dec-POMDPs requires agents to adopt robust strategies
and interpretable styles of play for their partner. A common failure mode is symmetry breaking, when agents arbitrarily converge on one out of many equivalent but
mutually incompatible policies. Commonly these examples include partial observability, e.g. waving your right hand vs. left hand to convey a covert message. In this
paper, we present a novel equivariant network architecture for use in Dec-POMDPs
that prevents the agent from learning policies which break symmetries, doing so
more effectively than prior methods. Our method also acts as a “coordinationimprovement operator” for generic, pre-trained policies, and thus may be applied
at test-time in conjunction with any self-play algorithm. We provide theoretical
guarantees of our work and test on the AI benchmark task of Hanabi, where we
demonstrate our methods outperforming other symmetry-aware baselines in zeroshot coordination, as well as able to improve the coordination ability of a variety
of pre-trained policies. In particular, we show our method can be used to improve
on the state of the art for zero-shot coordination on the Hanabi benchmark.

1

Introduction

A popular method for learning strategies in partially-observable cooperative Markov games is via
self-play (SP), where a joint policy controls all players during training and at test time [21, 37, 45, 53].
While SP can yield highly effective strategies, these strategies often fail in zero-shot coordination
(ZSC), where independently trained strategies are paired together for one step at test time. A common
cause for this failure is mutually incompatible symmetry breaking (e.g. signalling 0 to refer to a “cat”
vs. a “dog”). Specifically, this symmetry breaking results in policies that act differently in situations
which are equivalent with respect to the symmetries of the environment [22, 38].
To address this, we are interested in devising equivariant strategies, which we illustrate in Figure
1. Equivariant policies are such that symmetric changes to their observation cause a corresponding
change to their output. In doing so, we fundamentally prevent the agent from breaking symmetries
over the course of training.
In earlier work, the Other-Play (OP) learning algorithm [22] addressed symmetry in this setting by
training agents to maximize expected return when randomly matched with symmetry-equivalent
policies of their training time partners. This learning rule is implemented by independently applying
a random symmetry permutation to the action-observation history of each agent during each episode.
OP, however, has some pitfalls, namely: 1) it does not guarantee equivariance; 2) it poses the burden
of learning environmental symmetry onto the agent; and 3) it is only applicable during training time
and cannot be used as a policy-improvement operator.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

