Hard ImageNet: Segmentations for Objects with
Strong Spurious Cues
Mazda Moayeri
mmoayeri@umd.edu

Sahil Singla
ssingla@umd.edu

Soheil Feizi
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland

Abstract
Deep classifiers are known to rely on spurious features, leading to reduced generalization. The severity of this problem varies significantly by class. We identify
15 classes in ImageNet with very strong spurious cues, and collect segmentation
masks for these challenging objects to form Hard ImageNet. Leveraging noise,
saliency, and ablation based metrics, we demonstrate that models rely on spurious
features in Hard ImageNet far more than in RIVAL10, an ImageNet analog to
CIFAR10. We observe Hard ImageNet objects are less centered and occupy much
less space in their images than RIVAL10 objects, leading to greater spurious feature
reliance. Further, we use robust neural features to automatically rank our images
based on the degree of spurious cues present. Comparing images with high and
low rankings within a class naturally reveals the exact spurious features models
rely upon, and shows classifiers suffer reduced accuracy when spurious features
are absent. With Hard ImageNet’s annotations and evaluation suite, the community
can begin to address the problem of learning to detect challenging objects for the
right reasons, despite the presence of strong spurious cues.

1

Introduction

Deep learning based image classifiers are effective but brittle to distribution shift, leading to serious
issues when models are deployed to sensitive applications like medicine [7, 42]. The reliance of
models on spurious features, which are predictive of class labels in training data but are irrelevant to
the true labeling function, contributes to reduced distributional robustness. The lack of interpretability
of deep models is a bottleneck to understanding causes and degree to which models rely on spurious
features, especially on real data. Some datasets have been proposed where spurious features are
manually annotated or injected into synthetic [1, 30] or application-specific [25, 21] datasets, though
insights from these benchmarks may have limited transferability to more general domains.
Recently, [34] apply a mostly automated procedure for neural network interpretability [36] to discover
and annotate core (i.e. essential to the class label) and spurious features at scale. [35] expand this
analysis to softly segment core input regions in nearly all of the ubiquitous benchmark dataset, ImageNet [8]. Their method leverages the activation maps of neural features that highly contribute to the
activation of a given class logit and detect core features for that class. However, for 15 classes, all of
the inspected features were spurious, making the core-feature-based segmentation scheme infeasible,
while suggesting the presence of uniquely strong spurious cues within this subset of ImageNet.
In this paper, we first gather object segmentations for these 15 classes, forming the Hard ImageNet
dataset. We then curate an evaluation suite of ablation, noise, and saliency based analyses that
leverage object segmentations to assess the degree to which models rely on spurious features. With
this benchmark, we show that models rely on spurious features much more for Hard ImageNet objects
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

