Uncertainty Estimation for Multi-view Data:
The Power of Seeing the Whole Picture

Myong Chol Jung
Monash University
david.jung@monash.edu

He Zhao
CSIRO’s Data61
he.zhao@ieee.org

Belinda Gabbe
Monash University
belinda.gabbe@monash.edu

Joanna Dipnall
Monash University
jo.dipnall@monash.edu
Lan Du∗
Monash University
lan.du@monash.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty estimation is essential to make neural networks trustworthy in realworld applications. Extensive research efforts have been made to quantify and
reduce predictive uncertainty. However, most existing works are designed for
unimodal data, whereas multi-view uncertainty estimation has not been sufficiently
investigated. Therefore, we propose a new multi-view classification framework
for better uncertainty estimation and out-of-domain sample detection, where we
associate each view with an uncertainty-aware classifier and combine the predictions of all the views in a principled way. The experimental results with real-world
datasets demonstrate that our proposed approach is an accurate, reliable, and wellcalibrated classifier, which predominantly outperforms the multi-view baselines
tested in terms of expected calibration error, robustness to noise, and accuracy
for the in-domain sample classification and the out-of-domain sample detection
tasks2 .

1

Introduction

Reliable uncertainty estimation is critical for deploying deep learning models in a number of domains
such as medical imaging diagnosis [35] or autonomous driving [8]. Even with accurate predictions,
domain experts still raise questions of how trustworthy the models are [39]. For example, when a
model’s prediction contradicts a domain expert’s opinion, the quantification of the uncertainty of the
model’s predictions can help determine model’s reliability and justify model use.
Recently, uncertainty estimation of neural networks has been an active research area, where many
methods of quantifying uncertainty in predictions have been proposed [44, 9, 40, 50, 32, 24]. The
majority of existing work focuses on uncertainty estimation for unimodal data. However, in many
practical problems, data can exhibit in multi-views or multi-modalities. For example, LiDAR, radar,
and RGB cameras can simultaneously capture complementary information about a scene [49], and
computed tomography (CT) scans and x-ray images can be analyzed together to diagnose a disease
[3]. Trustworthy uncertainty estimation with multi-view or multi-modalities data is important because
the challenges it faces may differ from a unimodal setting (e.g., maintaining accurate predictions
with one of the input views’ domain shifted). Despite the success of existing work on unimodality,
modelling and estimating uncertainty for multi-view data remain a less explored question [11].
∗
2

Corresponding author
We provide our code at https://github.com/davidmcjung/multiview_uncertainty_estimation

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

