Data Distributional Properties Drive
Emergent In-Context Learning in Transformers
Stephanie C.Y. Chan
DeepMind
Aaditya K. Singh
University College London

Adam Santoro
DeepMind

Andrew K. Lampinen
DeepMind

Pierre H. Richemond
DeepMind

Jane X. Wang
DeepMind

James L. McClelland
DeepMind, Stanford University

Felix Hill
DeepMind

Abstract
Large transformer-based models are able to perform in-context few-shot learning,
without being explicitly trained for it. This observation raises the question: what
aspects of the training regime lead to this emergent behavior? Here, we show that
this behavior is driven by the distributions of the training data itself. In-context
learning emerges when the training data exhibits particular distributional properties
such as burstiness (items appear in clusters rather than being uniformly distributed
over time) and having large numbers of rarely occurring classes. In-context learning
also emerges more strongly when item meanings or interpretations are dynamic
rather than fixed. These properties are exemplified by natural language, but are
also inherent to naturalistic data in a wide range of other domains. They also
depart significantly from the uniform, i.i.d. training distributions typically used for
standard supervised learning. In our initial experiments, we found that in-context
learning traded off against more conventional weight-based learning, and models
were unable to achieve both simultaneously. However, our later experiments
uncovered that the two modes of learning could co-exist in a single model when
it was trained on data following a skewed Zipfian distribution – another common
property of naturalistic data, including language. In further experiments, we found
that naturalistic data distributions were only able to elicit in-context learning in
transformers, and not in recurrent models. In sum, our findings indicate how the
transformer architecture works together with particular properties of the training
data to drive the intriguing emergent in-context learning behaviour of large language
models, and how future work might encourage both in-context and in-weights
learning in domains beyond language.1

1

Introduction

Large transformer-based language models show an intriguing ability to perform in-context learning
(Brown et al., 2020). This is the ability to generalize rapidly from a few examples of a new concept
on which they have not been previously trained, without gradient updates to the model. In-context
learning is a special case of few-shot learning in which the output is conditioned on examples from a
‘context’, and where there are no gradient updates. It contrasts with ‘in-weights’ learning, which is
1

Code is available at: https://github.com/deepmind/emergent_in_context_learning

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

