Learning low-dimensional generalizable natural
features from retina using a U-net
Siwei Wang1 , Benjamin Hoshal1 , Elizabeth A de Laittre2 , Olivier Marre3 , Michael J Berry II4 , and
Stephanie E Palmer1
1

Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago
2
Committee on Computational Neuroscience, University of Chicago
3
Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la Vision
4
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University

Abstract
Much of sensory neuroscience focuses on presenting stimuli that are chosen by the
experimenter because they are parametric and easy to sample and are thought to
be behaviorally relevant to the organism. However, it is not generally known what
these relevant features are in complex, natural scenes. This work focuses on using
the retinal encoding of natural movies to determine the presumably behaviorallyrelevant features that the brain represents. It is prohibitive to parameterize a natural
movie and its respective retinal encoding fully. We use time within a natural movie
as a proxy for the whole suite of features evolving across the scene. We then
use a task-agnostic deep architecture, an encoder-decoder, to model the retinal
encoding process and characterize its representation of “time in the natural scene”
in a compressed latent space. In our end-to-end training, an encoder learns a
compressed latent representation from a large population of salamander retinal
ganglion cells responding to natural movies, while a decoder samples from this
compressed latent space to generate the appropriate future movie frame. By
comparing latent representations of retinal activity from three movies, we find that
the retina has a generalizable encoding for time in the natural scene: the precise,
low-dimensional representation of time learned from one movie can be used to
represent time in a different movie, with up to 17 ms resolution. We then show
that static textures and velocity features of a natural movie are synergistic. The
retina simultaneously encodes both to establishes a generalizable, low-dimensional
representation of time in the natural scene.

1

Introduction

The flexibility and computational power of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has helped sensory
neuroscience model the neural code for natural stimuli with rich feature repertoires. It has been
shown that CNNs carryout encoding computations similar to those observed in the retina [1, 2]. A
CNN also makes the inverse problem of decoding complex stimuli from the retinal response [3] more
tractable. Understanding decoding has its own significant merit because neural systems downstream
of the retina can only ‘see’ the world through the retinal code. For any visual information to be
used to guide behavior, it must first be decoded from retinal responses. Historically, the decoding
problem for natural stimuli has been challenging because both the retinal response and the stimuli
are high-dimensional. Although deep neural networks can capture the high dimensionality of neural
inputs and responses [4], they do so by projecting the neural code into another high-dimensional
parameter space that is also hard to interpret. While these tools tell us that we can decode, our ability
to understand the features of neural activity relevant for that decoding is limited. In this work, we
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

