On the Effective Number of Linear Regions in Shallow
Univariate ReLU Networks: Convergence Guarantees
and Implicit Bias

Itay Safran∗
Princeton University

Gal Vardi*
TTI-Chicago and Hebrew University

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University

Abstract
We study the dynamics and implicit bias of gradient flow (GF) on univariate
ReLU neural networks with a single hidden layer in a binary classification setting.
We show that when the labels are determined by the sign of a target network
with r neurons, with high probability over the initialization of the network and
the sampling of the dataset, GF converges in direction (suitably defined) to a
network achieving perfect training accuracy and having at most O(r) linear regions,
implying a generalization bound. Unlike many other results in the literature, under
an additional assumption on the distribution of the data, our result holds even
for mild over-parameterization, where the width is Õ(r) and independent of the
sample size.

1

Introduction

Over-parameterized neural networks are known to be easier to train compared to their smaller counterparts, despite the resulting increase in the problem’s dimensionality and the required computational
resources [Daniely, 2017, Allen-Zhu et al., 2018, Safran and Shamir, 2018, Du et al., 2018, 2019, Ji
et al., 2019, Zou et al., 2020, Li et al., 2020, Safran et al., 2021, Zhou et al., 2021]. However what
is perhaps more surprising, is that in stark contrast to our classic understanding of generalization
in machine learning models, this does not seem to degrade the generalization capabilities of the
learned model in spite of the significant increase in its capacity. It is widely believed that what
plays a key role in explaining this phenomenon is what is commonly referred to in the literature
as implicit bias/regularization [Neyshabur et al., 2014, Zhang et al., 2021], where the optimization
algorithm used inadvertently exhibits a bias towards empirical minimizers with a certain property that
might induce better generalization. For example, such properties may include having a small norm
or quasi-norm of the weights (e.g. Neyshabur [2017], Neyshabur et al. [2017], Lyu and Li [2019],
Woodworth et al. [2020], Ji and Telgarsky [2020]) or a low rank solution (e.g. Razin and Cohen
[2020]).
In this work, we study the dynamics and the implicit bias of GF on univariate ReLU neural networks,
with the underlying assumption that the labels are determined by the sign of a target network of width
r (which thus changes sign between −1 and 1 at most r times). Our analysis reveals that under the
assumption of an i.i.d., normally-distributed initialization of the weights and biases of the network,
over-parameterization (i.e. the use of width strictly larger than r) is necessary for attaining a small
population loss. Moreover, if we also assume that the width scales at least linearly (up to logarithmic
terms, excluding dependence on the confidence parameter) with the length of the shortest interval on
which the labels do not change sign, then with high probability over the initialization of the network
and the sampling of the data, over-parameterization is sufficient for driving the empirical loss to be
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

