Effective Dimension in Bandit Problems under
Censorship
Gauthier Guinet ⇤
AWS AI Labs
guinetgg@amazon.com

Saurabh Amin †
MIT
amins@mit.edu

Patrick Jaillet ‡
MIT
jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study both multi-armed and contextual bandit problems in censored environments. Our goal is to estimate the performance loss due to censorship
in the context of classical algorithms designed for uncensored environments. Our
main contributions include the introduction of a broad class of censorship models
and their analysis in terms of the effective dimension of the problem – a natural
measure of its underlying statistical complexity and main driver of the regret bound.
In particular, the effective dimension allows us to maintain the structure of the
original problem at first order, while embedding it in a bigger space, and thus
naturally leads to results analogous to uncensored settings. Our analysis involves a
continuous generalization of the Elliptical Potential Inequality, which we believe
is of independent interest. We also discover an interesting property of decisionmaking under censorship: a transient phase during which initial misspecification
of censorship is self-corrected at an extra cost; followed by a stationary phase that
reflects the inherent slowdown of learning governed by the effective dimension.
Our results are useful for applications of sequential decision-making models where
the feedback received depends on strategic uncertainty (e.g., agents’ willingness to
follow a recommendation) and/or random uncertainty (e.g., loss or delay in arrival
of information).

1

Introduction

Bandit problems are prototypical models of sequential decision-making under uncertainty. They
are widely studied due to their applications in recommender systems, online advertising, medical
treatment assignment, revenue management, network routing and control [26, 39]. Our work is
motivated by settings in which the feedback received by the decision-maker in each round of decision
is censored by a stochastic process that depends on the current action as well as past history of
feedbacks and actions. For instance, in typical missing data problems, the decision-maker needs to
deal with frequent losses of information (or delays in arrival of information) due to exogeneous failures
such as faulty and/or unreliable communication. Missing observations in dynamical interactions
with the environment are a common concern in diverse fields ranging from operations management
to health sciences to physical sciences [45, 20, 29]. In other settings, such as AI-driven platforms
for health alerts, route guidance, and product recommendations [7, 46], the reception of feedback
depends on whether or not the decision (or recommendation) is adopted by strategic agents (e.g.
patients, customers or drivers) with private valuations. Thus, from the platform’s viewpoint, the
adoption behavior of heterogeneous agents can be regarded as a stochastic censorship process.
⇤

Work done prior to joining Amazon.
Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering & Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems.
‡
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science & Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

