Parameters or Privacy: A Provable Tradeoff Between
Overparameterization and Membership Inference
Jasper Tan
Rice University

Blake Mason
Rice University

Hamid Javadi
Rice University

Richard G. Baraniuk
Rice University

Abstract
A surprising phenomenon in modern machine learning is the ability of a highly
overparameterized model to generalize well (small error on the test data) even
when it is trained to memorize the training data (zero error on the training data).
This has led to an arms race towards increasingly overparameterized models (c.f.,
deep learning). In this paper, we study an underexplored hidden cost of overparameterization: the fact that overparameterized models may be more vulnerable
to privacy attacks, in particular the membership inference attack that predicts the
(potentially sensitive) examples used to train a model. We significantly extend the
relatively few empirical results on this problem by theoretically proving for an
overparameterized linear regression model in the Gaussian data setting that membership inference vulnerability increases with the number of parameters. Moreover,
a range of empirical studies indicates that more complex, nonlinear models exhibit
the same behavior. Finally, we extend our analysis towards ridge-regularized linear
regression and show in the Gaussian data setting that increased regularization also
increases membership inference vulnerability in the overparameterized regime.

1

Introduction

As more machine learning models are being trained on sensitive user data (e.g., customer behavior,
medical records, personal media), there is a growing concern that these models may serve as a
gateway for malicious adversaries to access the models’ private training data [1, 2]. For example,
the possibility of performing membership inference (MI), the task of identifying whether a specific
data point was included in a model’s training set or not, can be greatly detrimental to user privacy. In
settings like healthcare, knowledge of mere inclusion in a training dataset (e.g., hospital visitation
records) already reveals sensitive information. Moreover, MI can enable the extraction of verbatim
training data from a released model [1].
The general motivation for this paper is the recent realization that privacy issues around machine
learning might be exacerbated by today’s trend towards increasingly overparameterized models that
have more parameters than training data points and so can be trained to memorize (attain zero error
on) the training data. Surprisingly, some overparameterized models (e.g., large regression models [3],
massive deep networks [4, 5]) generalize extremely well [6, 7]. Limited empirical evidence suggests
that overparameterization may lead to greater privacy vulnerabilities [1, 8–11]. However, there has
been little to no analytical work on this important problem.
In this paper, we take the first steps towards an analytical understanding of how the number of
parameters in a machine learning model relates to MI vulnerability. In a theoretical direction, we
prove for linear regression on Gaussian data in the overparameterized regime that increasing the
number of parameters of the model increases its vulnerability to MI (Theorem 3.2). In a supporting
empirical direction, we demonstrate that the same behavior holds for a range of more complex models:
a latent space model, a time-series model, and a nonlinear random ReLU features model (Section 5).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

