A Robust Phased Elimination Algorithm for
Corruption-Tolerant Gaussian Process Bandits
Ilija Bogunovic
University College London
i.bogunovic@ucl.ac.uk
Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Zihan Li
National University of Singapore
lizihan@u.nus.edu
Jonathan Scarlett
National University of Singapore
scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We consider the sequential optimization of an unknown, continuous, and expensive
to evaluate reward function, from noisy and adversarially corrupted observed
rewards. When the corruption attacks are subject to a suitable budget C and the
function lives in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS), the problem can
be posed as corrupted Gaussian process (GP) bandit optimization. We propose a
novel robust elimination-type algorithm that runs in epochs, combines exploration
with infrequent switching to select a small subset of actions, and plays each
action for multiple time instants. Our algorithm, Robust GP Phased Elimination
(RGP-PE), successfully balances robustness to corruptions with exploration and
exploitation such that its performance degrades minimally in the presence (or
absence) of adversarial corruptions. When T is the number of samples and T
is the maximal information gain, the corruption-dependent term in our regret
p
3/2
bound is O(C T ), which is significantly tighter than the existing O(C T T )
for several commonly-considered kernels. We perform the first empirical study
of robustness in the corrupted GP bandit setting, and show that our algorithm is
robust against a variety of adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Black-box optimization is a fundamental problem with broad applications including hyperparameter
tuning [42], robotics [34], and chemical design [20], among others. To make the problem tractable, a
variety of smoothness properties have been adopted, and Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS)
functions have proved to provide a versatile framework that can be tackled via Gaussian process (GP)
methods [43, 15]. This problem is referred to as GP bandits or kernelized bandits.
While an extensive line of works have established GP bandit algorithms and regret bounds, settings
with adversarial corruptions have only arisen relatively recently. Such corruptions may come in the
form of outliers [38, 41], perturbations of sampled inputs [5, 40, 16], adversarial noise in the rewards
[8], or perturbations of the final recommendation [7]. In this work, we are interested in the setting
of adversarial noise in the rewards, in which the performance of standard non-robust GP bandit
algorithms can deteriorate significantly (see Fig. 1).
The first work considering this setting [8] established regret bounds for various algorithms depending
on the degree of knowledge on the corruption level C (defined formally in Section 2). A key limitation
in their regret bound
is that the main corruption-dependent term, C, and the usual uncorrupted regret
p
term, which is T or higher (with time horizon T ), are multiplied together. That is, the dependence
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

