Robust Generalized Method of Moments:
A Finite Sample Viewpoint

Dhruv Rohatgi∗
MIT

Vasilis Syrgkanis†
Stanford University

Abstract
For many inference problems in statistics and econometrics, the unknown parameter is identified by a set of moment conditions. A generic method of solving
moment conditions is the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM). However, classical GMM estimation is potentially very sensitive to outliers. Robustified GMM
estimators have been developed in the past, but suffer from several drawbacks:
computational intractability, poor dimension-dependence, and no quantitative recovery guarantees in the presence of a constant fraction of outliers. In this work, we
develop the first computationally efficient GMM estimator (under intuitive assumptions) that can tolerate a constant  fraction
√ of adversarially corrupted samples, and
that has an `2 recovery guarantee of O( ). To achieve this, we draw upon and
extend a recent line of work on algorithmic robust statistics for related but simpler
problems such as mean estimation, linear regression and stochastic optimization.
As a special case, we apply our algorithm to instrumental variables linear regression
with heterogeneous treatment effects, and experimentally demonstrate that it can
tolerate as much as 10 – 15% corruption, significantly improving upon baseline
methods.

1

Introduction

Econometric and causal inference methodologies are increasingly being incorporated in automated
large scale decision systems. Inevitably these systems need to deal with the plethora of practical
issues that arise from automation. One important aspect is being able to deal with corrupted or
irregular data, either due to poor data collection, the presence of outliers, or adversarial attacks by
malicious agents. Even traditional applications of econometric methods, in social science studies,
can greatly benefit from robust inference so as not to draw conclusions solely driven by a handful of
samples, as was recently highlighted in [4].
One broad statistical framework, that encompasses the most widely used estimation techniques
in econometrics and causal inference, is the framework of estimating models defined via moment
conditions. In this paper we offer a robust estimation algorithm that extends prior recent work in
robust statistics to this more general estimation setting.
For a family of distributions {Dθ : θ ∈ Θ}, identifying the parameter θ is often equivalent to solving
EX∼Dθ [g(X, θ)] = 0,

(1)

for an appropriate problem-specific vector-valued function g. This formalism encompasses such
problems as linear regression (with covariates X, response Y , and moment g((X, Y ), θ) = X(Y −
∗
drohatgi@mit.edu. This work was partially done while the first author was an intern at Microsoft
Research New England.
†
vsyrgk@stanford.edu. This work was partially done while the second author was a Principal Researcher
at Microsoft Research New England.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

