Effective Backdoor Defense by Exploiting Sensitivity
of Poisoned Samples

1

Weixin Chen1 , Baoyuan Wu2 ∗ , Haoqian Wang1∗
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
chenwx20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn,
wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Poisoning-based backdoor attacks are serious threat for training deep models on
data from untrustworthy sources. Given a backdoored model, we observe that
the feature representations of poisoned samples with trigger are more sensitive
to transformations than those of clean samples. It inspires us to design a simple
sensitivity metric, called feature consistency towards transformations (FCT), to
distinguish poisoned samples from clean samples in the untrustworthy training
set. Moreover, we propose two effective backdoor defense methods. Built upon a
sample-distinguishment module utilizing the FCT metric, the first method trains
a secure model from scratch using a two-stage secure training module. And the
second method removes backdoor from a backdoored model with a backdoor
removal module which alternatively unlearns the distinguished poisoned samples
and relearns the distinguished clean samples. Extensive results on three benchmark
datasets demonstrate the superior defense performance against eight types of
backdoor attacks, to state-of-the-art backdoor defenses. Codes are available at:
https://github.com/SCLBD/Effective_backdoor_defense.

1

Introduction

Training deep neural networks (DNNs) often requires a large amount of training data, which is
sometimes obtained from a third-party untrustworthy source. However, the untrustworthy data may
bring serious security threats. One of the typical threats is the poisoning-based backdoor attack [1],
which could inject undesired backdoor—the correlation between trigger(s) and target class(es)—into
the model through maliciously poisoning a few training samples. Specifically, as shown in the top
left of Fig. 1, each poisoned sample is attached with a trigger (see a small grid patch) at the bottom
right corner, and relabelled as a target class. Consequently, the trained backdoored model will predict
clean samples very well, but is likely to predict any sample with the trigger to be the target class.
It has been observed in [2] that poisoned samples with triggers are likely to gather together in
the feature space of a backdoored model, as shown in the top right of Fig. 1. Note that these
poisoned samples contain diverse objects (may be from different source classes), but the information from these objects seems to be ignored by the backdoor model. In other words, the feature
representations of poisoned samples are dominated by the triggers, rather than the objects. We
conjecture that such a domination is mainly due to the overfitting to the triggers by the backdoor
model, since triggers across different poisoned samples are much less diverse than objects. To
verify this conjecture, we propose to slightly perturb both poisoned and clean samples, such as
∗

Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

