Verification and search algorithms for causal DAGs
Davin Choo⇤
National University of Singapore
davin@u.nus.edu

Kirankumar Shiragur⇤
Stanford University
shiragur@stanford.edu

Arnab Bhattacharyya
National University of Singapore
arnabb@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We study two problems related to recovering causal graphs from interventional data:
(i) verification, where the task is to check if a purported causal graph is correct, and
(ii) search, where the task is to recover the correct causal graph. For both, we wish
to minimize the number of interventions performed. For the first problem, we give a
characterization of a minimal sized set of atomic interventions that is necessary and
sufficient to check the correctness of a claimed causal graph. Our characterization
uses the notion of covered edges, which enables us to obtain simple proofs and
also easily reason about earlier known results. We also generalize our results to the
settings of bounded size interventions and node-dependent interventional costs. For
all the above settings, we provide the first known provable algorithms for efficiently
computing (near)-optimal verifying sets on general graphs. For the second problem,
we give a simple adaptive algorithm based on graph separators that produces an
atomic intervention set which fully orients any essential graph while using O(log n)
times the optimal number of interventions needed to verify (verifying size) the
underlying DAG on n vertices. This approximation is tight as any search algorithm
on an essential line graph has worst case approximation ratio of ⌦(log n) with
respect to the verifying size. With bounded size interventions, each of size  k,
our algorithm gives an O(log n · log k) factor approximation. Our result is the first
known algorithm that gives a non-trivial approximation guarantee to the verifying
size on general unweighted graphs and with bounded size interventions.

1

Introduction

Causal inference has long been an important concept in various fields such as philosophy
[Rei56, Woo05, ES07], medicine/biology/genetics [KWJ+ 04, SC17, RHT+ 17, POS+ 18], and econometrics [Hoo90, RW06]. Recently, there has also been a growing interest in the machine learning
community to use causal inference techniques to improve generalizability to novel testing environments (e.g. see [GUA+ 16, LKC17, ABGLP19, Sch22] and references therein). Under the assumption
of causal sufficiency, where there is no unobserved confounders or selection bias, causal inference
using observational data has been extensively studied and many algorithms such as PC [SGSH00]
and GES [Chi02] have been proposed. These algorithms typically recover a causal graph up to its
Markov equivalence class and it is known to be fundamentally impossible to learn causal relationships solely based on observational data. To overcome this issue, one either adds data modeling
assumptions (e.g. see [SHHK06, PB14, MPJ+ 16]) or performs interventions to obtain interventional
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

