Learning to Configure Computer Networks with
Neural Algorithmic Reasoning

Luca Beurer-Kellner1,
1

∗

Martin Vechev1

Laurent Vanbever1

ETH Zurich, Switzerland

2

Petar Veličković2

DeepMind

https://github.com/eth-sri/learning-to-configure-networks

Abstract
We present a new method for scaling automatic configuration of computer
networks. The key idea is to relax the computationally hard search problem of
finding a configuration that satisfies a given specification into an approximate
objective amenable to learning-based techniques. Based on this idea, we train
a neural algorithmic model which learns to generate configurations likely to
(fully or partially) satisfy a given specification under existing routing protocols.
By relaxing the rigid satisfaction guarantees, our approach (i) enables greater
flexibility: it is protocol-agnostic, enables cross-protocol reasoning, and does not
depend on hardcoded rules; and (ii) finds configurations for much larger computer
networks than previously possible. Our learned synthesizer is up to 490× faster
than state-of-the-art SMT-based methods, while producing configurations which
on average satisfy more than 92% of the provided requirements.

1

Introduction

Configuring large-scale networks is a challenging and important task as network configuration
mistakes regularly lead to massive internet-wide outages affecting millions (resp. billions2 ) of
Internet users [35, 25]. Typically, network operators provide a router-level configuration W which,
after applying protocols such as shortest-path routing, induces a certain forwarding behaviour F WD
as illustrated in Figure 1. As this remains a challenging task, much recent research has focused on
automating configuration by leveraging synthesis techniques [15, 5, 31]: A synthesizer is used to
automatically generate a router-level configuration W that, after applying routing protocols results in
forwarding behavior that satisfies a given specification S on how traffic should be routed.
SMT-based Synthesis Due to the hardness of the configuration synthesis problem [7], many
effective tools in this domain [15, 14] resort to satisfiability modulo theory (SMT) solvers, which
employ search-based procedures to find a solution to a set of first-order logic constraints. This enables
comprehensive and exact synthesis by modelling network behavior in first-order logic. However,
these tools are typically protocol-specific, hand-coded, and can exhibit discrepancies in behavior
when compared to actual router hardware [6]. Most importantly, however, they can be very slow or
fail to complete for large networks. For example, the state-of-the-art SMT-based tool NetComplete
[15] requires more than 6 hours to synthesize a configuration for a network with 64 nodes, for which
other SMT-based tools like SyNET [14] take even longer (> 24 hours) [15]. Non-SMT-based tools
such as Propane [4] or Zeppelin [39] have achieved better performance, but at the cost of generality.
∗
2

Correspondence to luca.beurer-kellner@inf.ethz.ch.
As of 2021, Facebook reportedly has 2.9 billion monthly active users [1].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

