PointTAD: Multi-Label Temporal Action Detection
with Learnable Query Points

Jing Tan 1∗ Xiaotong Zhao 2 Xintian Shi 2 Bin Kang 2 Limin Wang 1,3†
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
3
Platform and Content Group (PCG), Tencent
Shanghai AI Lab
jtan@smail.nju.edu.cn, {davidxtzhao,tinaxtshi,binkang}@tencent.com, lmwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional temporal action detection (TAD) usually handles untrimmed videos
with small number of action instances from a single label (e.g., ActivityNet, THUMOS). However, this setting might be unrealistic as different classes of actions
often co-occur in practice. In this paper, we focus on the task of multi-label temporal action detection that aims to localize all action instances from a multi-label
untrimmed video. Multi-label TAD is more challenging as it requires for finegrained class discrimination within a single video and precise localization of the
co-occurring instances. To mitigate this issue, we extend the sparse query-based
detection paradigm from the traditional TAD and propose the multi-label TAD
framework of PointTAD. Specifically, our PointTAD introduces a small set of
learnable query points to represent the important frames of each action instance.
This point-based representation provides a flexible mechanism to localize the discriminative frames at boundaries and as well the important frames inside the action.
Moreover, we perform the action decoding process with the Multi-level Interactive
Module to capture both point-level and instance-level action semantics. Finally,
our PointTAD employs an end-to-end trainable framework simply based on RGB
input for easy deployment. We evaluate our proposed method on two popular
benchmarks and introduce the new metric of detection-mAP for multi-label TAD.
Our model outperforms all previous methods by a large margin under the detectionmAP metric, and also achieves promising results under the segmentation-mAP
metric. Code is available at https://github.com/MCG-NJU/PointTAD.

1

Introduction

With the increasing amount of video resources on the Internet, video understanding is becoming one
of the most important topics in computer vision. Temporal action detection (TAD) [50, 23, 21, 4, 10,
19, 36] has been formally studied on traditional benchmarks such as THUMOS [15], ActivityNet [14],
and HACS [48]. However, the task seems impractical because their videos almost contain nonoverlapping actions from a single category: 85% videos in THUMOS are annotated with single
action category. As a result, most TAD methods [23, 21, 43, 5, 34] simply cast this TAD problem into
sub-problems of action proposal generation and global video classification [40]. In this paper, we
shift our playground to the more complex setup of multi-label temporal action detection, which aims
to detect all action instances from multi-labeled untrimmed videos. Existing works [9, 16, 38, 8] in
this field formulate the problem as a dense prediction task and perform multi-label classification in a
frame-wise manner. Consequently, these methods are weak in localization and fail to provide the
instance-level detection results (i.e., the starting time and ending time of each instance). In analogy
to image instance segmentation [22], we argue that it is necessary to redefine multi-label TAD as a
∗

Work is done during internship at Tencent PCG.

†

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

