Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent on Reparametrized
Models: On Equivalence to Mirror Descent
Zhiyuan Li⇤
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu
Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Tianhao Wang⇤
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
tianhao.wang@yale.edu
Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
arora@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
As part of the effort to understand implicit bias of gradient descent in overparametrized models, several results have shown how the training trajectory on
the overparametrized model can be understood as mirror descent on a different
objective. The main result here is a characterization of this phenomenon under
a notion termed commuting parametrization, which encompasses all the previous results in this setting. It is shown that gradient flow with any commuting
parametrization is equivalent to continuous mirror descent with a related Legendre
function. Conversely, continuous mirror descent with any Legendre function can
be viewed as gradient flow with a related commuting parametrization. The latter
result relies upon Nash’s embedding theorem.

1

Introduction

Implicit bias refers to the phenomenon in machine learning whereby the solution obtained from loss
minimization has special properties that were not implied by value of the loss function and instead
arose from the optimization’s trajectory through the parameter space. Quantifying implicit bias necessarily has to go beyond the traditional black-box convergence analyses of optimization algorithms.
Implicit bias can explain how choice of optimization algorithm can affect generalization [61, 42, 41].
Many existing results about implicit bias view training (in the limit of infinitesimal step size) as
a differential equation or process {x(t)}t 0 ⇢ RD . To show the implicit bias of x(t), the idea
is to show for another (more intuitive or better understood) process {w(t)}t 0 ⇢ Rd that x(t) is
simulating w(t), in the sense that there exists a mapping G : RD ! Rd such that w(t) = G(x(t)).
Then the implicit bias of x(t) can be characterized by translating the special properties of w(t) back
to x(t) through G. A related term, implicit regularization, refers to a handful of such results where
particular update rules are shown to lead to regularized solutions; specifically, x(t) is simulating w(t)
where w(t) is solution to a regularized version of the original loss.
The current paper develops a general framework involving optimization in the continuous-time
regime of a loss L : Rd ! R that has been re-parametrized before optimization as w = G(x)
for some G : RD ! Rd . Then the original loss L(w) in the w-space induces the implied loss
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

