Zero-Shot 3D Drug Design by Sketching and
Generating

1

Siyu Long∗1 , Yi Zhou2 , Xinyu Dai1 , Hao Zhou3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
ByteDance AI Lab
3
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
longsy@smail.nju.edu.cn, zhouyi.naive@bytedance.com
daixinyu@nju.edu.cn, zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Drug design is a crucial step in the drug discovery cycle. Recently, various deep
learning-based methods design drugs by generating novel molecules from scratch,
avoiding traversing large-scale drug libraries. However, they depend on scarce
experimental data or time-consuming docking simulation, leading to overfitting
issues with limited training data and slow generation speed. In this study, we
propose the zero-shot drug design method D ESERT (Drug dEsign by SkEtching
and geneRaTing). Specifically, D ESERT splits the design process into two stages:
sketching and generating, and bridges them with the molecular shape. The twostage fashion enables our method to utilize the large-scale molecular database to
reduce the need for experimental data and docking simulation. Experiments show
that D ESERT achieves a new state-of-the-art at a fast speed.1

1

Introduction

Drug design is a crucial step in the drug discovery cycle, which is the inventive process of finding new
drugs based on a biological target (usually a protein pocket) [1, 2, 3]. However, seeking appropriate
drugs for a particular target is quite challenging due to the enormous space of drug candidates (almost
1033 ). Traditional drug design approaches usually employ virtual screening [4, 5, 6] and molecular
dynamics [7, 8] to traverse in a large scaled drug library, which is time-consuming and could not
produce novel drug candidates. Recently, a line of work proposes to realize drug design by generating
drug molecules from scratch using deep generative models [9, 2, 10], which is quite promising due to
the fast speed and the ability of de-novo drug design.
Most of current drug generation model are developed upon 1D (SMILES) [11, 12, 13] or 2D (molecular graph) [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19] molecular structures, which heavily rely on expensive experimental
data for supervised training while ignoring the 3D interaction information between the drug and the
pocket. In a word, they attempt to find a molecule that maximizes the score given by a bio-activity predictor trained on experimental data. They employ different optimization methods, such as Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) [20], Bayesian Optimization (BO) [21, 22, 9], Reinforcement Learning
(RL) [23, 24, 20, 25, 26, 27], Evolutionary and Genetic Algorithms (EA/GA) [28, 29, 30, 31, 32],
and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [33, 34], in the molecular space for obtaining desired
drug molecule under certain constraints. However, we argue that a purely data-driven approach of
drug design is practically limited, since in most cases, the quantity of experimental drug-pocket pairs
hardly enables supervised training of de-novo drug design. Generally, most protein pockets lack
bio-activity data, and learning on noisy and deficient data may lead to severe overfitting problems.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/longlongman/DESERT.
∗ Work was done when Siyu Long was a research intern at Bytedance AI Lab.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

