Cost-efficient Gaussian tensor network embeddings
for tensor-structured inputs

Linjian Ma, Edgar Solomonik
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{lma16, solomon2}@illinois.edu

Abstract
This work discusses tensor network embeddings, which are random matrices (S)
with tensor network structure. These embeddings have been used to perform dimensionality reduction of tensor network structured inputs x and accelerate applications such as tensor decomposition and kernel regression. Existing works have
designed embeddings for inputs x with specific structures, such as the Kronecker
product or Khatri-Rao product, such that the computational cost for calculating Sx
is efficient. We provide a systematic way to design tensor network embeddings
consisting of Gaussian random tensors, such that for inputs with more general
tensor network structures, both the sketch size (row size of S) and the sketching
computational cost are low.
We analyze general tensor network embeddings that can be reduced to a sequence
of sketching matrices. We provide a sufficient condition to quantify the accuracy
of such embeddings and derive sketching asymptotic cost lower bounds using embeddings that satisfy this condition and have a sketch size lower than any input
dimension. We then provide an algorithm to efficiently sketch input data using
such embeddings. The sketch size of the embedding used in the algorithm has a
linear dependence on the number of sketching dimensions of the input. Assuming tensor contractions are performed with classical dense matrix multiplication
√
algorithms, this algorithm achieves asymptotic cost within a factor of O( m) of
our cost lower bound, where m is the sketch size. Further, when each tensor in
the input has a dimension that needs to be sketched, this algorithm yields the optimal sketching asymptotic cost. We apply our sketching analysis to inexact tensor
decomposition optimization algorithms. We provide a sketching algorithm for CP
decomposition that is asymptotically faster than existing work in multiple regimes,
and show the optimality of an existing algorithm for tensor train rounding.

1

Introduction

Sketching techniques, which randomly project high-dimensional data onto lower dimensional spaces
while still preserving relevant information in the data [43], have been widely used in numerical linear
algebra, including for regression, low-rank approximation, and matrix multiplication [50]. One key
step of sketching algorithms is to design an embedding matrix S ∈ Rm×n with m  n, such that for
any input (also called data throughout the paper) x ∈ Rn , the projected vector norm is (1 ± )-close
to the input vector, kSxk2 = (1 ± )kxk2 , with probability at least 1 − δ (defined as (, δ)-accurate
embedding throughout the paper), and the multiplication Sx can be computationally efficient. S is
commonly chosen as a random matrix with each element being an i.i.d. Gaussian variable when x
is dense, or a random sparse matrix when x is sparse, etc.
In this work, we focus on the case where x has a tensor network structure. A tensor network [35]
uses a set of (small) tensors, where some or all of their dimensions are contracted according to some
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

