On the Generalizability and Predictability of
Recommender Systems
Duncan McElfresh⇤1 , Sujay Khandagale⇤1 , Jonathan Valverde⇤1,3 ,
John P. Dickerson2,3 , Colin White1
1
Abacus.AI, 2 ArthurAI, 3 University of Maryland

Abstract
While other areas of machine learning have seen more and more automation,
designing a high-performing recommender system still requires a high level of
human effort. Furthermore, recent work has shown that modern recommender
system algorithms do not always improve over well-tuned baselines. A natural
follow-up question is, “how do we choose the right algorithm for a new dataset
and performance metric?” In this work, we start by giving the first large-scale
study of recommender system approaches by comparing 24 algorithms and 100
sets of hyperparameters across 85 datasets and 315 metrics. We find that the
best algorithms and hyperparameters are highly dependent on the dataset and
performance metric. However, there is also a strong correlation between the
performance of each algorithm and various meta-features of the datasets. Motivated
by these findings, we create RecZilla, a meta-learning approach to recommender
systems that uses a model to predict the best algorithm and hyperparameters for
new, unseen datasets. By using far more meta-training data than prior work,
RecZilla is able to substantially reduce the level of human involvement when
faced with a new recommender system application. We not only release our code
and pretrained RecZilla models, but also all of our raw experimental results, so
that practitioners can train a RecZilla model for their desired performance metric:
https://github.com/naszilla/reczilla.

1

Introduction

Due to the large computational resources for training machine learning models, researchers have
found many ways to repurpose existing computation. For example, it is common to start with a
pretrained ImageNet classification model for computer vision tasks [30, 50, 75], or a pretrained BERT
model for natural language tasks [31, 65]. These approaches work well because the core problems are
largely homogeneous; for example, any computer vision model at its core must be able to distinguish
edges, colors, and shapes. Even a task-specific architecture can be found automatically through neural
architecture search [36], since the building blocks such as convolutional layers stay the same.
On the other hand, recommender system (rec-sys) research has followed a different trajectory: despite
their widespread usage across many e-commerce, social media, and entertainment companies such as
Amazon, YouTube, and Netflix [21, 41, 77], there is far less work in reusing models or automating
the process of selecting models. Many rec-sys techniques are designed and optimized with just a
single dataset in mind [21, 41, 48, 58, 81]. Intuitively, this might be because each rec-sys application
is highly unique based on the dataset and the target metric. For example, a typical user session looks
very different among e.g. YouTube, Home Depot, and AirBnB [21, 48, 58]. However, this intuition
⇤
Equal Contribution. Work done while the first two authors were employed at Abacus.AI. Correspondence
to: {duncan, sujay, colin}@abacus.ai, valverde@cs.umd.edu, john@arthur.ai.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

