Graph Neural Network Bandits

Parnian Kassraie
ETH Zurich
pkassraie@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Ilija Bogunovic
University College London
i.bogunovic@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider the bandit optimization problem with the reward function defined over
graph-structured data. This problem has important applications in molecule design
and drug discovery, where the reward is naturally invariant to graph permutations.
The key challenges in this setting are scaling to large domains, and to graphs
with many nodes. We resolve these challenges by embedding the permutation
invariance into our model. In particular, we show that graph neural networks
(GNNs) can be used to estimate the reward function, assuming it resides in the
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space of a permutation-invariant additive kernel. By
establishing a novel connection between such kernels and the graph neural tangent
kernel (GNTK), we introduce the first GNN confidence bound and use it to design
a phased-elimination algorithm with sublinear regret. Our regret bound depends
on the GNTK’s maximum information gain, which we also provide a bound for.
While the reward function depends on all N node features, our guarantees are
independent of the number of graph nodes N . Empirically, our approach exhibits
competitive performance and scales well on graph-structured domains.

1

Introduction

Contemporary bandit optimization approaches consider problems on large or continuous domains
and have successfully been applied to a significant number of machine learning and real-world
applications, e.g., in mobile health, environmental monitoring, economics, and hyperparameter
tuning, to name a few. The main idea behind them is to exploit the correlations between the rewards
of “similar” actions. This in turn, has resulted in increasingly rich models of reward functions (e.g.,
in linear and kernelized bandits [37, 12]), including several recent attempts to harness deep neural
networks for bandit tasks (see, e.g, [45, 29]). A vast majority of previous works only focus on
standard input domains and obtaining theoretical regret bounds.
Learning on graph-structured data, such as molecules or biological graph representations, requires
designing sequential methods that can effectively exploit the structure of graphs. Consequently, graph
neural networks (GNNs) have received attention as a rapidly expanding class of machine learning
models. They deem remarkably well-suited for prediction tasks in applications such as designing
novel materials [20], drug discovery [22], structure-based protein function prediction [16], etc. This
rises the question of how to bridge the gap, and design bandit optimization algorithms on graphstructured data that can exploit the power of graph neural networks to approximate a graph reward.
In this paper, we consider bandit optimization over graphs and propose to employ graph neural networks with one convolutional layer to estimate the unknown reward. To scale to large graph domains
(both in the number of graphs and number of nodes), we propose practical structural assumptions
to model the reward function. In particular, we propose to use permutation invariant additive kernels.
We show a novel connection between such kernels and the graph neural tangent kernel (GNTK)
that we define in Section 3. Our main result are GNN confidence bounds that can be readily used
in sequential decision-making algorithms to achieve sublinear regret bounds (see Section 4.3).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

