Preservation of the Global Knowledge by
Not-True Distillation in Federated Learning

Gihun Lee*, Minchan Jeong*, Yongjin Shin, Sangmin Bae, Se-Young Yun
KAIST
{opcrisis, mcjeong, yj.shin, bsmn0223, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In federated learning, a strong global model is collaboratively learned by aggregating clients’ locally trained models. Although this precludes the need to access
clients’ data directly, the global model’s convergence often suffers from data heterogeneity. This study starts from an analogy to continual learning and suggests that
forgetting could be the bottleneck of federated learning. We observe that the global
model forgets the knowledge from previous rounds, and the local training induces
forgetting the knowledge outside of the local distribution. Based on our findings,
we hypothesize that tackling down forgetting will relieve the data heterogeneity
problem. To this end, we propose a novel and effective algorithm, Federated
Not-True Distillation (FedNTD), which preserves the global perspective on locally
available data only for the not-true classes. In the experiments, FedNTD shows
state-of-the-art performance on various setups without compromising data privacy
or incurring additional communication costs1 .

1

Introduction

At present, massive data is being collected from edge devices such as mobile phones, vehicles, and
facilities. As the data may be distributed on numerous devices, decentralized training is often required
to train deep network models. Federated learning [23, 24] is a distributed learning paradigm that
enables the learning of a global model while preserving clients’ data privacy. In federated learning,
clients independently train local models using their private data, and the server aggregates them into
a single global model. In this process, most of the computation is performed by client devices, while
the global server only aggregates the model parameters and distributes them to clients [2, 50].
Most federated learning algorithms are based on FedAvg [37], which aggregates the locally trained
model parameters by weighted averaging proportional to the amount of local data that each client
had. While various federated learning algorithms have been proposed thus far, they each conduct
parameter averaging in a certain manner [1, 9, 20, 30, 47, 52]. Although this aggregation scheme
empirically works well and provides a conceptually ideal framework when all client devices are
active and i.i.d. distributed (a.k.a. LocalSGD), the data heterogeneity problem [31, 56] is a notorious
challenge for federated learning applications and prevents their widespread applicability [19, 29].
As the clients generate their own data, the data is not identically distributed. More precisely, the local
data across clients are drawn from heterogeneous underlying distributions; thereby, locally available
data fail to represent the overall global distribution, which is referred to as data heterogeneity. Despite
its inevitable occurrence in many real-world scenarios, data heterogeneity not only makes theoretical
analysis difficult [31, 56] but also degrades many federated learning algorithms’ performances
[18, 27]. By resolving the data heterogeneity problem, learning becomes more robust against partial
participation [31, 37], and the communication cost is also reduced by faster convergence [46, 52].
1

* Equal contribution.
https://github.com/Lee-Gihun/FedNTD

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

