Learning Equivariant Segmentation with
Instance-Unique Querying

Wenguan Wang∗

James Liang∗

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney

Rochester Institute of Technology

Dongfang Liu†
Rochester Institute of Technology

https://github.com/JamesLiang819/Instance_Unique_Querying

Abstract
Prevalent state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods fall into a query-based
scheme, in which instance masks are derived by querying the image feature using
a set of instance-aware embeddings. In this work, we devise a new training framework that boosts query-based models through discriminative query embedding
learning. It explores two essential properties, namely dataset-level uniqueness
and transformation equivariance, of the relation between queries and instances.
First, our algorithm uses the queries to retrieve the corresponding instances from
the whole training dataset, instead of only searching within individual scenes. As
querying instances across scenes is more challenging, the segmenters are forced to
learn more discriminative queries for effective instance separation. Second, our
algorithm encourages both image (instance) representations and queries to be equivariant against geometric transformations, leading to more robust, instance-query
matching. On top of four famous, query-based models (i.e., CondInst, SOLOv2,
SOTR, and Mask2Former), our training algorithm provides significant performance
gains (e.g., +1.6 – 3.2 AP) on COCO dataset. In addition, our algorithm promotes
the performance of SOLOv2 by 2.7 AP, on LVISv1 dataset.

1

Introduction

Instance segmentation, i.e., labeling image pixels with classes and instances, plays a critical role in a
wide range of applications, e.g., autonomous driving, medical health, and augmented reality. Modern
instance segmentation solutions are largely built upon three paradigms: top-down (‘detect-thensegment’) [1–19], bottom-up (‘label-then-cluster’) [20–28], and single-shot (‘directly-predict’) [29–
44]. Among them, the top-leading algorithms [18, 34, 39–44] typically operate in a query-based mode,
in which a set of instance-aware embeddings is learned and used to query the dense image feature for
instance mask prediction. The key to their triumph is the instance-aware query vectors that are learned
to encode the characteristics (e.g., location, appearance) of instances [34, 43]. By straightforwardly
minimizing the differences between the retrieved and groundtruth instance masks, the query-based
methods, in essence, learn the query vectors for instance discrimination only within individual scenes.
As a result, existing query-based instance segmentation algorithms place a premium on intra-scene
analysis during network training. Since the scenario in one single training scene is simple, i.e., the
diversity and volume of object instances as well as the complexity of the background are typically
limited, learning to distinguish between object instances only within the same training scenes is less
challenging, and inevitably hinders the discrimination potential of the learned instance queries.
∗
†

authors contributed equally
corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

