PolarMix: A General Data Augmentation Technique
for LiDAR Point Clouds
Aoran Xiao1 , Jiaxing Huang1 , Dayan Guan2 , Kaiwen Cui1 , Shijian Lu1∗, Ling Shao3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence 3 Terminus Group, China
{aoran.xiao, jiaxing.huang, kaiwen.cui, shijian.lu}@ntu.edu.sg
dayan.guan@mbzuai.ac.ae, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
LiDAR point clouds, which are usually scanned by rotating LiDAR sensors continuously, capture precise geometry of the surrounding environment and are crucial to
many autonomous detection and navigation tasks. Though many 3D deep architectures have been developed, efficient collection and annotation of large amounts of
point clouds remain one major challenge in the analytics and understanding of point
cloud data. This paper presents PolarMix, a point cloud augmentation technique
that is simple and generic but can mitigate the data constraint effectively across different perception tasks and scenarios. PolarMix enriches point cloud distributions
and preserves point cloud fidelity via two cross-scan augmentation strategies that
cut, edit, and mix point clouds along the scanning direction. The first is scene-level
swapping which exchanges point cloud sectors of two LiDAR scans that are cut
along the azimuth axis. The second is instance-level rotation and paste which crops
point instances from one LiDAR scan, rotates them by multiple angles (to create
multiple copies), and paste the rotated point instances into other scans. Extensive
experiments show that PolarMix achieves superior performance consistently across
different perception tasks and scenarios. In addition, it can work as a plug-and-play
for various 3D deep architectures and also performs well for unsupervised domain
adaptation. Code is available at https://github.com/xiaoaoran/polarmix

1

Introduction

In the past decade, LiDAR sensors have been increasingly employed in various perception related
applications such as autonomous driving. They provide accurate and robust depth sensing of the
surrounding environments which is crucial for scene understanding for autonomous navigation indoors
and outdoors. With the recent advance of deep neural networks (DNNs), point cloud understanding
has achieved significant progress in various perception tasks such as semantic segmentation [47,
16, 41, 53, 26, 27] and object detection [23, 48, 9]. On the other hand, training reliable DNN
models requires large amount of well-annotated training data, whereas collecting and annotating large
amounts of point clouds is often laborious, time-consuming, and has poor scalability across tasks and
domains. This has become one major constraint in LiDAR point cloud analytics and understanding.
Data augmentation (DA) [37, 3], which aims to expand the distribution of the training data by modifying and creating new training samples, has been widely studied for 2D images and demonstrated
great potential in training robust DNN models with limited training images. However, most existing
DA methods do not work well for LiDAR point clouds, a very meaningful but largely neglected task.
Specifically, most existing DA methods perform global augmentation such as randomly scaling, flipping, and rotation which cannot augment local structures or model relationships across neighbouring
∗

Shijian Lu is the corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

