FedPop: A Bayesian Approach for Personalised
Federated Learning

Nikita Kotelevskii∗
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
Nikita.Kotelevskii@skoltech.ru
∗
Equal contribution
Alain Durmus
ENS Paris-Saclay
alain.durmus@ens-paris-saclay.fr

Maxime Vono∗
Criteo AI Lab
Paris, France
m.vono@criteo.com
∗
Equal contribution

Eric Moulines
Ecole Polytechnique
eric.moulines@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
Personalised federated learning (FL) aims at collaboratively learning a machine
learning model tailored for each client. Albeit promising advances have been
made in this direction, most of existing approaches do not allow for uncertainty
quantification which is crucial in many applications. In addition, personalisation
in the cross-silo and cross-device setting still involves important issues, especially
for new clients or those having small number of observations. This paper aims at
filling these gaps. To this end, we propose a novel methodology coined FedPop by
recasting personalised FL into the population modeling paradigm where clients’
models involve fixed common population parameters and random effects, aiming
at explaining data heterogeneity. To derive convergence guarantees for our scheme,
we introduce a new class of federated stochastic optimisation algorithms which
relies on Markov chain Monte Carlo methods. Compared to existing personalised
FL methods, the proposed methodology has important benefits: it is robust to client
drift, practical for inference on new clients, and above all, enables uncertainty
quantification under mild computational and memory overheads. We provide nonasymptotic convergence guarantees for the proposed algorithms and illustrate their
performances on various personalised federated learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a recent machine learning paradigm in which distributed clients holding
siloed data collaborate in solving a learning problem, usually under the coordination of a central server
(Wang et al., 2021; Kairouz et al., 2021). One of the main focus of FL is on so-called cross-device
applications where a large number of personal electronic devices such as mobile phones, wearable
devices or home assistants collect and store data at the edges of a decentralised network (McMahan
et al., 2017).
While standard FL methods (McMahan et al., 2017; Alistarh et al., 2017; Karimireddy et al., 2020;
Horváth et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020) have focused on training a global model that can be applied to
individual agents, the relevance of such inferences has recently been questioned due to statistical
heterogeneity between clients. Indeed, the considered common model may not generalise well on
a client with a local data distribution that differs significantly from the global data distribution,
especially if that client has not participated in the training process. In fact, it might even be better for
such clients to derive a local model from their own data set. To circumvent these issues, a number of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

