Sublinear Algorithms for Hierarchical Clustering
Arpit Agarwal1
2

Sanjeev Khanna2

Huan Li2

Prathamesh Patil2

1
Data Science Institute, Columbia University
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania
{arpit.agarwal}@columbia.edu
{sanjeev,huanli,pprath}@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
Hierarchical clustering over graphs is a fundamental task in data mining and machine learning with applications in many domains including phylogenetics, social
network analysis, and information retrieval. Specifically, we consider the recently
popularized objective function for hierarchical clustering due to Dasgupta [20],
namely, minimum cost hierarchical partitioning. Previous algorithms for (approximately) minimizing this objective function require linear time/space complexity. In
many applications the underlying graph can be massive in size making it computationally challenging to process the graph even using a linear time/space algorithm.
As a result, there is a strong interest in designing algorithms that can perform global
computation using only sublinear resources (space, time, and communication). The
focus of this work is to study hierarchical clustering for massive graphs under three
well-studied models of sublinear computation which focus on space, time, and
communication, respectively, as the primary resources to optimize: (1) (dynamic)
streaming model where edges are presented as a stream, (2) query model where
the graph is queried using neighbor and degree queries, (3) massively parallel computation (MPC) model where the edges of the graph are partitioned over several
machines connected via a communication channel.
We design sublinear algorithms for hierarchical clustering in all three models
above. At the heart of our algorithmic results is a view of the objective in terms of
cuts in the graph, which allows us to use a relaxed notion of cut sparsifiers to do
hierarchical clustering while introducing only a small distortion in the objective
function. Our main algorithmic contributions are then to show how cut sparsifiers
of the desired form can be efficiently constructed in the query model and the MPC
model. We believe this relaxed notion of cut sparsifiers may be of broader interest.
We complement our algorithmic results by establishing nearly matching lower
bounds that rule out the possibility of designing algorithms with better performance
guarantees in each of these models.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical clustering (HC) is a popular unsupervised learning method for organizing data into a
dendrogram (rooted tree). It can be viewed as clustering datapoints at multiple levels of granularity
simultaneously, with each leaf of the tree corresponding to a datapoint and each internal node of the
tree corresponding to a cluster consisting of its descendent leaves. Much of the technical development
of HC originated in the field of phylogenetics, where the motivation was to organize the different
species into an evolutionary tree based on genomic similarities [22]. Since then, this tool has seen
widespread use in data analysis for a variety of domains ranging from social networks, information
retrieval, financial markets [28, 8, 43] amongst many others.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

