EAGER: Asking and Answering Questions for
Automatic Reward Shaping in Language-guided RL

Thomas Carta
Inria - Flowers team
Université de Bordeaux
thomas.carta@inria.fr

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
Inria - Flowers team
Université de Bordeaux
Microsoft Research Montreal
pierre-yves.oudeyer@inria.fr

Sylvain Lamprier
ISIR Sorbonne Université
Univ Angers, LERIA,
SFR MATHSTIC, F-49000 Angers, France
sylvain.lamprier@univ-angers.fr

ISIR Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
olivier.sigaud@isir.upmc.fr

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) in long horizon and sparse reward tasks is notoriously
difficult and requires a lot of training steps. A standard solution to speed up the
process is to leverage additional reward signals, shaping it to better guide the
learning process. In the context of language-conditioned RL, the abstraction and
generalisation properties of the language input provide opportunities for more
efficient ways of shaping the reward. In this paper, we leverage this idea and
propose an automated reward shaping method where the agent extracts auxiliary
objectives from the general language goal. These auxiliary objectives use a question
generation (QG) and question answering (QA) system: they consist of questions
leading the agent to try to reconstruct partial information about the global goal using
its own trajectory. When it succeeds, it receives an intrinsic reward proportional
to its confidence in its answer. This incentivizes the agent to generate trajectories
which unambiguously explain various aspects of the general language goal. Our
experimental study shows that this approach, which does not require engineer
intervention to design the auxiliary objectives, improves sample efficiency by
effectively directing exploration.

1

Introduction

One of the main challenges of Reinforcement Learning (RL) research is to train agents able of
abstraction, generalisation and communication. Languages, be they natural or formal, afford these
desirable properties [11]. Based on this insight, many papers have tried to leverage the abilities
of language in RL to enable communication and improve generalisation and sample efficiency
[3, 22, 12, 36]. The domain can be subdivided into language-conditioned RL (LC-RL), in which
language conditions the formulation of the problem[2, 12], and language-assisted RL, where language
helps the agent to learn [15, 10, 1, 9]. In the present paper, we focus on the LC-RL framework where
the agent initially receives a language instruction and must act to optimise the corresponding reward
function. Unfortunately, the corresponding RL algorithms are sample inefficient, especially due to
the fact that the reward function is sparse when it is restricted to completing the goal.
To tackle the reward sparsity issue, one idea is to densify the reward by decomposing the general goal
into sub-goals and rewarding them individually. This idea is based on a decomposition principle which
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

