Nest Your Adaptive Algorithm for Parameter-Agnostic
Nonconvex Minimax Optimization
Junchi Yang⇤
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
junchi.yang@inf.ethz.ch

Xiang Li⇤
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
xiang.li@inf.ethz.ch

Niao He
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Adaptive algorithms like AdaGrad and AMSGrad are successful in nonconvex
optimization owing to their parameter-agnostic ability – requiring no a priori
knowledge about problem-specific parameters nor tuning of learning rates. However, when it comes to nonconvex minimax optimization, direct extensions of
such adaptive optimizers without proper time-scale separation may fail to work
in practice. We provide such an example proving that the simple combination
of Gradient Descent Ascent (GDA) with adaptive stepsizes can diverge if the
primal-dual stepsize ratio is not carefully chosen; hence, a fortiori, such adaptive
extensions are not parameter-agnostic. To address the issue, we formally introduce
a Nested Adaptive framework, NeAda for short, that carries an inner loop for
adaptively maximizing the dual variable with controllable stopping criteria and an
outer loop for adaptively minimizing the primal variable. Such mechanism can
be equipped with off-the-shelf adaptive optimizers and automatically balance the
progress in the primal and dual variables. Theoretically, for nonconvex-stronglyconcave minimax problems, we show that NeAda with AdaGrad stepsizes can
achieve the near-optimal e
O(✏ 2 ) and e
O(✏ 4 ) gradient complexities respectively in
the deterministic and stochastic settings, without prior information on the problem’s
smoothness and strong concavity parameters. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first algorithm that simultaneously achieves near-optimal convergence rates and
parameter-agnostic adaptation in the nonconvex minimax setting. Numerically, we
further illustrate the robustness of the NeAda family with experiments on simple
test functions and a real-world application.

1

Introduction

Adaptive gradient methods, whose stepsizes and search directions are adjusted based on past gradients,
have received phenomenal popularity and are proven successful in a variety of large-scale machine
learning applications. Prominent examples include AdaGrad [17], RMSProp [31], AdaDelta [84],
Adam [41], and AMSGrad [69], just to name a few. Their empirical success is especially pronounced
for nonconvex optimization such as training deep neural networks. Besides improved performance,
being parameter-agnostic is another important trait of adaptive methods. Unlike (stochastic) gradient
descent, adaptive methods often do not require a priori knowledge about problem-specific parameters
⇤

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

