Learning with little mixing
Ingvar Ziemann
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
ziemann@kth.se

Stephen Tu
Robotics at Google
stephentu@google.com

Abstract
We study square loss in a realizable time-series framework with martingale difference noise. Our main result is a fast rate excess risk bound which shows that
whenever a trajectory hypercontractivity condition holds, the risk of the leastsquares estimator on dependent data matches the iid rate order-wise after a burn-in
time. In comparison, many existing results in learning from dependent data have
rates where the effective sample size is deflated by a factor of the mixing-time of the
underlying process, even after the burn-in time. Furthermore, our results allow the
covariate process to exhibit long range correlations which are substantially weaker
than geometric ergodicity. We call this phenomenon learning with little mixing, and
present several examples for when it occurs: bounded function classes for which
the L2 and L2+ε norms are equivalent, ergodic finite state Markov chains, various
parametric models, and a broad family of infinite dimensional ℓ2 (N) ellipsoids. By
instantiating our main result to system identification of nonlinear dynamics with
generalized linear model transitions, we obtain a nearly minimax optimal excess
risk bound after only a polynomial burn-in time.

1

Introduction

Consider regression in the context of the time-series model:
Yt = f⋆ (Xt ) + Wt ,

t = 0, 1, 2, . . . .

(1)

Such models are ubiquitous in applications of machine learning, signal processing, econometrics,
−1
and control theory. In our setup, the learner is given access to T ∈ N+ pairs {(Xt , Yt )}Tt=0
drawn
b
from the model (1), and is asked to output a hypothesis f from a hypothesis class F which best
approximates the (realizable) regression function f⋆ ∈ F in terms of square loss.
In this work, we study the least-squares estimator (LSE). This procedure minimizes the empirical
risk associated to the square loss over the class F . When each pair of observations (Xt , Yt ) is drawn
iid from some fixed distribution, this procedure is minimax optimal over a broad set of hypothesis
classes [1–4]. However, much less is known about the optimal rate of convergence for the general
time-series model (1), as correlations across time in the covariates {Xt } complicate the analysis.

With this in mind, we seek to extend our understanding of the minimax optimality of the LSE for the
time-series model (1). We show that for a broad class of function spaces and covariate processes, the
effects of data dependency across time enter the LSE excess risk only as a higher order term, whereas
the leading term in the excess risk remains order-wise identical to that in the iid setting. Hence,
after a sufficiently long, but finite burn-in time, the LSE’s excess risk scales as if all T samples are
independent. This behavior applies to processes that exhibit correlations which decay slower than
geometrically. We refer to this double phenomenon, where the mixing-time only enters as a burn-in
time, and where the mixing requirement is mild, as learning with little mixing.
Our result stands in contrast to a long line of work on learning from dependent data (see e.g., [5–14]
and the references within), where the blocking technique [5] is used to create independence amongst
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

