Learning Substructure Invariance for
Out-of-Distribution Molecular Representations

Nianzu Yang, Kaipeng Zeng, Qitian Wu, Xiaosong Jia, Junchi Yan∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yangnianzu,zengkaipeng,echo740,jiaxiaosong,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Molecule representation learning (MRL) has been extensively studied and current methods have shown promising power for various tasks, e.g., molecular
property prediction and target identification. However, a common hypothesis of
existing methods is that either the model development or experimental evaluation is mostly based on i.i.d. data across training and testing. Such a hypothesis
can be violated in real-world applications where testing molecules could come
from new environments, bringing about serious performance degradation or unexpected prediction. We propose a new representation learning framework entitled
MoleOOD to enhance the robustness of MRL models against such distribution
shifts, motivated by an observation that the (bio)chemical properties of molecules
are usually invariantly associated with certain privileged molecular substructures
across different environments (e.g., scaffolds, sizes, etc.). Specifically, We introduce an environment inference model to identify the latent factors that impact
data generation from different distributions in a fully data-driven manner. We
also propose a new learning objective to guide the molecule encoder to leverage environment-invariant substructures that more stably relate with the labels
across environments. Extensive experiments on ten real-world datasets demonstrate that our model has a stronger generalization ability than existing methods
under various out-of-distribution (OOD) settings, despite the absence of manual
specifications of environments. Particularly, our method achieves up to 5.9% and
3.9% improvement over the strongest baselines on OGB and DrugOOD benchmarks in terms of ROC-AUC, respectively. Our source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/yangnianzu0515/MoleOOD.

1

Introduction

Predicting molecular properties plays an important role in many related applications like drug
discovery [13] and material design [51]. These professional tasks conventionally take great efforts by
experts e.g. in chemistry and pharmacology. Recent years have witnessed inspiring breakthroughs on
building effective machine learning models for scientific discovery, and solid progress has been made
along the avenue of ML-based molecule representation learning (MRL). In general, MRL aims at
embedding a molecule into a vector in latent space as a foundation model, on top of which the learned
representations could be used for a variety of downstream tasks, such as target identification [69],
retrosynthetic analysis [65], search of antibiotics [54], virtual screening [40] for drug discovery, etc.
The challenge, however, is that existing MRL methods are mostly based on an underlying hypothesis
that training and testing molecules are independently sampled from an identical environment, yet
∗

Junchi Yan is the correspondence author who is also with Shanghai AI Laboratory.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

