The price of ignorance: how much does it cost to
forget noise structure in low-rank matrix estimation?
Jean Barbier∗
International Center for Theoretical Physics
jbarbier@ictp.it
Marco Mondelli∗
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
marco.mondelli@ist.ac.at

Tianqi Hou
Huawei
thou@connect.ust.hk

Manuel Sáenz∗
International Center for Theoretical Physics
msaenz@ictp.it

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a rank-1 signal corrupted by structured rotationally invariant noise, and address the following question: how well do inference
algorithms perform when the noise statistics is unknown and hence Gaussian noise
is assumed? While the matched Bayes-optimal setting with unstructured noise is
well understood, the analysis of this mismatched problem is only at its premises. In
this paper, we make a step towards understanding the effect of the strong source
of mismatch which is the noise statistics. Our main technical contribution is the
rigorous analysis of a Bayes estimator and of an approximate message passing
(AMP) algorithm, both of which incorrectly assume a Gaussian setup. The first
result exploits the theory of spherical integrals and of low-rank matrix perturbations; the idea behind the second one is to design and analyze an artificial AMP
which, by taking advantage of the flexibility in the denoisers, is able to “correct” the
mismatch. Armed with these sharp asymptotic characterizations, we unveil a rich
and often unexpected phenomenology. For example, despite AMP is in principle
designed to efficiently compute the Bayes estimator, the former is outperformed
by the latter in terms of mean-square error. We show that this performance gap is
due to an incorrect estimation of the signal norm. In fact, when the SNR is large
enough, the overlaps of the AMP and the Bayes estimator coincide, and they even
match those of optimal estimators taking into account the structure of the noise.

1

Introduction

The estimation of a low-rank matrix from noisy data is a central problem in machine learning, and it
appears, e.g., in sparse principal component analysis (PCA) [50, 88], community detection [1, 62],
and group synchronization [69]. In this paper, we consider the prototypical task of recovering a
symmetric rank-1 matrix XX ⊺ from noisy observations of the form
√
λ∗
Y =
XX ⊺ + Z ∈ RN ×N .
(1)
N
Here, λ∗ > 0 is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) which quantifies the signal strength, and Z ∈ RN ×N is
a random matrix that captures the noise. A natural estimator of X is given by the principal eigenvector
of Y . Its performance and, more generally, the behavior of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of (1) has
been studied in exquisite detail in statistics [49, 68] and random matrix theory [7, 8, 21, 22, 26, 40,
52, 6]. Going beyond the spectral estimator given by the principal eigenvector, approximate message
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
∗

Equal contribution

