MetricFormer: A Unified Perspective of Correlation
Exploring in Similarity Learning

1

Jiexi Yan1,2 Erkun Yang2 Cheng Deng2∗ Heng Huang3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
3
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA
{jxyan1995, erkunyang, chdeng.xd, henghuanghh}@gmail.com

Abstract
Similarity learning can be significantly advanced by informative relationships
among different samples and features. The current methods try to excavate the
multiple correlations in different aspects, but cannot integrate them into a unified
framework. In this paper, we provide to consider the multiple correlations from
a unified perspective and propose a new method called MetricFormer, which
can effectively capture and model the multiple correlations with an elaborate
metric transformer. In MetricFormer, the feature decoupling block is adopted to
learn an ensemble of distinct and diverse features with different discriminative
characteristics. After that, we apply the batch-wise correlation block into the batch
dimension of each mini-batch to implicitly explore sample relationships. Finally,
the feature-wise correlation block is performed to discover the intrinsic structural
pattern of the ensemble of features and obtain the aggregated feature embedding
for similarity measuring. With three kinds of transformer blocks, we can learn
more representative features through the proposed MetricFormer. Moreover, our
proposed method can be flexibly integrated with any metric learning framework.
Extensive experiments on three widely-used datasets demonstrate the superiority
of our proposed method over state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Exploring how to effectively learn semantic similarities among examples is an important problem in
the field of machine learning and computer vision. Metric learning aims to transform the original data
into an embedding space and learn a distance metric in this space to promote intra-class compactness
and inter-class separability. In recent years, benefiting from the emerging advance of deep learning
technique [20, 17], deep metric learning (DML) can capture more representative embeddings, and has
been widely applied to various downstream tasks, including image retrieval [29, 28], face recognition
[19, 36], and person re-identification [57].
The core idea of DML is to excavate the intrinsic structural relations of data, and utilize them to
learn discriminative embeddings. As shown in Figure 1, such relations can be divided into two
main categories: sample relationship and feature relationship. The former, i.e. sample relationship,
includes pairwise correlation and batch-wise correlation. Most of existing supervised DML methods
utilize pairwise correlations (i.e., positive and negative pairs) to construct and utilize valid tuples
of pairs through well-designed pair-based losses, e.g. triplet loss [36] and multi-similarity loss [46].
Due to training with random sampling, such methods suffer from heavily low convergence and model
degradation. To discover the implicit global structure of the dataset, recent studies started to explore
∗

Corresponding Author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

