Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning is
A Sequence Modeling Problem
Muning Wen1,2 , Jakub Grudzien Kuba3 , Runji Lin4 ,
Weinan Zhang1 , Ying Wen1 , Jun Wang2,5 , Yaodong Yang6,7,†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Digital Brain Lab, 3 University of Oxford,
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science,
5
University College London, 6 Beijing Institute for General AI,
7
Institute for AI, Peking University

Abstract
Large sequence models (SM) such as GPT series and BERT have displayed outstanding performance and generalization capabilities in natural language process,
vision and recently reinforcement learning. A natural follow-up question is how to
abstract multi-agent decision making also as an sequence modeling problem and
benefit from the prosperous development of the SMs. In this paper, we introduce a
novel architecture named Multi-Agent Transformer (MAT) that effectively casts cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) into SM problems wherein
the objective is to map agents’ observation sequences to agents’ optimal action
sequences. Our goal is to build the bridge between MARL and SMs so that the modeling power of modern sequence models can be unleashed for MARL. Central to our
MAT is an encoder-decoder architecture which leverages the multi-agent advantage
decomposition theorem to transform the joint policy search problem into a sequential decision making process; this renders only linear time complexity for multiagent problems and, most importantly, endows MAT with monotonic performance
improvement guarantee. Unlike prior arts such as Decision Transformer fit only precollected offline data, MAT is trained by online trial and error from the environment
in an on-policy fashion. To validate MAT, we conduct extensive experiments on
StarCraftII, Multi-Agent MuJoCo, Dexterous Hands Manipulation, and Google Research Football benchmarks. Results demonstrate that MAT achieves superior performance and data efficiency compared to strong baselines including MAPPO and
HAPPO. Furthermore, we demonstrate that MAT is an excellent few-short learner
on unseen tasks regardless of changes in the number of agents. See our project
page at https://sites.google.com/view/multi-agent-transformer(1) .

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) [44, 8] is a challenging problem for its difficulty which
arises not only from identifying each individual agent’s policy improvement direction, but also from
combining agents’ policy updates jointly which should be beneficial for the whole team. Recently,
such difficulty in multi-agent learning has been eased owing to the introduction of centralized
training for decentralized execution (CTDE) [11, 45], which allows agents to access the global
information and opponents’ actions during the training phase. This framework enables successful
developments of methods that directly inherit single-agent algorithms. For examples, COMA replaces
the policy-gradient (PG) estimate with a multi-agent PG (MAPG) counterpart [11], MADDPG
(1)†
Corresponding to <yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>. The source code could be accessed directly with this link
https://github.com/PKU-MARL/Multi-Agent-Transformer.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

