Stars: Tera-Scale Graph Building for
Clustering and Graph Learning

CJ Carey
Google Research
cjcarey@google.com
Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Jonathan Halcrow
Google Research
halcrow@google.com

Rajesh Jayaram
Google Research
rkjayaram@google.com

Warren Schudy
Google Research
wschudy@google.com

Peilin Zhong
Google Research
peilinz@google.com

Abstract
A fundamental procedure in the analysis of massive datasets is the construction
of similarity graphs. Such graphs play a key role for many downstream tasks,
including clustering, classification, graph learning, and nearest neighbor search.
For these tasks, it is critical to build graphs which are sparse yet still representative
of the underlying data. The benefits of sparsity are twofold: firstly, constructing
dense graphs is infeasible in practice for large datasets, and secondly, the runtime
of downstream tasks is directly influenced by the sparsity of the similarity graph.
In this work, we present Stars: a highly scalable method for building extremely
sparse graphs via two-hop spanners, which are graphs where similar points are
connected by a path of length at most two. Stars can construct two-hop spanners
with significantly fewer similarity comparisons, which are a major bottleneck for
learning based models where comparisons are expensive to evaluate. Theoretically,
we demonstrate that Stars builds a graph in nearly-linear time, where approximate
nearest neighbors are contained within two-hop neighborhoods. In practice, we
have deployed Stars for multiple data sets allowing for graph building at the TeraScale, i.e., for graphs with tens of trillions of edges. We evaluate the performance
of Stars for clustering and graph learning, and demonstrate 10~1000-fold improvements in pairwise similarity comparisons compared to different baselines, and
2~10-fold improvement in running time without quality loss.

1

Introduction

Given a collection of unlabeled data, a critical technique in many data mining and machine learning
pipelines is the construction of a similarity graph over the data. Similarity graphs provide a sparse
representation of the underlying structure of a dataset by creating edges between the most similar
data points. This allows downstream analytic procedures to run more efficiently over the data
by restricting comparisons to edges in the graph. In particular, many such procedures, such as
Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC) and variants [17, 5, 1], can be run in time nearly-linear
in the number of edges.
In order to be useful as part of a larger pipeline, graph building itself must be an extremely efficient
procedure. Namely, if the time required to construct the graph exceeds the size of the graph itself,
then graph building may become the primary bottleneck of the pipeline. To avoid this scenario, graph
building algorithms must circumvent all-pairs comparisons by employing selective filtering methods,
such as locality sensitive hashing (LSH). However, with the extraordinary scale of modern datasets,
LSH alone is often no longer sufficient to ensure efficiency. Such methods still require an all-pairs
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

