Ordered Subgraph Aggregation Networks

Chendi Qian∗
Department of Computer Science
TU Munich

Gaurav Rattan∗
Department of Computer Science
RWTH Aachen University

Floris Geerts
Department of Computer Science
University of Antwerp

Christopher Morris
Department of Computer Science
RWTH Aachen University

Mathias Niepert
Department of Computer Science
University of Stuttgart

Abstract
Numerous subgraph-enhanced graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged recently,
provably boosting the expressive power of standard (message-passing) GNNs. However,
there is a limited understanding of how these approaches relate to each other and to the
Weisfeiler–Leman hierarchy. Moreover, current approaches either use all subgraphs of a
given size, sample them uniformly at random, or use hand-crafted heuristics instead of
learning to select subgraphs in a data-driven manner. Here, we offer a unified way to
study such architectures by introducing a theoretical framework and extending the
known expressivity results of subgraph-enhanced GNNs. Concretely, we show that
increasing subgraph size always increases the expressive power and develop a better
understanding of their limitations by relating them to the established k-WL hierarchy.
In addition, we explore different approaches for learning to sample subgraphs using
recent methods for backpropagating through complex discrete probability distributions.
Empirically, we study the predictive performance of different subgraph-enhanced GNNs,
showing that our data-driven architectures increase prediction accuracy on standard
benchmark datasets compared to non-data-driven subgraph-enhanced graph neural
networks while reducing computation time.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data are ubiquitous across application domains ranging from chemo- and bioinformatics [Barabasi and Oltvai, 2004, Jumper et al., 2021, Stokes et al., 2020] to image [Simonovsky and
Komodakis, 2017] and social-network analysis [Easley and Kleinberg, 2010]. Numerous approaches for
graph–based machine learning have been proposed, most notably those based on graph kernels [Borgwardt
et al., 2020, Kriege et al., 2020] or using graph neural networks (GNNs) [Chami et al., 2020, Gilmer et al.,
2017, Morris et al., 2021]. Here, graph kernels based on the 1-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm
(1-WL) [Weisfeiler and Leman, 1968], a simple heuristic for the graph isomorphism problem, and
corresponding GNNs [Morris et al., 2019, Xu et al., 2019], have recently advanced the state-of-the-art in
supervised vertex- and graph-level learning. However, the 1-WL and GNNs operate via local neighborhood
aggregation, missing crucial patterns in the given data while more expressive architectures based on the
k-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm (k-WL) [Azizian and Lelarge, 2020, Maron et al., 2019, Morris
et al., 2020b, 2021, 2022] may not scale to larger graphs.
∗

These authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

