DeepInteraction: 3D Object Detection via Modality
Interaction
Zeyu Yang1
1

Jiaqi Chen1

Fudan University

2

Zhenwei Miao2

Wei Li3

Alibaba DAMO Academy

3

Xiatian Zhu4

S-Lab, NTU

4

Li Zhang1∗

University of Surrey

https://github.com/fudan-zvg/DeepInteraction

Abstract
Existing top-performance 3D object detectors typically rely on the multi-modal
fusion strategy. This design is however fundamentally restricted due to overlooking
the modality-specific useful information and finally hampering the model performance. To address this limitation, in this work we introduce a novel modality
interaction strategy where individual per-modality representations are learned
and maintained throughout for enabling their unique characteristics to be exploited during object detection. To realize this proposed strategy, we design a
DeepInteraction architecture characterized by a multi-modal representational
interaction encoder and a multi-modal predictive interaction decoder. Experiments
on the large-scale nuScenes dataset show that our proposed method surpasses all
prior arts often by a large margin. Crucially, our method is ranked at the first
position at the highly competitive nuScenes object detection leaderboard.

1

Introduction

3D object detection is critical for autonomous driving by localizing and recognizing decisionsensitive objects in a 3D world. For reliable object detection, LiDAR and camera sensors have been
simultaneously deployed to provide point clouds and RGB images for more stronger perception.
The two modalities exhibit naturally strong complementary effects due to their different perceiving
characteristics. Point clouds offer necessary localization and geometry information at low resolution,
whilst images give rich appearance information at high resolution. Therefore, information fusion
across modalities becomes particularly crucial for strong 3D object detection performance.
Existing multi-modal 3D objection detection methods typically adopt a modality fusion strategy
(Figure 1(a)) by combining individual per-modality representations into a single hybrid representation.
For example, PointPainting [38] and its variants [39, 46, 43] aggregate category scores or semantic
features from the image space into the 3D point cloud space. AutoAlign [10] and VFF [23] similarly
integrate image representations into the 3D grid space. Latest alternatives [24, 30, 26] merge the
image and point cloud features into a joint bird’s-eye view (BEV) representation. This fusion approach
is, however, structurally restricted due to its intrinsic limitation of potentially dropping off a large
fraction of modality-specific representational strengths due to largely imperfect information fusion
into a unified representation.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, in this work a novel modality interaction strategy
(Figure 1(b)) for multi-modal 3D object detection is introduced. Our key idea is that, instead of
deriving a fused single representation, we learn and maintain two modality-specific representations
throughout to enable inter-modality interaction so that both information exchange and modalityspecific strengths can be achieved spontaneously. Our strategy is implemented by formulating a
∗

Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author with School of Data Science, Fudan
University.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

