Label Noise in Adversarial Training: A Novel
Perspective to Study Robust Overfitting
Chengyu Dong
University of California, San Diego
cdong@eng.ucsd.edu

Liyuan Liu
Microsoft Research
lucliu@microsoft.com

Jingbo Shang
University of California, San Diego
jshang@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We show that label noise exists in adversarial training. Such label noise is due to
the mismatch between the true label distribution of adversarial examples and the
label inherited from clean examples – the true label distribution is distorted by the
adversarial perturbation, but is neglected by the common practice that inherits labels
from clean examples. Recognizing label noise sheds insights on the prevalence of
robust overfitting in adversarial training, and explains its intriguing dependence
on perturbation radius and data quality. Also, our label noise perspective aligns
well with our observations of the epoch-wise double descent in adversarial training.
Guided by our analyses, we proposed a method to automatically calibrate the label
to address the label noise and robust overfitting. Our method achieves consistent
performance improvements across various models and datasets without introducing
new hyper-parameters or additional tuning.

1

Introduction

Adversarial training (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2015; Kurakin et al., 2017; Madry et al.,
2018) is known as one of the most effective ways (Athalye et al., 2018; Uesato et al., 2018) to enhance
the adversarial robustness of deep neural networks (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015). It
augments training data with adversarial perturbations to prepare the model for adversarial attacks.
Despite various efforts to generate more effective adversarial training examples (Ding et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020), the labels assigned to them attracts little attention. As the common practice, the
assigned labels of adversarial training examples are simply inherited from their clean counterparts.
In this paper, we argue that the existing labeling practice of the adversarial training examples
introduces label noise implicitly, since adversarial perturbation can distort the data semantics (Tsipras
et al., 2019; Ilyas et al., 2019). For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, even with a slight distortion of
the data semantics (e.g., more ambiguous), the label distribution of the adversarially perturbed data
may not match the label distribution of the clean counterparts. Such distribution shift is neglected
when assigning labels to adversarial examples, which are directly copied from the clean counterparts.
We observe that distribution mismatch caused by adversarial perturbation along with improper
labeling practice will cause label noise in adversarial training.
It is a mysterious and prominent phenomenon that the robust test error would start to increase after
conducting adversarial training for a certain number of epochs (Rice et al., 2020), and our label
noise perspective provides an adequate explanation for this phenomenon. Specifically, from a classic
bias-variance view of model generalization, label noise that implicitly exists in adversarial training
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

