Can Push-forward Generative Models
Fit Multimodal Distributions?
Antoine Salmona
Centre Borelli,
ENS Paris Saclay, France

Agnès Desolneux
Centre Borelli, CNRS
ENS Paris Saclay, France

Julie Delon
MAP5, Université Paris Cité, France
Institut Universitaire de France (IUF)

Valentin De Bortoli
Center for Sciences of Data, CNRS
ENS Ulm, France

Abstract
Many generative models synthesize data by transforming a standard Gaussian
random variable using a deterministic neural network. Among these models are the
Variational Autoencoders and the Generative Adversarial Networks. In this work,
we call them "push-forward" models and study their expressivity. We formally
demonstrate that the Lipschitz constant of these generative networks has to be
large in order to fit multimodal distributions. More precisely, we show that the
total variation distance and the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the generated
and the data distribution are bounded from below by a constant depending on
the mode separation and the Lipschitz constant. Since constraining the Lipschitz
constants of neural networks is a common way to stabilize generative models, there
is a provable trade-off between the ability of push-forward models to approximate
multimodal distributions and the stability of their training. We validate our findings
on one-dimensional and image datasets and empirically show that the recently
introduced diffusion models do not suffer of such limitation.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling has become over the last years one of the most popular research topics in
machine learning and computer vision. From a mathematical perspective, the goal of generative
modeling can be seen as predicting new synthetic samples from an unknown probability distribution
ν on Rd given the information of m true samples xi drawn from ν (the data distribution). A general
approach to solve this problem is to define a parametric family of probability distributions (νθ )θ∈Θ
and solve the problem
P
1
minθ∈Θ D( m
i δxi , νθ ) ,

where D is a similarity measure between probability distributions and δx is the delta distribution at
x. Beside their direct application (Sandfort et al., 2019; Antoniou et al., 2018), generative models
have been used in numerous applications in various machine learning subfields, such as solving
inverse problems (Ravuri et al., 2021; Ledig et al., 2017) or machine translation (Isola et al., 2017;
Yang et al., 2018). However, most generative modeling methods still lack theoretical understanding
and it remains often unclear whether the method approaches correctly the probability distribution
ν or only generates samples that appear to have been drawn from ν without fully recovering the
underlying structure of the distribution. In this work, we focus on the particular class of push-forward
generative models. Those models have in common that for any θ ∈ Θ, the parametric distribution νθ
approaching ν is of the form
νθ = gθ# µp ,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

