Learning Expressive Meta-Representations with
Mixture of Expert Neural Processes

Qi Wang
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
hhq123go@gmail.com

Herke van Hoof
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
h.c.vanhoof@uva.nl

Abstract
Neural processes (NPs) formulate exchangeable stochastic processes and are
promising models for meta learning that do not require gradient updates during
the testing phase. However, most NP variants place a strong emphasis on a global
latent variable. This weakens the approximation power and restricts the scope
of applications using NP variants, especially when data generative processes are
complicated. To resolve these issues, we propose to combine the Mixture of Expert
models with Neural Processes to develop more expressive exchangeable stochastic
processes, referred to as Mixture of Expert Neural Processes (MoE-NPs). Then
we apply MoE-NPs to both few-shot supervised learning and meta reinforcement
learning tasks. Empirical results demonstrate MoE-NPs’ strong generalization
capability to unseen tasks in these benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Humans can naturally accommodate themselves to new environments after developing related skills, and this kind of adaptability
relies on the good abstraction of environments. Similarly, meta
learning or learning to learn tries to leverage past experiences,
and with help of the incorporated meta learned knowledge, a
new skill can be mastered rapidly with a few instances.
During the past decade, an increasing number of methods have
emerged in meta learning domains. In this paper, we concentrate
on a special branch of meta learning methods, referred to as
context-based meta learning [1; 2]. A representative one is a
neural process (NP) [1], which was initially proposed to approximate Gaussian processes with lower computational cost. The
core purpose of NPs is to learn meta-representations [3], which
encode context points into latent variables and represent the
task in a functional form. In comparison to gradient-based meta
learning algorithms, e.g. model-agnostic meta learning (MAML)
[4], the NP directly learns a functional representation and does
not require additional gradient updates in fast adaptation.

Figure 1: Generative Process of MoENPs. Here DτC refers to dataset of context points in the paper. {zk }K
k=1 are
a set of expert latent variables and e
is an assignment latent variable. Observed variables are grey in circles
with latent variables white.

Research Motivations. Fundamentally, vanilla NPs employ
global Gaussian latent variables to specify different tasks. This setting raises several concerns in
some scenarios. (i) When observations originate from a mixture of stochastic processes [5], a single
Gaussian latent variable is faced with deficiencies in formulating complex functional forms. (ii) In
context-based meta reinforcement learning, the uncertainty of value functions revealed from latent
variables encourages effective exploration in environments [6]. But when tasks are governed by
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

