Adaptive Data Debiasing through
Bounded Exploration
Yifan Yang
Ohio State University
yang.5483@osu.edu

Yang Liu
University of California, Santa Cruz
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Parinaz Naghizadeh
Ohio State University
naghizadeh.1@osu.edu

Abstract
Biases in existing datasets used to train algorithmic decision rules can raise ethical
and economic concerns due to the resulting disparate treatment of different groups.
We propose an algorithm for sequentially debiasing such datasets through adaptive
and bounded exploration in a classification problem with costly and censored
feedback. Exploration in this context means that at times, and to a judiciouslychosen extent, the decision maker deviates from its (current) loss-minimizing rule,
and instead accepts some individuals that would otherwise be rejected, so as to
reduce statistical data biases. Our proposed algorithm includes parameters that can
be used to balance between the ultimate goal of removing data biases – which will
in turn lead to more accurate and fair decisions, and the exploration risks incurred
to achieve this goal. We analytically show that such exploration can help debias
data in certain distributions. We further investigate how fairness criteria can work
in conjunction with our data debiasing algorithm. We illustrate the performance of
our algorithm using experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Data-driven algorithmic decision making is being adopted widely to aid humans’ decisions, in
applications ranging from loan approvals to determining recidivism in courts. Despite their ability to
process vast amounts of data and make accurate predictions, these algorithms can also exhibit and
amplify existing social biases (e.g., [11, 23, 33]). There are at least two possible sources of unfairness
in algorithmic decision rules: (data) biases in the training datasets, and (prediction) biases arising
from the algorithm’s decisions [29]. The latter problem has been receiving increasing attention, and
is often addressed by imposing fairness constraints on the algorithm. In contrast, in this paper, we are
primarily focused on the former problem of statistical biases in the training data itself.
The datasets used for training machine learning algorithms might not accurately represent the agents
they make decisions on, due to, e.g., historical biases in decision making and feature selection, or
changes in the populations’ characteristics or participation rates since the data was initially collected.
Such data biases in turn can result in disparate treatment of underrepresented or disadvantaged
groups; i.e., data bias can cause prediction/model bias, as also verified by recent work [18, 40, 43, 25].
Motivated by this, we focus on data biases, and propose an algorithm which, while attempting to
make accurate (and fair) decisions, also aims to collect data in a way that helps it recover unbiased
estimates of the characteristics of agents interacting with it.
In particular, we study a classification problems with censored and costly feedback. Censored
feedback means that the decision maker only observes the true qualification state of those individuals
it admits (e.g., a bank will only observe whether an individual defaults on or repays a loan if the loan
is extended in the first place; an employer only assesses the performance of applicants it hires). In
such settings, any mismatch between the available training data and the true population may grow
over time due to adaptive sampling bias: once a decision rule is adopted based on the current training
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

