Stability Analysis and Generalization Bounds of
Adversarial Training

Jiancong Xiao1,∗ , Yanbo Fan2,† , Ruoyu Sun1,3,† , Jue Wang2 , Zhi-Quan Luo1,3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen;
2
Tencent AI Lab; 3 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
jiancongxiao@link.cuhk.edu.cn, fanyanbo0124@gmail.com,
sunruoyu@cuhk.edu.cn, arphid@gmail.com, luozq@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
In adversarial machine learning, deep neural networks can fit the adversarial examples on the training dataset but have poor generalization ability on the test set.
This phenomenon is called robust overfitting, and it can be observed when adversarially training neural nets on common datasets, including SVHN, CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and ImageNet. In this paper, we study the robust overfitting issue of
adversarial training by using tools from uniform stability. One major challenge
is that the outer function (as a maximization of the inner function) is nonsmooth,
so the standard technique (e.g., (Hardt et al., 2016)) cannot be applied. Our approach is to consider η-approximate smoothness: we show that the outer function
satisfies this modified smoothness assumption with η being a constant related to
the adversarial perturbation ϵ. Based on this, we derive stability-based generalization bounds for stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on the general class of
η-approximate smooth functions, which covers the adversarial loss. Our results
suggest that √
robust test accuracy decreases in ϵ when T is large, with a speed
between Ω(ϵ T ) and O(ϵT ). This phenomenon is also observed in practice. Additionally, we show that a few popular techniques for adversarial training (e.g.,
early stopping, cyclic learning rate, and stochastic weight averaging) are stabilitypromoting in theory.

1

Introduction

cifar10, eps=8, Accuracy
Deep neural networks (DNNs) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Hochreiter
1.0
and Schmidhuber, 1997) have become successful in many machine
0.9
learning tasks and rarely suffered overfitting issues (Zhang et al.,
0.8
2021). A neural network model can be trained to achieve zero train0.7
ing error and generalize well to the unseen data. While in the setting
0.6
of adversarial training, robust overfitting is a dominant issue (Rice
0.5
et al., 2020). Specifically, robust overfitting characterizes a train0.4
Train_Acc
ing procedure shown in Fig. 1. After a particular epoch, the robust
Train_Robust_Acc
0.3
Test_Acc
test accuracy (black line) starts to decrease, but the robust trainTest_Robust_Acc
0.2
0
50
100
150
200
ing accuracy (blue line) is still increasing. This phenomenon can
epochs
be observed in the experiments on common datasets, e.g., SVHN, Figure 1: Experiments of adCIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet. Recent works (Gowal et al., versarial training on CIFAR2020; Rebuffi et al., 2021) mitigated the overfitting issue using reg- 10.
ularization techniques such as stochastic weight averaging (SWA)
∗
†

This work is done when Jiancong Xiao is a research intern at Tencent AI Lab, China.
Corresponding Authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

