Translation-equivariant Representation in Recurrent
Networks with a Continuous Manifold of Attractors
Wen-Hao Zhang1,2∗
wenhao.zhang@utsouthwestern.edu

Ying Nian Wu3
ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Si Wu4
siwu@pku.edu.cn
1
Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, UT Southwestern Medical Center.
2
O’Donnell Brain Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center.
3
Department of Statistics, UCLA.
4
School of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences,
Peking University.

Abstract
Equivariant representation is necessary for the brain and artificial perceptual systems to faithfully represent the stimulus under some (Lie) group transformations.
However, it remains unknown how recurrent neural circuits in the brain represent
the stimulus equivariantly, nor the neural representation of abstract group operators.
The present study uses a one-dimensional (1D) translation group as an example to
explore the general recurrent neural circuit mechanism of the equivariant stimulus
representation. We found that a continuous attractor network (CAN), a canonical
neural circuit model, self-consistently generates a continuous family of stationary
population responses (attractors) that represents the stimulus equivariantly. Inspired
by the Drosophila’s compass circuit, we found that the 1D translation operators
can be represented by extra speed neurons besides the CAN, where speed neurons’
responses represent the moving speed (1D translation group parameter), and their
feedback connections to the CAN represent the translation generator (Lie algebra).
We demonstrated that the network responses are consistent with experimental data.
Our model for the first time demonstrates how recurrent neural circuitry in the
brain achieves equivariant stimulus representation.

1

Introduction

Neuronal responses in the brain internally represent the stimulus s in the world. When the stimulus
changes due to some transformations, the brain updates its internal representation accordingly to
faithfully reflect the stimulus change. For example, V1 neurons encode the visual orientation, and their
population responses track the changing orientation which enables subsequent brain areas to decode
the instantaneous orientation. Transformations acting on a continuous stimulus can be described
by the Lie group theory [1], and a neural representation reflecting the stimulus transformation is
called group equivariant representation [2–4]. Mathematically, supposing a Lie group G acting on a
continuous stimulus s, the evoked neural population response ū(s) (a continuous function of s, and ū
denotes the mean response) is equivariant with the action of group G (group homomorphism) if,
T̂g · ū(s) = ū(Tg · s), ∀g ∈ G, ∀s.
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(1)

