Provably Efficient Reinforcement Learning in Partially
Observable Dynamical Systems

Masatoshi Uehara
Cornell University
mu223@cornell.edu

Ayush Sekhari
MIT
sekhari@mit.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University
kallus@cornell.edu
Wen Sun
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Abstract
We study Reinforcement Learning for partially observable dynamical systems
using function approximation. We propose a new Partially Observable Bilinear
Actor-Critic framework, that is general enough to include models such as
observable tabular Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs),
observable Linear-Quadratic-Gaussian (LQG), Predictive State Representations
(PSRs), as well as a newly introduced model Hilbert Space Embeddings of
POMDPs and observable POMDPs with latent low-rank transition. Under this
framework, we propose an actor-critic style algorithm that is capable of performing
agnostic policy learning. Given a policy class that consists of memory based
policies (that look at a fixed-length window of recent observations), and a value
function class that consists of functions taking both memory and future observations as inputs, our algorithm learns to compete against the best memory-based
policy in the given policy class. For certain examples such as undercomplete
observable tabular POMDPs, observable LQGs and observable POMDPs with
latent low-rank transition, by implicitly leveraging their special properties, our
algorithm is even capable of competing against the globally optimal policy without
paying an exponential dependence on the horizon in its sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Large state space and partial observability are two key challenges of Reinforcement Learning (RL).
While recent advances in RL for fully observable systems have focused on the challenge of scaling RL
to large state space in both theory and in practice using rich function approximation, the understanding
of large-scale RL under partial observability is still limited. In POMDPs, for example, a core issue is
that the optimal policy is not necessarily Markovian since the observations are not Markovian.
A common heuristic to tackle large-scale RL with partial observability in practice is to simply
maintain a time window of the history of observations, which is treated as a state to feed into the
policy and the value function. Such a window of history can be often maintained explicitly via
truncating away older history (e.g., DQN uses a window with length 4 for playing video games
[52]; Open AI Five uses a window with length 16 for LSTMs [5]). Since even for planning under
partial observations and known dynamics, finding the globally optimal policy conditional on the
entire history is generally NP-hard (due to the curse of the history) [46, 55, 23], searching for a short
memory-based policy can be understood as a reasonable middle ground that balances computation
and optimality. The impressive empirical results of these prior works also demonstrate that in practice,
there often exists a high-quality policy (not necessarily the globally optimal) that is only a function of
a short window of recent observations. However, these prior works that search for the best memorybased policy unfortunately cannot ensure sample efficient PAC guarantees due to the difficulty of
strategic exploration in POMDPs. The key question that we aim to answer in this work is:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

