Robust Semi-Supervised Learning when Not All
Classes have Labels
Lan-Zhe Guo∗ , Yi-Ge Zhang∗ , Zhi-Fan Wu, Jie-Jing Shao, Yu-Feng Li†
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{guolz,zhangyg,wuzf,shaojj,liyf}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) provides a powerful framework for leveraging
unlabeled data. Existing SSL typically requires all classes have labels. However,
in many real-world applications, there may exist some classes that are difficult to
label or newly occurred classes that cannot be labeled in time, resulting in there
are unseen classes in unlabeled data. Unseen classes will be misclassified as seen
classes, causing poor classification performance. The performance of seen classes
is also harmed by the existence of unseen classes. This limits the practical and
wider application of SSL. To address this problem, this paper proposes a new
SSL approach that can classify not only seen classes but also unseen classes. Our
approach consists of two modules: unseen class classification and learning pace
synchronization. Specifically, we first enable the SSL methods to classify unseen
classes by exploiting pairwise similarity between examples and then synchronize
the learning pace between seen and unseen classes by proposing an adaptive threshold with distribution alignment. Extensive empirical results show our approach
achieves significant performance improvement in both seen and unseen classes
compared with previous studies.

1

Introduction

Machine learning, especially deep learning, has achieved great success in various tasks by leveraging
sufficient labeled training data [21]. However, for many practical tasks, it can be difficult to attain a
number of labeled examples due to the high cost of the data labeling process [41, 23], which limits
the widespread adoption of machine learning techniques.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [43] provides a powerful framework for leveraging unlabeled data
when labels are limited or expensive to obtain. There has been a rapid development of SSL methods in
recent years, such as entropy minimization methods [22, 8], consistency regularization methods [24,
29, 20, 32], and holistic methods[30, 2, 1, 35, 37]. It has been reported that in certain cases, such as
image classification [30], SSL methods can achieve the performance of purely supervised learning
even when a substantial portion of the labels in a given dataset have been discarded.
All the positive results of SSL, however, are based on a basic assumption that there are labels for
each of the classes that one wishes to learn, i.e., all training and testing data are from seen classes
that are observed in the labeled dataset. However, in many real-world applications, particularly those
involving open-environment scenarios [42, 11], such an assumption is difficult to hold. For example,
in the product recognition task, thousands of new types of products are introduced to the supermarkets
every once in a while, and it would be expensive to label them all in time; in the judicial sentencing
task, some sentencing elements are naturally scarce, resulting in labeled judgment documents being
difficult to obtain for these elements in the training phase.
∗
†

Contribute to this work equally
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

