TempEL: Linking Dynamically Evolving and
Newly Emerging Entities

Klim Zaporojets ♮
Lucie-Aimée Kaffee ♯
Johannes Deleu ♮
♮
♮
Thomas Demeester
Chris Develder
Isabelle Augenstein ♯
♮
Ghent University – imec, IDLab, Ghent, Belgium
♯
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
{klim.zaporojets,johannes.deleu,thomas.demeester,chris.develder}@ugent.be
{kaffee,augenstein}@di.ku.dk

Abstract
In our continuously evolving world, entities change over time and new, previously
non-existing or unknown, entities appear. We study how this evolutionary scenario
impacts the performance on a well established entity linking (EL) task. For that
study, we introduce TempEL, an entity linking dataset that consists of time-stratified
English Wikipedia snapshots from 2013 to 2022, from which we collect both anchor
mentions of entities, and these target entities’ descriptions. By capturing such
temporal aspects, our newly introduced TempEL resource contrasts with currently
existing entity linking datasets, which are composed of fixed mentions linked
to a single static version of a target Knowledge Base (e.g., Wikipedia 2010 for
CoNLL-AIDA). Indeed, for each of our collected temporal snapshots, TempEL
contains links to entities that are continual, i.e., occur in all of the years, as well as
completely new entities that appear for the first time at some point. Thus, we enable
to quantify the performance of current state-of-the-art EL models for: (i) entities
that are subject to changes over time in their Knowledge Base descriptions as well
as their mentions’ contexts, and (ii) newly created entities that were previously
non-existing (e.g., at the time the EL model was trained). Our experimental results
show that in terms of temporal performance degradation, (i) continual entities suffer
a decrease of up to 3.1% EL accuracy, while (ii) for new entities this accuracy drop
is up to 17.9%. This highlights the challenge of the introduced TempEL dataset and
opens new research prospects in the area of time-evolving entity disambiguation.1

1

Introduction

Entity linking (EL) is a well-established task that is concerned with mapping anchor mentions in
text to target entities that describe them in a Knowledge Base (KB) (e.g., Wikipedia).2 Existing
benchmark datasets for EL [73, 66, 71, 57] are composed of a fixed set of annotated mentions linked
to a single version of a target KB. This static setup is oblivious to the inherently non-stationary
nature of the entity linking task where both target entities as well as anchor mentions change over
time. The example in Fig. 1 illustrates this time-evolving essence of entity linking with a simple
evolutionary comparison between Wikipedia 2013 and 2022. It showcases two scenarios studied in
the current paper: (i) temporal evolution of existing (continual) entities across temporal snapshots,
1

TempEL dataset, code and models are made public at https://github.com/klimzaporojets/TempEL.
Some of the related work [19, 37, 71, 88, 86] distinguishes between entity disambiguation and entity linking
tasks. This latter including mention detection and disambiguation in an end-to-end setting. In the current work,
we follow a more conservative naming convention [61, 78, 43, 53, 60], and use the term entity linking and entity
disambiguation interchangeably.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

