Collaborative Learning by Detecting
Collaboration Partners
Shu Ding, Wei Wang ⇤
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{dings, wangw}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Massive amounts of data are naturally dispersed over different clients in many
real-world applications, collaborative learning has been a promising paradigm
that allows to learn models through collaboration among the clients. However,
leveraging these dispersed data to learn good models is still challenging since
data over different clients are heterogeneous. Previous works mainly focus on
learning the centralized model for all clients or learning a personalized model for
each client. When there are numerous clients, the centralized model performs
badly on some clients, while learning a personalized model for each client costs
unaffordable computational resources. In this paper, we propose the collaborative
learning method to detect collaboration partners and adaptively learn K models
for numerous heterogeneous clients. We theoretically prove that the model learned
for each client is a good approximation of its personalized model. Experimental
results on real-world datasets verify the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, massive amounts of data are naturally dispersed over numerous
clients and each client only has limited data. The model trained with local data on each client has poor
performance since local data are insufficient. Leveraging these dispersed data on these clients to build
well-generalized models is challenging. In recent years, collaborative learning has been a promising
paradigm that enables the clients to collaboratively learn the models (Blum et al., 2017). Blum et al.
(2017) formalized two settings of collaborative learning, i.e., personalized setting and centralized
setting. The personalized setting allows to return a model for each client, while the centralized setting
only allows to return one single model for all clients. They evaluated the efficiency of collaborative
learning with overhead, i.e., the ratio between the sample complexity of collaborative learning and its
non-collaborative counterpart, and proved that the overhead of personalized setting is O(ln N ) and
the overhead of centralized setting is O(ln2 N ). Later, Nguyen & Zakynthinou (2018) and Chen et al.
(2018) proved that the overhead of centralized setting could be improved to O(ln N ), which matches
its lower bound ⌦(ln N ).
Generally, the data on different clients come from heterogeneous distributions. For example, in the
credit card fraud behavior detection task, the users’ revenue and expenditure behavior and credit
rating information are different among banks in regions with diverse socioeconomic characteristics.
To deal with heterogeneous data, Mohri et al. (2019) proposed Agnostic Federated Learning which
optimizes the performance of the model for the single worst client with the min-max optimization
scheme. Mansour et al. (2020) and Deng et al. (2020) advocated that combining local and global
models could improve the generalization ability. Nevertheless, the learned single model may perform
badly on clients whose distributions are different from the average distribution over all clients.
⇤

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

