A Solver-Free Framework for Scalable Learning in
Neural ILP Architectures
Yatin Nandwani∗, Rishabh Ranjan∗, Mausam & Parag Singla
Department of Computer Science, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, INDIA
{yatin.nandwani, rishabh.ranjan.cs118, mausam, parags}@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
There is a recent focus on designing architectures that have an Integer Linear
Programming (ILP) layer following a neural model (referred to as Neural ILP
in this paper). Neural ILP architectures are suitable for pure reasoning tasks
that require data-driven constraint learning or for tasks requiring both perception
(neural) and reasoning (ILP). A recent SOTA approach for end-to-end training of
Neural ILP explicitly defines gradients through the ILP black box [Paulus et al.,
2021] – this trains extremely slowly, owing to a call to the underlying ILP solver
for every training data point in a minibatch. In response, we present an alternative
training strategy that is solver-free, i.e., does not call the ILP solver at all at training
time. Neural ILP has a set of trainable hyperplanes (for cost and constraints in ILP),
together representing a polyhedron. Our key idea is that the training loss should
impose that the final polyhedron separates the positives (all constraints satisfied)
from the negatives (at least one violated constraint or a suboptimal cost value),
via a soft-margin formulation. While positive example(s) are provided as part
of the training data, we devise novel techniques for generating negative samples.
Our solution is flexible enough to handle equality as well as inequality constraints.
Experiments on several problems, both perceptual as well as symbolic, which
require learning the constraints of an ILP, show that our approach has superior
performance and scales much better compared to purely neural baselines and other
state-of-the-art models that require solver-based training. In particular, we are able
to obtain excellent performance on 9 × 9 symbolic and visual sudoku, to which the
other Neural ILP model is not able to scale. 2

1

Introduction

There has been a growing interest in the community which focuses on developing neural models
for solving combinatorial optimization problems. These problems often require complex reasoning
over discrete symbols. Many of these problems can be expressed in the form an underlying Integer
Linear Program (ILP). Two different kinds of problem (input) settings have been considered in the
literature: (a) purely symbolic and (b) combination of perceptual and symbolic. Solving an n-Queens
problem given the partial assignment of queens on the board as input would be an example of the
former, and solving a sudoku puzzle given the image of a partially filled board as input would be an
example of the latter. While the first setting corresponds to a pure reasoning task, second involves a
combination of perception and reasoning tasks which need to be solved in a joint fashion. Existing
literature proposes various approaches to handle one or both these settings. One line of work proposes
purely neural models [Palm et al., 2018, Nandwani et al., 2021, Dong et al., 2019] for solving these
tasks representing the underlying constraints and costs implicitly. While standard CNNs are used to
∗
2

Equal contribution. Work done while at IIT Delhi. Current email: rishabhr@andrew.cmu.edu
Code available at: https://github.com/dair-iitd/ilploss

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

