Computationally Efficient Horizon-Free
Reinforcement Learning for Linear Mixture MDPs

Dongruo Zhou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
drzhou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that episodic reinforcement learning (RL) is not more
difficult than contextual bandits, even with a long planning horizon and unknown
state transitions. However, these results are limited to either tabular Markov
decision processes (MDPs) or computationally inefficient algorithms for linear
mixture MDPs. In this paper, we propose the first computationally efficient
√ horizone
free algorithm for linear mixture MDPs, which achieves the optimal O(d
K + d2 )
regret up to logarithmic factors. Our algorithm adapts a weighted least square
estimator for the unknown transitional dynamic, where the weight is both varianceaware and uncertainty-aware. When applying our weighted
qPleast square estimator
K
2
O(d
to heterogeneous linear bandits, we can obtain an e
k=1 σk + d) regret in
the first K rounds, where d is the dimension of the context and σk2 is the variance of
the reward in the k-th round. This also improves upon the best-known algorithms
in this setting when σk2 ’s are known.

1

Introduction

How to design efficient algorithms is a central problem for reinforcement learning (RL). Here,
the efficiency includes both statistical efficiency, which requires the RL algorithm enjoy a low
regret/polynomial sample complexity for finding the near-optimal policy, and computational efficiency,
which expects the RL algorithm have polynomial running time. When restricting to episodic RL with
total reward upper bounded by 11 , a longstanding question is whether episodic RL is statistically and
computationally more difficult than contextual bandits (Jiang and Agarwal, 2018), since episodic
RL can be seen as an extension of contextual bandits to have a long planning horizon and unknown
state transition. For tabular RL, this questions has been fully resolved by a line of works (Wang et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022), which propose various horizon-free
algorithms. Here we say an algorithm is horizon-free if its regret/sample complexity has at most a
polylogarithmic dependence on the planning horizon H. In particular, (Zhang et al., 2021b) proposed
the first computationally efficient algorithm for tabular RL whose regret enjoys a polylogarithmic
dependence on the planning horizon, and (Zhang et al., 2022) further removed the polylogarithmic
dependence on the planning horizon.
For RL with function approximation to deal with large state space, Zhang et al. (2021c); Kim et al.
(2021) have made some progress towards horizon-free RL for a class of MDPs called linear mixture
MDPs (Jia et al., 2020; Ayoub et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021a), whose transition dynamic can be
represented as a linear combination of d basic transition models. More specifically, Zhang et al.
1

See Assumption 3.1 for a detailed description.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

