Unsupervised Representation Learning from
Pre-trained Diffusion Probabilistic Models

1

Zijian Zhang1
Zhou Zhao1∗
Zhijie Lin2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Sea AI Lab
{ckczzj,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn
linzj@sea.com

Abstract
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) have shown a powerful capacity of generating high-quality image samples. Recently, diffusion autoencoders (Diff-AE) have
been proposed to explore DPMs for representation learning via autoencoding. Their
key idea is to jointly train an encoder for discovering meaningful representations
from images and a conditional DPM as the decoder for reconstructing images.
Considering that training DPMs from scratch will take a long time and there have
existed numerous pre-trained DPMs, we propose Pre-trained DPM AutoEncoding
(PDAE), a general method to adapt existing pre-trained DPMs to the decoders for
image reconstruction, with better training efficiency and performance than Diff-AE.
Specifically, we find that the reason that pre-trained DPMs fail to reconstruct an
image from its latent variables is due to the information loss of forward process,
which causes a gap between their predicted posterior mean and the true one. From
this perspective, the classifier-guided sampling method can be explained as computing an extra mean shift to fill the gap, reconstructing the lost class information in
samples. These imply that the gap corresponds to the lost information of the image,
and we can reconstruct the image by filling the gap. Drawing inspiration from this,
we employ a trainable model to predict a mean shift according to encoded representation and train it to fill as much gap as possible, in this way, the encoder is forced
to learn as much information as possible from images to help the filling. By reusing
a part of network of pre-trained DPMs and redesigning the weighting scheme of
diffusion loss, PDAE can learn meaningful representations from images efficiently.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness, efficiency and flexibility of
PDAE. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/ckczzj/PDAE.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) [25, 39], generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [13], autoregressive models [50, 48], normalizing flows (NFs) [38, 23] and energybased models (EBMs) [9, 45] have shown remarkable capacity to synthesize striking image samples.
Recently, another kind of generative models, Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) [43, 14] are
further developed and becoming popular for their stable training process and state-of-the-art sample
quality [8]. Although a large number of degrees of freedom in implementation, the DPMs discussed
in this paper will refer exclusively to those trained by the denoising method proposed in DDPMs [14].
Unsupervised representation learning via generative modeling is a popular topic in computer vision.
Latent variable generative models, such as GANs and VAEs, are a natural candidate for this, since
they inherently involve a latent representation of the data they generate. Likewise, DPMs inherently
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

