Thor: Wielding Hammers to Integrate Language
Models and Automated Theorem Provers
Albert Q. Jiang
University of Cambridge
qj213@cam.ac.uk

Wenda Li
University of Cambridge
wl302@cam.ac.uk

Konrad Czechowski
University of Warsaw
konrad.czechowski@gmail.com

Tomasz Odrzygóźdź
IDEAS NCBR
tomaszo@impan.pl

Yuhuai Wu
Google Research & Stanford University
yuhuai@google.com

Szymon Tworkowski
University of Warsaw
szy.tworkowski@gmail.com
Piotr Miłoś
Polish Academy of Sciences
pmilos@mimuw.edu.pl

Mateja Jamnik
University of Cambridge
mateja.jamnik@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
In theorem proving, the task of selecting useful premises from a large library to
unlock the proof of a given conjecture is crucially important. This presents a
challenge for all theorem provers, especially the ones based on language models,
due to their relative inability to reason over huge volumes of premises in text
form. This paper introduces Thor, a framework integrating language models and
automated theorem provers to overcome this difficulty. In Thor, a class of methods
called hammers that leverage the power of automated theorem provers are used for
premise selection, while all other tasks are designated to language models. Thor
increases a language model’s success rate on the PISA dataset from 39% to 57%,
while solving 8.2% of problems neither language models nor automated theorem
provers are able to solve on their own. Furthermore, with a significantly smaller
computational budget, Thor can achieve a success rate on the MiniF2F dataset that
is on par with the best existing methods. Thor can be instantiated for the majority
of popular interactive theorem provers via a straightforward protocol we provide.

1

Introduction

In theorem proving, premise selection is the task of identifying useful facts from a large library
that enable finding the proof of a given conjecture. It is essential for the discovery of many proofs,
and Automated Reasoning in Large Theories (ARLT) depends on having apt methods for premise
selection [Kühlwein et al., 2012, Sutcliffe et al., 2007]. A group of proof methods have been developed
inside interactive theorem provers (ITPs) to deal with this task. They use external automated theorem
provers (ATPs) to reach the remaining goals, inspect the proofs produced, and pick out the premises
involved in them. Such systems are called hammers [Blanchette et al., 2016]. Hammers are available
in many ITPs [Paulson, 2010, Kaliszyk and Urban, 2015, Gauthier and Kaliszyk, 2015, Czajka and
Kaliszyk, 2018] and are immensely popular within the theorem proving community.
Language models have had some successful applications in the area of formal theorem proving [Polu
and Sutskever, 2020, Han et al., 2021, Jiang et al., 2021, Polu et al., 2022]. However, we observe that
language-model-based reasoning systems are inept at premise selection. The difficulty of premise
selection for language models is that they cannot effectively reason over thousands of available facts
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

