MonoSDF: Exploring Monocular Geometric Cues
for Neural Implicit Surface Reconstruction

Zehao Yu1
1

Songyou Peng2,3

University of Tübingen
4

Michael Niemeyer1,3

Torsten Sattler4

Andreas Geiger1,3

2
3
ETH Zurich
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
Czech Technical University in Prague

https://niujinshuchong.github.io/monosdf

Abstract
In recent years, neural implicit surface reconstruction methods have become popular for multi-view 3D reconstruction. In contrast to traditional multi-view stereo
methods, these approaches tend to produce smoother and more complete reconstructions due to the inductive smoothness bias of neural networks. State-of-the-art
neural implicit methods allow for high-quality reconstructions of simple scenes
from many input views. Yet, their performance drops significantly for larger and
more complex scenes and scenes captured from sparse viewpoints. This is caused
primarily by the inherent ambiguity in the RGB reconstruction loss that does not
provide enough constraints, in particular in less-observed and textureless areas.
Motivated by recent advances in the area of monocular geometry prediction, we
systematically explore the utility these cues provide for improving neural implicit
surface reconstruction. We demonstrate that depth and normal cues, predicted by
general-purpose monocular estimators, significantly improve reconstruction quality
and optimization time. Further, we analyse and investigate multiple design choices
for representing neural implicit surfaces, ranging from monolithic MLP models
over single-grid to multi-resolution grid representations. We observe that geometric
monocular priors improve performance both for small-scale single-object as well
as large-scale multi-object scenes, independent of the choice of representation.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction from multiple RGB images is a fundamental problem in computer vision with
various applications in robotics, graphics, animation, virtual reality, and more. Recently, coordinatebased neural networks have emerged as a powerful tool for representing 3D geometry and appearance.
The key idea is to use compact, memory efficient multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to parameterize
implicit shape representations such as occupancy or signed distance fields. While early works [8, 37,
44] relied on 3D supervision, several recent works [41, 60, 75] use differentiable surface rendering to
reconstruct scenes from multi-view images. At the same time, neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [38]
achieved impressive novel view synthesis results with volume rendering techniques. [43, 69, 74]
combine surface and volume rendering for the task of 3D reconstruction by expressing volume density
as a function of the underlying 3D surface, which in turn improves scene geometry.
Current neural implicit-based surface reconstruction approaches achieve impressive reconstruction
results for simple scenes with dense viewpoint sampling. Yet, as shown in the first row of Fig. 1,
they struggle in the presence of limited input views (DTU with 3 views) or for scenes that contain
large textureless regions (walls in ScanNet or Tanks & Temples). A key reason for this behavior is
that these model are optimized using a per-pixel RGB reconstruction loss. Using only RGB images
as input leads to an underconstrained problem as there exist an infinite number of photo-consistent
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

