Data-Efficient Augmentation for Training Neural
Networks
Tian Yu Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
tianyu@cs.ucla.edu

Baharan Mirzasoleiman
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
baharan@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Data augmentation is essential to achieve state-of-the-art performance in many
deep learning applications. However, the most effective augmentation techniques
become computationally prohibitive for even medium-sized datasets. To address
this, we propose a rigorous technique to select subsets of data points that when
augmented, closely capture the training dynamics of full data augmentation. We
first show that data augmentation, modeled as additive perturbations, improves
learning and generalization by relatively enlarging and perturbing the smaller
singular values of the network Jacobian, while preserving its prominent directions.
This prevents overfitting and enhances learning the harder to learn information.
Then, we propose a framework to iteratively extract small subsets of training
data that when augmented, closely capture the alignment of the fully augmented
Jacobian with labels/residuals. We prove that stochastic gradient descent applied
to the augmented subsets found by our approach has similar training dynamics
to that of fully augmented data. Our experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves 6.3x speedup on CIFAR10 and 2.2x speedup on SVHN, and outperforms
the baselines by up to 10% across various subset sizes. Similarly, on TinyImageNet
and ImageNet, our method beats the baselines by up to 8%, while achieving up to
3.3x speedup across various subset sizes. Finally, training on and augmenting 50%
subsets using our method on a version of CIFAR10 corrupted with label noise even
outperforms using the full dataset. 1

1

Introduction

Standard (weak) data augmentation transforms the training examples with e.g. rotations or crops for
images, and trains on the transformed examples in place of the original training data. While weak
augmentation is effective and computationally inexpensive, strong data augmentation (in addition to
weak augmentation) is a key component in achieving nearly all state-of-the-art results in deep learning
applications [31]. However, strong data augmentation techniques often increase the training time by
orders of magnitude. First, they often have a very expensive pipeline to find or generate more complex
transformations that best improves generalization [4, 13, 19, 36]. Second, appending transformed
examples to the training data is often much more effective than training on the (strongly or weakly)
transformed examples in-place of the original data. For example, appending one transformed example
to the training data is often much more effective than training on two transformed examples in place
of every original training data, while both strategies have the same computational cost (c.f. Appendix
D.6). Hence, to obtain the state-of-the-art performance, multiple augmented examples are added
for every single data point and to each training iteration [12, 36]. In this case, even if producing
transformations are cheap, such methods increases the size of the training data by orders of magnitude.
1

Our code can be found at https://github.com/tianyu139/data-efficient-augmentation

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

