Few-Shot Non-Parametric Learning with Deep Latent
Variable Model
Zhiying Jiang1,2

Yiqin Dai2 Ji Xin1 Ming Li1 Jimmy Lin1
University of Waterloo 2 AFAIK.
zhiying.jiang@uwaterloo.ca quinn@afaik.io
{ji.xin, mli, jimmylin}@uwaterloo.ca
1

Abstract
Most real-world problems that machine learning algorithms are expected to solve
face the situation with (1) unknown data distribution; (2) little domain-specific
knowledge; and (3) datasets with limited annotation. We propose Non-Parametric
learning by Compression with Latent Variables (NPC-LV), a learning framework
for any dataset with abundant unlabeled data but very few labeled ones. By
only training a generative model in an unsupervised way, the framework utilizes
the data distribution to build a compressor. Using a compressor-based distance
metric derived from Kolmogorov complexity, together with few labeled data,
NPC-LV classifies without further training. We show that NPC-LV outperforms
supervised methods on all three datasets on image classification in the low data
regime and even outperforms semi-supervised learning methods on CIFAR-10. We
demonstrate how and when negative evidence lowerbound (nELBO) can be used as
an approximate compressed length for classification. By revealing the correlation
between compression rate and classification accuracy, we illustrate that under
NPC-LV how the improvement of generative models can enhance downstream
classification accuracy.

1

Introduction

The progress of deep neural networks drives great success of supervised learning with huge labeled
datasets [1, 2, 3]. However, large labeled datasets are luxurious in many applications and huge
amounts of training parameters make the model easy to overfit and hard to generalize to other datasets.
The urge to learn with small labeled dataset prompts Few-Shot Learning (FSL). However, most fewshot classification settings require either an auxiliary “support set” [4, 5, 6, 7] that contains c classes,
each with k samples (c-way k-shot); or prior knowledge about the dataset, where data augmentation
can be performed within the same dataset [8, 9, 10] or from other weakly-labeled/unlabeled/similar
datasets [11, 12, 13]. This setting is not widely applicable to every dataset in practice, as it requires
either the elaborate construction of an additional “support set” or augmentation algorithms tailored to
specific datasets. Pre-trained models, on the other hand, do not require adhoc “support” and have
proved to be good at few-shot learning [14] and even zero-shot learning [15]. However, thousands of
millions of training parameters make the model hard to be retrained but only fine-tuned. When the
data distribution is substantially different from any datasets used in pre-training, the inductive bias
from pre-training holds up fine-tuning, making the model less pliable [16].
Goals from the above learning paradigms can be summarized as to design algorithms that can be
applied to any dataset, and can learn with few labeled data, ideally with no training. “No Free
Lunch” [17] implies that it’s impossible to have an algorithm that is both “universal” and “best”.
But how good can a “universal” algorithm be, especially in the low data regime, with no external
data resources? Specifically, we are interested in a new setting, Non-Supported Few-Shot Learning
(NS-FSL), defined as follows:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

