Non-Linguistic Supervision for Contrastive Learning
of Sentence Embeddings

Yiren Jian
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
yiren.jian.gr@dartmouth.edu
Chongyang Gao∗
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
chongyanggao2026@u.northwestern.edu

Soroush Vosoughi
Department of Computer Science
Dartmouth College
soroush.vosoughi@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
Semantic representation learning for sentences is an important and well-studied
problem in NLP. The current trend for this task involves training a Transformerbased sentence encoder through a contrastive objective with text, i.e., clustering
sentences with semantically similar meanings and scattering others. In this work,
we find the performance of Transformer models as sentence encoders can be improved by training with multi-modal multi-task losses, using unpaired examples
from another modality (e.g., sentences and unrelated image/audio data). In particular, besides learning by the contrastive loss on text, our model clusters examples
from a non-linguistic domain (e.g., visual/audio) with a similar contrastive loss
at the same time. The reliance of our framework on unpaired non-linguistic data
makes it language-agnostic, enabling it to be widely applicable beyond English
NLP. Experiments on 7 semantic textual similarity benchmarks reveal that models
trained with the additional non-linguistic (images/audio) contrastive objective lead
to higher quality sentence embeddings. This indicates that Transformer models
are able to generalize better by doing a similar task (i.e., clustering) with unpaired
examples from different modalities in a multi-task fashion. The code is available at
https://github.com/yiren-jian/NonLing-CSE.

1

Introduction

Learning semantically meaningful sentence embeddings is an important task in Natural Language
Processing (NLP), with applications for semantic retrieval and search among other things. The
embeddings of sentences are such that semantically similar sentences are located closer to each
other in the embedding space. The current state-of-the-art method for learning sentence embeddings
is SimCSE [13], which uses contrastive learning. Unsupervised contrastive learning clusters the
representations of same examples under different augmentations. SimCSE’s main contribution is
the use of Dropout augmentation, which they show outperforms other traditional text augmentation
methods (e.g., random deletion, swapping, etc.) for learning sentence embeddings. To improve the
results further, supervised SimCSE leverages a labeled Natural Language Inference (NLI) dataset
during the learning. Each entry of the NLI dataset is a triplet of sentences, a source sentence and its
positive and negative pairs (e.g., "Two dogs are running" (src), "There are animals outdoors" (pos),
∗

Contributed as co-first author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

