Adaptive Distribution Calibration for Few-Shot
Learning with Hierarchical Optimal Transport

Dandan Guo 1,2 , Long Tian3 , He Zhao 4 , Mingyuan Zhou5 , Hongyuan Zha1,6
1
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing
3
Xidian University 4 CSIRO’s Data61 5 The University of Texas at Austin
6
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
guodandan@cuhk.edu.cn tianlong@xidian.edu.cn he.zhao@ieee.org
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot classification aims to learn a classifier to recognize unseen classes during
training, where the learned model can easily become over-fitted based on the
biased distribution formed by only a few training examples. A recent solution
to this problem is calibrating the distribution of these few sample classes by
transferring statistics from the base classes with sufficient examples, where how to
decide the transfer weights from base classes to novel classes is the key. However,
principled approaches for learning the transfer weights have not been carefully
studied. To this end, we propose a novel distribution calibration method by learning
the adaptive weight matrix between novel samples and base classes, which is
built upon a hierarchical Optimal Transport (H-OT) framework. By minimizing
the high-level OT distance between novel samples and base classes, we can view
the learned transport plan as the adaptive weight information for transferring
the statistics of base classes. The learning of the cost function between a base
class and novel class in the high-level OT leads to the introduction of the lowlevel OT, which considers the weights of all the data samples in the base class.
Experiments on standard benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed plug-andplay model outperforms competing approaches and owns desired cross-domain
generalization ability, proving the effectiveness of the learned adaptive weights. 1

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have become the regular ingredients for numerous computer vision tasks
such as image classification [1, 2] and achieve state-of-the-art performance. However, the strong
performance of deep neural networks typically relies on abundant labeled instances for training [3].
Considering the high cost of collecting and annotating a large amount of data, a major research
effort is being dedicated to fields such as transfer learning [4] and domain adaptation [5]. As a
trending research subject in the low data regime, few-shot classification aims to learn a model on
the data from the base classes, so that the model can generalize well on the tasks sampled from
the novel classes. Several lines of works have been proposed such as those based on meta-learning
paradigms [3, 6–11] and those directly predicting the weights of the classifiers for novel classes
[12, 13]. Recently, methods based on distribution calibration have gained increasing attention. As a
representative example, Yang et al. [14] calibrate the feature distribution of the few-sample classes by
transferring the statistics from the base classes and then utilize the sampled data to train a classifier
1
If you are interested in our work, please see our code, which is available at https://github.com/
DandanGuo1993/Adaptive-Distribution-Calibration-for-Few-Shot-Learning-with-Hierarchical-Optimal-Transport.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

