Beyond Separability: Analyzing the Linear
Transferability of Contrastive Representations to
Related Subpopulations
Jeff Z. HaoChen
Stanford University

Colin Wei
Stanford University

Ananya Kumar
Stanford University

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University

Abstract
Contrastive learning is a highly effective method for learning representations from
unlabeled data. Recent works show that contrastive representations can transfer
across domains, leading to simple state-of-the-art algorithms for unsupervised
domain adaptation. In particular, a linear classifier trained to separate the
representations on the source domain can also predict classes on the target domain
accurately, even though the representations of the two domains are far from each
other. We refer to this phenomenon as linear transferability. This paper analyzes
when and why contrastive representations exhibit linear transferability in a general
unsupervised domain adaptation setting. We prove that linear transferability can
occur when data from the same class in different domains (e.g., photo dogs and
cartoon dogs) are more related with each other than data from different classes in
different domains (e.g., photo dogs and cartoon cats) are. Our analyses are in a
realistic regime where the source and target domains can have unbounded density
ratios and be weakly related, and they have distant representations across domains.

1

Introduction

In recent years, contrastive learning and related ideas have been shown to be highly effective for
representation learning [Chen et al., 2020a,b, He et al., 2020, Caron et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020c,
Gao et al., 2021, Su et al., 2021, Chen and He, 2020]. Contrastive learning trains representations on
unlabeled data by encouraging positive pairs (e.g., augmentations of the same image) to have
closer representations than negative pairs (e.g., augmentations of two random images). The
learned representations are almost linearly separable: one can train a linear classifier on top of
the fixed representations and achieve strong performance on many natural downstream tasks [Chen
et al., 2020a]. Prior theoretical works analyze contrastive learning by proving that semantically
similar datapoints (e.g., datapoints from the same class) are mapped to geometrically nearby
representations [Arora et al., 2019, Tosh et al., 2020, 2021, HaoChen et al., 2021]. In other words,
representations form clusters in the Euclidean space that respect the semantic similarity; therefore,
they are linearly separable for downstream tasks where datapoints in the same semantic cluster have
the same label.
Intriguingly, recent empirical works show that contrastive representations carry richer information
beyond the cluster memberships—they can transfer across domains in a linear way as elaborated
below. Contrastive learning is used in many unsupervised domain adaptation algorithms[Thota
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

