A general approximation lower bound in Lp norm,
with applications to feed-forward neural networks
El Mehdi Achour1 , Armand Foucault1 , Sébastien Gerchinovitz2,1 , and François Malgouyres1
1

Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse ; UMR5219 , Université de Toulouse ; CNRS , UPS IMT
F-31062 Toulouse Cedex 9, France
2
IRT Saint Exupéry, 3 rue Tarfaya, 31400 Toulouse, France
{El_mehdi.achour,armand.foucault,francois.malgouyres} AT
math.univ-toulouse.fr
sebastien.gerchinovitz AT irt-saintexupery.com

Abstract
We study the fundamental limits to the expressive power of neural networks. Given
two sets F , G of real-valued functions, we first prove a general lower bound on how
well functions in F can be approximated in Lp (µ) norm by functions in G, for any
p ≥ 1 and any probability measure µ. The lower bound depends on the packing
number of F , the range of F , and the fat-shattering dimension of G. We then
instantiate this bound to the case where G corresponds to a piecewise-polynomial
feed-forward neural network, and describe in details the application to two sets
F : Hölder balls and multivariate monotonic functions. Beside matching (known
or new) upper bounds up to log factors, our lower bounds shed some light on
the similarities or differences between approximation in Lp norm or in sup norm,
solving an open question by DeVore et al. [DHP21]. Our proof strategy differs
from the sup norm case and uses a key probability result of Mendelson [Men02].

1

Introduction

Neural networks are known for their great expressive power: in classification, they can interpolate
arbitrary labels [ZBH+ 21], while in regression they have universal approximation properties [Cyb89,
Hor91, LLPS93, KL20], with approximation rates that can outperform those of linear approximation
methods [Yar18, DHP21]. Though the approximation problem is often only one part of the underlying
learning problem (where generalization and optimization properties are also at stake), understanding
the fundamental limits to the approximation properties of neural networks is key, both conceptually
and for practical issues such as designing the right network architecture for the right problem.
Setting and related works. One way to quantify the expressive power of neural networks is
through the following problem (some informal statements will be made more precise in the next
sections). Let G be the set of all functions gw : X ⊂ Rd → R that can be represented by tuning the
weights w ∈ RW of a feed-forward neural network with a fixed architecture, and let F be any set of
real-valued functions on X . A natural question is: how well can functions f ∈ F be approximated by
functions gw ∈ G? More precisely, given a norm ∥ · ∥ on functions, what is the order of magnitude of
the (worst-case) approximation error of F by G defined by
sup inf ∥f − gw ∥ ,

f ∈F gw ∈G

(1)

and how small can it be given the numbers W , L of weights and layers, and some properties of F ?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

