Deep Active Learning by Leveraging Training
Dynamics
Haonan Wang1 , Wei Huang2 , Ziwei Wu1 , Andrew Margenot1 ,
Hanghang Tong1 , Jingrui He1
1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2
University of New South Wales
1
{haonan3,ziweiwu2,margenot,htong,jingrui}@illinois.edu
2
{weihuang.uts}@gmail.com

Abstract
Active learning theories and methods have been extensively studied in classical
statistical learning settings. However, deep active learning, i.e., active learning
with deep learning models, is usually based on empirical criteria without solid
theoretical justification, thus suffering from heavy doubts when some of those fail
to provide benefits in real applications. In this paper, by exploring the connection
between the generalization performance and the training dynamics, we propose a
theory-driven deep active learning method (dynamicAL) which selects samples to
maximize training dynamics. In particular, we prove that the convergence speed
of training and the generalization performance are positively correlated under the
ultra-wide condition and show that maximizing the training dynamics leads to better
generalization performance. Furthermore, to scale up to large deep neural networks
and data sets, we introduce two relaxations for the subset selection problem and
reduce the time complexity from polynomial to constant. Empirical results show
that dynamicAL not only outperforms the other baselines consistently but also
scales well on large deep learning models. We hope our work would inspire more
attempts on bridging the theoretical findings of deep networks and practical impacts
of deep active learning in real applications.

1

Introduction

Training deep learning (DL) models usually requires large amount of high-quality labeled data [1] to
optimize a model with a massive number of parameters. The acquisition of such annotated data is
usually time-consuming and expensive, making it unaffordable in the fields that require high domain
expertise. A promising approach for minimizing the labeling effort is active learning (AL), which
aims to identify and label the maximally informative samples, so that a high-performing classifier can
be trained with minimal labeling effort [2]. Under classical statistical learning settings, theories of
active learning have been extensively studied from the perspective of VC dimension [3]. As a result,
a variety of methods have been proposed, such as (i) the version-space-based approaches, which
require maintaining a set of models [4, 5], and (ii) the clustering-based approaches, which assume
that the data within the same cluster have pure labels [6].
However, the theoretical analyses for these classical settings may not hold for over-parameterized
deep neural networks where the traditional wisdom is ineffective [1]. For example, margin-based
methods select the labeling examples in the vicinity of the learned decision boundary [7, 8]. However,
in the over-parameterized regime, every labeled example could potentially be near the learned decision
boundary [9]. As a result, theoretically, such analysis can hardly guide us to design practical active
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

