Practical Adversarial Multivalid Conformal Prediction
Osbert Bastani1 , Varun Gupta1 , Christopher Jung2 ,
Georgy Noarov1 , Ramya Ramalingam1 , Aaron Roth1
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 Stanford University
{obastani, vgup, gnoarov, ramya23, aaroth}@seas.upenn.edu,
csj93@stanford.edu

Abstract
We give a simple, generic conformal prediction method for sequential prediction
that achieves target empirical coverage guarantees on adversarial data. It is computationally lightweight — comparable to split conformal prediction — but does
not require having a held-out validation set, and so all data can be used for training
models from which to derive a conformal score. Furthermore, it gives stronger
than marginal coverage guarantees in two ways. First, it gives threshold calibrated
prediction sets that have correct empirical coverage even conditional on the threshold used to form the prediction set from the conformal score. Second, the user can
specify an arbitrary collection of subsets of the feature space — possibly intersecting — and the coverage guarantees will also hold conditional on membership in
each of these subsets. We call our algorithm MVP, short for MultiValid Prediction.
We give both theory and an extensive set of empirical evaluations.1

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of predicting labels y ∈ Y given examples x ∈ X . One popular strategy for
expressing uncertainty is to allow the algorithm to produce a prediction set T ⊆ Y rather than an
individual label. We give a simple, practical algorithm for constructing prediction sets in sequential
prediction problems over an arbitrary domain X ×Y, given any data-dependent sequence of conformal
score functions st : X × Y → R≥0 . In each round t, an example represented by a feature vector
xt ∈ X arrives. We can define an arbitrary conformal score st : X × Y → R≥0 that can depend on
previously observed examples (as well as on f ) in arbitrary ways. We produce a round-dependent
threshold qt , which gives us a prediction set Tt = {y ∈ Y : st (xt , y) ≤ qt }. We then observe the
true label yt ; we say our prediction set covers yt if yt ∈ St . Given a coverage target 1 − δ, our goal
is to produce sets that have correct empirical coverage — i.e. that cover a 1 − δ fraction of the labels
(we do not want either over-coverage or under-coverage). We wish to make as few assumptions as
possible, so that our method is robust to arbitrary and unanticipated distribution shift, and applies to
e.g. time series data which are very far from exchangeable. We also want our coverage guarantees to
be meaningful not just marginally, but at finer granularities: conditional on both the threshold value
we choose, and on membership of xt ∈ G for a set of groups G ∈ G ⊆ 2X that can be arbitrarily
defined and intersecting. Finally, we want our algorithm to have low computational overhead, so
that it can be applied as a wrapper on top of arbitrary prediction methods, for both regression and
classification. The algorithm we propose achieves these goals and has several desirable properties:
Worst-Case Empirical Coverage: Our method has worst case adversarial guarantees. The
sequence of examples {(xt , yt )}Tt=1 needs not be drawn from an exchangeable distribution as it does
for standard conformal prediction methods [Shafer and Vovk, 2008] — instead, it can be chosen
by an adaptive adversary. The conformal scores st can be arbitrary and can depend on data from
1

Code to replicate our experiments can be found at https://github.com/ProgBelarus/MultiValidPrediction.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

