Convergence for score-based generative modeling
with polynomial complexity

Holden Lee
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
hlee283@jhu.edu

Jianfeng Lu
Department of Mathematics
Duke University
jianfeng@math.duke.edu

Yixin Tan
Department of Mathematics
Duke University
yixin.tan@duke.edu

Abstract
Score-based generative modeling (SGM) is a highly successful approach for learning a probability distribution from data and generating further samples. We prove
the first polynomial convergence guarantees for the core mechanic behind SGM:
drawing samples from a probability density p given a score estimate (an estimate
of ∇ ln p) that is accurate in L2 (p). Compared to previous works, we do not incur
error that grows exponentially in time or that suffers from a curse of dimensionality. Our guarantee works for any smooth distribution and depends polynomially
on its log-Sobolev constant. Using our guarantee, we give a theoretical analysis of score-based generative modeling, which transforms white-noise input into
samples from a learned data distribution given score estimates at different noise
scales. Our analysis gives theoretical grounding to the observation that an annealed procedure is required in practice to generate good samples, as our proof
depends essentially on using annealing to obtain a warm start at each step. Moreover, we show that a predictor-corrector algorithm gives better convergence than
using either portion alone.

1

Introduction

A key task in machine learning is to learn a probability distribution from data, in a way that allows efficient generation of additional samples from the learned distribution. Score-based generative modeling (SGM) is one empirically successful approach that implicitly learns the probability
distribution by learning how to transform white noise into the data distribution, and gives stateof-the-art performance for generating images and audio [SE19; Dat+19; Gra+19; SE20; Son+20b;
Men+21; Son+21b; Son+21a; Jin+22]. It also yields a conditional generation process for inverse
problems [DN21]. The basic idea behind score-based generative modeling is to first estimate the
score function from data [Son+20a] and then to sample the distribution based on the learned score
function. Other approaches for generative modeling include generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[Goo+14; ACB17], normalizing flows [DSB16], variational autoencoders [KW19], and energybased models [ZML16]. While score-based generative modeling has achieved great success, its
theoretical analysis is still lacking and is the focus of our work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

