Set-based Meta-Interpolation for
Few-Task Meta-Learning

Seanie Lee1∗, Bruno Andreis1∗ ,
Kenji Kawaguchi 2 , Juho Lee1,3 , Sung Ju Hwang1
KAIST1 , National University of Singapore2 , AITRICS3
{lsnfamily02, andries}@kaist.ac.kr,
kenji@comp.nus.edu.sg, {juholee, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Meta-learning approaches enable machine learning systems to adapt to new tasks
given few examples by leveraging knowledge from related tasks. However, a large
number of meta-training tasks are still required for generalization to unseen tasks
during meta-testing, which introduces a critical bottleneck for real-world problems
that come with only few tasks, due to various reasons including the difficulty
and cost of constructing tasks. Recently, several task augmentation methods have
been proposed to tackle this issue using domain-specific knowledge to design
augmentation techniques to densify the meta-training task distribution. However,
such reliance on domain-specific knowledge renders these methods inapplicable
to other domains. While Manifold Mixup based task augmentation methods are
domain-agnostic, we empirically find them ineffective on non-image domains. To
tackle these limitations, we propose a novel domain-agnostic task augmentation
method, Meta-Interpolation, which utilizes expressive neural set functions to densify the meta-training task distribution using bilevel optimization. We empirically
validate the efficacy of Meta-Interpolation on eight datasets spanning across various
domains such as image classification, molecule property prediction, text classification and sound classificattion. Experimentally, we show that Meta-Interpolation
consistently outperforms all the relevant baselines. Theoretically, we prove that
task interpolation with the set function regularizes the meta-learner to improve
generalization.

1

Introduction

The ability to learn a new task given only a few examples is crucial for artificial intelligence. Recently,
meta-learning [39, 3] has emerged as a viable method to achieve this objective and enables machine
learning systems to quickly adapt to a new task by leveraging knowledge from other related tasks seen
during meta-training. Although existing meta-learning methods can efficiently adapt to new tasks
with few data samples, a large dataset of meta-training tasks is still required to learn meta-knowledge
that can be transferred to unseen tasks. For many real-world applications, such extensive collections
of meta-training tasks may be unavailable. Such scenarios give rise to the few-task meta-learning
problem where a meta-learner can easily memorize the meta-training tasks but fail to generalize
well to unseen tasks. The few-task meta-learning problem usually results from the difficulty in task
generation and data collection. For instance, in the medical domain, it is infeasible to collect a large
amount of data to construct extensive meta-training tasks due to privacy concerns. Moreover, for
natural language processing, it is not straightforward to split a dataset into tasks, and hence entire
datasets are treated as tasks [30].
∗

Equal Contribution. Order of the authors was determined by a coin toss.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

