Archimedes Meets Privacy:
On Privately Estimating Quantiles in High Dimensions
Under Minimal Assumptions

Omri Ben-Eliezer
Department of Mathematics
MIT
omrib@mit.edu

Dan Mikulincer
Department of Mathematics
MIT
danmiku@mit.edu

Ilias Zadik
Department of Mathematics
MIT
izadik@mit.edu

Abstract
The last few years have seen a surge of work on high dimensional statistics under
privacy constraints, mostly following two main lines of work: the “worst case” line,
which does not make any distributional assumptions on the input data; and the
“strong assumptions” line, which assumes that the data is generated from specific
families, e.g., subgaussian distributions. In this work we take a middle ground,
obtaining new differentially private algorithms with polynomial sample complexity
for estimating quantiles in high-dimensions, as well as estimating and sampling
points of high Tukey depth, all working under very mild distributional assumptions.
From the technical perspective, our work relies upon fundamental robustness results
in the convex geometry literature, demonstrating how such results can be used
in a private context. Our main object of interest is the (convex) floating body
(FB), a notion going back to Archimedes, which is a robust and well studied highdimensional analogue of the interquantile range. We show how one can privately,
and with polynomially many samples, (a) output an approximate interior point
of the FB – e.g., “a typical user” in a high-dimensional database – by leveraging
the robustness of the Steiner point of the FB; and at the expense of polynomially
many more samples, (b) produce an approximate uniform sample from the FB, by
constructing a private noisy projection oracle.

1

Introduction

Computing statistics of large, complex high-dimensional datasets under privacy constraints is a
fundamental challenge in modern data science. In this work, we study the sample complexity of
several different tasks related to estimating the quantiles of a d-dimensional distribution D, from
having sample access to it, under privacy constraints. Our first focus is on estimating quantiles of fixed
marginals. For a random vector X ∈ Rd , the quantiles of X along direction θ are the quantiles of the
(one-dimensional) marginal ⟨X, θ⟩, which we denote by Qq (⟨X, θ⟩) for q ∈ [0, 1]. Our second focus
is on estimating a convex region called the floating body of a d-dimensional distribution, an analogue
of the 1-dimensional interquantile range exhibiting rich mathematical properties, investigated over
decades of research in convex geometry and sharing connections with the work of Archimedes (see,
e.g., the survey [NSW19]). Formally, the q-floating body of a random vector X ∈ Rd is given by
\ 
Fq (X) =
x ∈ Rd : ⟨x, θ⟩ ≤ Qq (⟨X, θ⟩) ,
(1)
θ∈Sd−1

and in statistical language corresponds to the points of so-called Tukey-depth at least 1 − q [NSW19].
When clear from context, we also denote by Fq (D) the floating body of the random vector X ∼ D.
See Figure 1 for a simple demonstration of the floating body.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

