Contrastive Neural Ratio Estimation
Benjamin Kurt Miller
University of Amsterdam
b.k.miller@uva.nl

Christoph Weniger
University of Amsterdam
c.weniger@uva.nl

Patrick Forré
University of Amsterdam
p.d.forre@uva.nl

Abstract
Likelihood-to-evidence ratio estimation is usually cast as either a binary (NRE - A)
or a multiclass (NRE - B) classification task. In contrast to the binary classification
framework, the current formulation of the multiclass version has an intrinsic and
unknown bias term, making otherwise informative diagnostics unreliable. We
propose a multiclass framework free from the bias inherent to NRE - B at optimum,
leaving us in the position to run diagnostics that practitioners depend on. It
also recovers NRE - A in one corner case and NRE - B in the limiting case. For fair
comparison, we benchmark the behavior of all algorithms in both familiar and novel
training regimes: when jointly drawn data is unlimited, when data is fixed but prior
draws are unlimited, and in the commonplace fixed data and parameters setting.
Our investigations reveal that the highest performing models are distant from the
competitors (NRE - A, NRE - B) in hyperparameter space. We make a recommendation
for hyperparameters distinct from the previous models. We suggest a bound on
the mutual information as a performance metric for simulation-based inference
methods, without the need for posterior samples, and provide experimental results.

1

Introduction

We begin with a motivating example: Consider
the task of inferring the mass of an exoplanet θ o
from the light curve observations xo of a distant
star. We design a computer program that maps
hypothetical mass θ to a simulated light curve
x using relevant physical theory. Our simulator
computes x from θ, but the inverse mapping is
unspecified and likely intractable. Simulationbased inference (SBI) puts this problem in a
probabilistic context [13, 64]. Although we cannot analytically evaluate it, we assume that the
simulator is sampling from the conditional probability distribution p(x | θ). After specifying a
prior p(θ), the inverse amounts to estimating the
posterior p(θ | xo ). This problem setting occurs
across scientific domains [1, 7, 10, 11, 29] where
θ generally represents input parameters of the
simulator and x the simulated output observation. Our design goal is to produce a surrogate
model p̂(θ | x) approximating the posterior for
any data x while limiting excessive simulation.

Figure 1: Conceptual, interpolated map from investigated hyperparameters of proposed algorithm
NRE - C to a measurement of posterior exactness
using the Classifier Two-Sample Test. Best 0.5,
worst 1.0. Red dot indicates NRE - A’s hyperparameters, γ = 1 and K = 1 [30]. Purple line implies
NRE - B [16] with γ = ∞ and K ≥ 1. NRE - C covers the entire plane, generalizing other methods.
Best performance occurs with K > 1 and γ ≈ 1,
Density estimation [5, 54, 55] can fit the like- in contrast with the settings of existing algorithms.
lihood [2, 15, 43, 56] or posterior [6, 21, 42, 53] directly; however, an appealing alternative for
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

