On the detrimental effect of invariances in the
likelihood for variational inference
Richard Kurle ∗
AWS AI Labs

Ralf Herbrich
Hasso-Plattner Institut

Tim Januschowski †
Zalando SE

kurler@amazon.com

ralf.herbrich@hpi.de

tim.januschowski@zalando.de

Yuyang Wang
AWS AI Labs

Jan Gasthaus
AWS AI Labs

yuyawang@amazon.com

gasthaus@amazon.com

Abstract
Variational Bayesian posterior inference often requires simplifying approximations
such as mean-field parametrisation to ensure tractability. However, prior work has
associated the variational mean-field approximation for Bayesian neural networks
with underfitting in the case of small datasets or large model sizes. In this work,
we show that invariances in the likelihood function of over-parametrised models
contribute to this phenomenon because these invariances complicate the structure
of the posterior by introducing discrete and/or continuous modes which cannot be
well approximated by Gaussian mean-field distributions. In particular, we show that
the mean-field approximation has an additional gap in the evidence lower bound
compared to a purpose-built posterior that takes into account the known invariances.
Importantly, this invariance gap is not constant; it vanishes as the approximation
reverts to the prior. We proceed by first considering translation invariances in
a linear model with a single data point in detail. We show that, while the true
posterior can be constructed from a mean-field parametrisation, this is achieved
only if the objective function takes into account the invariance gap. Then, we
transfer our analysis of the linear model to neural networks. Our analysis provides
a framework for future work to explore solutions to the invariance problem.

1

Introduction

Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) have several appealing advantages compared to deterministic
neural networks (NN) such as improving generalization [38], capturing epistemic uncertainty [17],
and providing a framework for continual learning methods [18, 23]. Unfortunately, reaping these
theoretical benefits has so far been impeded [37]. In particular, several practical issues with variational
Bayesian inference methods—which are the de-facto standard technique for scaling inference in
BNNs to large datasets [15, 2]—have been identified to be partially responsible for a performance gap
compared to deterministic NNs[16]. The most common variational approximation of the posterior is a
product of independent Normal distributions, commonly referred to as the mean-field approximation.
It has been observed that mean-field variational BNNs (VBNNs) suffer from severe underfitting for
large models and small dataset sizes [13]. Recent work [5] showed that under certain assumptions
such as an odd Lipschitz activation function and a finite dataset with bounded likelihood, the optimal
mean-field approximation collapses to the prior as the NN width increases, ignoring the data.
∗
†

Correspondence to kurler@amazon.com.
Work done while at AWS AI Labs.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

