Deep Multi-Modal Structural Equations For Causal
Effect Estimation With Unstructured Proxies
Shachi Deshpande1,2 , Kaiwen Wang1,2 , Dhruv Sreenivas2 , Zheng Li1,2 , Volodymyr Kuleshov1,2
Department of Computer Science, Cornell Tech1 and Cornell University2
{ssd86, kw437, ds844, zl634, kuleshov}@cornell.edu

Abstract
Estimating the effect of an intervention from observational data while accounting for confounding variables is a key task in causal inference. Oftentimes, the
confounders are unobserved, but we have access to large amounts of additional unstructured data (images, text) that contain valuable proxy signal about the missing
confounders. This paper argues that leveraging this unstructured data can greatly
improve the accuracy of causal effect estimation. Specifically, we introduce deep
multi-modal structural equations, a generative model for causal effect estimation in
which confounders are latent variables and unstructured data are proxy variables.
This model supports multiple multi-modal proxies (images, text) as well as missing
data. We empirically demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing methods
based on propensity scores and corrects for confounding using unstructured inputs
on tasks in genomics and healthcare. Our methods can potentially support the use
of large amounts of data that were previously not used in causal inference.

1

Introduction

An important goal of causal inference is to understand from observational data the causal effect of
performing an intervention—e.g., the effect of a behavioral choice on an individual’s health [36].
As an initial motivating example for this work, consider the problem of determining the effect of
smoking on an individual’s risk of heart disease.
This problem is complicated by the presence of confounders: e.g., it is possible that individuals
who smoke have a higher likelihood to be sedentary, which is a lifestyle choice that also negatively
impacts their heart disease risk. If the individual’s lifestyle is available to us as a well-defined feature,
we may adjust for this factor while computing treatment effects [36]. However, confounders are often
not observed and not available in the form of features, making accurate causal inference challenging.
Oftentimes, datasets in domains such as medicine or genomics come with large amounts of unstructured data—e.g., medical images, clinical notes, wearable sensor measurements [7]. This
data contains strong proxy signal about unobserved confounding factors—e.g., wearable sensor
measurements can help reveal individuals who are sedentary. However, existing causal inference
methods are often not able to leverage this “dark data” for causal effect estimation [18].
The goal of this paper is to develop methods in causal inference that improve the estimation of causal
effects in the presence of unobserved confounders by leveraging additional sources of unstructured
multi-modal data, such as images and text. For example, given time series from patients’ wearables,
our methods may disentangle the effects of being sedentary from the effects of smoking by using
clusters in the sensor measurements (which would correspond to groups of active and sedentary
individuals) as a proxy for the patients’ lifestyles and without requiring explicit lifestyle features.
Concretely, our paper formalizes the task of estimating causal effects using rich, unstructured, multimodal proxy variables (e.g. images, text, time series) and introduces deep multi-modal structural
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

