Boosting the Transferability of Adversarial Attacks
with Reverse Adversarial Perturbation
Zeyu Qin1* , Yanbo Fan2* , Yi Liu1 , Li Shen3 , Yong Zhang2 , Jue Wang2 , Baoyuan Wu1†
1
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
JD Explore Academy
{zeyu6181136, fanyanbo0124, yiliuhk2000}@gmail.com
{mathshenli, zhangyong201303, arphid}@gmail.com
wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial
examples, which can produce erroneous predictions by injecting imperceptible perturbations. In this work, we study the transferability of adversarial examples, which
is significant due to its threat to real-world applications where model architecture or
parameters are usually unknown. Many existing works reveal that the adversarial
examples are likely to overfit the surrogate model that they are generated from,
limiting its transfer attack performance against different target models. To mitigate
the overfitting of the surrogate model, we propose a novel attack method, dubbed
reverse adversarial perturbation (RAP). Specifically, instead of minimizing the
loss of a single adversarial point, we advocate seeking adversarial example located
at a region with unified low loss value, by injecting the worst-case perturbation (i.e.,
the reverse adversarial perturbation) for each step of the optimization procedure.
The adversarial attack with RAP is formulated as a min-max bi-level optimization
problem. By integrating RAP into the iterative process for attacks, our method can
find more stable adversarial examples which are less sensitive to the changes of decision boundary, mitigating the overfitting of the surrogate model. Comprehensive
experimental comparisons demonstrate that RAP can significantly boost adversarial
transferability. Furthermore, RAP can be naturally combined with many existing
black-box attack techniques, to further boost the transferability. When attacking
a real-world image recognition system, i.e., Google Cloud Vision API, we obtain
22% performance improvement of targeted attacks over the compared method. Our
codes are available at: https://github.com/SCLBD/Transfer_attack_RAP.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully applied in many safety-critical tasks, such
as autonomous driving, face recognition and verification, etc. However, it has been shown that
DNN models are vulnerable to adversarial examples [9, 12, 27, 32, 35, 44, 45, 50], which are
indistinguishable from natural examples but make a model produce erroneous predictions. For
real-world applications, the DNN models are often hidden from users. Therefore, the attackers need
to generate the adversarial examples under black-box setting where they do not know any information
of the target model [2, 3, 18, 32]. For black-box setting, the adversarial transferability matters since
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
‡

This work is done when Zeyu Qin is a research intern at Tencent AI Lab.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

