Bootstrapped Transformer for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Kerong Wang∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Kan Ren†
Microsoft Research Asia

Hanye Zhao
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Weinan Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Xufang Luo
Microsoft Research Asia
Dongsheng Li
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims at learning policies from previously
collected static trajectory data without interacting with the real environment. Recent
works provide a novel perspective by viewing offline RL as a generic sequence
generation problem, adopting sequence models such as Transformer architecture to
model distributions over trajectories, and repurposing beam search as a planning
algorithm. However, the training datasets utilized in general offline RL tasks
are quite limited and often suffer from insufficient distribution coverage, which
could be harmful to training sequence generation In this paper, we propose a
novel algorithm named Bootstrapped Transformer, which incorporates the idea of
bootstrapping and leverages the learned model to self-generate more offline data to
further boost the sequence model training. We conduct extensive experiments on
two offline RL benchmarks and demonstrate that our model can largely remedy
the existing offline RL training limitations and beat other strong baseline methods.
We also analyze the generated pseudo data and the revealed characteristics may
shed some light on offline RL training. The codes and supplementary materials are
available at https://seqml.github.io/bootorl.

1

Introduction

Online reinforcement learning (RL) [42, 33, 8, 50] requires environments and interactions to train
policies. However, such a requirement obstructs RL from being applied to many real-world problems
where simulation environments are unavailable or interactions are incredibly costly. Offline RL tries
to get rid of the requirement and learn policies from a previously collected offline dataset without
interacting with the real environment. This setting enables more practical RL training in the real
world and thus attracts lots of attention [27].
Unlike conventional approaches that focus on learning value functions [41] or computing policy
gradients [34], recent works [32, 3] view the offline RL problem from a novel perspective, where it is
considered a generic sequence generation problem. Specifically, these works utilize a mainstream
sequence modeling neural network, i.e., Transformer [47], to model the joint distribution of the offline
decision-making trajectory data, after discretizing each term vector within the transitions (states,
rewards, actions), in a supervised learning (SL) manner. In such a sequence modeling framework, a
trajectory consisting of states, actions, and rewards is viewed as a stream of tokens, and the learned
Transformer can generate tokens in an autoregressive way and subsequently be utilized for execution
in the real environments. This framework unifies multiple components in offline RL in one big
∗
†

The work was conducted during the internship of Kerong Wang and Hanye Zhao at Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to Kan Ren, contact: kan.ren@microsoft.com.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

