Unsupervised Skill Discovery via Recurrent Skill
Training
Zheyuan Jiang1⇤
1

Jingyue Gao2⇤

Jianyu Chen1,3

Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
3
Shanghai Qizhi Institute

Abstract
Being able to discover diverse useful skills without external reward functions is
beneficial in reinforcement learning research. Previous unsupervised skill discovery
approaches mainly train different skills in parallel. Although impressive results
have been provided, we found that parallel training procedure can sometimes block
exploration when the state visited by different skills overlap, which leads to poor
state coverage and restricts the diversity of learned skills. In this paper, we take
a deeper look into this phenomenon and propose a novel framework to address
this issue, which we call Recurrent Skill Training (ReST). Instead of training all
the skills in parallel, ReST trains different skills one after another recurrently,
along with a state coverage based intrinsic reward. We conduct experiments on
a number of challenging 2D navigation environments and robotic locomotion
environments. Evaluation results show that our proposed approach outperforms
previous parallel training approaches in terms of state coverage and skill diversity.
Videos of the discovered skills are available at https://sites.google.com/
view/neurips22-rest.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning have shown its promising performance in domains ranging
from game playing [2, 3], robotics [4,
5] and recommender systems [6].
These applications of reinforcement
learning rely on task-specific reward
functions for the agents to successfully accomplish the tasks. However,
intelligent creatures can automatically
explore the environments and learn diverse useful skills in the absence of external supervision. Such ability is beneficial in a variety of situations. For
tasks where rewards are non-trivial to
design or where the reward signal is
sparse, unsupervised skill discovery
approaches can provide intrinsic re⇤

(a) Explored

(b) Converge

(c) ReST (ours)

Figure 1: Skills discovered in a 2D navigation environment.(a) shows the explored states of skills during the training phase of DIAYN [1], where two skills (red and blue) have
successfully passed through the bottleneck and explored the
states on the right room. (b) shows the states covered by the
converged skills of DIAYN, which does not reach states on
the right, indicating that the two skills (blue and red) visiting
the same state in (a) discourages both skills from visiting that
state later. Our proposed method, as shown in (c), successfully reached the states on the right after convergence.

Equal Contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

