Paraphrasing Is All You Need
for Novel Object Captioning

Cheng-Fu Yang1
Ruslan Salakhutdinov2
1

UCLA

2

Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai2
Louis-Philippe Morency2

Carnegie Mellon University

3

Wan-Cyuan Fan3
Yu-Chiang Frank Wang3,4

National Taiwan University

4

NVIDIA

cfyang@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Novel object captioning (NOC) aims to describe images containing objects without observing their ground truth captions during training. Due to the absence of
caption annotation, captioning models cannot be directly optimized via sequenceto-sequence training or CIDEr optimization. As a result, we present Paraphrasingto-Captioning (P2C), a two-stage learning framework for NOC, which would
heuristically optimize the output captions via paraphrasing. With P2C, the captioning model first learns paraphrasing from a language model pre-trained on text-only
corpus, allowing expansion of the word bank for improving linguistic fluency.
To further enforce the output caption sufficiently describing the visual content
of the input image, we perform self-paraphrasing for the captioning model with
fidelity and adequacy objectives introduced. Since no ground truth captions are
available for novel object images during training, our P2C leverages cross-modality
(image-text) association modules to ensure the above caption characteristics can be
properly preserved. In the experiments, we not only show that our P2C achieves
state-of-the-art performances on nocaps and COCO Caption datasets, we also verify
the effectiveness and flexibility of our learning framework by replacing language
and cross-modality association models for NOC. Implementation details and code
are available in the supplementary materials.

1

Introduction

Novel Object Captioning (NOC) [1] requires one to accurately describe images containing novel
objects unseen during training captions. Despite impressive benchmark performance on COCO
Captions [2] and Flickr30K [3], existing image captioning models [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] or unsupervised
image captioning works [9, 10] cannot generalize well. This is because existing unsupervised
captioning models typically assume that training image and caption data share the same visual content
(i.e., objects) of interest, which might not be held in practice [9, 10].
Without observing captions describing novel objects during training, a number of NOC works choose
to rely on object detection results for filling in the generated slotted sentences [11, 12]. Since the
object words and the template sentences are generated separately, their relationships might not be
well described. Therefore, Hu et al. [13] propose to relate images and the produced captions by
aligning the region features of an object and its associated word embedding, aiming at improved
description of novel objects in scenes which are similar to the training ones. However, if a word is not
presented in the training corpus, it might not be properly presented in the predicted caption. That is,
the word embedding related to novel objects such as verbs and adjectives might not be fully exploited
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

