Error Analysis of Tensor-Train Cross Approximation

Zhen Qin
Ohio State University
qin.660@osu.edu

Alexander Lidiak
Colorado School of Mines
alidiak@mines.edu

Gongguo Tang
University of Colorado
gongguo.tang@colorado.edu

Zhexuan Gong
Colorado School of Mines
gong@mines.edu

Michael B. Wakin
Colorado School of Mines
mwakin@mines.edu

Zhihui Zhu∗
Ohio State University
zhu.3440@osu.edu

Abstract
Tensor train decomposition is widely used in machine learning and quantum physics
due to its concise representation of high-dimensional tensors, overcoming the curse
of dimensionality. Cross approximation—originally developed for representing
a matrix from a set of selected rows and columns—is an efficient method for
constructing a tensor train decomposition of a tensor from few of its entries.
While tensor train cross approximation has achieved remarkable performance in
practical applications, its theoretical analysis, in particular regarding the error
of the approximation, is so far lacking. To our knowledge, existing results only
provide element-wise approximation accuracy guarantees, which lead to a very
loose bound when extended to the entire tensor. In this paper, we bridge this gap by
providing accuracy guarantees in terms of the entire tensor for both exact and noisy
measurements. Our results illustrate how the choice of selected subtensors affects
the quality of the cross approximation and that the approximation error caused by
model error and/or measurement error may not grow exponentially with the order
of the tensor. These results are verified by numerical experiments and may have
important implications for the usefulness of cross approximations for high-order
tensors, such as those encountered in the description of quantum many-body states.

1

Introduction

As modern big datasets are typically represented in the form of huge tensors, tensor decomposition
has become ubiquitous across science and engineering applications, including signal processing and
machine learning [1, 2], communication [3], chemometrics [4, 5], genetic engineering [6], and so on.
The most widely used tensor decompositions include the canonical polyadic (CP) [7], Tucker [8]
and tensor train (TT) [9] decompositions. In general, the CP decomposition provides a compact
representation but comes with computational difficulties in finding the optimal decomposition for
high-order tensors [10, 11]. The Tucker decomposition can be approximately computed via the higher
order singular value decomposition (SVD) [12], but it is inapplicable for high-order tensors since
its number of parameters scales exponentially with the tensor order. The TT decomposition sits in
the middle between CP and Tucker decompositions and combines the best of the two worlds: the
number of parameters does not grow exponentially with the tensor order, and it can be approximately
computed by the SVD-based algorithms with a guaranteed accuracy [9]. (See the monograph [13] for
a detailed description.) As such, TT decomposition has attracted tremendous interest over the past
decade [14–26]. Notably, the TT decomposition is equivalent to the matrix product state (MPS) or
matrix product operator (MPO) introduced in the quantum physics community to efficiently represent
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

