Max-Min Off-Policy Actor-Critic Method Focusing on
Worst-Case Robustness to Model Misspecification

Takumi Tanabe
University of Tsukuba & RIKEN AIP
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8573, Japan
tanabe@bbo.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Rei Sato
University of Tsukuba & RIKEN AIP
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8573, Japan
reisato@bbo.cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Kazuto Fukuchi
University of Tsukuba & RIKEN AIP
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8573, Japan
fukuchi@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Jun Sakuma
University of Tsukuba & RIKEN AIP
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8573, Japan
jun@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Youhei Akimoto
University of Tsukuba & RIKEN AIP
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8573, Japan
akimoto@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
In the field of reinforcement learning, because of the high cost and risk of policy
training in the real world, policies are trained in a simulation environment and
transffered to the corresponding real-world environment. However, differences in
the environments lead to model misspecification. Multiple studies report significant
deterioration of policy performance in a real-world environment. In this study, we
focus on scenarios involving a simulation environment with uncertainty parameters
and the set of their possible values, called the uncertainty parameter set. The
aim is to optimize the worst-case performance on the uncertainty parameter set
to guarantee the performance in the corresponding real-world environment. To
obtain a policy for the optimization, we propose an off-policy actor-critic approach
called the Max-Min Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient algorithm
(M2TD3), which solves a max-min optimization problem using a simultaneous
gradient ascent descent approach. Experiments in multi-joint dynamics with contact
(MuJoCo) environments show that the proposed method exhibited a worst-case
performance superior to several baseline approaches. Our implementation is
publicly available (https://github.com/akimotolab/M2TD3).

1

Introduction

Applications of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to control tasks that involving interaction with
the real world are limited because of the need for interaction between the agent and the real-world
environment [37]. This difficulty arises because of high interaction time, agent maintenance costs,
and safety issues during the interaction. Without enough interactions, DRL tends to overfit to specific
interaction histories and yields policies with poor generalizability and safety issues [29].
To solve this problem, simulation environments that estimate the characteristics of real-world environments are often employed, which enable enough interactions for effective DRL application. The
policy is trained in the simulation environment and then transferred to the real-world environment [45].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

