Alleviating Adversarial Attacks on Variational
Autoencoders with MCMC
Anna Kuzina
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
a.kuzina@vu.nl

Max Welling
Universiteit van Amsterdam
m.welling@uva.nl

Jakub M. Tomczak
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
j.m.tomczak@vu.nl

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are latent variable models that can generate complex objects and provide meaningful latent representations. Moreover, they could
be further used in downstream tasks such as classification. As previous work has
shown, one can easily fool VAEs to produce unexpected latent representations and
reconstructions for a visually slightly modified input. Here, we examine several
objective functions for adversarial attack construction proposed previously and
present a solution to alleviate the effect of these attacks. Our method utilizes the
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) technique in the inference step that we motivate with a theoretical analysis. Thus, we do not incorporate any extra costs during
training, and the performance on non-attacked inputs is not decreased. We validate
our approach on a variety of datasets (MNIST, Fashion MNIST, Color MNIST,
CelebA) and VAE configurations (β-VAE, NVAE, β-TCVAE), and show that our
approach consistently improves the model robustness to adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [27, 34] are latent variable models parameterized by deep neural
networks and trained with variational inference. Recently, it has been shown that VAEs with
hierarchical structures of latent variables [33], coupled with skip-connections [30, 37], can generate
high-quality images [15, 39]. An interesting trait of VAEs is that they allow learning meaningful
latent space that could be further used in downstream tasks [7, 22]. These successes of VAEs motivate
us to explore the robustness of the resulting latent representations to better understand the capabilities
and potential vulnerabilities of VAEs. Here, we focus on adversarial attacks on VAEs to verify
robustness of latent representations that is especially important in such applications as anomaly
detection [1, 30] or data compression [5, 20].
The main questions about adversarial attacks for VAEs are mainly focused on how they could
be formulated and alleviated. In [18], it is proposed to minimize the KL-divergence between an
adversarial input and a target input to learn an adversarial attack for the vanilla VAE. Further, in
[28], it is shown that a similar strategy can be used to attack hierarchical VAEs. To counteract the
adversarial attacks, the authors of [42] suggest using a modified VAE objective, namely, β-TCVAE,
that increases VAE robustness, especially when coupled with a hierarchical structure. It was shown
in [10] that β-VAEs tend to be more robust to adversarial attacks in terms of the r-metric proposed
therein. The authors of [6] presented that the adversarial robustness can be achieved by constraining
the Lipschitz constant of the encoder and the decoder. [12, 13] introduced modifications in the VAE
framework that allow for better robustness against the adversarial attacks on downstream classification
tasks. In our work, we consider β-VAE, β-TCVAE and a hierarchical VAE, and outline a defence
strategy that improves robustness to attacks on the encoder and the downstream classification task.
The proposed method is applied during inference and, therefore, can be combined with other known
techniques to get more robust latent representations.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

