Task-level Differentially Private Meta Learning

Xinyu Zhou
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
zhou.3542@buckeyemail.osu.edu
Raef Bassily
Department of Computer Science & Engineering and TDAI Institute
The Ohio State University
bassily.1@osu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of meta-learning with task-level differential privacy. Metalearning has received increasing attention recently because of its ability to enable
fast generalization to new task with small number of data points. However, the
training process of meta learning likely involves exchange of task specific information, which may pose privacy risk especially in some privacy-sensitive applications.
Therefore, it is important to provide strong privacy guarantees such that the learning
process will not reveal any task sensitive information. To this end, existing works
have proposed meta learning algorithms with record-level differential privacy,
which is not sufficient in many scenarios since it does not protect the aggregated
statistics based on the task dataset as a whole. Moreover, the utility guarantees in
the prior work are based on assuming the loss function satisfies both smoothness
and quadratic growth conditions, which do not necessarily hold in practice. To address these issues, we propose meta learning algorithms with task-level differential
privacy; that is, our algorithms protect the entire dataset for each task. In the case
when a single meta model is trained, we give both privacy and utility guarantees
assuming only that the loss is convex and Lipschitz. Moreover, we propose a
new private clustering-based meta-learning algorithm that enables private meta
learning of multiple meta models. This can provide significant accuracy gains over
the single meta model paradigm, especially when the tasks distribution cannot be
well represented by a single meta model. Finally, we conduct several experiments
demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

Meta learning has received increasing attention recently due to its successful applications in a variety
of machine learning domains. Meta learning is the process in which existing learning tasks are
used to infer a learning rule that enables faster adaptation to new tasks from the same environment.
Specifically, meta learning takes in a collection of tasks (datasets) sampled from an unknown
distribution. Each task defines a learning problem with respect to an input dataset. The goal of
meta learning is to output a meta-learner which can extract the shared knowledge among the tasks
(datasets) and generalize well on a newly sampled task (dataset) with a small number of data points.
The performance of a meta learner is measured by transfer risk, defined as the expected risk of the
output of the algorithm w.r.t. a newly sampled task.
Machine learning algorithms typically rely on gradient-based optimization methods. The optimizationbased meta learning framework allows such methods to converge to a solution using a small number
of samples. This is done by learning either a good parameter initialization or a regularizer. In meta
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

