Exposing and Exploiting Fine-Grained Block
Structures for Fast and Accurate Sparse Training
Peng Jiang
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, USA
peng-jiang@uiowa.edu

Lihan Hu
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, USA
lihan-hu@uiowa.edu

Shihui Song
The University of Iowa
Iowa City, USA
shihui-song@uiowa.edu

Abstract
Sparse training is a popular technique to reduce the overhead of training large
models. Although previous work has shown promising results for nonstructured
sparse models, it is still unclear whether a sparse model with structural constraints
can be trained from scratch to high accuracy. In this work, we study the dynamic sparse training for a class of sparse models with shuffled block structures.
Compared to nonstructured models, such fine-grained structured models are more
hardware-friendly and can effectively accelerate the training process. We propose
an algorithm that keeps adapting the sparse model while maintaining the active
parameters in shuffled blocks. We conduct experiments on a variety of networks
and datasets and obtain positive results. In particular, on ImageNet, we achieve
dense accuracy for ResNet50 and ResNet18 at 0.5 sparsity. On CIFAR10/100, we
show that dense accuracy can be recovered at 0.6 sparsity for various models. At
higher sparsity, our algorithm can still match the accuracy of nonstructured sparse
training in most cases, while reducing the training time by up to 5x due to the
fine-grained block structures in the models.

1

Introduction

As large neural networks keep advancing the state-of-the-art in many machine learning tasks, training
the models has become increasingly expensive. It is reported that training GPT-3 costs an estimated
$12 million in computational resources [41]. To reduce the cost, there is a growing interest in
developing sparse training algorithms [30, 2, 8, 18, 26, 27]. By computing on a small subset of
parameters throughout the training process, these algorithms aim to reduce the memory and computing
power consumption for large-scale neural network training.
The existing sparse training methods can be categorized as either static or dynamic. While training a
static sparse model from scratch is appealing, it usually requires nontrivial initialization to achieve
good accuracy [9, 23, 22]. In contrast, dynamic sparse training uses simple random initialization. In
every few iterations, it drops a small number of ‘unimportant’ weights and replaces them with some
new parameters. By exploring a larger set of parameters than the sparse model itself, dynamic sparse
training, in general, achieves higher accuracy than static sparse training [14].
Most of the existing dynamic sparse training methods focus on nonstructured models. That is, the
active parameters are scattered in the model without any constraints. Although they can retain
high accuracy with much fewer parameters, the nonstructured sparse models do not necessarily
accelerate the training process because the irregular computation suffers from poor data locality and
low parallelism [13, 39]. A common way to improve the efficiency of sparse models is by imposing
structures on model parameters. However, current structured models have only been shown attainable
by pruning and mostly beneficial to inference [13, 39, 28, 1]. Whether structured models can be
obtained by sparse training and in turn accelerate the training process is still an open problem.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

