Spatial Mixture-of-Experts
Nikoli Dryden
ETH Zürich
ndryden@ethz.ch

Torsten Hoefler
ETH Zürich
htor@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Many data have an underlying dependence on spatial location; it may be weather
on the Earth, a simulation on a mesh, or a registered image. Yet this feature
is rarely taken advantage of, and violates common assumptions made by many
neural network layers, such as translation equivariance. Further, many works that
do incorporate locality fail to capture fine-grained structure. To address this, we
introduce the Spatial Mixture-of-Experts (SM O E) layer, a sparsely-gated layer that
learns spatial structure in the input domain and routes experts at a fine-grained
level to utilize it. We also develop new techniques to train SM O Es, including a
self-supervised routing loss and damping expert errors. Finally, we show strong
results for SM O Es on numerous tasks, and set new state-of-the-art results for
medium-range weather prediction and post-processing ensemble weather forecasts.

1

Introduction

Many datasets exhibit an underlying, location-based structure, where the value at a point depends
on where that point is. For example, weather predictions [78] depend on their location on Earth;
many scientific simulations are parameterized on an underlying mesh [9]; data (e.g., faces) may be
specifically aligned [91]; or it may approximately hold, as in natural images with centered objects.
Further, tasks on such data are often dense regression tasks, such as predicting weather several days in
the future. Numerous architectures have been successfully applied to such tasks. Convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [80] and transformers [74] show promise for medium-range weather prediction.
Locally-connected networks (LCNs), which use independent, rather than shared, filters at each
point, have been applied to weather post-processing [38], face recognition [46, 77, 91], and other
tasks [18, 71], specifically to learn local features. Low-rank local connectivity (LRLCN) [30] relaxes
the translation equivariance of CNNs while requiring fewer parameters than LCNs. Other approaches,
such as CoordConv [65], add an additional inductive bias by providing explicit input coordinates.
However, for tasks on data with location-based structure, prior approaches suffer from various
limitations. Convolution assumes that data is translation equivariant, which does not hold for such
tasks [46, 91]. Approaches like LCNs require many parameters. Many architectures have been
designed for classification tasks and fail to perform well on regression because they opererate at too
coarse granularity and are unable to capture key details. This limits their applicability to important
tasks, such as medium-range weather prediction or climate simulations. Indeed, on a simple heat
diffusion task with location-dependent diffusivities (see §3.1), many approaches do not learn the
location dependence at all and instead converge to an “average” diffusivity.
To address this, we introduce a novel neural network layer, the Spatial Mixture-of-Experts (SM O E)
layer (§2). An SM O E uses a learned gating function to sparsely select and route from a shared set of
experts to each spatial location (e.g., pixel) in an input sample. This enables experts to specialize to
the unique characteristics of different “regions” within the data and easy interpretability by analyzing
the gate. SM O Es require the assumption that all samples in the dataset have a similar underlying
spatial structure, but this often holds (at least approximately) for many datasets, such as weather,
where each example is on the same latitude/longitude grid. For the SM O E gating function, we
introduce tensor routing, a simple and cheap routing function that effectively learns this spatial
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

