Inducing Neural Collapse in Imbalanced Learning:
Do We Really Need a Learnable Classifier at the End
of Deep Neural Network?

Yibo Yang1 , Shixiang Chen1 , Xiangtai Li2 , Liang Xie3 , Zhouchen Lin2,4,5∗ , Dacheng Tao1,6
1

2

JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
5
Pazhou Laboratory, Guangzhou, China
6
The University of Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks for classification usually jointly learn a backbone for
representation and a linear classifier to output the logit of each class. A recent study
has shown a phenomenon called neural collapse that the within-class means of
features and the classifier vectors converge to the vertices of a simplex equiangular
tight frame (ETF) at the terminal phase of training on a balanced dataset. Since the
ETF geometric structure maximally separates the pair-wise angles of all classes
in the classifier, it is natural to raise the question, why do we spend an effort to
learn a classifier when we know its optimal geometric structure? In this paper, we
study the potential of learning a neural network for classification with the classifier
randomly initialized as an ETF and fixed during training. Our analytical work
based on the layer-peeled model indicates that the feature learning with a fixed
ETF classifier naturally leads to the neural collapse state even when the dataset is
imbalanced among classes. We further show that in this case the cross entropy (CE)
loss is not necessary and can be replaced by a simple squared loss that shares the
same global optimality but enjoys a better convergence property. Our experimental
results show that our method is able to bring significant improvements with faster
convergence on multiple imbalanced datasets.

1

Introduction

Modern deep neural networks for classification are composed of a backbone network to extract
features, and a linear classifier in the last layer to predict the logit of each class. As widely adopted in
various deep learning fields, the linear classifier has been learnable jointly with the backbone network
using the cross entropy (CE) loss function for classification problems [19, 10, 13].
A recent study reveals a very symmetric phenomenon named neural collapse, that the last-layer
features of the same class will collapse to their within-class mean, and the within-class means of all
classes and their corresponding classifier vectors will converge to the vertices of a simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF) at the terminal phase of training on a balanced dataset [28]. A simplex ETF
describes a geometric structure that maximally separates the pair-wise angles of K vectors in Rd ,
d ≥ K − 1, and all vectors have an equal `2 norm. As shown in Figure 1, when d = K − 1, the ETF
reduces to a regular simplex. Following studies focus on unveiling the physics of such a phenomenon
based on the layer-peeled model (LPM) [5] or unconstrained feature model [24]. They peel off the topmost layer, so the features are independent variables to optimize [41]. Although this toy model is impracticable for application, it inherits the nature of feature and classifier learning in real deep networks.
∗: corresponding author.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

