Near-Optimal Goal-Oriented Reinforcement
Learning in Non-Stationary Environments

Liyu Chen
University of Southern California
liyuc@usc.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
We initiate the study of dynamic regret minimization for goal-oriented reinforcement learning modeled by a non-stationary stochastic shortest path problem with
changing cost and transition functions. We start by establishing a lower bound
Ω((B? SAT? (∆c + B?2 ∆P ))1/3 K 2/3 ), where B? is the maximum expected cost
of the optimal policy of any episode starting from any state, T? is the maximum hitting time of the optimal policy of any episode starting from the initial
state, SA is the number of state-action pairs, ∆c and ∆P are the amount of
changes of the cost and transition functions respectively, and K is the number
of episodes. The different roles of ∆c and ∆P in this lower bound inspire us
to design algorithms that estimate costs and transitions separately. Specifically,
assuming the knowledge of ∆c and ∆P , we develop a simple but sub-optimal
algorithm and another more involved minimax optimal algorithm (up to logarithmic terms). These algorithms combine the ideas of finite-horizon approximation [Chen et al., 2022a], special Bernstein-style bonuses of the MVP algorithm [Zhang et al., 2020], adaptive confidence widening [Wei and Luo, 2021], as
well as some new techniques such as properly penalizing long-horizon policies.
Finally, when ∆c and ∆P are unknown, we develop a variant of the MASTER
algorithm [Wei and Luo,
integrate the aforementioned ideas into it to
√ 2021] and
2 2
achieve Õ(min{B? S ALK, (B? S AT? (∆c + B? ∆P ))1/3 K 2/3 }) regret, where
L is the unknown number of changes of the environment.

1

Introduction

Goal-oriented reinforcement learning studies how to achieve a certain goal with minimal total cost in
an unknown environment via sequential interactions. It has often been modeled as online learning
in an episodic Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) model, where in each episode, starting from a fixed
initial state, the learner sequentially takes an action, suffers a cost, and transits to the next state, until
the goal state is reached. The performance of the learner can be measured by her regret, generally
defined as the difference between her total cost and that of a sequence of benchmark policies (one for
each episode).
Despite the recent surge of studies on this problem, all previous works consider minimizing static
regret, a special case where the benchmark policy is the same for every episode. This is reasonable
only for (near) stationary environments where one single policy performs well over all episodes.
In reality, however, the environment is often non-stationary with both the cost function and the
transition function changing over episodes, making static regret an unreasonable metric. Instead, the
desired objective is to minimize dynamic regret, where the benchmark policy for each episode is the
optimal policy for that corresponding environment, and the hope is to obtain sublinear dynamic regret
whenever the non-stationarity is not too large.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

