Matrix Multiplicative Weights Updates in Quantum
Zero-Sum Games: Conservation Laws & Recurrence
Rahul Jain
NUS
rahul@comp.nus.edu.sg

Georgios Piliouras
SUTD
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Ryann Sim
SUTD
ryann_sim@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Recent advances in quantum computing and in particular, the introduction of
quantum GANs, have led to increased interest in quantum zero-sum game theory,
extending the scope of learning algorithms for classical games into the quantum
realm. In this paper, we focus on learning in quantum zero-sum games under Matrix
Multiplicative Weights Update (a generalization of the multiplicative weights update
method) and its continuous analogue, Quantum Replicator Dynamics. When each
player selects their state according to quantum replicator dynamics, we show that
the system exhibits conservation laws in a quantum-information theoretic sense.
Moreover, we show that the system exhibits Poincaré recurrence, meaning that
almost all orbits return arbitrarily close to their initial conditions infinitely often.
Our analysis generalizes previous results in the case of classical games [48, 42].

1

Introduction

The Nash equilibrium has always been a central concept in non-cooperative game theory. While the
existence of Nash equilibria is well known in finite games where mixed strategies are allowed [44],
it is less clear how to efficiently compute these equilibria themselves. Indeed, much work revolves
around finding methods to solve for Nash equilibria in different contexts, as well as analyzing the
complexity of solving for the Nash [33, 15].
Despite the dominance of equilibrium computation in classical theory, recent works have begun
to move towards attempting to understand the nature of learning in games [23, 51]. The family of
regret-minimizing algorithms known as Follow-The-Regularized-Leader (FTRL) have been studied
extensively, both for discrete time [7, 13, 45, 49] and continuous time [42, 21, 48, 47] dynamics.
These algorithms have found many applications in the domain of machine learning - one such example
is that of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [25], which have been successfully modeled
using zero-sum game theory. This rich connection has led to a stronger understanding of adversarial
learning and improved practical performance of GANs in various settings [21, 32, 36].
On the other side of the coin, quantum computing is a field which has garnered much interest in
the machine learning community. Many quantum machine learning algorithms have been proposed,
extending standard classical algorithms. One such example is quantum GANs [14, 39, 12]. While
such works describe the architecture of quantum GANs, we still do not fully understand the behavior
of learning algorithms in the quantum setting. In this paper, we provide an initial analysis of
learning in zero-sum quantum games. We do so by studying the learning behaviour of the ubiquitous
Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU) update rule [37, 22, 5], a specific instance of the FTRL
framework, when applied to such games.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

