Sequencer: Deep LSTM for Image Classification
Yuki Tatsunami1,2 Masato Taki1
1
Rikkyo University, Tokyo, Japan
2
AnyTech Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
{y.tatsunami, taki_m}@rikkyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In recent computer vision research, the advent of the Vision Transformer (ViT)
has rapidly revolutionized various architectural design efforts: ViT achieved stateof-the-art image classification performance using self-attention found in natural
language processing, and MLP-Mixer achieved competitive performance using
simple multi-layer perceptrons. In contrast, several studies have also suggested that
carefully redesigned convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can achieve advanced
performance comparable to ViT without resorting to these new ideas. Against
this background, there is growing interest in what inductive bias is suitable for
computer vision. Here we propose Sequencer, a novel and competitive architecture
alternative to ViT that provides a new perspective on these issues. Unlike ViTs,
Sequencer models long-range dependencies using LSTMs rather than self-attention
layers. We also propose a two-dimensional version of Sequencer module, where an
LSTM is decomposed into vertical and horizontal LSTMs to enhance performance.
Despite its simplicity, several experiments demonstrate that Sequencer performs
impressively well: Sequencer2D-L, with 54M parameters, realizes 84.6% top-1
accuracy on only ImageNet-1K. Not only that, we show that it has good transferability and the robust resolution adaptability on double resolution-band. Our source
code is available at https://github.com/okojoalg/sequencer.

1

Introduction

The de-facto standard for computer vision has been
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [39, 64, 22,
65, 66, 9, 29, 67]. However, inspired by the many
breakthroughs in natural language processing (NLP)
achieved by Transformers [75, 35, 57], applications
of Transformers for computer vision are now being
actively studied. In particular, Vision Transformer
(ViT) [16] is a pure Transformer applied to image
recognition and achieves performance competitive
with CNNs. Various studies triggered by ViT have
shown that the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance
can be achieved for a wide range of vision tasks using self-attention alone [79, 48, 73, 47, 15], without
Figure 1: IN-1K top-1 accuracy v.s. model
convolution.
parameters. All models are trained on IN-1K
The reason for this success is thought to be due to the at resolution 2242 from scratch.
ability of self-attention to model long-range dependencies. However, it is still unclear how essential the
self-attention is to the effectiveness of Transformers for vision tasks. Indeed, the MLP-Mixer [70]
based only on multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) is proposed as an appealing alternative to Vision Trans36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

