Biologically-Plausible Determinant Maximization
Neural Networks for Blind Separation of Correlated
Sources
Bariscan Bozkurt1,2 Cengiz Pehlevan3 Alper T. Erdogan1,2
KUIS AI Center, Koc University, Turkey 2 EEE Department, Koc University, Turkey
3
John A. Paulson School of Engineering & Applied Sciences and Center for
Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, 02138 MA, USA
{bbozkurt15, alperdogan}@ku.edu.tr cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu
1

Abstract
Extraction of latent sources of complex stimuli is critical for making sense of the
world. While the brain solves this blind source separation (BSS) problem continuously, its algorithms remain unknown. Previous work on biologically-plausible
BSS algorithms assumed that observed signals are linear mixtures of statistically
independent or uncorrelated sources, limiting the domain of applicability of these
algorithms. To overcome this limitation, we propose novel biologically-plausible
neural networks for the blind separation of potentially dependent/correlated
sources. Differing from previous work, we assume some general geometric, not
statistical, conditions on the source vectors allowing separation of potentially
dependent/correlated sources. Concretely, we assume that the source vectors are
sufficiently scattered in their domains which can be described by certain polytopes.
Then, we consider recovery of these sources by the Det-Max criterion, which
maximizes the determinant of the output correlation matrix to enforce a similar
spread for the source estimates. Starting from this normative principle, and using a
weighted similarity matching approach that enables arbitrary linear transformations
adaptable by local learning rules, we derive two-layer biologically-plausible
neural network algorithms that can separate mixtures into sources coming from
a variety of source domains. We demonstrate that our algorithms outperform other
biologically-plausible BSS algorithms on correlated source separation problems.

1

Introduction

Our brains constantly and effortlessly extract latent causes, or sources, of complex visual, auditory
or olfactory stimuli sensed by sensory organs [1–11]. This extraction is mostly done without any
instruction, in an unsupervised manner, making the process an instance of the blind source separation
(BSS) problem [12, 13]. Indeed, visual and auditory cortical receptive fields were argued to be the
result of performing BSS on natural images [1, 2] and sounds [4]. The wide-spread use of BSS in the
brain suggests the existence of generic circuit motifs that perform this task [14]. Consequently, the
literature on biologically-plausible neural network algorithms for BSS is growing [15–19].
Because BSS is an underdetermined inverse problem, BSS algorithms make generative assumptions
on observations. In most instances of the biologically-plausible BSS algorithms, complex stimuli are
assumed to be linear mixtures of latent sources. This assumption is particularly fruitful and is used to
model, for example, natural images [1, 20], and responses of olfactory neurons to complex odorants
[21–23]. However, linear mixing by itself is not sufficient for source identifiability; further assumptions are needed. Previous work on biologically-plausible algorithms for BSS of linear mixtures
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

