C-Mixup: Improving Generalization in Regression

Huaxiu Yao1∗ , Yiping Wang2∗ , Linjun Zhang3 , James Zou1 , Chelsea Finn1
1
Stanford University, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Rutgers University
1
{huaxiu,cbfinn}@cs.stanford.edu, jamesz@stanford.edu
2
yipingwang6161@gmail.com, 3 linjun.zhang@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Improving the generalization of deep networks is an important open challenge,
particularly in domains without plentiful data. The mixup algorithm improves
generalization by linearly interpolating a pair of examples and their corresponding
labels. These interpolated examples augment the original training set. Mixup has
shown promising results in various classification tasks, but systematic analysis of
mixup in regression remains underexplored. Using mixup directly on regression
labels can result in arbitrarily incorrect labels. In this paper, we propose a simple
yet powerful algorithm, C-Mixup, to improve generalization on regression tasks. In
contrast with vanilla mixup, which picks training examples for mixing with uniform
probability, C-Mixup adjusts the sampling probability based on the similarity of
the labels. Our theoretical analysis confirms that C-Mixup with label similarity
obtains a smaller mean square error in supervised regression and meta-regression
than vanilla mixup and using feature similarity. Another benefit of C-Mixup is
that it can improve out-of-distribution robustness, where the test distribution is
different from the training distribution. By selectively interpolating examples
with similar labels, it mitigates the effects of domain-associated information and
yields domain-invariant representations. We evaluate C-Mixup on eleven datasets,
ranging from tabular to video data. Compared to the best prior approach, C-Mixup
achieves 6.56%, 4.76%, 5.82% improvements in in-distribution generalization, task
generalization, and out-of-distribution robustness, respectively. Code is released at
https://github.com/huaxiuyao/C-Mixup.

1

Introduction

Deep learning practitioners commonly face the challenge of overfitting. To improve generalization,
prior works have proposed a number of techniques, including data augmentation [3, 10, 12, 81, 82]
and explicit regularization [15, 38, 60]. Representatively, mixup [82, 83] densifies the data distribution
and implicitly regularizes the model by linearly interpolating the features of randomly sampled pairs
of examples and applying the same interpolation on the corresponding labels. Despite mixup having
demonstrated promising results in improving generalization in classification problems, it has rarely
been studied in the context of regression with continuous labels, on which we focus in this paper.
In contrast to classification, which formalizes the label as a one-hot vector, the goal of regression is
to predict a continuous label from each input. Directly applying mixup to input features and labels
in regression tasks may yield arbitrarily incorrect labels. For example, as shown in Figure 1(a),
ShapeNet1D pose prediction [18] aims to predict the current orientation of the object relative to
its canonical orientation. We randomly select three mixing pairs and show the mixed images and
labels in Figure 1(b), where only pair 1 exhibits reasonable mixing results. We thus see that sampling
mixing pairs uniformly from the dataset introduces a number of noisy pairs.
∗

Equal contribution. This work was done when Yiping Wang was remotely co-mentored by Huaxiu Yao
and Linjun Zhang.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

