Domain Generalization by Learning and Removing
Domain-specific Features

Yu Ding
University of Wollongong
yd624@uowmail.edu.au

Lei Wang
University of Wollongong
leiw@uow.edu.au

Shuming Liang
University of Technology Sydney
Shuming.Liang@uts.edu.au

Bin Liang
University of Technology Sydney
Bin.Liang@uts.edu.au

Yang Wang
University of Technology Sydney
Yang.Wang@uts.edu.au

Fang Chen
University of Technology Sydney
Fang.Chen@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) suffer from domain shift when the test dataset
follows a distribution different from the training dataset. Domain generalization
aims to tackle this issue by learning a model that can generalize to unseen domains. In this paper, we propose a new approach that aims to explicitly remove
domain-specific features for domain generalization. Following this approach, we
propose a novel framework called Learning and Removing Domain-specific features for Generalization (LRDG) that learns a domain-invariant model by tactically
removing domain-specific features from the input images. Specifically, we design a classifier to effectively learn the domain-specific features for each source
domain, respectively. We then develop an encoder-decoder network to map each
input image into a new image space where the learned domain-specific features
are removed. With the images output by the encoder-decoder network, another
classifier is designed to learn the domain-invariant features to conduct image
classification. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework achieves
superior performance compared with state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/yulearningg/LRDG.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great performance in computer vision tasks [26].
However, the performance would drop if the test dataset follows a distribution different from the
training dataset. This issue is also known as domain shift [39]. Recent research has found that DNNs
tend to learn decision rules differently from humans [17, 21, 16]. For example, in ImageNet-based
[37] image classification tasks, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) tend to learn local textures to
discriminate objects, while we humans could use the knowledge of global object shapes as cues. The
features learned by the DNNs may only belong to specific domains and are not generalized for other
domains. For example, in real-world photos, objects belonging to the same category have similar
textures, but in sketches [27], objects are only drawn by lines and contain no texture information. For
a CNN that uses textures to discriminate objects in the photos, poor performance can be expected
when it is applied to the sketches. This situation calls for DNNs that can learn features invariant
across domains instead of learning features that are domain-specific.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

