OmniVL: One Foundation Model for Image-Language
and Video-Language Tasks

Junke Wang1,2 , Dongdong Chen3 , Zuxuan Wu1,2† , Chong Luo4 , Luowei Zhou3⋆ ,
Yucheng Zhao4 , Yujia Xie3 , Ce Liu3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2† , Lu Yuan3
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft Cloud + AI, 4 Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
This paper presents OmniVL, a new foundation model to support both imagelanguage and video-language tasks using one universal architecture. It adopts a
unified transformer-based visual encoder for both image and video inputs, and thus
can perform joint image-language and video-language pretraining. We demonstrate,
for the first time, such a paradigm benefits both image and video tasks, as opposed
to the conventional one-directional transfer (e.g., use image-language to help videolanguage). To this end, we propose a decoupled joint pretraining of image-language
and video-language to effectively decompose the vision-language modeling into
spatial and temporal dimensions and obtain performance boost on both image and
video tasks. Moreover, we introduce a novel unified vision-language contrastive
(UniVLC) loss to leverage image-text, video-text, image-label (e.g., image classification), video-label (e.g., video action recognition) data together, so that both
supervised and noisily supervised pretraining data are utilized as much as possible.
Without incurring extra task-specific adaptors, OmniVL can simultaneously support
visual only tasks (e.g., image classification, video action recognition), cross-modal
alignment tasks (e.g., image/video-text retrieval), and multi-modal understanding
and generation tasks (e.g., image/video question answering, captioning). We evaluate OmniVL on a wide range of downstream tasks and achieve state-of-the-art or
competitive results with similar model size and data scale.

1

Introduction

Vision-language pretraining has been demonstrated to be a promising direction for building foundation
models that can support a broad range of downstream AI tasks. By pretraining on web-scale noisy
image-text data, the pioneering works [53, 29, 71] suggest a unified model can be equipped with
unprecedented capabilities (e.g., zero-shot classification) and achieve outstanding performance on
various tasks, thus significantly reducing the cost of designing task-specific models. Following this
thread, some works [55, 60, 3, 37, 79] are further proposed to support more tasks. There are also
some efforts [23, 72] studying video-language pretraining to solve video-related multi-modal tasks.
In this paper, we take a step forward and aim to design an omni-vision-language foundation model
OmniVL, to support both image-language and video-language pretraining and corresponding downstream tasks1 , including visual only tasks (e.g., image classification, video action recognition),
⋆Work done at Microsoft, currently at Google Brain. † Corresponding authors.
Here we regard models like [71, 70] as image-language only, as they only pretrain on image-language and
naively regard video as independent frames without temporal modeling or need heavy adaption to video.

1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

