Recovering Private Text in Federated Learning of
Language Models
Samyak Gupta⇤
Princeton University
samyakg@cs.princeton.edu

Yangsibo Huang⇤
Princeton University
yangsibo@princeton.edu

Zexuan Zhong
Princeton University
zzhong@cs.princeton.edu

Tianyu Gao
Princeton University
tianyug@cs.princeton.edu

Kai Li
Princeton University
li@cs.princeton.edu

Danqi Chen
Princeton University
danqic@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract

Federated learning allows distributed users to collaboratively train a model while
keeping each user’s data private. Recently, a growing body of work has demonstrated that an eavesdropping attacker can effectively recover image data from
gradients transmitted during federated learning. However, little progress has been
made in recovering text data. In this paper, we present a novel attack method FILM
for federated learning of language models (LMs). For the first time, we show
the feasibility of recovering text from large batch sizes of up to 128 sentences.
Unlike image-recovery methods that are optimized to match gradients, we take
a distinct approach that first identifies a set of words from gradients and then
directly reconstructs sentences based on beam search and a prior-based reordering
strategy. We conduct the FILM attack on several large-scale datasets and show
that it can successfully reconstruct single sentences with high fidelity for large
batch sizes and even multiple sentences if applied iteratively. We evaluate three
defense methods: gradient pruning, DPSGD, and a simple approach to freeze word
embeddings that we propose. We show that both gradient pruning and DPSGD
lead to a significant drop in utility. However, if we fine-tune a public pre-trained
LM on private text without updating word embeddings, it can effectively defend
the attack with minimal data utility loss. Together, we hope that our results can
encourage the community to rethink the privacy concerns of LM training and its
standard practices in the future.2

1

Introduction

Federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017)
is a method to allow multiple participants
to collaboratively train a global model
without exchanging their private data. At
each step of training, a central server transmits model parameters to every participating client. Each client then computes
a model update (i.e., gradients) using its
local data and sends it to the server. Finally, the server aggregates all updates—
typically by averaging them—and updates
the model. Federated learning is actively
being considered for privacy-sensitive applications such as virtual mobile keyboards
and analysis of electronic health records in
hospitals (Li et al., 2020a).
⇤

Attacker

Private Mini-batch

My phone number
is 123-4567.
John’s SSN is
764–00-4285.
…
Private Mini-batch

Username: dfar
Pwd: jung
…

Gradients
Model Parameters

Gradients
Model Parameters
FL Model

Private Mini-batch

The patient has
COVID.
…

Clients

Gradients
Model Parameters

Server

Figure 1: FILM allows an honest-but-curious eavesdropper
on the communication between the client and the server in
federated learning to recover private text of the client.

The first two authors contributed equally.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/Princeton-SysML/FILM.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
2

Reconstructed text:
My phone number is
123-4567.

