Efficient Architecture Search for Diverse Tasks
Junhong Shen⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
junhongs@andrew.cmu.edu

Mikhail Khodak⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
khodak@cmu.edu

Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
While neural architecture search (NAS) has enabled automated machine learning
(AutoML) for well-researched areas, its application to tasks beyond computer vision
is still under-explored. As less-studied domains are precisely those where we expect
AutoML to have the greatest impact, in this work we study NAS for efficiently
solving diverse problems. Seeking an approach that is fast, simple, and broadly
applicable, we fix a standard convolutional network (CNN) topology and propose
to search for the right kernel sizes and dilations its operations should take on. This
dramatically expands the model’s capacity to extract features at multiple resolutions
for different types of data while only requiring search over the operation space. To
overcome the efficiency challenges of naive weight-sharing in this search space,
we introduce DASH, a differentiable NAS algorithm that computes the mixtureof-operations using the Fourier diagonalization of convolution, achieving both a
better asymptotic complexity and an up-to-10x search time speedup in practice.
We evaluate DASH on ten tasks spanning a variety of application domains such
as PDE solving, protein folding, and heart disease detection. DASH outperforms
state-of-the-art AutoML methods in aggregate, attaining the best-known automated
performance on seven tasks. Meanwhile, on six of the ten tasks, the combined
search and retraining time is less than 2x slower than simply training a CNN
backbone that is far less accurate.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning for computer vision and natural language processing has spurred
growing interest in enabling similar breakthroughs for other domains such as biology, healthcare,
and physical sciences. Consequently, there is enormous potential for neural architecture search to
help automate model development in these diverse areas. However, while extensive NAS research
has been devoted to improving the search speed [1, 2] and automatically attaining state-of-the-art
performance on vision datasets such as CIFAR and ImageNet [3], the resulting algorithms have
subpar performance beyond the tasks on which they were developed. For example, in the analysis of
NAS-Bench-360 [4], a recent benchmark designed for improving task diversity in NAS evaluation,
the authors showed a significant gap between models found by NAS methods, such as DARTS [2]
and DenseNAS [5], and hand-crafted expert architectures on a number of distinct applications.
To improve the generalizability of AutoML methods, recent works such as AutoML-Zero [6] and XDoperations [7] propose to relax the inductive biases encoded in the standard search spaces. However,
the former is not designed for practical deployment, and the latter is too expensive to execute even
for simple problems like CIFAR-100 (Fig. 1b). Hence we ask: is there an approach that can provide
sufficient expressivity to yield high accuracy across multiple domains, while still retaining the faster
search and the more efficient final models of discrete architecture search?
⇤ Equal contribution.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

