HierSpeech: Bridging the Gap between Text and
Speech by Hierarchical Variational Inference using
Self-supervised Representations for Speech Synthesis

Sang-Hoon Lee1
Eunwoo Song3
1

Seung-Bin Kim2
Min-Jae Hwang3

Ji-Hyun Lee2
Seong-Whan Lee2∗

Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
3
NAVER Corp., Seongnam, Korea
1,2
{sh_lee, sb-kim, jihyun-lee, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr
3
{eunwoo.song, min-jae.hwang}@navercorp.com

Abstract
This paper presents HierSpeech, a high-quality end-to-end text-to-speech (TTS)
system based on a hierarchical conditional variational autoencoder (VAE) utilizing
self-supervised speech representations. Recently, single-stage TTS systems, which
directly generate raw speech waveform from text, have been getting interest thanks
to their ability in generating high-quality audio within a fully end-to-end training
pipeline. However, there is still a room for improvement in the conventional TTS
systems. Since it is challenging to infer both the linguistic and acoustic attributes
from the text directly, missing the details of attributes, specifically linguistic information, is inevitable, which results in mispronunciation and over-smoothing
problem in their synthetic speech. To address the aforementioned problem, we
leverage self-supervised speech representations as additional linguistic representations to bridge an information gap between text and speech. Then, the hierarchical
conditional VAE is adopted to connect these representations and to learn each
attribute hierarchically by improving the linguistic capability in latent representations. Compared with the state-of-the-art TTS system, HierSpeech achieves +0.303
comparative mean opinion score, and reduces the phoneme error rate of synthesized speech from 9.16% to 5.78% on the VCTK dataset. Furthermore, we extend
our model to HierSpeech-U, an untranscribed text-to-speech system. Specifically,
HierSpeech-U can adapt to a novel speaker by utilizing self-supervised speech
representations without text transcripts. The experimental results reveal that our
method outperforms publicly available TTS models, and show the effectiveness of
speaker adaptation with untranscribed speech.

1

Introduction

Text-to-speech (TTS) systems have undergone significant improvements in synthesizing high-quality
speech from text sequence. Conventional TTS systems generally consist of two parts; an acoustic
model and a vocoder. First, acoustic models (Wang et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018) have shown the
success of synthesizing acoustic features (e.g., Mel-spectrogram) as an intermediate feature from
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

