Learning to Scaffold:
Optimizing Model Explanations for Teaching

Patrick Fernandes∗,Ψ,Ω,ℜ
Marcos Treviso∗,Ω,ℜ
Danish Pruthi†,Λ
Ω,ℜ,Γ
André F. T. Martins
Graham NeubigΨ
Ψ
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
Ω
Instituto Superior Técnico & LUMLIS (Lisbon ELLIS Unit), Lisbon, Portugal
ℜ
Instituto de Telecomunicações, Lisbon, Portugal
Λ
Γ
Amazon Web Services
Unbabel, Lisbon, Portugal

Abstract
Modern machine learning models are opaque, and as a result there is a burgeoning
academic subfield on methods that explain these models’ behavior. However, what
is the precise goal of providing such explanations, and how can we demonstrate
that explanations achieve this goal? Some research argues that explanations should
help teach a student (either human or machine) to simulate the model being
explained, and that the quality of explanations can be measured by the simulation
accuracy of students on unexplained examples. In this work, leveraging metalearning techniques, we extend this idea to improve the quality of the explanations
themselves, specifically by optimizing explanations such that student models more
effectively learn to simulate the original model. We train models on three natural
language processing and computer vision tasks, and find that students trained
with explanations extracted with our framework are able to simulate the teacher
significantly more effectively than ones produced with previous methods. Through
human annotations and a user study, we further find that these learned explanations
more closely align with how humans would explain the required decisions in these
tasks. Our code is available at https://github.com/coderpat/learning-scaffold.

1

Introduction

While deep learning’s performance has led it to become the dominant paradigm in machine learning,
its relative opaqueness has brought great interest in methods to improve model interpretability. Many
recent works propose methods for extracting explanations from neural networks (§ 7), which vary from
the highlighting of relevant input features [Simonyan et al., 2014, Arras et al., 2017, Ding et al., 2019]
to more complex representations of the reasoning of the network [Mu and Andreas, 2020, Wu et al.,
2021]. However, are these methods actually achieving their goal of making models more interpretable?
Some concerning findings have cast doubt on this proposition; different explanations methods have
been found to disagree on the same model/input [Neely et al., 2021, Bastings et al., 2021] and explanations do not necessarily help predict a model’s output and/or its failures [Chandrasekaran et al., 2018].
In fact, the research community is still in the process of understanding what explanations are supposed
to achieve, and how to assess success of an explanation method [Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017, Miller,
2019]. Many early works on model interpretability designed their methods around a set of desiderata
[Sundararajan et al., 2017, Lertvittayakumjorn and Toni, 2019] and relied on qualitative assessment of
a handful of samples with respect to these desiderata; a process that is highly subjective and is hard to
reproduce. In contrast, recent works have focused on more quantitative criteria: correlation between
∗
†

Equal contribution. Corresp. to pfernand@cs.cmu.edu or marcos.treviso@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
Work done while at Carnegie Mellon University, prior to joining Amazon.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

