Non-deep Networks

Ankit Goyal1,2 Alexey Bochkovskiy2,3 Jia Deng1 Vladlen Koltun2,3
1
Princeton University 2 Intel Labs 3 Apple

Abstract
Latency is of utmost importance in safety-critical systems. In neural networks,
lowest theoretical latency is dependent on the depth of the network. This begs the
question – is it possible to build high-performing “non-deep" neural networks?
We show that it is. To do so, we use parallel subnetworks instead of stacking one
layer after another. This helps effectively reduce depth while maintaining high
performance. By utilizing parallel substructures, we show, for the first time, that a
network with a depth of just 12 can achieve top-1 accuracy over 80% on ImageNet,
96% on CIFAR10, and 81% on CIFAR100. We also show that a network with a
low-depth (12) backbone can achieve an AP of 48% on MS-COCO. We analyze
the scaling rules for our design and show how to increase performance without
changing the network’s depth. Finally, we provide a proof of concept for how
non-deep networks could be used to build low-latency recognition systems.

1

Introduction

Latency, which is the time taken to process a request, can be of utmost importance in safety-critical
systems that require real-time predictions. Consider an autonomous car driving at high speed. In
order to ensure safety, the car must be able to react within a very small time window. Since deep
neural networks (DNNs) are the workhorse behind a lot of intelligent systems, considering the latency
of DNNs is critical. Depending upon the use case, latency could take precedence over other factors
like the number of parameters, memory use, and number of calculations.
In a DNN, the lowest achievable latency is fd , where d is depth of the network and f is the processor
frequency. Although, this limit is hard to achieve on a general-purpose processor like GPU, for
practical applications, one can build custom chips to get closer to the theoretical latency. This limit
for latency can also be considered for future hardware with large FLOPs or bandwidth. In such a case,
the latency could only be improved by reducing depth or increasing frequency. On the frequency
front, the scope of improvement is limited as the current process of lithography is approaching the
size of the silicon crystal lattice (Sec. 3.5). Therefore, it is worthwhile to ask if one can achieve high
performance with “non-deep” neural networks.
Large depth is accepted as an essential component for high-performing networks because depth
increases its representational ability and helps learn increasingly abstract features (He et al., 2016a).
In contrast, biological neural networks are expected to be much shallower given how quickly humans
can perceive objects and scenes Renninger & Malik (2004). This disconnect between artificial
and biological neural networks, further enhances the scientific value in the question of whether it is
possible to design high-performing “non-deep" neural networks.
In this work, we show that, it is indeed possible to build high-performing non-deep networks. We refer
to our architecture as ParNet (Parallel Networks). We show, for the first time, that a classification
network with a depth of just 12 can achieve accuracy greater than 80% on ImageNet, 96% on
CIFAR10, and 81% on CIFAR100. We also show that a detection network with a low-depth (12)
backbone can achieve an AP of 48% on MS-COCO. Note that the number of parameters in ParNet is
comparable to state-of-the-art models, as illustrated in Figure 1.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

