On Enforcing Better Conditioned Meta-Learning
for Rapid Few-Shot Adaptation

Markus Hiller1
2

Mehrtash Harandi2

Tom Drummond1

1
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
Department of Electrical and Computer Systems Engineering, Monash University
markus.hiller@student.unimelb.edu.au
mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu
tom.drummond@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Inspired by the concept of preconditioning, we propose a novel method to increase
adaptation speed for gradient-based meta-learning methods without incurring extra
parameters. We demonstrate that recasting the optimisation problem to a non-linear
least-squares formulation provides a principled way to actively enforce a wellconditioned parameter space for meta-learning models based on the concepts of
the condition number and local curvature. Our comprehensive evaluations show
that the proposed method significantly outperforms its unconstrained counterpart
especially during initial adaptation steps, while achieving comparable or better
overall results on several few-shot classification tasks – creating the possibility of
dynamically choosing the number of adaptation steps at inference time.

1

Introduction

Learning a new task from only a very limited number of datapoints in the target domain poses a
central challenge in machine learning. Gradient-based meta-learning as introduced in MAML (Finn
et al., 2017) has proved to be a versatile tool to successfully address such few-shot problems, and
has inspired a significant number of follow-up works tackling a diverse set of applications like
regression (Nichol et al., 2018; Finn et al., 2018), image classification (Zintgraf et al., 2019; Antoniou
et al., 2019; Rajeswaran et al., 2019), reinforcement (Al-Shedivat et al., 2018) and online continual
learning (Gupta et al., 2020).
Broadly speaking, such approaches define a family of tasks and attempt to solve a bi-level optimization
problem. The outer loop aims to learn an effective meta initialization of the parameters capturing
properties that generalize well across different training tasks. This learned set of parameters is then
adapted to a novel and previously unseen task in only a few steps during the inner loop.
Intuitively, one might expect that each step taken during the inner-loop adaptation ought to be as
efficient as possible, enabling the model to quickly converge towards the desired goal (i.e., solving
the new task). Evaluating popular methods like MAML (Finn et al., 2017) however shows that this is
not the case (Figures 1 and 2). Particularly the initial steps fall short of this expectation. The reason
for this behaviour is readily explained: Gradient directions do generally not point towards the actual
desired minimum (Figure 1) as a result of the often ill-conditioned parameter space in which the
optimization is performed.
This behaviour is undesirable for a number of reasons. Having high contribution towards reaching
the optimum from the start opens up the possibility of dynamically choosing the number of steps
to take at inference time, an interesting property for applications with limited or changing access to
computational resources, and might further lead to a better overall convergence during the final steps.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

