CEDe: A collection of expert-curated datasets with
atom-level entity annotations for Optical Chemical
Structure Recognition

Rodrigo Hormazabal1,2 , Changyoung Park1 , Soonyoung Lee1 ,
Sehui Han1 Yeonsik Jo1 , Jaewan Lee1 , Ahra Jo1
Seunghwan Kim1 , Jaegul Choo2 , Moontae Lee1 , Honglak Lee1
1
LG AI Research, 2 KAIST
{rodrigo, changyoung.park, soonyoung.lee, hansse.han
yeonsik.jo, jaewan.lee, ahra.jo
sh.kim, moontae.lee, honglak}@lgresearch.ai
jchoo@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Optical Chemical Structure Recognition (OCSR) deals with the translation from
chemical images to molecular structures, this being the main way chemical compounds are depicted in scientific documents. Traditionally, rule-based methods
have followed a framework based on the detection of chemical entities, such as
atoms and bonds, followed by a compound structure reconstruction step. Recently,
neural architectures analog to image captioning have been explored to solve this
task, yet they still show to be data inefficient, using millions of examples just to
show performances comparable with traditional methods. Looking to motivate
and benchmark new approaches based on atomic-level entities detection and graph
reconstruction, we present CEDe, a unique collection of chemical entity bounding
boxes manually curated by experts for scientific literature datasets. These annotations combine to more than 700,000 chemical entity bounding boxes with the
necessary information for structure reconstruction. Also, a large synthetic dataset
containing one million molecular images and annotations is released in order to explore transfer-learning techniques that could help these architectures perform better
under low-data regimes. Benchmarks show that detection-reconstruction based
models can achieve performances on par with or better than image captioning-like
models, even with 100x fewer training examples.

1

Introduction

The recognition of molecular structures presented as images in scientific literature is an essential
part of material design and drug discovery pipelines [1, 2]. Most chemical structures are typically
shown only as 2D structural depictions in image form instead of digital representations using parsable
data formats. The lack of a widely adopted standard to publish molecular structures slows down the
material discovery process and poses a long-standing problem in effectively searching for seemingly
unexplored parts of chemical space in previous literature. This problem worsens when it comes to
patents containing newly discovered chemicals or drugs. Chemical structure descriptions tend to be
superficial, ignoring certain structural details and common conventions, while in most cases still being
solely presented in image format [3]. Naturally, this leads to the introduction of uncommon symbols
and markers on chemical structure images, making them even harder to be discovered. Therefore,
transforming and storing existing literature and molecular structures as indexable data formats is a
critical challenge to improving current chemical databases.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

