Learning in Observable POMDPs,
without Computationally Intractable Oracles

Noah Golowich
MIT
nzg@mit.edu

Ankur Moitra
MIT
moitra@mit.edu

Dhruv Rohatgi
MIT
drohatgi@mit.edu

Abstract
Much of reinforcement learning theory is built on top of oracles that are computationally hard to implement. Specifically for learning near-optimal policies in
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs), existing algorithms
either need to make strong assumptions about the model dynamics (e.g. deterministic transitions) or assume access to an oracle for solving a hard optimistic planning
or estimation problem as a subroutine. In this work we develop the first oracle-free
learning algorithm for POMDPs under reasonable assumptions. Specifically, we
give a quasipolynomial-time end-to-end algorithm for learning in “observable”
POMDPs, where observability is the assumption that well-separated distributions
over states induce well-separated distributions over observations. Our techniques
circumvent the more traditional approach of using the principle of optimism under uncertainty to promote exploration, and instead give a novel application of
barycentric spanners to constructing policy covers.

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are a ubiquitous model in reinforcement learning that aim
to capture sequential decision-making problems in a variety of applications spanning robotics to
healthcare. However, modelling a problem with an MDP makes the often-unrealistic assumption
that the agent has perfect knowledge about the state of the world. Partially Observable Markov
Decision Processes (POMDPs) are a broad generalization of MDPs which capture an agent’s inherent
uncertainty about the state: while there is still an underlying state that updates according to the
agent’s actions, the agent never directly observes the state, but instead receives samples from a statedependent observation distribution. The greater generality afforded by partial observability is crucial
to applications in game theory [BS18], healthcare [Hau00, HF00b], market design [WME+ 22], and
robotics [CKK96].
Unfortunately, this greater generality comes with steep statistical and computational costs. There
are well-known statistical lower bounds [JKKL20, KAL16], which show that in the worst case, it is
statistically intractable to find a near-optimal policy for a POMDP given the ability to play policies
on it (the learning problem), even given unlimited computation. Furthermore, there are worst-case
computational lower bounds [PT87, Lit94, BDRS96, LGM01, VLB12], which establish that it is
computationally intractable to find a near-optimal policy even when given the exact parameters of the
model (the substantially simpler planning problem).
Nevertheless there is a sizeable literature devoted to overcoming the statistical intractability of
the learning problem by restricting to natural subclasses of POMDPs [KAL16, GDB16, ALA16,
JKKL20, XCGZ21, KECM21a, KECM21b, LCSJ22]. There are far fewer works attempting to
overcome computational intractability, and all make severe restrictions on either the model dynamics
[JKKL20, KAL16] or the structure of the uncertainty [BDRS96, KECM21a]. The standard practice
is to simply sidestep computational issues by assuming access to strong oracles such as ones that
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

