GraB: Finding Provably Better Data Permutations
than Random Reshuffling
Yucheng Lu, Wentao Guo, Christopher De Sa
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
{yl2967, wg247, cmd353}@cornell.edu

Abstract
Random reshuffling, which randomly permutes the dataset each epoch, is
widely adopted in model training because it yields faster convergence than withreplacement sampling. Recent studies indicate greedily chosen data orderings
can further speed up convergence empirically, at the cost of using more computation and memory. However, greedy ordering lacks theoretical justification and
has limited utility due to its non-trivial memory and computation overhead. In
this paper, we first formulate an example-ordering framework named herding and
answer affirmatively that SGD with herding converges at the rate O(T 2/3 ) on
smooth, non-convex objectives, faster than the O(n1/3 T 2/3 ) obtained by random
reshuffling, where n denotes the number of data points and T denotes the total
number of iterations. To reduce the memory overhead, we leverage discrepancy
minimization theory to propose an online Gradient Balancing algorithm (GraB)
that enjoys the same rate as herding, while reducing the memory usage from O(nd)
to just O(d) and computation from O(n2 ) to O(n), where d denotes the model
dimension. We show empirically1 on applications including MNIST, CIFAR10,
WikiText and GLUE that GraB can outperform random reshuffling in terms of both
training and validation performance, and even outperform state-of-the-art greedy
ordering while reducing memory usage over 100⇥.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning problems can be formulated as minimizing a differentiable (loss) function
f : Rd ! R for a set of data examples {xi }ni=1 . To train a parameterized
Pnmodel, the goal is to obtain
a set of target parameters w⇤ = arg min f (w), where f (w) = n1 i=1 f (w; xi ), and f (w; xi )
denotes the loss incurred on the i-th data example xi (usually a mini-batch of images, sentences, etc.)
with model parameters w. A typical model training, or optimization process, is to iteratively update
the model parameter w starting from some initial w(1) by running
w(t+1) = w(t)

↵rf (w(t) ; x (t) )

t = 1, 2, · · ·

(1)

where ↵ denotes the step size, and : {1, . . . , n} ! {1, . . . , n} denotes a permutation (ordering)
from which the examples are chosen to compute the stochastic gradients2 . A widely adopted ordering
protocol is Random Reshuffling (RR), where the optimizer scans in an order drawn at random without
replacement over the entire training dataset multiple times during training (a common name for a
single such scan is an “epoch”). RR allows the optimizer to converge faster empirically and enjoys a
1

The experimental code is available at https://github.com/EugeneLYC/GraB.
In this paper, we consistently use the term stochastic gradients to refer to gradients computed on a single (or
a set of) data example(s), even when those examples are not selected at random.
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

