NAS-Bench-Suite-Zero:
Accelerating Research on Zero Cost Proxies
Arjun Krishnakumar⇤1 , Colin White⇤2 , Arber Zela⇤1 , Renbo Tu⇤3 ,
Mahmoud Safari1 , Frank Hutter1,4
1
University of Freiburg, 2 Abacus.AI, 3 University of Toronto,
4
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Zero-cost proxies (ZC proxies) are a recent architecture performance prediction
technique aiming to significantly speed up algorithms for neural architecture search
(NAS). Recent work has shown that these techniques show great promise, but certain aspects, such as evaluating and exploiting their complementary strengths, are
under-studied. In this work, we create NAS-Bench-Suite-Zero: we evaluate 13
ZC proxies across 28 tasks, creating by far the largest dataset (and unified codebase)
for ZC proxies, enabling orders-of-magnitude faster experiments on ZC proxies,
while avoiding confounding factors stemming from different implementations.
To demonstrate the usefulness of NAS-Bench-Suite-Zero, we run a large-scale
analysis of ZC proxies, including a bias analysis, and the first information-theoretic
analysis which concludes that ZC proxies capture substantial complementary information. Motivated by these findings, we present a procedure to improve the performance of ZC proxies by reducing biases such as cell size, and we also show that
incorporating all 13 ZC proxies into the surrogate models used by NAS algorithms
can improve their predictive performance by up to 42%. Our code and datasets are
available at https://github.com/automl/naslib/tree/zerocost.

1

Introduction

Algorithms for neural architecture search (NAS) seek to automate the design of high-performing
neural architectures for a given dataset. NAS has successfully been used to discover architectures
with better accuracy/latency tradeoffs than the best human-designed architectures [5, 9, 28, 38]. Since
early NAS algorithms were prohibitively expensive to run [58], a long line of recent work has focused
on improving the runtime and efficiency of NAS methods (see [9, 49] for recent surveys).
A recent thread of research within NAS focuses on zero-cost proxies (ZC proxies) [1, 23]. These
novel techniques aim to give an estimate of the (relative) performance of neural architectures from
just a single minibatch of data. Often taking just five seconds to run, these techniques are essentially
“zero cost” compared to training an architecture or to any other method of predicting the performance
of neural architectures [48]. Since the initial ZC proxy was introduced [23], there have been many
follow-up methods [1, 16]. However, several recent works have shown that simple baselines such
as “number of parameters” and “FLOPS” are competitive with all existing ZC proxies across most
settings, and that most ZC proxies do not generalize well across different benchmarks, thus requiring
broader large-scale evaluations in order to assess their strengths [2, 25]. A recent landscape overview
concluded that ZC proxies show great promise, but certain aspects are under-studied and their true
⇤
Equal contribution. Work done while RT was part-time at Abacus.AI. Email to:
{krishnan, zelaa, fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de, colin@abacus.ai, renbo.tu@mail.utoronto.ca,
safarim@informatik.uni-freiburg.de.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

