Statistical, Robustness, and Computational
Guarantees for Sliced Wasserstein Distances
Sloan Nietert
Cornell University
nietert@cs.cornell.edu

Ritwik Sadhu
Cornell University
rs2526@cornell.edu

Ziv Goldfeld
Cornell University
goldfeld@cornell.edu

Kengo Kato
Cornell University
kk976@cornell.edu

Abstract
Sliced Wasserstein distances preserve properties of classic Wasserstein distances
while being more scalable for computation and estimation in high dimensions. The
goal of this work is to quantify this scalability from three key aspects: (i) empirical
convergence rates; (ii) robustness to data contamination; and (iii) efficient computational methods. For empirical convergence, we derive fast rates with explicit
dependence of constants on dimension, subject to log-concavity of the population
distributions. For robustness, we characterize minimax optimal, dimension-free robust estimation risks, and show an equivalence between robust sliced 1-Wasserstein
estimation and robust mean estimation. This enables lifting statistical and algorithmic guarantees available for the latter to the sliced 1-Wasserstein setting.
Moving on to computational aspects, we analyze the Monte Carlo estimator for the
average-sliced distance, demonstrating that larger dimension can result in faster
convergence of the numerical integration error. For the max-sliced distance, we
focus on a subgradient-based local optimization algorithm that is frequently used in
practice, albeit without formal guarantees, and establish an O(ϵ−4 ) computational
complexity bound for it. Our theory is validated by numerical experiments, which
altogether provide a comprehensive quantitative account of the scalability question.

1

Introduction

Sliced Wasserstein distances consider the average or maximum of Wasserstein distances between
one-dimensional projections of the two distributions. Formally, for 1 ≤ p < ∞, they are defined as
Z
1/p
Wp (µ, ν) :=
Wpp (pθ♯ µ, pθ♯ ν)dσ(θ)
and Wp (µ, ν) := max Wp (pθ♯ µ, pθ♯ ν),
(1)
Sd−1

θ∈Sd−1

where pθ♯ µ is the pushforward of µ under the projection pθ : x 7→ θ⊺ x from Rd to R and σ is the
uniform distribution on the unit sphere Sd−1 in Rd . Sliced Wasserstein distances were introduced
in [49] as a means to mitigate the computational burden of evaluating classic Wp , which rapidly
becomes excessive as d grows. Indeed, sliced distances are readily computable using the closed-form
expression for Wp between distributions on R (as the Lp norm between quantile functions). Further,
Wp and Wp are metrics on Pp (Rd ) and generate the same topology as classic Wp [10, 44, 6, 42]. As
such, the sliced distances have been applied to various statistical inference and machine learning tasks,
including barycenter computation [49, 9], generative modeling [18, 17, 44, 58], autoencoders [29],
differential privacy [50], Bayesian computation [41] and topological data analysis [12].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

