AUTOMATA : Gradient Based Data Subset Selection
for Compute-Efficient Hyper-parameter Tuning

Krishnateja Killamsetty1 , Guttu Sai Abhishek2 , Aakriti2 , Ganesh Ramakrishnan2
Alexandre V. Evfimievski3 , Lucian Popa3 , Rishabh Iyer1
1
The University of Texas at Dallas, USA
2
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India
3
IBM Research, USA
{krishnateja.killamsetty, rishabh.iyer}@utdallas.edu
{gsaiabhishek, aakriti, ganesh}@cse.iitb.ac.in
{evfimi, lpopa}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks have seen great success in recent years; however, training a
deep model is often challenging as its performance heavily depends on the hyperparameters used. In addition, finding the optimal hyper-parameter configuration,
even with state-of-the-art (SOTA) hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) algorithms,
can be time-consuming, requiring multiple training runs over the entire dataset
for different possible sets of hyper-parameters. Our central insight is that using
an informative subset of the dataset for model training runs involved in hyperparameter optimization, allows us to find the optimal hyper-parameter configuration
significantly faster. In this work, we propose AUTOMATA, a gradient-based subset
selection framework for hyper-parameter tuning. We empirically evaluate the
effectiveness of AUTOMATA in hyper-parameter tuning through several experiments
on real-world datasets in the text, vision, and tabular domains. Our experiments
show that using gradient-based data subsets for hyper-parameter tuning achieves
significantly faster turnaround times and speedups of 3×-30× while achieving
comparable performance to the hyper-parameters found using the entire dataset.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning systems have found great success in a wide range of tasks, such as
object recognition [15], speech recognition [17], and machine translation [1], making people’s lives
easier on a daily basis. However, in the quest for near-human performance, more complex and deeper
machine learning models trained on increasingly large datasets are being used at the expense of
substantial computational costs. Furthermore, deep learning is associated with a significantly large
number of hyper-parameters such as the learning algorithm, batch size, learning rate, and model
configuration parameters (e.g., depth, number of hidden layers, etc.) that need to be tuned. Hence,
running extensive hyper-parameter tuning and auto-ml pipelines is becoming increasingly necessary
to achieve state-of-the-art models. However, tuning the hyper-parameters requires multiple training
runs over the entire datasets (which are significantly large nowadays), resulting in staggering compute
costs, running times, and, more importantly, CO2 emissions.
To give an idea of staggering compute costs, we consider an image classification task on a relatively
simple CIFAR-10 dataset where a single training run using a relatively simple model class of Residual
Networks [16] for 300 epochs on a V100 GPU takes around 4 hours. If we perform 1000 training
runs (which is not uncommon today) naively using grid search for hyper-parameter tuning, it will
take 4000 GPU hours. The resulting CO2 emissions would be between 440 to 1000 kg of CO2
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

