Improving Task-Specific Generalization in Few-Shot
Learning via Adaptive Vicinal Risk Minimization
Long-Kai Huang
Tencent AI Lab
hlongkai@gmail.com

Ying Wei⇤
City University of Hong Kong
yingwei@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of meta-learning in improving
the meta generalization over tasks in few-shot learning. However, the task-specific
level generalization is overlooked in most algorithms. For a novel few-shot learning
task where the empirical distribution likely deviates from the true distribution, the
model obtained via minimizing the empirical loss can hardly generalize to unseen
data. A viable solution to improving the generalization comes as a more accurate
approximation of the true distribution; that is, admitting a Gaussian-like vicinal
distribution for each of the limited training samples. Thereupon we derive the
resulting vicinal loss function over vicinities of all training samples and minimize
it instead of the conventional empirical loss over training samples only, favorably
free from the exhaustive sampling of all vicinal samples. It remains challenging
to obtain the statistical parameters of the vicinal distribution for each sample. To
tackle this challenge, we further propose to estimate the statistical parameters as the
weighted mean and variance of a set of unlabeled data it passed by a random walk
starting from training samples. To verify the performance of the proposed method,
we conduct experiments on three standard few-shot learning benchmarks and
consolidate the superiority of the proposed method over state-of-the-art few-shot
learning baselines.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep learning algorithms have made tremendous progress and have been widely
applied in vision [16], language [37] and speech [10] areas. Despite the prevalence, deep learning
algorithms rely heavily on a sufficient amount of labeled data and often fail when only a limited
number of labeled samples are available. Considering the high cost of extensive data collection and
annotation, it has attracted increasing attention to developing algorithms learning from a limited
number of training samples, which has been widely known as few-shot learning [39, 5].
The recent focus of few-shot learning is built on the meta-learning framework [9, 39, 33]. The goal
of meta-learning is to train a model that can be quickly adapted to a new task with a small number of
labeled samples by leveraging the knowledge from previous related tasks. Typically, a meta-learning
model consists of the meta-training stage where a well-generalized feature extractor is learned from
meta-training tasks and the meta-testing stage during which a classifier is built on top of the feature
extractor for novel tasks. While the majority of meta-learning works revolved around developing
better meta-training strategies to reduce the meta-generalization error over all tasks, how to fully
leverage the meta-trained feature extractor to build a robust classifier and improve a task-specific
generalization in the meta-testing stage remains less explored.
⇤

Correspondence to Ying Wei.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

