Context-Based Dynamic Pricing with Partially Linear
Demand Model
Jinzhi Bu † , David Simchi-Levi ‡§ , Chonghuan Wang §
Department of Logistics and Maritime Studies, Faculty of Business,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
‡
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Operations Research Center, MIT
§
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, MIT
jinzhi.bu@polyu.edu.hk, dslevi@mit.edu, chwang9@mit.edu
†

Abstract
In today’s data-rich environment, context-based dynamic pricing has gained much
attention. To model the demand as a function of price and context, the existing
literature either adopts a parametric model or a non-parametric model. The former is easier to implement but may suffer from model mis-specification, whereas
the latter is more robust but does not leverage many structural properties of the
underlying problem. This paper combines these two approaches by studying the
context-based dynamic pricing with online learning, where the unknown expected
demand admits a semi-parametric partially linear structure. Specifically, we consider two demand models, whose expected demand at price p∈R+ and context
x ∈ Rd is given by bp + g(x) and f (p) + a⊤ x respectively. We assume that
g(x) is β-Hölder continuous in the first model, and f (p) is kth-order smooth with
an additional parameter δ in the second model. For both models, we design an
efficient online learning algorithm with provable regret upper bounds, and establish
matching lower bounds. This enables us to characterize the statistical complexity
√
d
for the two learning models, whose optimal regret rates are e
Θ( T ∨ T d+2β ) and
√
1
e T ∨ (δT k+1 ) 2k+1 ) respectively. The numerical results demonstrate that our
Θ(
learning algorithms are more effective than benchmark algorithms, and also reveal
the effects of parameters d, β and δ on the algorithm’s empirical regret, which are
consistent with our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

The recent success of online retailing has provided a data-rich environment for sellers to take better
advantage of contextual information to dynamically improve their pricing strategies. Examples
of such contextual information include products’ characteristics, seasonality, festival information,
economic indicators, etc. A fundamental question stemming from the presence of contexts is how to
select a predictive model to capture the relationship among demand, price, and context.
In the current literature, there are two modeling approaches. The first approach is to adopt a parametric
model, among which the linear model, i.e., demand = b × price + ⟨a, context⟩, is arguably the most
fundamental one. The parametric assumption brings great convenience to practical implementation,
and inspires many efficient learning algorithms. However, it may also lead to a serious issue of model
mis-specification, as discussed in [25]. The second approach is to employ a fully non-parametric
model, i.e., demand = µ(price, context) for some unknown function µ(·) without any parametric
assumption. The non-parametric model can be quite robust to different application contexts. However,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

