Retaining Knowledge for Learning with Dynamic
Definition
Zichang Liu
Rice University
Houston, TX 77025
zichangliu@rice.edu
Tianyi Zhang
Rice University
Houston, TX 77025
tz21@rice.edu

Benjamin Coleman
Rice University
Houston, TX 77025
brc7@rice.edu
Anshumali Shrivastava
Rice University/ThirdAI Corp.
Houston, TX 77025
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models are often deployed in settings where they must be constantly updated in response to the changes in class definitions while retaining high
accuracy on previously learned definitions. A classical use case is fraud detection,
where new fraud schemes come one after another. While such an update can be
accomplished by re-training on the complete data, the process is inefficient and
prevents real-time and on-device learning. On the other hand, efficient methods
that incrementally learn from new data often result in the forgetting of previouslylearned knowledge. We define this problem as Learning with Dynamic Definition
(LDD) and demonstrate that popular models, such as the Vision Transformer and
Roberta, exhibit substantial forgetting of past definitions. We present a first practical and provable solution to LDD. Our proposal is a hash-based sparsity model
RIDDLE that solves evolving definitions by associating samples only to relevant
parameters. We prove that our model is a universal function approximator and
theoretically bounds the knowledge lost during the update process. On practical
tasks with evolving class definition in vision and natural language processing, RIDDLE outperforms baselines by up to 30% on the original dataset while providing
competitive accuracy on the update dataset.

1

Introduction

Motivation: A common machine learning pipeline is to first define a task objective based on
historical experience, then deploy a model trained to optimize the objective over collected data.
However, machine learning models rarely operate in such a static environment. Instead, models must
be dynamically updated to accommodate changes in class definitions without forgetting previous
knowledge. Consider the case of fraud detection, where models must adapt to emerging scam patterns
while also providing protection against previously-known patterns. Machine learning models are also
used to identify harmful microbes given gene sequences, where it is important to perform well on
new variants or newly discovered microorganisms. A similar situation arises when models are used to
filter inappropriate content such as hate speech and violence. New phrases or previously-innocuous
language may become inappropriate due to world events or attempts by users to circumvent the
filter. While the classification task remains the same (fraud or safe, harmful or not, inappropriate or
appropriate, etc.), class definitions evolve over time and likely differ significantly from the point of
the initial training. We refer to this setting as Learning under Dynamic Definition (LDD). It should be
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

