Certifying Some Distributional Fairness with
Subpopulation Decomposition
Mintong Kang ⇤
UIUC

Linyi Li ⇤
UIUC

Maurice Weber
ETH Zurich

mintong2@illinois.edu

linyi2@illinois.edu

maurice.weber@inf.ethz.ch

Yang Liu
UC Santa Cruz

Ce Zhang
ETH Zurich

Bo Li
UIUC

yangliu@ucsc.edu

ce.zhang@inf.ethz.ch

lbo@illinois.edu

Abstract
Extensive efforts have been made to understand and improve the fairness of machine learning models based on different fairness measurement metrics, especially
in high-stakes domains such as medical insurance, education, and hiring decisions.
However, there is a lack of certified fairness on the end-to-end performance of an
ML model. In this paper, we first formulate the certified fairness of an ML model
trained on a given data distribution as an optimization problem based on the model
performance loss bound on a fairness constrained distribution, which is within
bounded distributional distance with the training distribution. We then propose a
general fairness certification framework and instantiate it for both sensitive shifting
and general shifting scenarios. In particular, we propose to solve the optimization
problem by decomposing the original data distribution into analytical subpopulations and proving the convexity of the sub-problems to solve them. We evaluate
our certified fairness on six real-world datasets and show that our certification is
tight in the sensitive shifting scenario and provides non-trivial certification under
general shifting. Our framework is flexible to integrate additional non-skewness
constraints and we show that it provides even tighter certification under different
real-world scenarios. We also compare our certified fairness bound with adapted
existing distributional robustness bounds on Gaussian data and demonstrate that
our method is significantly tighter.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) has become ubiquitous [24, 18, 5, 11, 8, 13], fairness of ML have attracted
a lot of attention from different perspectives. For instance, some automated hiring systems are biased
towards males due to gender imbalanced training data [3]. Different approaches have been proposed
to improve ML fairness, such as regularized training [16, 22, 26, 30], disentanglement [12, 28, 40],
duality [44], low-rank matrix factorization [34], and distribution alignment [4, 29, 53].
In addition to existing approaches that evaluate fairness, it is important and challenging to provide
certification for ML fairness. Recent studies have explored the certified fair representation of
ML [39, 4, 36]. However, there lacks certified fairness on the predictions of an end-to-end ML model
trained on an arbitrary data distribution. In addition, current fairness literature mainly focuses on
training an ML model on a potentially (im)balanced distribution and evaluate its performance in a
target domain measured by existing statistical fairness definitions [17, 20]. Since in practice these
selected target domains can encode certain forms of unfairness of their own (e.g., sampling bias),
the evaluation would be more informative if we can evaluate and certify fairness of an ML model
⇤

The first two authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

