Learning Optimal Flows for
Non-Equilibrium Importance Sampling

Yu Cao
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
yucaoyc@outlook.com
Eric Vanden-Eijnden
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
eve2@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Many applications in computational sciences and statistical inference require the
computation of expectations with respect to complex high-dimensional distributions
with unknown normalization constants, as well as the estimation of these constants.
Here we develop a method to perform these calculations based on generating
samples from a simple base distribution, transporting them by the flow generated
by a velocity field, and performing averages along these flowlines. This nonequilibrium importance sampling (NEIS) strategy is straightforward to implement
and can be used for calculations with arbitrary target distributions. On the theory
side, we discuss how to tailor the velocity field to the target and establish general
conditions under which the proposed estimator is a perfect estimator with zerovariance. We also draw connections between NEIS and approaches based on
mapping a base distribution onto a target via a transport map. On the computational
side, we show how to use deep learning to represent the velocity field by a neural
network and train it towards the zero variance optimum. These results are illustrated
numerically on benchmark examples (with dimension up to 10), where after training
the velocity field, the variance of the NEIS estimator is reduced by up to 6 orders
of magnitude than that of a vanilla estimator. We also compare the performances
of NEIS with those of Neal’s annealed importance sampling (AIS).

1

Introduction

Given a potential function U1 : Ω → R on the domain Ω ⊆ Rd , the main goal of this paper is to
evaluate
Z
Z1 :=
e−U1 (x) dx.
(1)
Ω

The calculations of such integrals arise in many applications from several scientific fields. For instance,
Z1 is known as the partition function in statistical physics [21], where it is used to characterize the
thermodynamic properties of a system with energy U1 , and as the evidence in Bayesian statistics,
where it is used for model selection [12].
When the dimension d of the domain Ω is large, standard numerical quadrature methods are inapplicable to (1) and the method of choice to estimate Z1 is Monte-Carlo sampling [22, 8]. This requires
expressing Z1 as an expectation, which can be done, e.g., by realizing that


Z1 = E0 e−U1 /ρ0 ,
(2)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

