Distributionally Robust Weighted k-Nearest
Neighbors
Shixiang Zhu
Carnegie Mellon University
shixianz@andrew.cmu.edu
Minghe Zhang
Georgia Institute of Technology
minghe_zhang@gatech.edu

Liyan Xie
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
xieliyan@cuhk.edu.cn
Rui Gao
University of Texas at Austin
rui.gao@mccombs.utexas.edu

Yao Xie
Georgia Institute of Technology
yao.xie@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
Learning a robust classifier from a few samples remains a key challenge in machine
learning. A major thrust of research has been focused on developing k-nearest
neighbor (k-NN) based algorithms combined with metric learning that captures
similarities between samples. When the samples are limited, robustness is especially crucial to ensure the generalization capability of the classifier. In this paper,
we study a minimax distributionally robust formulation of weighted k-nearest
neighbors, which aims to find the optimal weighted k-NN classifiers that hedge
against feature uncertainties. We develop an algorithm, Dr.k-NN, that efficiently
solves this functional optimization problem and features in assigning minimax
optimal weights to training samples when performing classification. These weights
are class-dependent, and are determined by the similarities of sample features
under the least favorable scenarios. The proposed framework can be shown to
be equivalent to a Lipschitz norm regularization problem. We also couple our
framework with neural-network-based feature embedding. We demonstrate the
competitive performance of our algorithm compared to the state-of-the-art in the
few-training-sample setting with various real-data experiments.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has been proven successful in data-intensive applications but is often hampered
when the data set is small. For example, in breast mammography diagnosis for breast cancer screening
[5], the diagnosis of the type of breast cancer requires specialized analysis by pathologists in a highly
time- and cost-consuming task and often leads to non-consensual results. As a result, labeled data in
digital pathology are generally very scarce; so do many other applications.
In this paper, we aim to tackle the general multi-class classification problem when only very few
training samples are available for each class [43]. Evidently, k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) algorithm
[3] is a natural idea to tackle this problem and shows promising empirical performances. Notable
contributions, including seminal work [19] and the follow-up non-linear version [34], go beyond the
vanilla k-NN and propose neighborhood component analysis (NCA). NCA learns a distance metric
that minimizes the expected leave-one-out classification error on the training data using a stochastic
neighbor selection rule. Some recent studies in few-shot learning utilize the limited training data
using a similar idea, such as matching network [41] and prototypical network [39]. They are primarily
based on distance-weighted k-NN, which classifies an unseen sample (aka. query) by a weighted
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

