On Embeddings for Numerical Features
in Tabular Deep Learning

Yury Gorishniy∗
Yandex

Ivan Rubachev
HSE, Yandex

Artem Babenko
Yandex

Abstract
Recently, Transformer-like deep architectures have shown strong performance on
tabular data problems. Unlike traditional models, e.g., MLP, these architectures
map scalar values of numerical features to high-dimensional embeddings before
mixing them in the main backbone. In this work, we argue that embeddings for
numerical features are an underexplored degree of freedom in tabular DL, which
allows constructing more powerful DL models and competing with gradient boosted
decision trees (GBDT) on some GBDT-friendly benchmarks (that is, where GBDT
outperforms conventional DL models). We start by describing two conceptually
different approaches to building embedding modules: the first one is based on a
piecewise linear encoding of scalar values, and the second one utilizes periodic
activations. Then, we empirically demonstrate that these two approaches can
lead to significant performance boosts compared to the embeddings based on
conventional blocks such as linear layers and ReLU activations. Importantly, we
also show that embedding numerical features is beneficial for many backbones, not
only for Transformers. Specifically, after proper embeddings, simple MLP-like
models can perform on par with the attention-based architectures. Overall, we
highlight embeddings for numerical features as an important design aspect with
good potential for further improvements in tabular DL. The source code is available
at https://github.com/Yura52/tabular-dl-num-embeddings.

1

Introduction

Tabular data problems are currently a final frontier for deep learning (DL) research. While the most
recent breakthroughs in NLP, vision, and speech are achieved by deep models [12], their success
in the tabular domain is not convincing yet. Despite a large number of proposed architectures for
tabular DL [2, 3, 13, 17, 21, 24, 31, 39, 40], the performance gap between them and the “shallow”
ensembles of decision trees, like GBDT, often remains significant [13, 36].
The recent line of works [13, 24, 39] reduce this performance gap by successfully adapting the
Transformer architecture [45] for the tabular domain. Compared to traditional models, like MLP
or ResNet, the proposed Transformer-like architectures have a specific way to handle numerical
features of the data. Namely, they map scalar values of numerical features to high-dimensional
embedding vectors, which are then mixed by the self-attention modules. Beyond transformers,
mapping numerical features to vectors was also employed in different forms in the click-through rate
(CTR) prediction problems [8, 14, 40]. Nevertheless, the literature is mostly focused on developing
more powerful backbones while keeping the design of embedding modules relatively simple. In
particular, the existing architectures [13, 14, 24, 39, 40] construct embeddings for numerical features
using quite restrictive parametric mappings, e.g., linear functions, which can lead to suboptimal
performance. In this work, we demonstrate that the embedding step has a substantial impact on the
model effectiveness, and its proper design can significantly improve tabular DL models.
∗

Correspondence to: yuragorishniy@icloud.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

