Local Identifiability of Deep ReLU Neural Networks:
the Theory
Joachim Bona-Pellissierab⇤ , François Malgouyresb , François Bachocb
Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse ; UMR 5219

Université de Toulouse ; CNRS
a

b

⇤

UT1, F-31042 Toulouse, France
UPS, F-31062 Toulouse Cedex 9, France

Corresponding author: Joachim Bona-Pellissier; joachim.bona-pellissier@univ-toulouse.fr

Abstract
Is a sample rich enough to determine, at least locally, the parameters of a neural
network? To answer this question, we introduce a new local parameterization of a
given deep ReLU neural network by fixing the values of some of its weights. This
allows us to define local lifting operators whose inverses are charts of a smooth
manifold of a high dimensional space. The function implemented by the deep
ReLU neural network composes the local lifting with a linear operator which
depends on the sample. We derive from this convenient representation a geometric
necessary and sufficient condition of local identifiability. Looking at tangent spaces,
the geometric condition provides: 1/ a sharp and testable necessary condition of
identifiability and 2/ a sharp and testable sufficient condition of local identifiability.
The validity of the conditions can be tested numerically using backpropagation and
matrix rank computations.

1

Introduction

1.1 Context and motivations
Neural networks are famous for their capacity to perform complex tasks in a wide variety of domains
such as image classification [20], object recognition [33, 34], speech recognition [17, 36, 16], natural
language processing [27, 26, 19], anomaly detection [32] or climate sciences [1].
The following properties of the parameters of neural networks have recently drawn attention: identifiability, inverse stability and stable recovery; from weaker to stronger. Let f✓ (X) be the outputs
of a network parameterized by the parameters ✓, for given inputs X. Global identifiability means
that if f✓ (X) = f✓˜(X) then ✓ = ˜
✓, up to identified invariances, for instance neuron permutation and
rescaling for ReLU networks. Local identifiability restricts this analysis for ✓ and ✓˜ sufficiently close.
Then, inverse stability means that the distance between ✓ and ✓˜ (up to invariances) is bounded by a
function of the distance between f✓ (X) and f✓˜(X). Finally, stable recovery consists in obtaining an
algorithm to approximately recover ✓ from a noisy version of f✓ (X), with quantitative guarantees. In
all cases, we must distinguish between statements for X being a finite list of inputs, in which case we
would like X to be small, and for infinite X (for instance determining ✓ from the entire function f✓ ).
Identifiability from finite X, which is the focus of this paper, is important for different reasons. In
the first place, model extraction attacks for neural networks have been a growing topic over the last
years. Indeed, some algorithms are able to recover in practice the parameters of a neural network
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

