Constants of motion network
M. F. Kasim & Y. H. Lim
Machine Discovery Ltd.
Oxford, United Kingdom
{muhammad, yi.heng}@machine-discovery.com

Abstract
The beauty of physics is that there is usually a conserved quantity in an alwayschanging system, known as the constant of motion. Finding the constant of motion
is important in understanding the dynamics of the system, but typically requires
mathematical proficiency and manual analytical work. In this paper, we present
a neural network that can simultaneously learn the dynamics of the system and
the constants of motion from data. By exploiting the discovered constants of
motion, it can produce better predictions on dynamics and can work on a wider
range of systems than Hamiltonian-based neural networks. In addition, the training
progresses of our method can be used as an indication of the number of constants
of motion in a system which could be useful in studying a novel physical system.

1

Introduction

Noether’s theorem [1] states that if a system has a symmetry, then there’s a constant of motion
corresponding to it. As it turns out, constants of motion play a significant role in understanding the
world around us and are ubiquitous in almost every aspect of physics. Among of the most prominent
examples are the conservation of energy, the conservation of momentum, as well as the conservation
of angular momentum.
Historically, constants of motion were discovered by doing analytical works from observational data
or from mathematical descriptions of the systems’ equations of motion. For example, the law of
conservation of energy was proposed by Châtelet based on Newton’s work on classical mechanics [2].
With the recent emergence of employing neural networks for scientific discovery and learning systems’
behaviour from observational data [3, 4, 5, 6], naturally it raises a question, "can we find constants of
motion of dynamical systems from their data and exploit them to make a better prediction?"
A large body of literature has been moving into this direction by learning the Hamiltonian [6, 7] or
its variations [8, 9] of a system. However, as most of the previous works focus on Hamiltonian and
its variations, they work well in conserving the Hamiltonian or energy. However, when the systems
have other constants of motion, the Hamiltonian-based works fail to discover and exploit those
quantities. Here we present the "Constant Of Motion nETwork" (COMET) that can discover constants
of motion of a system and exploit them to make a better prediction. In contrast to Hamiltonian-based
networks [6, 7, 8, 9], COMET is not constrained to Hamiltonian systems and its coordinate choice,
making it generally applicable to a wider range of systems as shown in Table 1. In addition, we also
found that the training progress of COMET can be used as an indication of how many independent
constants of motion there are in the system (see section 6) which could be a valuable hint in studying
a novel physical system. Our implementation and experiments can be found in the public domain1 .
1

https://github.com/machine-discovery/comet/

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

