Test-Time Training with Masked Autoencoders

Yossi Gandelsman∗
UC Berkeley

Yu Sun∗
UC Berkeley

Xinlei Chen
Meta AI

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Test-time training adapts to a new test distribution on the fly by optimizing a model
for each test input using self-supervision. In this paper, we use masked autoencoders for this one-sample learning problem. Empirically, our simple method
improves generalization on many visual benchmarks for distribution shifts. Theoretically, we characterize this improvement in terms of the bias-variance trade-off.

1

Introduction

Generalization is the central theme of supervised learning, and a hallmark of intelligence. While
most of the research focuses on generalization when the training and test data are drawn from the
same distribution, this is rarely the case for real world deployment [43], and is certainly not true for
environments where natural intelligence has emerged.
Most models today are fixed during deployment, even when the test distribution changes. As a
consequence, a trained model needs to be robust to all possible distribution shifts that could happen
in the future [22, 14, 46, 33]. This turns out to be quite difficult because being ready for all possible
futures limits the model’s capacity to be good at any particular one. But only one of these futures is
actually going to happen.
This motivates an alternative perspective on generalization: instead of being ready for everything,
one simply adapts to the future once it arrives. Test-time training (TTT) is one line of work that
takes this perspective [42, 32, 18, 1]. The key insight is that each test input gives a hint about the
test distribution. We modify the model at test time to take advantage of this hint by setting up a
one-sample learning problem.
The only issue is that the test input comes without a ground truth label. But we can generate labels
from the input itself thanks to self-supervised learning. At training time, TTT optimizes both the
main task (e.g. object recognition) and the self-supervised task. Then at test time, it adapts the model
with the self-supervised task alone for each test input, before making a prediction on the main task.
The choice of the self-supervised task is critical: it must be general enough to produce useful features
for the main task on a wide range of potential test distributions. The self-supervised task cannot
be too easy or too hard, otherwise the test input will not provide useful signal. What is a general
task at the right level of difficulty? We turn to a fundamental property shared by natural images –
spatial smoothness, i.e. the local redundancy of information in the xy space. Spatial autoencoding –
removing parts of the data, then predicting the removed content – forms the basis of some of the most
successful self-supervised tasks [47, 37, 19, 2, 49].
In this paper, we show that masked autoencoders (MAE) [19] is well-suited for test-time training.
Our simple method leads to substantial improvements on four datasets for object recognition. We also
provide a theoretical analysis of our method with linear models. Our code and models are available at
https://yossigandelsman.github.io/ttt_mae/index.html.
* Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

