Geoclidean: Few-Shot Generalization
in Euclidean Geometry

Joy Hsu
Computer Science
Stanford University
joycj@stanford.edu

Jiajun Wu
Computer Science
Stanford University
jiajunwu@cs.stanford.edu

Noah D. Goodman
Psychology and Computer Science
Stanford University
ngoodman@stanford.edu

Abstract
Euclidean geometry is among the earliest forms of mathematical thinking. While
the geometric primitives underlying its constructions, such as perfect lines and
circles, do not often occur in the natural world, humans rarely struggle to perceive
and reason with them. Will computer vision models trained on natural images
show the same sensitivity to Euclidean geometry? Here we explore these questions
by studying few-shot generalization in the universe of Euclidean geometry constructions. We introduce Geoclidean, a domain-specific language for Euclidean
geometry, and use it to generate two datasets of geometric concept learning tasks
for benchmarking generalization judgements of humans and machines. We find
that humans are indeed sensitive to Euclidean geometry and generalize strongly
from a few visual examples of a geometric concept. In contrast, low-level and
high-level visual features from standard computer vision models pretrained on
natural images do not support correct generalization. Thus Geoclidean represents a
novel few-shot generalization benchmark for geometric concept learning, where
the performance of humans and of AI models diverge. The Geoclidean framework
and dataset are publicly available for download.* †

1

Introduction

The built world we inhabit is constructed from geometric principles. Yet geometric primitives such as
perfect lines and circles, which are the foundations of human-made creations, are uncommon in the
natural world. Whether for efficiency or for visual aesthetics, whether innate or learned, humans are
sensitive to geometric forms and relations. This natural understanding of geometry enables a plethora
of applied skills such as design, construction, and visual reasoning; it also scaffolds the development
of rigorous mathematical thinking, historically and in modern education. Thus, understanding the
visually-grounded geometric universe is an important desideratum for machine vision systems.
Ancient Greek philosophers were amongst the earliest to formalize geometric notions, culminating
in Euclid’s geometry in the 4th century BC. With a compass and straight edge, Euclid’s axioms can
construct a geometric world that reflects an idealized, or Platonic, physical reality. We hypothesize
that Euclidean constructions are intrinsic to human visual reasoning. We thus build a library to define
and render such concepts, allowing systematic exploration of geometric generalization. In this paper,
we present Geoclidean, a domain-specific language (DSL) for describing Euclidean primitives and
construction rules. Sets of construction rules define concepts that can then be realized into infinitely
many rendered images capturing the same abstract geometric model.
* The Geoclidean framework can be found at https://github.com/joyhsu0504/geoclidean_framework.
†

Datasets can be found at https://downloads.cs.stanford.edu/viscam/Geoclidean/geoclidean.zip.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

