FedRolex: Model-Heterogeneous Federated Learning
with Rolling Sub-Model Extraction

Samiul Alam1,2 , Luyang Liu3 , Ming Yan4,1 , Mi Zhang2,1
1
Michigan State University, 2 The Ohio State University,
3
Google Research, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
alamsami@msu.edu, luyangliu@google.com, yanming@cuhk.edu.cn, mizhang.1@osu.edu

Abstract
Most cross-device federated learning (FL) studies focus on the model-homogeneous
setting where the global server model and local client models are identical. However, such constraint not only excludes low-end clients who would otherwise make
unique contributions to model training but also restrains clients from training large
models due to on-device resource bottlenecks. In this work, we propose FedRolex,
a partial training (PT)-based approach that enables model-heterogeneous FL and
can train a global server model larger than the largest client model. At its core,
FedRolex employs a rolling sub-model extraction scheme that allows different
parts of the global server model to be evenly trained, which mitigates the client
drift induced by the inconsistency between individual client models and server
model architectures. We show that FedRolex outperforms state-of-the-art PTbased model-heterogeneous FL methods (e.g. Federated Dropout) and reduces
the gap between model-heterogeneous and model-homogeneous FL, especially
under the large-model large-dataset regime. In addition, we provide theoretical
statistical analysis on its advantage over Federated Dropout and evaluate FedRolex
on an emulated real-world device distribution to show that FedRolex can enhance
the inclusiveness of FL and boost the performance of low-end devices that would
otherwise not benefit from FL. Our code is available at: https://github.com/AIoTMLSys-Lab/FedRolex.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a machine learning paradigm that trains models from distributed clients
with private data under the coordination of a central server [1, 2]. In this work, we focus on crossdevice FL where clients are usually resource-constrained edge devices. The majority of existing
cross-device FL studies focus on the model-homogeneous setting [3–6], in which the server model
and the client models across all the participating client devices are identical. However, modelhomogeneous FL are confronted with two fundamental constraints: (1) device heterogeneity is
a more realistic consideration when deploying FL systems in real-world applications: different
client devices could have very diverse on-device resources and are only capable of training models
with capacities that match their on-device resources. Having the same model on all the devices
would, unfortunately, exclude clients with low-end devices who would otherwise make unique
contributions to model training from their own local data; (2) state-of-the-art machine learning has
moved towards large models [7] such as Transformer [8]. Restricting server and client models to
be the same inevitably causes model-homogeneous FL to fail to train such large models due to the
resource constraint of client devices.
To relax the fundamental constraints of model-homogeneous FL, model-heterogeneous FL was
proposed where heterogeneous models with different capacities across the server and the clients are
trained during the federated training process. One primary challenge in model-heterogeneous FL is
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

