Self-Supervised Learning Through Efference Copies

Franz Scherr1 *
Huawei Technologies

franz.scherr@huawei.com

Qinghai Guo2
Huawei Technologies

guoqinghai@huawei.com

Timoleon Moraitis1 *
Huawei Technologies

timoleon.moraitis@huawei.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods aim to exploit the abundance of unlabelled
data for machine learning (ML), however the underlying principles are often
method-specific. An SSL framework derived from biological first principles of
embodied learning could unify the various SSL methods, help elucidate learning
in the brain, and possibly improve ML. SSL commonly transforms each training
datapoint into a pair of views, uses the knowledge of this pairing as a positive (i.e.
non-contrastive) self-supervisory sign, and potentially opposes it to unrelated, (i.e.
contrastive) negative examples. Here, we show that this type of self-supervision is
an incomplete implementation of a concept from neuroscience, the Efference Copy
(EC). Specifically, the brain also transforms the environment through efference, i.e.
motor commands, however it sends to itself an EC of the full commands, i.e. more
than a mere SSL sign. In addition, its action representations are likely egocentric.
From such a principled foundation we formally recover and extend SSL methods
such as SimCLR, BYOL, and ReLIC under a common theoretical framework,
i.e. Self-supervision Through Efference Copies (S-TEC). Empirically, S-TEC
restructures meaningfully the within- and between-class representations. This
manifests as improvement in recent strong SSL baselines in image classification,
segmentation, object detection, and in audio. These results hypothesize a testable
positive influence from the brain’s motor outputs onto its sensory representations.

1

Introduction

Deep Learning (DL) has drawn inspiration from Neuroscience and also offers models for understanding aspects of the brain (Richards et al., 2019). DL has been extremely successful, largely
owing to labelled big datasets. However, such labelling is a costly procedure carried out by human
supervisors. Fully unsupervised ML techniques do exist, however they rarely reach the performance
of supervised learning (Moraitis et al., 2022; Journé et al., 2022). On the other hand, recently, a
category of algorithms that are self-supervised has emerged. In self-supervised learning (SSL), the
model itself generates the supervisory signal, so that human supervision is not needed, and then uses
that signal for supervised learning. Recent SSL algorithms generate the supervisory signal by using
pairs of inputs where it is known whether they are of the same or of a different instance, therefore
self-generating positive or negative labels. Examples can be associated as being positive, e.g. based
on their temporal proximity, if the input is in a sequential domain (Oord et al., 2018). Advanced SSL
algorithms generate themselves the positive pairs of inputs, by augmenting the training dataset (He
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a; Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020; Mitrovic et al., 2021). Further
improving these algorithms even has the potential to outperform supervised learning (Tomasev et al.,
2022), because more information exists in the comparison of complete input pairs than in individual
human-labelled examples. Therefore, improving SSL consists in devising representation-learning
methods that better capture that information. However, conceptual frameworks that unify these
1

Huawei Zurich Research Center, Switzerland, 2 Huawei ACS Lab, Shenzhen, China, *Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

