Star Temporal Classification: Sequence Modeling with
Partially Labeled Data

Vineel Pratap
Meta AI

Awni Hannun∗
Zoom AI

Gabriel Synnaeve
Meta AI

Ronan Collobert∗
Meta AI

Abstract
We develop an algorithm which can learn from partially labeled and unsegmented
sequential data. Most sequential loss functions, such as Connectionist Temporal
Classification (CTC), break down when many labels are missing. We address this
problem with Star Temporal Classification (STC) which uses a special star token
to allow alignments which include all possible tokens whenever a token could be
missing. We express STC as the composition of weighted finite-state transducers
(WFSTs) and use GTN (a framework for automatic differentiation with WFSTs)
to compute gradients. We perform extensive experiments on automatic speech
recognition. These experiments show that STC can close the performance gap with
supervised baseline to about 1% WER when up to 70% of the labels are missing.
We also perform experiments in handwriting recognition to show that our method
easily applies to other sequence classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Applications of machine learning in settings with little or no labeled data are growing rapidly. Much
prior work in temporal classification focuses on semi-supervised or self-supervised learning [6, 37].
Instead, we focus on weakly supervised learning, in which the learner receives incomplete labels
for the examples in the data set. Examples include multi-instance learning [1, 44], and partial-label
learning [18, 9, 25]. In our case, we assume that each example in the training set is partially labeled,
as in Figure 1: neither the number of missing words nor their positions in the label sequence are
known in advance.
Input:
Original Label: seen from an airplane the island looks like a big spider
Partial Label: from airplane the a spider

Figure 1: An example of speech with a complete and a partial label.
Partial labeling problem could arise in many practical scenarios. In semi-supervised learning or
transfer learning of sequence labeling tasks, we can only consider high confidence tokens in the label
sequence and discard rest of the tokens. These labels with incomplete tokens can be treated as partial
labels. When transcribing a dataset, we can randomly label parts of the dataset and use them as partial
labels, at a much lower cost than transcribing the full dataset. We can also consider semi-automatic
ways to label a dataset. Restoring damaged texts [2, 3] where some of the writing is illegible could be
considered as a partial labeling problem. We also often face partial alignment problem [5] in practice
∗

Currently at Apple. Correspondence to Vineel Pratap ⟨vineelkpratap@meta.com⟩.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

