Reinforced Genetic Algorithm for Structure-based
Drug Design

Tianfan Fu1∗ , Wenhao Gao2∗ , Connor W. Coley2,3 , Jimeng Sun4,5 ,
Department of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
2
Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
3
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
5
Carle Illinois College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
∗
Equal Contributions
1

tfu42@gatech.edu, {whgao,ccoley}@mit.edu, jimeng@illinois.edu

Abstract
Structure-based drug design (SBDD) aims to discover drug candidates by finding
molecules (ligands) that bind tightly to a disease-related protein (targets), which is
the primary approach to computer-aided drug discovery. Recently, applying deep
generative models for three-dimensional (3D) molecular design conditioned on
protein pockets to solve SBDD has attracted much attention, but their formulation
as probabilistic modeling often leads to unsatisfactory optimization performance.
On the other hand, traditional combinatorial optimization methods such as genetic
algorithms (GA) have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in various molecular optimization tasks. However, they do not utilize protein target structure to
inform design steps but rely on a random-walk-like exploration, which leads to
unstable performance and no knowledge transfer between different tasks despite
the similar binding physics. To achieve a more stable and efficient SBDD, we
propose Reinforced Genetic Algorithm (RGA) that uses neural models to prioritize
the profitable design steps and suppress random-walk behavior. The neural models take the 3D structure of the targets and ligands as inputs and are pre-trained
using native complex structures to utilize the knowledge of the shared binding
physics from different targets and then fine-tuned during optimization. We conduct thorough empirical studies on optimizing binding affinity to various disease
targets and show that RGA outperforms the baselines in terms of docking scores
and is more robust to random initializations. The ablation study also indicates
that the training on different targets helps improve the performance by leveraging
the shared underlying physics of the binding processes. The code is available at
https://github.com/futianfan/reinforced-genetic-algorithm.

1

Introduction

Rapid drug discovery that requires less time and cost is of significant interest in pharmaceutical
science. Structure-based drug design (SBDD) [1] that leverages the three-dimensional (3D) structures
of the disease-related proteins to design drug candidates is one primary approach to accelerate the
drug discovery processes with physical simulation and data-driven modeling. According to the lock
and key model [2], the molecules that bind tighter to a disease target are more likely to expose
bioactivity against the disease, which has been verified experimentally [3]. As AlphaFold2 has
provided accurate predictions to most human proteins [4, 5], SBDD has a tremendous opportunity to
discover new drugs for new targets that we cannot model before [6].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

