Policy Gradient With Serial Markov Chain Reasoning
Edoardo Cetin
Department of Engineering
King’s College London
edoardo.cetin@kcl.ac.uk

Oya Celiktutan
Department of Engineering
King’s College London
oya.celiktutan@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a new framework that performs decision-making in reinforcement
learning (RL) as an iterative reasoning process. We model agent behavior as
the steady-state distribution of a parameterized reasoning Markov chain (RMC),
optimized with a new tractable estimate of the policy gradient. We perform action
selection by simulating the RMC for enough reasoning steps to approach its steadystate distribution. We show our framework has several useful properties that are
inherently missing from traditional RL. For instance, it allows agent behavior to
approximate any continuous distribution over actions by parameterizing the RMC
with a simple Gaussian transition function. Moreover, the number of reasoning
steps to reach convergence can scale adaptively with the difficulty of each action
selection decision and can be accelerated by re-using past solutions. Our resulting
algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance in popular Mujoco and DeepMind
Control benchmarks, both for proprioceptive and pixel-based tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has the potential to provide a general and effective solution to many
modern challenges. Recently, this class of methods achieved numerous impressive milestones in
different problem domains, such as games [1–3], robotics [4–6], and other meaningful real-world
applications [7–9]. However, all these achievements relied on massive amounts of data, controlled
environments, and domain-specific tuning. These commonalities highlight some of the current
practical limitations that prevent RL to be widely applicable [10].
In the deep RL framework, practitioners train agents with
the end goal of obtaining optimal behavior. Traditionally,
agent behavior is modeled with feed-forward policies regressing from any state to a corresponding distribution
over actions. Such formulation yields practical training objectives in both off-policy [11–13] and on-policy settings
[14–16]. However, we identify three inherent properties
of this rigid representation of behavior that could considerably impact expressivity and efficiency in continuous
control tasks. First, agent behavior is restricted to a class
of tractable distributions, which might fail to capture the
necessary complexity and multi-modality of a task. Second, the policy performs a fixed reasoning process with
a feed-forward computation, which potency cannot adapt Figure 1: Depiction of agent decisionmaking with serial Markov chain reasoning.
to the varying complexity of individual action selection
problems. Third, decision-making is performed every time from scratch, without re-using any past
information that might still inform and facilitate the current action selection problem.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

