Interaction Modeling with Multiplex Attention

Fan-Yun Sun
Stanford University

Isaac Kauvar
Stanford University

Mykel Kochenderfer
Stanford University

Ruohan Zhang
Stanford University

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Jiachen Li
Stanford University

Nick Haber
Stanford University

Abstract
Modeling multi-agent systems requires understanding how agents interact. Such
systems are often difficult to model because they can involve a variety of types
of interactions that layer together to drive rich social behavioral dynamics. Here
we introduce a method for accurately modeling multi-agent systems. We present
Interaction Modeling with Multiplex Attention (IMMA)1 , a forward prediction
model that uses a multiplex latent graph to represent multiple independent types of
interactions and attention to account for relations of different strengths. We also
introduce Progressive Layer Training, a training strategy for this architecture. We
show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art models in trajectory forecasting
and relation inference, spanning three multi-agent scenarios: social navigation,
cooperative task achievement, and team sports. We further demonstrate that our
approach can improve zero-shot generalization and allows us to probe how different
interactions impact agent behavior.

1

Introduction

Modeling multi-agent systems is important for a wide variety of applications, including self-driving
cars, crowd navigation, and human-machine collaboration. The dynamics of multi-agent systems can
be challenging to model as they are usually governed by various independent types of interactions.
Consider modeling crowd navigation at a social gathering, where agents’ behaviors might be governed
by at least two types of interactions: target destinations (e.g. a person trying to meet up with a friend)
and collision avoidance (e.g. navigating a busy sidewalk). In social scenarios like this, humans often
appear to navigate and make predictions based on estimated high-level intentions and relations among
the other people [16, 45, 46]. Motivated by this observation, we aim to build a forecasting model for
multi-agent systems that infers high-level abstractions in the form of graphs, entirely through the task
of predicting agent trajectories.
Leading approaches in modeling multi-agent systems, such as Neural Relational Inference (NRI) [22],
Relational Forward Model (RFM) [8], and their extensions [12, 27], use graph neural networks
(GNNs) to infer edge types for every pair of entities in the interacting systems. However, this
inductive bias does not explicitly handle the multiple layers of interactions present in social multiagent systems and, as shown empirically in Section 4, has led to at least two shortcomings: reduced
performance on long-term predictions and decreased interpretability. Our approach, Interaction
Modeling with Multiplex Attention (IMMA), overcomes these issues by using a multiplex graph2
latent structure to model multiple interaction types, with attention graph layers that can capture the
strength of relations.
1

Project website: https://cs.stanford.edu/ sunfanyun/imma/
A multiplex graph is a graph with multiple layers. Nodes are replicated over layers, but each layer can have
different connectivity [14].
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

