A Reparametrization-Invariant Sharpness Measure
Based on Information Geometry

Cheongjae Jang
Hanyang University
cjjang@hanyang.ac.kr

Sungyoon Lee
Korea Institute for Advanced Study
sungyoonlee@kias.re.kr

Frank C. Park
Seoul National University
Saige Research
fcp@snu.ac.kr

Yung-Kyun Noh
Hanyang University
Korea Institute for Advanced Study
nohyung@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
It has been observed that the generalization performance of neural networks correlates with the sharpness of their loss landscape. Dinh et al. (2017) [8] have observed
that existing formulations of sharpness measures fail to be invariant with respect to
scaling and reparametrization. While some scale-invariant measures have recently
been proposed, reparametrization-invariant measures are still lacking. Moreover,
they often do not provide any theoretical insights into generalization performance
nor lead to practical use to improve the performance. Based on an information
geometric analysis of the neural network parameter space, in this paper we propose
a reparametrization-invariant sharpness measure that captures the change in loss
with respect to changes in the probability distribution modeled by neural networks,
rather than with respect to changes in the parameter values. We reveal some theoretical connections of our measure to generalization performance. In particular,
experiments confirm that using our measure as a regularizer in neural network
training significantly improves performance.

1

Introduction

From recent discoveries in deep learning, it has been conjectured that the generalization performance
of neural networks correlates with the sharpness of their loss landscape. In particular, lower generalization performance of large-batch training of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been attributed
to its convergence to sharper minima [22, 49], and several optimization methods have shown better
generalization performance by actively finding solutions with lower sharpness [7, 19, 4, 43, 12, 24].
Minimum description length (MDL)-based arguments [16, 17] and the generalization upper bound of
the PAC-Bayes theory for neural networks [10] also suggest that the flatter the loss landscape, the
better the generalization performance. Furthermore, in [21, 32], measures based on the sharpness
concept show better performance in predicting the generalization performance of models among
various generalization measures considered in the past including the margin [5] and norm [34, 33].
Various measures for sharpness and flatness have been proposed in the literature. Hochreiter &
Schmidhuber (1997) [17] propose the concept of ‘flat minima,’ in which the flatness of a minimum
is interpreted as the volume of the connected region in the parameter space over which the loss has
approximately similar values. Similarly, the sharpness has often been measured by the maximum loss
value (inside a Euclidean ball) near the minimum [22] or by the spectral norm of the Hessian at the
minimum [49].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

