Efficient Scheduling of Data Augmentation
for Deep Reinforcement Learning

Byungchan Ko∗
NALBI
kbc@nalbi.ai

Jungseul Ok
GSAI, POSTECH
jungseul@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
In deep reinforcement learning (RL), data augmentation is widely considered as
a tool to induce a set of useful priors about semantic consistency and to improve
sample efficiency and generalization performance. However, even when the prior
is useful for generalization, distilling it to RL agent often interferes with RL
training and degenerates sample efficiency. Meanwhile, the agent is forgetful of
the prior due to the non-stationary nature of RL. These observations suggest two
extreme schedules of distillation: (i) over the entire training; or (ii) only at the
end. Hence, we devise a stand-alone network distillation method to inject the
consistency prior at any time (even after RL), and a simple yet efficient framework
to automatically schedule the distillation. Specifically, the proposed framework first
focuses on mastering train environments regardless of generalization by adaptively
deciding which or no augmentation to be used for the training. After this, we
add the distillation to extract the remaining benefits for generalization from all the
augmentations, which requires no additional new samples. In our experiments, we
demonstrate the utility of the proposed framework, in particular, that considers
postponing the augmentation to the end of RL training. https://github.com/kbc6723/es-da

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) aims at finding a neural network to represent policy or value
functions taking raw observation as input, of which the most common form in practice is visual
data or images of high-dimensionality, e.g., video games [23], board games [29, 28], and robot
controls [32, 18]. RL handling high-dimensional input often suffers from poor sample efficiency and
generalization capability, mainly due to the curse of dimensionality [4, 15]. To overcome these issues,
it has been widely considered to augment data based on prior knowledge that a set of transformations
preserve the meaning or context of input observations, e.g., cropping out unimportant parts of images,
and changing colors [20, 19, 21, 14]. On one hand, RL agent can be directly fed with the original and
augmented data so that it implicitly learns a representation with the prior and improves the sample
efficiency and generalization [20]. On the other hand, the prior knowledge in data augmentation can
be explicitly distilled via a self-supervised learning, which introduces additional regularization to
ensure consistency between responses to original and augmented inputs [25, 14].
However, data augmentation shows highly task-dependent effect in RL, and it is prone to generate
severe interference with the training even when it truly conveys a useful prior to train and test environments [20, 25, 14]. We address the problem of alleviating the interference between data augmentation
and RL training to improve sample efficiency for acquainting train tasks, and generalization capability
for unseen test environments. This problem in (online) RL is more critical and challenging than that
in supervised learning (SL) since the objective function and data distribution are time-varying in RL,
∗

This work was done while Byungchan Ko studied in GSAI, POSTECH.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

