FlowHMM: Flow-based continuous hidden Markov
models
Paweł Lorek
Mathematical Institute
University of Wrocław
Tooploox
pawel.lorek@math.uni.wroc.pl

Rafał Nowak
Institute of Computer Science
University of Wrocław
Tooploox
rafal.nowak@cs.uni.wroc.pl

Tomasz Trzciński
Warsaw University of Technology
Jagiellonian University of Cracow
Tooploox, IDEAS NCBR
tomasz.trzcinski@pw.edu.pl

Maciej Zi˛eba
Department of Artificial Intelligence
Wrocław University of Science and Technology
Tooploox
maciej.zieba@pwr.edu.pl

Abstract
Continuous hidden Markov models (HMMs) assume that observations are generated from a mixture of Gaussian densities, limiting their ability to model more
complex distributions. In this work, we address this shortcoming and propose
novel continuous HMM models, dubbed FlowHMMs, that enable learning general
continuous observation densities without constraining them to follow a Gaussian
distribution or their mixtures. To that end, we leverage deep flow-based architectures that model complex, non-Gaussian functions and propose two variants of
training a FlowHMM model. The first one, based on gradient-based technique, can
be applied directly to continuous multidimensional data, yet its application to larger
data sequences remains computationally expensive. Therefore, we also present
a second approach to training our FlowHMM that relies on the co-occurrence
matrix of discretized observations and considers the joint distribution of pairs of
co-observed values, hence rendering the training time independent of the training
sequence length. As a result, we obtain a model that can be flexibly adapted to the
characteristics and dimensionality of the data. We perform a variety of experiments
in which we compare both training strategies with a baseline of Gaussian mixture
models. We show, that in terms of quality of the recovered probability distribution,
accuracy of prediction of hidden states, and likelihood of unseen data, our approach
outperforms the standard Gaussian methods.

1

Introduction

Hidden Markov models (HMMs) are a standard tool in modeling and analysis of time series data.
Although structurally simple, they have been successfully applied in a wide variety of applications, ranging from finance [1], speech recognition [2] to computational biology [3] and climate
modeling [4].
HMMs are capable of solving complex problems, but their adoption is limited due to several reasons.
First, the training process of HMMs typically relies on the Baum-Welch algorithm [5] — a particular
case of expectation-maximization (EM) method, which offers a relatively slow convergence to a local
maximum. To reduce this burden, several discrete HHMs introduce the so-called co-occurrence matrix
that aggregates information about the probability of jointly observed values in the chain and estimate
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

