Sym-NCO: Leveraging Symmetricity for
Neural Combinatorial Optimization

Minsu Kim Junyoung Park Jinkyoo Park
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Dept. Industrial & Systems Engineering
{min-su, Junyoungpark, jinkyoo.park}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-based combinatorial optimization (CO) methods (i.e., DRL-NCO) have shown significant merit over the conventional CO solvers
as DRL-NCO is capable of learning CO solvers less relying on problem-specific expert domain knowledge (heuristic method) and supervised labeled data (supervised
learning method). This paper presents a novel training scheme, Sym-NCO, which
is a regularizer-based training scheme that leverages universal symmetricities in
various CO problems and solutions. Leveraging symmetricities such as rotational
and reflectional invariance can greatly improve the generalization capability of
DRL-NCO because it allows the learned solver to exploit the commonly shared
symmetricities in the same CO problem class. Our experimental results verify that
our Sym-NCO greatly improves the performance of DRL-NCO methods in four CO
tasks, including the traveling salesman problem (TSP), capacitated vehicle routing
problem (CVRP), prize collecting TSP (PCTSP), and orienteering problem (OP),
without utilizing problem-specific expert domain knowledge. Remarkably, SymNCO outperformed not only the existing DRL-NCO methods but also a competitive
conventional solver, the iterative local search (ILS), in PCTSP at 240× faster speed.
Our source code is available at https://github.com/alstn12088/Sym-NCO.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs), mathematical optimization problems on discrete input
space, have been used to solve numerous valuable applications, including vehicle routing problems
(VRPs) [1, 2], drug discovery [3, 4], and semi-conductor design [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, finding
an optimal solution to COP is difficult due to its NP-hardness. Therefore, computing near-optimal
solutions fast is essential from a practical point of view.
Conventionally, COPs are solved by integer program (IP) solvers or hand-crafted (meta) heuristics. Recent advances in computing infrastructures and deep learning have conceived the field
of neural combinatorial optimization (NCO), a deep learning-based COP solving strategy. Depending on the training scheme, NCO methods are generally classified into supervised learning
[10, 11, 12, 13, 14] and reinforcement learning (RL) [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27].
Depending on the solution generation scheme, NCO methods are also classified into improvement [17, 16, 15, 28, 18, 19, 25] and constructive heuristics [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27]. Among
the NCO approaches, deep RL (DRL)-based constructive heuristics (i.e., DRL-NCO) are favored
over conventional approaches for two major reasons. First, RL can be applied to train the NCO
model in less explorered CO tasks because training RL does not require domain expert knowledge and supervised labels from a verified solver. Second, it is easy to produce qualified feasible solutions because the constructive process can easily avoid constraint-violated actions [21].
Despite the strength of DRL-NCO, there exists a performance gap between the state-of-the-art
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

