Near-Optimal Collaborative Learning in Bandits

Clémence Réda
Université Paris Cité,
Inserm, NeuroDiderot,
F-75019 Paris, France
clemence.reda@inria.fr

Sattar Vakili
MediaTek Research,
Cambourne Business Park,
CB23 6DW, United Kingdom
sattar.vakili@mtkresearch.com

Emilie Kaufmann
Université de Lille,
CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille,
UMR 9189 CRIStAL,
F-59000 Lille, France
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr

Abstract
This paper introduces a general multi-agent bandit model in which each agent is
facing a finite set of arms and may communicate with other agents through a central
controller in order to identify –in pure exploration– or play –in regret minimization–
its optimal arm. The twist is that the optimal arm for each agent is the arm with
largest expected mixed reward, where the mixed reward of an arm is a weighted
sum of the rewards of this arm for all agents. This makes communication between
agents often necessary. This general setting allows to recover and extend several
recent models for collaborative bandit learning, including the recently proposed
federated learning with personalization [30]. In this paper, we provide new lower
bounds on the sample complexity of pure exploration and on the regret. We then
propose a near-optimal algorithm for pure exploration. This algorithm is based on
phased elimination with two novel ingredients: a data-dependent sampling scheme
within each phase, aimed at matching a relaxation of the lower bound.

1

Introduction

Collaborative learning is a general machine learning paradigm in which a group of agents collectively
train a learning algorithm. Some recent works have investigated how agents can efficiently perform
sequential decision making in a collaborative context [36]. In particular, Shi et al. propose an
interesting setting to tackle collaborative bandit learning when some level of personalization is
required [30]. Personalization leads to the twist that each agent should play the best arm in a mixed
model which is obtained as a combination of her local model with the local model of other agents.
In this work, we introduce a more general model retaining this idea, that we call the weighted
collaborative bandit model.
In this model, there are M agents and a finite number of K arms. When agent m samples arm k
at time t, she gets to observe a local reward Xk,m (t) , which is drawn from a 1-sub-Gaussian 1
distribution of mean µk,m , independently from past observations and from other agents’ observations.
However, this agent does not necessarily seek to maximize her local reward, but rather some notion
of mixed reward, related to the utility of that arm for other agents. More specifically, we assume
that agents share a known weight matrix W ∶= (wn,m )n,m ∈ [0, 1]M ×M , such that ∑n∈[M ] wn,m = 1
1

A random variable X is said to be σ 2 -sub-Gaussian if, for any λ ∈ R, ln(E[eλ(X−E[X]) ]) ≤ σ 2 λ2 /2.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

