Minimax Optimal Algorithms for
Fixed-Budget Best Arm Identification

Junpei Komiyama
New York University
New York, NY, United States
junpei@komiyama.info

Taira Tsuchiya
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
tsuchiya@sys.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Junya Honda
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
honda@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
We consider the fixed-budget best arm identification problem where the goal
is to find the arm of the largest mean with a fixed number of samples. It is
known that the probability of misidentifying the best arm is exponentially
small to the number of rounds. However, limited characterizations have been
discussed on the rate (exponent) of this value. In this paper, we characterize
the minimax optimal rate as a result of an optimization over all possible
go
parameters. We introduce two rates, Rgo and R∞
, corresponding to lower
bounds on the probability of misidentification, each of which is associated
with a proposed algorithm. The rate Rgo is associated with Rgo -tracking,
which can be efficiently implemented by a neural network and is shown to
outperform existing algorithms. However, this rate requires a nontrivial
condition to be achievable. To address this issue, we introduce the second
go
rate R∞
. We show that this rate is indeed achievable by introducing a
conceptual algorithm called delayed optimal tracking (DOT).

1

Introduction

We consider K-armed best arm identification problem with T samples. In this problem,
each arm i ∈ [K] = {1, 2, . . . , K} is associated with (unknown) distribution Pi ∈ P for some
class of distributions P. Upon choosing arm i, the forecaster observes reward X(t), which is
drawn independently from Pi . The forecaster then tries to identify (one of) the best arm1
I ∗ = arg maxi µi with the largest mean µ∗ = maxi µi for µi = EX∼Pi [X]. The problem2 is
called the best arm identification (BAI, Audibert et al. (2010)), or the ranking and selection
(R&S, Hong et al. (2021)).
To this aim, the forecaster uses some algorithm that would adaptively choose an arm based
on its history of rewards. At each round t, the algorithm chooses one of the arms I(t) ∈ [K]
and receives the corresponding reward X(t). After the T -th round, the algorithm outputs a
recommendation arm J(T ) ∈ [K], which corresponds to an estimator of the best arm. The
probability of misidentification is expressed by P[J(T ) ∈
/ I ∗ ], which will be referred to as
1
We use I ∗ = I ∗ (P ) ⊂ [K] as the set of best arms and i∗ = i∗ (P ) ∈ I ∗ (P ) as one of them (ties
are broken in an arbitrary way). These differences do not matter much in this paper.
2
See Section 1.3 regarding the related work on BAI and R&S.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

