Between Stochastic and Adversarial Online Convex
Optimization: Improved Regret Bounds via
Smoothness
Sarah Sachs
University of Amsterdam
Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics
s.c.sachs@uva.nl

Hédi Hadiji
University of Amsterdam
Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics
hedi.hadiji@gmail.com

Tim van Erven
University of Amsterdam
Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics
tim@timvanerven.nl
Cristóbal Guzmán
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Eng.
Facultad de Matemáticas and Escuela de Ingeniería
crguzmanp@mat.uc.cl

Abstract
Stochastic and adversarial data are two widely studied settings in online learning.
But many optimization tasks are neither i.i.d. nor fully adversarial, which makes
it of fundamental interest to get a better theoretical understanding of the world
between these extremes. In this work, we establish novel regret bounds for online
convex optimization in a setting that interpolates between stochastic i.i.d. and
fully adversarial losses. By exploiting smoothness of the expected losses, these
bounds replace dependence on the maximum gradient length by the variance of
the gradients, which was previously known only for linear losses. In addition,
they weaken the i.i.d. assumption by allowing, for example, adversarially poisoned
rounds, which were previously considered in the expert and bandit setting. Our
results extend this to the online convex optimization framework. In the fully i.i.d.
case, our bounds match the rates one would expect from results in stochastic
acceleration, and in the fully adversarial case, they gracefully deteriorate to match
the minimax regret. We further provide lower bounds showing that our regret upper
bounds are tight for all intermediate regimes in terms of the stochastic variance and
the adversarial variation of the loss gradients.

1

Introduction

Two of the main approaches for solving convex optimization problems under uncertain data are
stochastic convex optimization (SCO) [21, 30] and online convex optimization (OCO) [37]. These
two models are very different in their assumptions and goals, despite the fact that they share many
techniques. In SCO it is assumed that the loss functions follow an independent, identically distributed
(i.i.d.) process, and the goal is to minimize the excess risk, which is the optimization error under the
expected loss. By contrast, in OCO the losses can be chosen adversarially and the goal is to minimize
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

