A framework for bilevel optimization that enables
stochastic and global variance reduction algorithms

Mathieu Dagréou
Inria, CEA
Université Paris-Saclay
Palaiseau, France
mathieu.dagreou@inria.fr

Pierre Ablin
CNRS
Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL-University
Paris, France
pierre.ablin@cnrs.fr

Samuel Vaiter
CNRS
Université Côte d’Azur, LJAD
Nice, France
samuel.vaiter@cnrs.fr

Thomas Moreau
Inria, CEA
Université Paris-Saclay
Palaiseau, France
thomas.moreau@inria.fr

Abstract
Bilevel optimization, the problem of minimizing a value function which involves
the arg-minimum of another function, appears in many areas of machine learning.
In a large scale empirical risk minimization setting where the number of samples is
huge, it is crucial to develop stochastic methods, which only use a few samples at a
time to progress. However, computing the gradient of the value function involves
solving a linear system, which makes it difficult to derive unbiased stochastic
estimates. To overcome this problem we introduce a novel framework, in which
the solution of the inner problem, the solution of the linear system, and the main
variable evolve at the same time. These directions are written as a sum, making it
straightforward to derive unbiased estimates. The simplicity of our approach allows
us to develop global variance reduction algorithms, where the dynamics of all
variables is subject to variance reduction. We demonstrate that SABA, an adaptation
of the celebrated SAGA algorithm in our framework, has O( T1 ) convergence rate,
and that it achieves linear convergence under Polyak-Łojasciewicz assumption.
This is the first stochastic algorithm for bilevel optimization that verifies either of
these properties. Numerical experiments validate the usefulness of our method.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization is attracting more and more attention in the machine learning community thanks
to its wide range of applications. Typical examples are hyperparameters selection [5, 38, 17, 6],
data augmentation [11, 42], implicit deep learning [3] or neural architecture search [33]. Bilevel
optimization aims at minimizing a function whose value depends on the result of another optimization
problem:
min h(x) = F (z ∗ (x), x), such that z ∗ (x) ∈ arg minp G(z, x) ,
(1)
x∈Rd

z∈R

where F and G are two real valued functions defined on Rp × Rd . G is called the inner function, F
is the outer function and h is the value function. Similarly, z is the inner variable and x is the outer
variable. In most cases, the function z ∗ can only be approximated by an optimization algorithm,
which makes bilevel optimization problems challenging. Under appropriate hypotheses, the function
h is differentiable, and the chain rule and implicit function theorem give for any x ∈ Rd
∇h(x) = ∇2 F (z ∗ (x), x) + ∇221 G(z ∗ (x), x)v ∗ (x) ,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

(2)

