Composite Feature Selection Using Deep Ensembles

Fergus Imrie∗
University of California, Los Angeles
imrie@ucla.edu

Alexander Norcliffe∗
University of Cambridge
alin2@cam.ac.uk

Pietro Liò
University of Cambridge
pl219@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
University of California, Los Angeles
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
In many real world problems, features do not act alone but in combination with
each other. For example, in genomics, diseases might not be caused by any single
mutation but require the presence of multiple mutations. Prior work on feature
selection either seeks to identify individual features or can only determine relevant
groups from a predefined set. We investigate the problem of discovering groups
of predictive features without predefined grouping. To do so, we define predictive
groups in terms of linear and non-linear interactions between features. We introduce
a novel deep learning architecture that uses an ensemble of feature selection models
to find predictive groups, without requiring candidate groups to be provided. The
selected groups are sparse and exhibit minimum overlap. Furthermore, we propose
a new metric to measure similarity between discovered groups and the ground
truth. We demonstrate the utility of our model on multiple synthetic tasks and
semi-synthetic chemistry datasets, where the ground truth structure is known, as
well as an image dataset and a real-world cancer dataset.

1

Introduction

Feature selection is a key problem permeating statistics, machine learning and broader science.
Typically in high-dimensional datasets, the majority of features will not be responsible for the target
response and thus an important goal is to identify which variables are truly predictive. For example,
in healthcare there may be many features (such as age, sex, medical history, etc.) that could be
considered, while only a small subset might in fact be relevant for predicting the likelihood of
developing a specific disease. By eliminating irrelevant variables, feature selection algorithms can be
used to drive discovery, improve model generalisation/robustness, and improve interpretability [18].
However, features often do not act alone but instead in combination. In genetics, for instance, it has
been noted that understanding the origins of many diseases may require methods able to identify
more complex genetic models than single variants [65]. More generally, often there are multiple
groups of variables which act (somewhat) independently of each other. For example, in medicine
or biology, a number of diseases can manifest from different mechanisms or pathways. Examples
include cancer [63], amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) [6],
inflammatory bowel disease [31], cardiovascular disease [42], and diabetes [64].
While feature selection might be able to identify a set of features associated with a particular
response, the underlying structure of how features interact is not captured. Further, the resulting
∗

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

