Recurrent Memory Transformer

Aydar Bulatov1
bulatov.as@phystech.edu

Yuri Kuratov1,2
yurii.kuratov@phystech.edu

Mikhail S. Burtsev1,2
burtcev.ms@mipt.ru

1

Neural Networks and Deep Learning Lab,
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
2
AIRI, Moscow, Russia

Abstract
Transformer-based models show their effectiveness across multiple domains and
tasks. The self-attention allows to combine information from all sequence elements
into context-aware representations. However, global and local information has to
be stored mostly in the same element-wise representations. Moreover, the length
of an input sequence is limited by quadratic computational complexity of selfattention. In this work, we propose and study a memory-augmented segment-level
recurrent Transformer (RMT). Memory allows to store and process local and global
information as well as to pass information between segments of the long sequence
with the help of recurrence. We implement a memory mechanism with no changes
to Transformer model by adding special memory tokens to the input or output sequence. Then the model is trained to control both memory operations and sequence
representations processing. Results of experiments show that RMT performs on
par with the Transformer-XL on language modeling for smaller memory sizes
and outperforms it for tasks that require longer sequence processing. We show
that adding memory tokens to Tr-XL is able to improve its performance. This
makes Recurrent Memory Transformer a promising architecture for applications
that require learning of long-term dependencies and general purpose in memory
processing, such as algorithmic tasks and reasoning.

1

Introduction

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have been widely
adopted across multiple domains and tasks (Radford
et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019;
Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021; Jaegle
et al., 2021). The key component of Transformer
layer is a self-attention. Self-attention allows to update each sequence element representation with information from all other elements in the sequence.
As a result, rich contextual representation for every Figure 1: Recurrent Memory Transformer.
element is generated at the end of encoding. This Memory is added as tokens to the input sequence
way, global sequence-level and local information are and memory output is passed to the next segment.
stored in a single representation. However, this mix- During training gradients flow from the current
ing of two types of information in a single represen- segment through memory to the previous segment.
tation has limitations. Distributed storage of global
features across all sequence elements results in global features "blurring" and makes it harder to
access them. Another well-known deficiency of Transformers is poor scaling of self-attention with
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

