NeMF: Neural Motion Fields for Kinematic Animation
Chengan He
Yale University
chengan.he@yale.edu

Jun Saito
Adobe Research
jsaito@adobe.com

Holly Rushmeier
Yale University
holly.rushmeier@yale.edu

James Zachary
Adobe Research
zachary@adobe.com
Yi Zhou
Adobe Research
yizho@adobe.com

Abstract
We present an implicit neural representation to learn the spatio-temporal space
of kinematic motions. Unlike previous work that represents motion as discrete
sequential samples, we propose to express the vast motion space as a continuous
function over time, hence the name Neural Motion Fields (NeMF). Specifically,
we use a neural network to learn this function for miscellaneous sets of motions,
which is designed to be a generative model conditioned on a temporal coordinate
t and a random vector z for controlling the style. The model is then trained as a
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) with motion encoders to sample the latent space.
We train our model with a diverse human motion dataset and quadruped dataset
to prove its versatility, and finally deploy it as a generic motion prior to solve
task-agnostic problems and show its superiority in different motion generation and
editing applications, such as motion interpolation, in-betweening, and re-navigating.
More details can be found on our project page: https://cs.yale.edu/homes/
che/projects/nemf/.

1

Introduction

Motion synthesis and editing is a core problem in animation and game production, as well as in
emerging applications like artificial agents. Traditional algorithms have limited capability of automatically producing convincing motions with high diversity and complexity. With the recent availability
of large-scale motion capture data, more interest has shifted to deep learning-based methods. People
have adapted various deep learning technologies such as Recurrent Neural Networks [34], Reinforcement Learning [25, 35] and Normalizing Flows [10] for skeletal motion generation. However,
those methods are designed as an auto-regressive process that depends on its own past values and
some stochastic terms. With this constraint, those methods have to sequentially predict the motion
at discrete time steps. Consequently, they cannot just directly infer the motion at certain frames
since they must predict the past motion first. Moreover, with this temporally asymmetric design, it is
always hard for those methods to incorporate the control or editing of future frames and, thus, it is
difficult to apply them to tasks like motion in-betweening.
Inspired by the recent success in neural radiance fields (NeRF) for novel view synthesis [32], we
introduce Neural Motion Fields (NeMF) to model the spatio-temporal space of kinematic motions.
Given that a motion sequence consists of different poses at different time steps, we represent a motion
sequence as a continuous function f : t 7→ f (t) which parameterizes the entire sequence by the
temporal coordinate t. This function can be approximated by a multilayer perceptron network (MLP)
whose parameters are optimized by minimizing the reconstruction loss between the generated and
ground truth motion.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

