HSurf-Net: Normal Estimation for 3D Point Clouds by
Learning Hyper Surfaces

Qing Li1

Yu-Shen Liu1∗ Jin-San Cheng2 Cheng Wang3
Yi Fang4 Zhizhong Han5
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Academy of Mathematics and System Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
4
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE
5
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
{leoqli, liuyushen}@tsinghua.edu.cn jcheng@amss.ac.cn
cwang@xmu.edu.cn yfang@nyu.edu h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel normal estimation method called HSurf-Net, which can accurately predict normals from point clouds with noise and density variations. Previous
methods focus on learning point weights to fit neighborhoods into a geometric
surface approximated by a polynomial function with a predefined order, based
on which normals are estimated. However, fitting surfaces explicitly from raw
point clouds suffers from overfitting or underfitting issues caused by inappropriate polynomial orders and outliers, which significantly limits the performance of
existing methods. To address these issues, we introduce hyper surface fitting to
implicitly learn hyper surfaces, which are represented by multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) layers that take point features as input and output surface patterns in a high
dimensional feature space. We introduce a novel space transformation module,
which consists of a sequence of local aggregation layers and global shift layers, to
learn an optimal feature space, and a relative position encoding module to effectively convert point clouds into the learned feature space. Our model learns hyper
surfaces from the noise-less features and directly predicts normal vectors. We
jointly optimize the MLP weights and module parameters in a data-driven manner
to make the model adaptively find the most suitable surface pattern for various
points. Experimental results show that our HSurf-Net achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on the synthetic shape dataset, the real-world indoor and outdoor
scene datasets. The code, data and pretrained models are publicly available at
https://github.com/LeoQLi/HSurf-Net.

1

Introduction

Estimating normals from point clouds is vital for various downstream applications of 3D computer
vision, such as point cloud filtering [5, 46, 35, 34], surface reconstruction [27] and rendering [8, 15,
40]. Though this topic has been extensively studied, it is still a challenge to work on point clouds
with different types of noise, outliers, and density variations. It is well-known that point cloud normal
estimation can be formulated as the least squares optimization problem [12], which explicitly fits a
geometric surface (e.g. plane and polynomial surface) on local neighboring points and then computes
the normal from the fitted surface. Specifically, the point-wise weights dedicate the importance of
each point for the surface fitting.
∗

Correspondig author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

