Tight Analysis of Extra-gradient and Optimistic
Gradient Methods For Nonconvex Minimax Problems
Pouria Mahdavinia
Pennsylvania State University
pxm5426@psu.edu

Yuyang Deng
Pennsylvania State University
yzd82@psu.edu

Haochuan Li
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
haochuan@mit.edu

Mehrdad Mahdavi
Pennsylvania State University
mzm616@psu.edu

Abstract
Despite the established convergence theory of Optimistic Gradient Descent Ascent (OGDA) and Extragradient (EG) methods for the convex-concave minimax
problems, little is known about the theoretical guarantees of these methods in
nonconvex settings. To bridge this gap, for the first time, this paper establishes the
convergence of OGDA and EG methods under the nonconvex-strongly-concave
(NC-SC) and nonconvex-concave (NC-C) settings by providing a unified analysis
through the lens of single-call extra-gradient methods. We further establish lower
bounds on the convergence of GDA/OGDA/EG, shedding light on the tightness of
our analysis. We also conduct experiments supporting our theoretical results. We
believe our results will advance the theoretical understanding of OGDA and EG
methods for solving complicated nonconvex minimax real-world problems, e.g.,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) or robust neural networks training.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following minimax problem:
min max f (x, y)

x2Rd y2Y

(1)

where Y could be a bounded convex or unbounded set, and the function f : Rd ⇥ Y ! R is smooth
and strongly-concave/concave with respect to y, but possibly nonconvex in x. Minimax optimization
(Problem 1) has been explored in a variety of fields, including classical game theory, online learning,
and control theory [2, 50, 21]. Minimax has emerged as a key optimization framework for machine
learning applications such as generative adversarial networks (GANs) [14], robust and adversarial
machine learning [46, 37, 15], and reinforcement learning [54, 43].
Gradient descent ascent (GDA) is a well-known algorithm for solving minimax problems, and it
is widely used to optimize generative adversarial networks. GDA performs a gradient descent step
on the primal variable x and a gradient ascent step on the dual variable y simultaneously in each
iteration. GDA with equal step sizes for both variables converges linearly to Nash equilibrium under
the strongly-convex strongly-concave (SC-SC) assumption [28, 12], but diverges even under the
convex-concave (C-C) setting for functions such as bilinear [22, 38].
Given the high nonconvexity of practical applications such as GANs, exploring convergence guarantees of minimax optimization algorithms beyond the convex-concave (C-C) setting is one of the
canonical research directions in minimax optimization. Several algorithms with convergence guarantees beyond the C-C domain have been explored in the literature. Alternating Gradient Descent Ascent
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

