Grow and Merge: A Unified Framework for
Continuous Categories Discovery

Xinwei Zhang1∗, Jianwen Jiang2∗ , Yutong Feng2 , Zhi-fan Wu2 , Xibin Zhao1† ,
Hai Wan1 , Mingqian Tang2 , Rong Jin2 , Yue Gao1,3†
1
BNRist, KLISS, School of Software, Tsinghua University
2
Alibaba Group
3
THUIBCS, BLBCI, Tsinghua University
xinwei-z21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jianwen.jjw,fengyutong.fyt,wuzhifan.wzf,mingqian.tmq,jinrong.jr}
@alibaba-inc.com, {zxb,wanhai,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Although a number of studies are devoted to novel category discovery, most of
them assume a static setting where both labeled and unlabeled data are given at
once for finding new categories. In this work, we focus on the application scenarios
where unlabeled data are continuously fed into the category discovery system.
We refer to it as the Continuous Category Discovery (CCD) problem, which
is significantly more challenging than the static setting. A common challenge
faced by novel category discovery is that different sets of features are needed for
classification and category discovery: class discriminative features are preferred for
classification, while rich and diverse features are more suitable for new category
mining. This challenge becomes more severe for dynamic setting as the system
is asked to deliver good performance for known classes over time, and at the
same time continuously discover new classes from unlabeled data. To address
this challenge, we develop a framework of Grow and Merge (GM) that works by
alternating between a growing phase and a merging phase: in the growing phase, it
increases the diversity of features through a continuous self-supervised learning for
effective category mining, and in the merging phase, it merges the grown model
with a static one to ensure satisfying performance for known classes. Our extensive
studies verify that the proposed GM framework is significantly more effective than
the state-of-the-art approaches for continuous category discovery.

1

Introduction

Human beings are good at grouping objects into category through clustering, and the definition of
categories are continuously expanding and updated over time. Recent developments of intelligent
visual systems can not only distinguish pre-defined categories [1–5], but also discover new categories
from unlabeled data, a task that is known as novel category discovery [6–8].
Existing works on novel category discovery are limited to the static setting, where both labeled
data (by known classes) and unlabeled data (with potential unknown categories) are given at once.
In contrast, for real-world applications, unlabeled data are continuously fed into the system for
discovering new categories, making it a significantly more challenging problem. Besides, current
studies for novel category discovery often assume that all the unlabeled data belong to the unknown
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

