Unlabelled Sample Compression Schemes for
Intersection-Closed Classes and Extremal Classes
J. Hyam Rubinstein
School of Mathematics & Statistics
University of Melbourne
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia
joachim@unimelb.edu.au

Benjamin I. P. Rubinstein
School of Computing & Information Systems
University of Melbourne
Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia
brubinstein@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
The sample compressibility of concept classes plays an important role in learning
theory, as a sufficient condition for PAC learnability, and more recently as an avenue
for robust generalisation in adaptive data analysis. Whether compression schemes
of size O(d) must necessarily exist for all classes of VC dimension d is unknown,
but conjectured to be true by Warmuth. Recently Chalopin, Chepoi, Moran, and
Warmuth (2018) gave a beautiful unlabelled sample compression scheme of size
VC dimension for all maximum classes: classes that meet the Sauer-Shelah-Perles
Lemma with equality. They also offered a counterexample to compression schemes
based on a promising approach known as corner peeling. In this paper we simplify
and extend their proof technique to deal with so-called extremal classes of VC
dimension d which contain maximum classes of VC dimension d − 1. A criterion
is given which would imply that all extremal classes admit unlabelled compression
schemes of size d. We also prove that all intersection-closed classes with VC
dimension d admit unlabelled compression schemes of size at most 11d.

1

Introduction

Littlestone and Warmuth (1986) initiated the study of sample compression schemes as an alternative
characterisation of probably approximately correct (PAC) learnability, to finite Vapnik-Chervonenkis
(VC) dimension. Informally a sample compression scheme for a concept class comprises a compressor
and reconstructor: while the compressor represents samples labelled by the class as a labelled or
unlabelled subsample, the reconstructor must be able to recover a concept consistent with the original
labelled sample given only this representation. Littlestone and Warmuth (1986) demonstrated a
remarkably simple proof of PAC learnability for any concept classes with labelled compression
schemes provided compressed representations have bounded size, constant in the original sample
size. They conjectured that bounded labelled compression schemes should also be necessary for
PAC learnability—completing the characterisation—specifically that all VC-d concept classes (those
having VC dimension d) have labelled compression schemes of size d. This conjecture, for size
O(d), remains open now more than 35 years later, and stands as one of the oldest open problems
in learning theory. In addition to proving PAC generalisation bounds (von Luxburg, Bousquet, and
Schölkopf, 2004; Langford, 2005), compression has found important connections to generalisation in
the adaptive data analysis setting (Cummings, Ligett, Nissim, Roth, and Wu, 2016).
While Littlestone and Warmuth (1986) conjectured the existence of labelled schemes of size d for
all VC-d classes, Warmuth (2003) later relaxed this to O(d), while Kuzmin and Warmuth (2007)
conjectured size O(d) unlabelled compression schemes. (In unlabelled schemes, the compressor’s
representations omit labels; such schemes of size k imply labelled schemes of size k.) Indeed VC-d
classes are known that cannot be unlabelled compressed to size d (Pálvölgyi and Tardos, 2020).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

