Hyperparameter Sensitivity in Deep Outlier Detection
Analysis and a Scalable Hyper-Ensemble Solution

Xueying Ding
Carnegie Mellon University
xding2@cs.cmu.edu

Lingxiao Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University
lingxiao@cmu.edu

Leman Akoglu
Carnegie Mellon University
lakoglu@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Outlier detection (OD) literature exhibits numerous algorithms as it applies to
diverse domains. However, given a new detection task, it is unclear how to choose
an algorithm to use, nor how to set its hyperparameter(s) (HPs) in unsupervised
settings. HP tuning is an ever-growing problem with the arrival of many new
detectors based on deep learning, which usually come with a long list of HPs.
Surprisingly, the issue of model selection in the outlier mining literature has been
“the elephant in the room”; a significant factor in unlocking the utmost potential of
deep methods, yet little said or done to systematically tackle the issue. In the first
part of this paper, we conduct the first large-scale analysis on the HP sensitivity of
deep OD methods, and through more than 35,000 trained models, quantitatively
demonstrate that model selection is inevitable. Next, we design a HP-robust
and scalable deep hyper-ensemble model called ROB OD that assembles models
with varying HP configurations, bypassing the choice paralysis. Importantly, we
introduce novel strategies to speed up ensemble training, such as parameter sharing,
batch/simultaneous training, and data subsampling, that allow us to train fewer
models with fewer parameters. Extensive experiments on both image and tabular
datasets show that ROB OD achieves and retains robust, state-of-the-art detection
performance as compared to its modern counterparts, while taking only 2-10% of
the time by the naïve hyper-ensemble with independent training.

1

Introduction

Outlier detection (OD) finds numerous real-world applications in finance, security, healthcare, to
name a few. Thanks to this popularity, the literature has grown to offer a large catalog of detection
algorithms [1]. With the recent advances in deep learning, the literature has been booming with the
addition of many more OD models based on deep neural networks (NNs). (See surveys [9, 31, 36].)
While there is no shortage of OD methods today, given a new task, it is unclear how to choose
which algorithm or model to use, nor how to configure its hyperparameter(s) (HPs) in unsupervised
settings. That is, the fundamental problem of outlier model selection remains vastly understudied.
Several evaluation studies have illustrated the sensitivity to HPs for traditional (i.e. non-deep) OD
methods [2, 8, 17]. Most surprisingly, however, the issue of HP tuning/model selection for the newly
burgeoning deep OD models has been “the elephant in the room”; a well-known problem that no one
seems to want to bring up, which is exactly the focus of this paper.
Deep OD models are promising thanks to appealing properties such as task-driven representation
learning and end-to-end optimization. On the other hand, while their traditional counterparts had
only 1-2 HPs1 , deep OD models come with a long list of HPs: (i) architecture HPs (e.g. depth,
width), (ii) regularization HPs (e.g. dropout, weight decay rates), and (iii) optimization HPs (e.g.
1

e.g., k in nearest neighbor based LOF [7], ⌫ in OCSVM [39], sample size

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

and #trees t in IF [28].

