Infinite-Fidelity Coregionalization for Physical
Simulation
Shibo Li, Zheng Wang, Robert M. Kirby, and Shandian Zhe
School of Computing, University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
{shibo, wzhut, kirby, zhe}@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Multi-fidelity modeling and learning is important in physical simulation related applications. It can leverage both low-fidelity and high-fidelity examples for training
so as to reduce the cost of data generation yet still achieving good performance.
While existing approaches only model finite, discrete fidelities, in practice, the
feasible fidelity choice is often infinite, which can correspond to a continuous
mesh spacing or finite element length. In this paper, we propose Infinite Fidelity
Coregionalization (IFC). Given the data, our method can extract and exploit rich
information within infinite, continuous fidelities to bolster the prediction accuracy.
Our model can interpolate and/or extrapolate the predictions to novel fidelities that
are not covered by the training data. Specifically, we introduce a low-dimensional
latent output as a continuous function of the fidelity and input, and multiple it with
a basis matrix to predict high-dimensional solution outputs. We model the latent
output as a neural Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) to capture the complex
relationships within and integrate information throughout the continuous fidelities.
We then use Gaussian processes or another ODE to estimate the fidelity-varying
bases. For efficient inference, we reorganize the bases as a tensor, and use a
tensor-Gaussian variational posterior approximation to develop a scalable inference
algorithm for massive outputs. We show the advantage of our method in several
benchmark tasks in computational physics.

1

Introduction

Many scientific and engineering applications demand physical simulations, for which the task is
mainly to solve partial differential equations (PDEs) at a domain of interest. For example, to estimate
the temperature change at the end of a part, one might need to solve transient heat transfer equations
over the part (Incropera et al., 2007). Due to the high cost of running numerical solvers, in practice
it is often important to train a surrogate model (Kennedy and O’Hagan, 2000; Conti and O’Hagan,
2010). Given the PDE parameters and/or parameterized boundary/initial conditions, we use the
surrogate model to predict the high-dimensional solution field, rather than run the numerical solvers
from scratch. In this way, we can greatly reduce the cost, because computing the prediction for a
machine learning model is often much more efficient and faster.
However, we still have to run the numerical solvers to generate the training data for the surrogate
model, which is costly and can be a bottleneck. To alleviate this issue, a wise strategy is to conduct
multi-fidelity learning. High-fidelity examples are generated via dense meshes (or smaller finite
elements), hence are accurate yet expensive to compute; low-fidelity examples are generated with
coarse meshes, which are much cheaper for computation yet quite inaccurate. Despite the (significant)
difference in quality, the low-fidelity and high-fidelity examples are strongly correlated since they are
based on the same equation(s) or physical laws. Many multi-fidelity surrogate modeling and learning
methods have therefore been developed to effectively combine examples of different fidelities to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

