On Translation and Reconstruction Guarantees of the
Cycle-Consistent Generative Adversarial Networks

Anish Chakrabarty
Statistics and Mathematics Unit
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
West Bengal, India

Swagatam Das∗
Electronics and Communication Sciences Unit
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
West Bengal, India

Abstract
The task of unpaired image-to-image translation has witnessed a revolution with
the introduction of the cycle-consistency loss to Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs). Numerous variants, with Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Network (CycleGAN) at their forefront, have shown remarkable empirical performance. The
involvement of two unalike data spaces and the existence of multiple solution
maps between them are some of the facets that make such architectures unique. In
this study, we investigate the statistical properties of such unpaired data translator
networks between distinct spaces, bearing the additional responsibility of cycleconsistency. In a density estimation setup, we derive sharp non-asymptotic bounds
on the translation errors under suitably characterized models. This, in turn, points
out sufficient regularity conditions that maps must obey to carry out successful
translations. We further show that cycle-consistency is achieved as a consequence
of the data being successfully generated in each space based on observations from
the other. In a first-of-its-kind attempt, we also provide deterministic bounds on
the cumulative reconstruction error. In the process, we establish tolerable upper
bounds on the discrepancy responsible for ill-posedness in such networks.

1

Introduction

The overwhelming number of variants GANs [1] have inspired while catering to its vast application
domains is a testament to its versatility. One such family of progenies having remarkable accolades
of its own owes its genesis to the cycle-consistency constraint. Possibly the most influential one
belonging to this group is CycleGAN [2]. It offers an unsupervised image-to-image (I2I) translation
framework for unpaired observations hailing from unrelated data spaces. In terms of the architecture,
both DualGAN [3] and DiscoGAN [4] are immediate relatives to CycleGAN. In the chassis of
such networks lie two concurrent adversarial generation processes, commonly termed translations,
regularized by a cyclic loss. This penalization ensures the reconstruction of input data from either
space post-translation. In addition, models such as DTN [5] and UNIT [6] assume the existence of a
shared latent space between the domains. This allows the restructuring of the model without altering
the objective. By stacking multiple translator networks, SCAN [7] promises significant performance
improvement, especially for high-resolution images. Some members of the family ([2], U-GAT-IT[8],
[9]) also deploy an additional identity loss to remove tilt-shift in generated images. We call this broad
class of I2I translation machines ‘cycle-consistent networks’. The constraint of cycle-consistency
should be primarily credited for the masterly generative capability of such models, from which tasks
like style transfer, object transfiguration [2], and data augmentation [10] benefit immensely.
In this study, we intend to rise above the empirical evidences by providing a statistical backbone to
the fact that cycle-consistent networks can simultaneously translate data both ways without losing the
∗

Corresponding Author (Email: swagatam.das@isical.ac.in)

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

