Bessel Equivariant Networks for Inversion of
Transmission Effects in Multi-Mode Optical Fibres
Joshua Mitton∗
School of Computing Science
j.mitton.1@research.gla.ac.uk

Simon Peter Mekhail
School of Physics & Astronomy,
Simon.Mekhail@glasgow.ac.uk

Miles Padgett
School of Physics & Astronomy,
Miles.Padgett@glasgow.ac.uk

Daniele Faccio
School of Physics & Astronomy,
Daniele.Faccio@glasgow.ac.uk

Marco Aversa
School of Computing Science
marco.aversa@glasgow.ac.uk

Roderick Murray-Smith
School of Computing Science
roderick.murray-smith@glasgow.ac.uk

University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Abstract
We develop a new type of model for solving the task of inverting the transmission effects of multi-mode optical ﬁbres through the construction of an SO+ (2, 1)equivariant neural network. This model takes advantage of the of the azimuthal
correlations known to exist in ﬁbre speckle patterns and naturally accounts for the
difference in spatial arrangement between input and speckle patterns. In addition,
we use a second post-processing network to remove circular artifacts, ﬁll gaps,
and sharpen the images, which is required due to the nature of optical ﬁbre transmission. This two stage approach allows for the inspection of the predicted images produced by the more robust physically motivated equivariant model, which
could be useful in a safety-critical application, or by the output of both models,
which produces high quality images. Further, this model can scale to previously
unachievable resolutions of imaging with multi-mode optical ﬁbres and is demonstrated on 256 × 256 pixel images. This is a result of improving the trainable
parameter requirement from O(N 4 ) to O(m), where N is pixel size and m is
number of ﬁbre modes. Finally, this model generalises to new images, outside of
the set of training data classes, better than previous models.

1

Introduction

Multi-mode ﬁbres (MMF) have many potential applications in medical imaging, cryptography, and
communications. In the medical domain, the use of multi-mode ﬁbre imaging has potential to create
hair-thin endoscopes for imaging sensitive areas of the body. However, to achieve these applications,
the ﬁbre transmission properties must be compensated for to return a clear image (Stasio, 2017). A
MMF has multiple different ﬁbre modes, each of which propagates at a different velocity. This leads
to an amplitude and phase mixing of the image as it propagates through the ﬁbre (Mitschke, 2016).
As a result, an input image creates a complex-valued speckled pattern on the output of the MMF.
The ability to accurately and in a scalable way learn to invert the transmission effects would unlock
MMF imaging as a useful tool across a range of domains. This work concerns the use of a single
multi-mode ﬁbre and not ﬁbre bundles.
∗

https://github.com/JoshuaMitton

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

