Iso-Dream: Isolating and Leveraging Noncontrollable
Visual Dynamics in World Models

Minting Pan∗
Xiangming Zhu∗
Yunbo Wang†
Xiaokang Yang
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{panmt53, xmzhu76, yunbow, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
World models learn the consequences of actions in vision-based interactive systems.
However, in practical scenarios such as autonomous driving, there commonly
exists noncontrollable dynamics independent of the action signals, making it
difficult to learn effective world models. To tackle this problem, we present a
novel reinforcement learning approach named Iso-Dream, which improves the
Dream-to-Control framework [22] in two aspects. First, by optimizing the inverse
dynamics, we encourage the world model to learn controllable and noncontrollable
sources of spatiotemporal changes on isolated state transition branches. Second,
we optimize the behavior of the agent on the decoupled latent imaginations of the
world model. Specifically, to estimate state values, we roll-out the noncontrollable
states into the future and associate them with the current controllable state. In this
way, the isolation of dynamics sources can greatly benefit long-horizon decisionmaking of the agent, such as a self-driving car that can avoid potential risks by
anticipating the movement of other vehicles. Experiments show that Iso-Dream is
effective in decoupling the mixed dynamics and remarkably outperforms existing
approaches in a wide range of visual control and prediction domains.

1

Introduction

Humans can infer and predict real-world dynamics by simply observing and interacting with the
environment. Inspired by this, many cutting-edge AI agents use self-supervised learning [37, 20, 12]
or reinforcement learning [38, 22, 41] techniques to acquire knowledge from their surroundings.
Among them, world models [20] have received widespread attention in the field of robot visual
control, and led the recent progress in model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) [22, 41, 24, 29].
A typical approach [22] is to use the trajectories of observations and control signals collected by an
RL agent to learn a differentiable simulator of the environment, namely the world model, and then
update the RL agent by optimizing the behaviors on the latent imaginations of the world model.
However, since the observation sequence is high-dimensional, non-stationary, and often driven by
multiple sources of physical dynamics, how to learn effective world models in complex visual scenes
remains an open problem. In realistic scenarios such as autonomous driving, we can generally divide
spatiotemporal dynamics in the system into controllable parts that perfectly respond to action signals,
and parts beyond the control of the agent, such as the movement of other vehicles and other external
changes. The isolation of controllable and noncontrollable states can improve MBRL in two aspects:
• Modular representation improves the generalization of the agent to non-stationary environments
with noises, such as the time-varying background in our modified DeepMind Control Suite.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Yunbo Wang.
Code available at https://github.com/panmt/Iso-Dream
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

