TokenMixup: Efficient Attention-guided
Token-level Data Augmentation for Transformers

Hyeong Kyu Choi∗ , Joonmyung Choi∗ , Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{imhgchoi, pizard, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Mixup is a commonly adopted data augmentation technique for image classification.
Recent advances in mixup methods primarily focus on mixing based on saliency.
However, many saliency detectors require intense computation and are especially
burdensome for parameter-heavy transformer models. To this end, we propose
TokenMixup, an efficient attention-guided token-level data augmentation method
that aims to maximize the saliency of a mixed set of tokens. TokenMixup provides
×15 faster saliency-aware data augmentation compared to gradient-based methods.
Moreover, we introduce a variant of TokenMixup which mixes tokens within a single instance, thereby enabling multi-scale feature augmentation. Experiments show
that our methods significantly improve the baseline models’ performance on CIFAR and ImageNet-1K, while being more efficient than previous methods. We also
reach state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-100 among from-scratch transformer
models. Code is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/TokenMixup.

1

Introduction

Various data augmentation methods have been proposed for computer vision tasks. One of the most
successful augmentation methods is mixup [1], which is commonly applied to image classification.
It attempts to augment the input by taking a convex combination of two random instances, and by
reassigning the ground truth label correspondingly. Building on mixup, many subsequent works [2–9]
have been introduced. They focus on mixing instances in a more meaningful way (e.g., saliencyaware mixup, manifold level mixup, submodular diversity maximization etc.), while a great majority
attempts to perform mixup based on saliency.
These saliency-aware mixup methods often entail gradient computation. To detect salient regions, the
input is forward-propagated once and back-propagated to extract the gradient map. However, such
a mechanism tends to be computationally heavy. This is especially pertinent to transformer-based
models [10], as they generally retain high parameter volume. Keeping this in mind, we aim to present
a saliency-aware mixup method favorable for transformers. Specifically, we regard self-attention as
the inherent saliency detector, which serves as an efficient means for augmentation.
We accordingly propose TokenMixup, an efficient attention-guided token-level mixup method. Its
objective is to mix intermediate token sets so that the saliency level of a batch is maximized. To
detect salient tokens, we take advantage of the attention map to achieve a ×15 speed-up compared
to the gradient-based saliency estimator, without compromising model performance. The batch
saliency is maximized by optimally matching instance pairs, accomplished by an algorithm that
exactly solves the optimization problem. We also introduce ScoreNet, a simple module that measures
the difficulty of an instance. Based on ScoreNet, TokenMixup is applied selectively with respect
to sample difficulty, which can be viewed as a type of curriculum learning method. To the best of
∗ The first two authors contributed equally
† corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

