Breaking Bad:
A Dataset for Geometric Fracture and Reassembly
Silvia Sellán1,⇤ Yun-Chun Chen1,2,⇤ Ziyi Wu1,2,⇤ Animesh Garg1,2,3 Alec Jacobson1,2,4
1
University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 NVIDIA 4 Adobe Research, Toronto
{sgsellan, ycchen, ziyiwu, garg, jacobson}@cs.toronto.edu

Figure 1: The Breaking Bad dataset contains over one million fractured objects. A subset of these is shown
here, each base model in light blue and each fractured piece in a different color. This dataset can be used for
machine learning applications such as geometric reassembly or example-based fracture simulation.

Abstract
We introduce Breaking Bad, a large-scale dataset of fractured objects. Our dataset
consists of over one million fractured objects simulated from ten thousand base
models. The fracture simulation is powered by a recent physically based algorithm
that efficiently generates a variety of fracture modes of an object. Existing shape
assembly datasets decompose objects according to semantically meaningful parts,
effectively modeling the construction process. In contrast, Breaking Bad models the
destruction process of how a geometric object naturally breaks into fragments. Our
dataset serves as a benchmark that enables the study of fractured object reassembly
and presents new challenges for geometric shape understanding. We analyze
our dataset with several geometry measurements and benchmark three state-ofthe-art shape assembly deep learning methods under various settings. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate the difficulty of our dataset, calling on future
research in model designs specifically for the geometric shape assembly task. We
host our dataset at https://breaking-bad-dataset.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Fracture reassembly aims to compose the fragments of a fractured object back into its original
shape, e.g., a shattered sculpture or a broken item of kitchenware. With applications in artifact
preservation [38, 40], digital heritage archiving [39, 43], computer vision [20, 29], robotics [12, 24]
and geometry processing [2, 21], fracture reassembly is a practical yet challenging task that receives
attention from multiple communties.
⇤

Equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

