Exploit Reward Shifting in Value-Based Deep-RL:
Optimistic Curiosity-Based Exploration and
Conservative Exploitation via Linear Reward Shaping
Hao Sun1⇤

Lei Han2

Rui Yang3

Xiaoteng Ma4

Jian Guo5

Bolei Zhou6

Abstract
In this work, we study the simple yet universally applicable case of reward shaping
in value-based Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). We show that reward shifting
in the form of a linear transformation is equivalent to changing the initialization of
the Q-function in neural approximation. Based on such an equivalence, we bring
the key insight that a positive reward shifting leads to conservative exploitation,
while a negative reward shifting leads to curiosity-driven exploration. Accordingly,
conservative exploitation improves offline RL value estimation, and optimistic
value estimation improves exploration for online RL. We validate our insight
on a range of RL tasks and show its improvement over baselines: (1) In offline
RL, the conservative exploitation leads to improved performance based on offthe-shelf algorithms; (2) In online continuous control, multiple value functions
with different shifting constants can be used to tackle the exploration-exploitation
dilemma for better sample efficiency; (3) In discrete control tasks, a negative
reward shifting yields an improvement over the curiosity-based exploration method.
https://sites.google.com/view/rewardshaping

1

Introduction

While reward shaping is a well-established practice
in reinforcement learning and has a long-standing
history [1, 2], specifying a certain reward to incentivize the learning agent requires domain knowledge and a thorough understanding of the task [3–6].
Even with careful design and tuning, learning with
a shaped reward that intends to accelerate learning may on the contrary hinder the learning performance by incurring the sub-optimal behaviors of
the agent [7, 8]. Although Ng et al. [9] theoretically
points out that optimal policy remains unchanged
under certain form of reward transformation, and in
the later work of Wiewiora et al. [10] a framework is
proposed to guide policies with prior knowledge under tabular setting, how reward shifting accommodates recent Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)
algorithms remains much less explored.
In this work, we study a special linear transformation, which is the simplest form of reward shaping,

Figure 1: Our work is inspired by the observation that reward shifting remarkably helps exploration and outperforms count-based exploration in
Q-learning (left). Reward shifting does not change
the primal optimal Q-value landscape, and is able to
learn a near-optimal Q-value (right). While countbased exploration suffers from the curse of dimensionality, reward shifting can be seamlessly applied
to high-dim tasks including continuous control.

⇤
hs789@cam.ac.uk. 1 University of Cambridge; 2 Tencent RoboticsX; 3 Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology; 4 Tsinghua University; 5 IDEA; 6 University of California, Los Angeles

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

