Test-Time Adaptation via Conjugate Pseudo-labels

Sachin Goyal⋆1 Mingjie Sun⋆1 Aditi Raghunathan1 Zico Kolter1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Bosch Center for AI
{sachingo, mingjies, raditi, zkolter}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) refers to adapting neural networks to distribution shifts,
with access to only the unlabeled test samples from the new domain at test-time.
Prior TTA methods optimize over unsupervised objectives such as the entropy of
model predictions in TENT [50], but it is unclear what exactly makes a good TTA
loss. In this paper, we start by presenting a surprising phenomenon: if we attempt
to meta-learn the “best” possible TTA loss over a wide class of functions, then we
recover a function that is remarkably similar to (a temperature-scaled version of) the
softmax-entropy employed by TENT. This only holds, however, if the classifier we
are adapting is trained via cross-entropy loss; if the classifier is trained via squared
loss, a different “best” TTA loss emerges. To explain this phenomenon, we analyze
test-time adaptation through the lens of the training losses’s convex conjugate. We
show that under natural conditions, this (unsupervised) conjugate function can be
viewed as a good local approximation to the original supervised loss and indeed, it
recovers the “best” losses found by meta-learning. This leads to a generic recipe
that can be used to find a good TTA loss for any given supervised training loss
function of a general class. Empirically, our approach consistently dominates
other TTA alternatives over a wide range of domain adaptation benchmarks. Our
approach is particularly of interest when applied to classifiers trained with novel
loss functions, e.g., the recently-proposed PolyLoss [25] function, where it differs
substantially from (and outperforms) an entropy-based loss. Further, we show that
our conjugate based approach can also be interpreted as a kind of self-training using
a very specific soft label, which we refer to as the conjugate pseudo-label. Overall,
our method provides a broad framework for better understanding and improving
test-time adaptation. Code is available at https://github.com/locuslab/
tta_conjugate.

1

Introduction

Modern deep networks perform exceeding well on new test inputs that are close to the training
distribution. However, this performance dramatically decreases on test inputs drawn from a different
distribution. While there is a large body of work on improving the robustness of models, most robust
training methods are highly specialized to the setting they cater to. For e.g., they assume pre-specified
perturbations, subpopulations, and spurious correlations, or access to unlabeled data from the target
distribution, and most methods offer close to no improvement on general distribution shifts beyond
what they were trained for [12, 21].
In practice, it is often cumbersome (or even impossible) to precisely characterize all possible distribution shifts a model could encounter and then train accordingly. Instead, a model already trained
on some source data must be able to adapt at test-time to new inputs from a different domain. This
setting of test-time adaptation (TTA) has gained interest in recent years [6, 47, 50, 54]. TTA is
typically accomplished by updating the source model parameters via a few steps of optimization on
an unsupervised objective involving the new test sample from the target distribution. The choice
⋆

Equal Contribution
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

