FNeVR: Neural Volume Rendering for Face Animation

Bohan Zeng1,† , Boyu Liu2,† , Hong Li1 , Xuhui Liu1,* , Jianzhuang Liu3 ,
Dapeng Chen4 ,Wei Peng4 , Baochang Zhang1,5,*
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing, P.R.China
2
Sino-French Engineer School,
Beihang University, Beijing, P.R.China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Shenzhen, P.R.China
4
Huawei, Shenzhen, P.R.China
5
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, P.R.China
*
Corresponding author, email: xhliu@buaa.edu.cn, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn
†
Equal contributions

Abstract
Face animation, one of the hottest topics in computer vision, has achieved a promising performance with the help of generative models. However, it remains a critical
challenge to generate identity preserving and photo-realistic images due to the
sophisticated motion deformation and complex facial detail modeling. To address
these problems, we propose a Face Neural Volume Rendering (FNeVR) network
to fully explore the potential of 2D motion warping and 3D volume rendering in
a unified framework. In FNeVR, we design a 3D Face Volume Rendering (FVR)
module to enhance the facial details for image rendering. Specifically, we first
extract 3D information with a well-designed architecture, and then introduce an
orthogonal adaptive ray-sampling module for efficient rendering. We also design
a lightweight pose editor, enabling FNeVR to edit the facial pose in a simple yet
effective way. Extensive experiments show that our FNeVR obtains the best overall
quality and performance on widely used talking-head benchmarks. Our code is
available1 .

1

Introduction

Aiming at animating a still head, face animation has far-reaching applications, such as photography,
social media, movie production and virtual assistance, and has become a popular research topic in
computer vision and computer graphics [10; 44]. It synthesizes a realistic talking-head video by
combining the appearance and identity from one source face image with poses and motions extracted
from a given driving video, possibly of a different person’s identity from the source. With the
progress of generative models, especially Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Variational
Auto-Encoders (VAEs), recent methods have achieved a promising performance in face animation
[57; 46; 51; 12]. However, it is still a challenging task because of the difficulty of guaranteeing the
motion transform validity and generating authentic images simultaneously.
Face animation methods can be mainly divided into three categories: model-free, landmark-based, and
3D structure-based. Model-free methods [55; 45; 46; 52; 7] realize compelling reenactment by modeling the relative motion field from the source to the driving faces. Notably, First Order Motion Model
(FOMM) [46] significantly improves the performance of image animation by using self-supervised
keypoints with 2D motion warping. Our studies show that 2D warping is effective in generating
1

https://github.com/zengbohan0217/FNeVR

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

