On Uncertainty, Tempering, and Data Augmentation
in Bayesian Classification
Sanyam Kapoor⇤
New York University

Wesley J. Maddox⇤
New York University

Pavel Izmailov⇤
New York University

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Abstract
Aleatoric uncertainty captures the inherent randomness of the data, such as measurement noise. In Bayesian regression, we often use a Gaussian observation
model, where we control the level of aleatoric uncertainty with a noise variance parameter. By contrast, for Bayesian classification we use a categorical distribution
with no mechanism to represent our beliefs about aleatoric uncertainty. Our work
shows that explicitly accounting for aleatoric uncertainty significantly improves
the performance of Bayesian neural networks. We note that many standard benchmarks, such as CIFAR-10, have essentially no aleatoric uncertainty. Moreover,
we show that data augmentation in approximate inference softens the likelihood,
leading to underconfidence and misrepresenting our beliefs about aleatoric uncertainty. Accordingly, we find that a cold posterior, tempered by a power greater
than one, often more honestly reflects our beliefs about aleatoric uncertainty than
no tempering — providing an explicit link between data augmentation and cold
posteriors. We further show that we can match or exceed the performance of
posterior tempering by using a Dirichlet observation model, where we explicitly
control the level of aleatoric uncertainty, without any need for tempering.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty is often compartmentalized into epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty [27, 33, 41]. Epistemic uncertainty, sometimes called model uncertainty, is the reducible uncertainty about which
solution is correct given limited information. Bayesian methods naturally represent epistemic uncertainty through a distribution over model parameters, leading to a posterior distribution over functions
that are consistent with data. As we observe more data, this posterior concentrates around a single
solution. Aleatoric uncertainty is the irreducible uncertainty in data, often representing measurement
noise in regression, or mislabeled training points in classification [e.g. 4]. Although measurement
noise can be reduced, for example, with better instrumentation, it is often a fixed property of the
data we are given. Correctly expressing our assumptions about aleatoric uncertainty is crucial for
achieving good predictive performance, both with Bayesian and non-Bayesian models [56].
In particular, our assumptions about aleatoric uncertainty profoundly affect predictive accuracy, not
only predictive uncertainty.1 In Figure 1(a,b) we show the predictive distributions of two Gaussian
process (GP) regression models [54] trained on the same data and using the same RBF kernel function. The only difference between these models is their assumptions about the aleatoric uncertainty.
The model in Figure 1(a) assumes a high observation noise (each point is corrupted by N (0, 2 ),
⇤

1

Equal contribution.
Epistemic uncertainty also has a significant effect on predictive accuracy, see Wilson and Izmailov [62].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

