Reproducibility in Optimization:
Theoretical Framework and Limits
Kwangjun Ahn⇤
MIT EECS
kjahn@mit.edu
Satyen Kale
Google Research
satyenkale@google.com

Prateek Jain
Google Research
prajain@google.com

Ziwei Ji
Google Research
ziweiji@google.com

Praneeth Netrapalli
Google Research
pnetrapalli@google.com

Gil I. Shamir
Google Research, Brain Team
gshamir@google.com

Abstract
We initiate a formal study of reproducibility in optimization. We define a quantitative measure of reproducibility of optimization procedures in the face of noisy
or error-prone operations such as inexact or stochastic gradient computations or
inexact initialization. We then analyze several convex optimization settings of
interest such as smooth, non-smooth, and strongly-convex objective functions and
establish tight bounds on the limits of reproducibility in each setting. Our analysis
reveals a fundamental trade-off between computation and reproducibility: more
computation is necessary (and sufficient) for better reproducibility.

1

Introduction

Machine learned models are increasingly entering wider ranges of domains in our lives, driving a
constantly increasing number of important systems. Large scale systems can be trained in highly
parallel and distributed training environments, with a large amount of randomness in training the
models. While some systems may tolerate such randomness leading to models that differ from one
another every time a model retrains, for many applications, reproducible models are required, where
slight changes in training do not lead to drastic differences in the model learned.
Beyond practical deployments of machine learned models, the reproducibility crisis in the machine
learning academic world has also been well-documented: see [Pineau et al., 2021] and the references
therein for an excellent discussion of the reasons for irreproducibility (insufficient exploration
of hyperparameters and experimental setups, lack of sufficient documentation, inaccessible code,
and different computational hardware) and for mitigation recommendations. Recent papers [Chen
et al., 2020, D’Amour et al., 2020, Dusenberry et al., 2020, Snapp and Shamir, 2021, Summers
and Dinneen, 2021, Yu et al., 2021] have also demonstrated that even when models are trained on
identical datasets with identical optimization algorithms, architectures, and hyperparameters, they
can produce significantly different predictions on the same example. This type of irreproducibility
may be caused by multiple factors [D’Amour et al., 2020, Fort et al., 2020, Frankle et al., 2020,
Shallue et al., 2018, Snapp and Shamir, 2021, Summers and Dinneen, 2021], such as non-convexity
of the objective, random initialization, nondeterminism in training such as data shuffling, parallelism,
random schedules, hardware used, and round off quantization errors. Perhaps surprisingly, even if we
control for the randomness by using the same “seed" for model initialization, other factors such as
numerical errors introduced due to nondeterminism of modern GPUs (see, e.g., [Zhuang et al., 2021])
may still lead to significant differences. It was empirically shown (see, e.g., Achille et al. [2017]) that
⇤

Part of this work was done when Kwangjun Ahn was an intern at Google Research.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

