Dynamic Learning in Large Matching Markets
Anand Kalvit1 and Assaf Zeevi2
Columbia University, New York
{1 akalvit22,2 assaf}@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
We study a sequential matching problem faced by large centralized platforms where
“jobs” must be matched to “workers” subject to uncertainty about worker skill
proficiencies. Jobs arrive at discrete times with “job-types” observable upon arrival.
To capture the “choice overload” phenomenon, we posit an unlimited supply of
workers where each worker is characterized by a vector of attributes (aka “workertypes”) drawn from an underlying population-level distribution. The distribution
as well as mean payoffs for possible worker-job type-pairs are unobservables
and the platform’s goal is to sequentially match incoming jobs to workers in
a way that maximizes its cumulative payoffs over the planning horizon. We
establish lower bounds on the regret of any matching algorithm in this setting and
propose a novel rate-optimal learning algorithm that adapts to aforementioned
primitives online. Our learning guarantees highlight a distinctive characteristic
of the problem: achievable performance only has a second-order dependence on
worker-type distributions; we believe this finding may be of interest more broadly.

1

Introduction

Background and motivation. The problem of sequentially matching “jobs” to “workers” under
uncertainty forms the bedrock of many modern operational settings, especially in the online gig
economy, see, e.g., applications such as Amazon Mechanical Turk, TaskRabbit, Jobble, and the
likes. A simpler instance of the problem dates back to [13] where it is referred to as the sequential
stochastic assignment problem (SSAP). A fundamental issue in such settings is that the platform
typically is oblivious (at least initially) to the skill proficiencies of individual workers for specific
task categories. This complexity is further compounded by the large number of workers usually
present on such platforms, tantamount to prohibitively large experimentation costs associated with
acquisition of granular information at the level of an individual worker. This issue is commonly
mitigated by exploiting structure in the problem (if any), or by positing distributional assumptions on
the population of available workers, e.g., workers may be drawn from some distribution D satisfying
certain context-specific desiderata. Such distributional assumptions are vital to designing efficient
algorithms for these systems, and as such, traditional literature has largely relied on the availability of
ex ante knowledge of D or certain key aspects thereof (refer to the literature review in §1.2).

Key research question. An important characteristic of the gig economy is that the population of
workers may undergo distributional shifts over the course of the platform’s planning horizon. These
effects may, many a time, fail to register in a timely manner; as a result, there may be delays in
tailoring appropriately the matching algorithm (calibrated typically using available distribution-level
information) to the changed environment. This has the potential to cause revenue losses as well
as catalyze endogenous worker attrition. Such exigencies necessitate designing algorithms that are
agnostic to D and whose performance is robust to plausible realizations thereof.

The model at a glance. We consider a finite set of possible job-types (denoted by J ), an assumption
we deem appropriate for settings such as those discussed above. In addition, we model workers as
exhibiting discrete skill-levels (aka worker-types), indexed by {1, ..., Kj }, w.r.t. each job-type j 2 J ,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

