Near-Optimal No-Regret Learning Dynamics for
General Convex Games
Gabriele Farina∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Ioannis Anagnostides∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90007
haipengl@usc.edu

Chung-Wei Lee
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90007
leechung@usc.edu

Christian Kroer
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
A recent line of work has established uncoupled learning dynamics such that,
when employed by all players in a game, each player’s regret after T repetitions grows polylogarithmically in T , an exponential improvement over the traditional guarantees within the no-regret framework. However, so far these results have only been limited to certain classes of games with structured strategy spaces—such as normal-form and extensive-form games. The question as
to whether O(polylog T ) regret bounds can be obtained for general convex and
compact strategy sets—which occur in many fundamental models in economics
and multiagent systems—while retaining efficient strategy updates is an important question. In this paper, we answer this in the positive by establishing the first
uncoupled learning algorithm with O(log T ) per-player regret in general convex
games, that is, games with concave utility functions supported on arbitrary convex
and compact strategy sets. Our learning dynamics are based on an instantiation of
optimistic follow-the-regularized-leader over an appropriately lifted space using a
self-concordant regularizer that is peculiarly not a barrier for the feasible region.
Our learning dynamics are efficiently implementable given access to a proximal
oracle for the convex strategy set, leading to O(log log T ) per-iteration complexity; we also give extensions when access to only a linear√optimization oracle is
assumed. Finally, we adapt our dynamics to guarantee O( T ) regret in the adversarial regime. Even in those special cases where prior results apply, our algorithm
improves over the state-of-the-art regret bounds either in terms of the dependence
on the number of iterations or on the dimension of the strategy sets.
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

