What Makes Graph Neural Networks Miscalibrated?

Hans Hao-Hsun Hsu∗ 1

Yuesong Shen∗ 1,2 Christian Tomani 1,2 Daniel Cremers 1,2
Technical University of Munich, Germany
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany
{hans.hsu, yuesong.shen, christian.tomani, cremers}@tum.de
1

Abstract
Given the importance of getting calibrated predictions and reliable uncertainty
estimations, various post-hoc calibration methods have been developed for neural
networks on standard multi-class classification tasks. However, these methods
are not well suited for calibrating graph neural networks (GNNs), which presents
unique challenges such as accounting for the graph structure and the graph-induced
correlations between the nodes. In this work, we conduct a systematic study on
the calibration qualities of GNN node predictions. In particular, we identify five
factors which influence the calibration of GNNs: general under-confident tendency,
diversity of nodewise predictive distributions, distance to training nodes, relative
confidence level, and neighborhood similarity. Furthermore, based on the insights
from this study, we design a novel calibration method named Graph Attention
Temperature Scaling (GATS), which is tailored for calibrating graph neural networks. GATS incorporates designs that address all the identified influential factors
and produces nodewise temperature scaling using an attention-based architecture.
GATS is accuracy-preserving, data-efficient, and expressive at the same time. Our
experiments empirically verify the effectiveness of GATS, demonstrating that it can
consistently achieve state-of-the-art calibration results on various graph datasets
for different GNN backbones.2

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data, such as social networks, knowledge graphs and internet of things, have widespread presence and learning on graphs using neural networks has been an active area of research. For
node classification on graphs, a wide range of graph neural network (GNN) models, including GCN
[11], GAT [32] and GraphSAGE [7], have been proposed to achieve high classification accuracy.
This said, high accuracy is not the only desideratum for a classifier. Especially, reliable uncertainty
estimation is crucial for applications like safety critical tasks and active learning. Neural networks
are known to produce poorly calibrated predictions that are either overconfident or under-confident
[5, 33]. To mitigate this issue a variety of post-hoc calibration methods [5, 15, 35, 30, 6] have been
introduced over the last few years for calibrating neural networks on standard multi-class classification
problems. However, calibration of GNNs, in the context of node classification on graphs, is currently
still an underexplored topic. While it is possible to apply existing calibration methods designed for
multi-class classification to GNNs in a nodewise manner, this does not address the specific challenges
of node classification on graphs. Especially, node predictions in a graph are not i.i.d. but correlated,
and we are tackling a structured prediction problem [20]. A uniform treatment when calibrating
node predictions would fail to account for the structural information from graphs and the non i.i.d.
behavior of node predictions.
∗
2

Equal contribution
Source code available at https://github.com/hans66hsu/GATS

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

