Optimal Scaling for Locally Balanced Proposals in
Discrete Spaces
Haoran Sun⇤
Georgia Tech
hsun349@gatech.edu

Hanjun Dai
Google Brain
hadai@google.com

Dale Schuurmans
Google Brain, U of Alberta
schuurmans@google.com

Abstract
Optimal scaling has been well studied for Metropolis-Hastings (M-H) algorithms
in continuous spaces, but a similar understanding has been lacking in discrete
spaces. Recently, a family of locally balanced proposals (LBP) for discrete spaces
has been proved to be asymptotically optimal, but the question of optimal scaling
has remained open. In this paper, we establish, for the first time, that the efficiency
of M-H in discrete spaces can also be characterized by an asymptotic acceptance
rate that is independent of the target distribution. Moreover, we verify, both
theoretically and empirically, that the optimal acceptance rates for LBP and random
walk Metropolis (RWM) are 0.574 and 0.234 respectively. These results also help
2
establish that LBP is asymptotically O(N 3 ) more efficient than RWM with respect
to model dimension N . Knowledge of the optimal acceptance rate allows one to
automatically tune the neighborhood size of a proposal distribution in a discrete
space, directly analogous to step-size control in continuous spaces. We demonstrate
empirically that such adaptive M-H sampling can robustly improve sampling in
a variety of target distributions in discrete spaces, including training deep energy
based models.

1

Introduction

The Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm is one of the most widely used methods for
sampling from intractable distributions (Robert & Casella, 2013). An important class of MCMC
algorithms is Metropolis-Hastings (M-H) (Metropolis et al., 1953; Hastings, 1970), where new states
are generated from a proposal distribution followed by a M-H test. The efficiency for M-H algorithms
depends critically on the proposal distribution. For example, gradient based methods, such as the
Metropolis Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA) (Rossky et al., 1978), Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(HMC) (Neal et al., 2011), and their variants Girolami & Calderhead (2011); Hoffman et al. (2014)
substantially improve the performance of M-H algorithms in theory and in practice, compared to
naive Random Walk Metropolis (RWM), by leveraging gradient information to guide the proposal
distribution (Roberts & Rosenthal, 2001).
Despite many advances, progress in gradient based methods has generally focused on continuous
spaces. However, Zanella (2020) recently proposed a general framework of locally balanced proposals
(LBP) for discrete spaces, where a proposal distribution is designed to utilize probability changes
between states. Subsequently, Grathwohl et al. (2021) accelerated the sampler by using gradient
information to approximate the probability change. In empirical evaluations, similar to gradient based
samplers in continuous spaces, LBP significantly outperforms RWM and other samplers in discrete
spaces. However, both Zanella (2020) and Grathwohl et al. (2021) constrain the proposal distribution
to lie within a 1-Hamming ball; i.e., only one site of the state variable is allowed to change per M-H
⇤

Work done during an internship at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

