Friendly Noise against Adversarial Noise:
A Powerful Defense against Data Poisoning Attacks

Tian Yu Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
tianyu@cs.ucla.edu

Yu Yang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
yuyang@cs.ucla.edu

Baharan Mirzasoleiman
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
baharan@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
A powerful category of (invisible) data poisoning attacks modify a subset of training examples by small adversarial perturbations to change the prediction of certain
test-time data. Existing defense mechanisms are not desirable to deploy in practice,
as they often either drastically harm the generalization performance, or are attackspecific, and prohibitively slow to apply. Here, we propose a simple but highly
effective approach that unlike existing methods breaks various types of invisible
poisoning attacks with the slightest drop in the generalization performance. We
make the key observation that attacks introduce local sharp regions of high training
loss, which when minimized, results in learning the adversarial perturbations and
makes the attack successful. To break poisoning attacks, our key idea is to alleviate
the sharp loss regions introduced by poisons. To do so, our approach comprises two
components: an optimized friendly noise that is generated to maximally perturb
examples without degrading the performance, and a randomly varying noise component. The combination of both components builds a very light-weight but extremely
effective defense against the most powerful triggerless targeted and hidden-trigger
backdoor poisoning attacks, including Gradient Matching, Bulls-eye Polytope, and
Sleeper Agent. We show that our friendly noise is transferable to other architectures,
and adaptive attacks cannot break our defense due to its random noise component. 1

1

Introduction

Big datasets empower modern over-parameterized deep learning systems. Such datasets are often
scraped from the internet or other public and user-provided sources. An adversary can easily insert a
subset of malicious examples into the data collected from public sources to harm the model’s behavior
at test time. As a result, deep learning systems trained on public data are extremely vulnerable to data
poisoning attacks. Such attacks modify a subset of training examples under small (and potentially
invisible) adversarial perturbations, with the aim of changing the model’s prediction on specific
test-time examples. Powerful attacks generate poisons that visually look innocent and are seemingly
properly labeled [10, 15, 34]. This makes them hard to detect even by expert observers. Hence, data
poisoning attacks are arguably one of the most concerning threats to modern deep learning systems
[19].
1

Our code can be found at https://github.com/tianyu139/friendly-noise

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

