In Defense of the Unitary Scalarization
for Deep Multi-Task Learning

Vitaly Kurin∗
University of Oxford
vitaly.kurin@cs.ox.ac.uk
Ilya Kostrikov
University of California, Berkeley
New York University

Alessandro De Palma∗
University of Oxford
adepalma@robots.ox.ac.uk
Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford

M. Pawan Kumar
University of Oxford

Abstract
Recent multi-task learning research argues against unitary scalarization, where
training simply minimizes the sum of the task losses. Several ad-hoc multi-task optimization algorithms have instead been proposed, inspired by various hypotheses
about what makes multi-task settings difficult. The majority of these optimizers
require per-task gradients, and introduce significant memory, runtime, and implementation overhead. We show that unitary scalarization, coupled with standard
regularization and stabilization techniques from single-task learning, matches or
improves upon the performance of complex multi-task optimizers in popular supervised and reinforcement learning settings. We then present an analysis suggesting
that many specialized multi-task optimizers can be partly interpreted as forms of
regularization, potentially explaining our surprising results. We believe our results
call for a critical reevaluation of recent research in the area.

1

Introduction

Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [5] exploits similarities between tasks to yield models that are more
accurate, generalize better and require less training data. Owing to the success of MTL on traditional
machine learning models [3, 16, 22] and of deep single-task learning across a variety of domains, a
growing body of research has focused on deep MTL. The most straightforward way to train a neural
network for multiple tasks at once is to minimize the sum of per-task losses. Adopting terminology
from multi-objective optimization, we call this approach unitary scalarization.
While some work shows that multi-task networks trained via unitary scalarization exhibit superior
performance to independent per-task models [29, 35], others suggest the opposite [30, 54, 58].
As a result, many explanations for the difficulty of MTL have been proposed, each motivating a
new Specialized Multi-Task Optimizer (SMTO) [11, 42, 54, 62, 66]. These works typically claim that
the proposed SMTO outperforms unitary scalarization, in addition to relevant prior work. However,
SMTOs usually require access to per-task gradients either with respect to the shared parameters,
or to the shared representation. Therefore, their reported performance gain comes at significant
computation and memory cost, the overhead scaling linearly with the number of tasks. By contrast,
unitary scalarization requires only the average of the gradients across tasks, which can be computed
via a single backpropagation.
Existing SMTOs were introduced to solve challenges related to the optimization of the deep MTL
problem. We instead postulate that the reported weakness of unitary scalarization is linked to
experimental variability or to a lack of regularization, leading to the following contributions:
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

