Maximizing Revenue under Market Shrinkage
and Market Uncertainty

Maria-Florina Balcan
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Siddharth Prasad
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sprasad2@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Optimized Markets, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
A shrinking market is a ubiquitous challenge faced by various industries. In this
paper we formulate the first formal model of shrinking markets in multi-item settings, and study how mechanism design and machine learning can help preserve
revenue in an uncertain, shrinking market. Via a sample-based learning mechanism, we prove the first guarantees on how much revenue can be preserved by
truthful multi-item, multi-bidder auctions (for limited supply) when only a random
unknown fraction of the population participates in the market. We first present a
general reduction that converts any sufficiently rich auction class into a randomized
auction robust to market shrinkage. Our main technique is a novel combinatorial
construction called a winner diagram that concisely represents all possible executions of an auction on an uncertain set of bidders. Via a probabilistic analysis of
winner diagrams, we derive a general possibility result: a sufficiently rich class
of auctions always contains an auction that is robust to market shrinkage and
market uncertainty. Our result has applications to important practically-constrained
settings such as auctions with a limited number of winners. We then show how
to efficiently learn an auction that is robust to market shrinkage by leveraging
practically-efficient routines for solving the winner determination problem.

1

Introduction

A shrinking market with uncertain buyer participation is a natural phase of products’ and services’
lifecycles. Current examples of great importance include media consumers—known as cord cutters—
who cancel cable-TV subscriptions in favor of streaming services [29], a thinning customer base for
department stores due to online retailers like Amazon [11, 16], and reduced capacities for restaurants
during the COVID-19 pandemic [43]. In this paper we study how mechanism design can help preserve
revenue in this ubiquitous challenge of a shrinking market, specifically for combinatorial auctions for
limited supply. The seller has m indivisible items to allocate to a set S of n bidders. The bidders can
express how much they value each possible bundle b ⊆ {1, . . . , m} of items. Combinatorial auctions
have had wide reach in practice, from strategic sourcing to spectrum auctions to estate auctions.
Cramton et al. [10] provide a survey of various aspects of combinatorial auctions. The design of
revenue-maximizing combinatorial auctions in multi-item, multi-bidder settings is an elusive and
difficult problem that has spurred a long and active line of research combining techniques from
economics, artificial intelligence, and theoretical computer science. This is still largely an open
question and a very active research area.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

