Policy Optimization for Markov Games: Unified
Framework and Faster Convergence

Runyu Zhang∗
Harvard University

Qinghua Liu∗
Princeton University

Huan Wang
Salesforce Research

runyuzhang@fas.harvard.edu

qinghual@princeton.edu

huan.wang@salesforce.com

Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research

Na Li
Harvard University

Yu Bai
Salesforce Research

cxiong@salesforce.com

nali@seas.harvard.edu

yu.bai@salesforce.com

Abstract
This paper studies policy optimization algorithms for multi-agent reinforcement
learning. We begin by proposing an algorithm framework for two-player zero-sum
Markov Games in the full-information setting, where each iteration consists of a
policy update step at each state using a certain matrix game algorithm, and a value
update step with a certain learning rate. This framework unifies many existing and
new policy optimization algorithms. We show that the state-wise average policy of
this algorithm converges to an approximate Nash equilibrium (NE) of the game, as
long as the matrix game algorithms achieve low weighted regret at each state, with
respect to weights determined by the speed of the value updates. Next, we show that
this framework instantiated with the Optimistic Follow-The-Regularized-Leader
e −5/6 )
(OFTRL) algorithm at each state (and smooth value updates) can find an O(T
approximate NE in T iterations, and a similar algorithm with slightly modified
e −1 ) convergence rate. These improve over
value update rule achieves a faster O(T
−1/2
e
the current best O(T
) rate of symmetric policy optimization type algorithms.
We also extend this algorithm to multi-player general-sum Markov Games and show
e −3/4 ) convergence rate to Coarse Correlated Equilibria (CCE). Finally, we
an O(T
provide a numerical example to verify our theory and investigate the importance of
smooth value updates, and find that using “eager” value updates instead (equivalent
to the independent natural policy gradient algorithm) may significantly slow down
the convergence, even on a simple game with H = 2 layers.

1

Introduction

Policy optimization, i.e. algorithms that learn to make sequential decisions by local search on
the agent’s policy directly, is a widely used class of algorithms in reinforcement learning [40, 44,
45]. Policy optimization algorithms are particularly advantageous in the multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) setting (e.g. compared with value-based counterparts), due to their typically
lower representational cost and better scalability in both training and execution. A variety of policy
optimization algorithms such as Independent PPO [14], MAPPO [56], QMix [42] have been proposed
to solve real-world MARL problems [4, 39, 43]. These algorithms share a same high-level structure
with iterative value updates (for certain value estimates) and policy updates (often independently
with each agent) using information from the value estimates and/or true rewards.
∗

The two authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

