Improved Convergence Rate of Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Dynamics with Variance Reduction and its
Application to Optimization
Yuri Kinoshita
Department of Mathematical Informatics,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
yuri-kinoshita111@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Taiji Suzuki
Department of Mathematical Informatics,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan
taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The stochastic gradient Langevin Dynamics is one of the most fundamental algorithms to solve sampling problems and non-convex optimization appearing in
several machine learning applications. Especially, its variance reduced versions
have nowadays gained particular attention. In this paper, we study two variants
of this kind, namely, the Stochastic Variance Reduced Gradient Langevin Dynamics and the Stochastic Recursive Gradient Langevin Dynamics. We prove their
convergence to the objective distribution in terms of KL-divergence under the
sole assumptions of smoothness and Log-Sobolev inequality which are weaker
conditions than those used in prior works
for these algorithms. With the batch
p
size and the inner loop length set to n, the gradient complexity to achieve an
✏-precision is Õ((n + dn1/2 ✏ 1 ) 2 L2 ↵ 2 ), which is an improvement from any
previous analyses. We also show some essential applications of our result to
non-convex optimization.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and Organization

Over the past decade, the gradient Langevin Dynamics (GLD) has gained particular attention for
providing an effective tool for sampling from a Gibbs distribution, a fundamental task omnipresent
in the field of machine learning and statistics, and for non-convex optimization, which is nowadays
witnessing an unignorable empirical success. Notably, GLD is a stochastic differential equation (SDE)
that can be viewed as the steepest descent flow of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence towards the
stationary Gibbs distribution in the space of measures endowed with the 2-Wasserstein metric (Jordan
et al., 1998). As a consequence of the unique properties of GLD, its implementable discrete schemes
and their ability to suitably track it have been the subject of a large number of studies.
The Euler-Maruyama scheme of GLD gives rise to an algorithm known as the Langevin Monte
Carlo method (LMC). This algorithm is biased (Wibisono, 2018): that is, the distribution of the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

