Fine-Grained Analysis of Stability and Generalization
for Modern Meta Learning Algorithms

Jiechao Guan1,3
Yong Liu2,3
Zhiwu Lu2,3,∗
1
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
{2014200990, liuyonggsai, luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
The support/query episodic training strategy has been widely applied in modern
meta learning algorithms. Supposing the n training episodes and the test episodes
are sampled independently from√the same environment, previous work has derived
a generalization bound of O(1/ n) for smooth non-convex functions via algorithmic stability analysis. In this paper, we provide fine-grained analysis of stability
and generalization for modern meta learning algorithms by considering more general situations. Firstly, we develop matching lower and upper stability bounds for
meta learning algorithms with two types of loss functions: (1) nonsmooth convex
functions with α-Hölder continuous subgradients (α ∈ [0, 1)); (2) smooth (including convex and non-convex) functions. Our tight stability bounds show that, in
the nonsmooth convex case, meta learning algorithms can be inherently less stable
than in the smooth convex case. For the smooth non-convex functions, our stability
bound is sharper than the existing one, especially in the setting where the number
of iterations is larger than the number n of training episodes. Secondly, we derive
improved generalization bounds for meta learning algorithms that hold with high
probability. Specifically, we first demonstrate that, under the √
independent episode
environment assumption, the generalization bound of O(1/ n) via algorithmic
stability analysis is near optimal. To attain faster convergence rate, we show how to
yield a deformed generalization bound of O(ln n/n) with the curvature condition
of loss functions. Finally, we obtain a generalization bound for meta learning
with dependent episodes whose dependency relation is characterized by a graph.
Experiments on regression problems are conducted to verify our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed the success of deep learning techniques in machine learning community
[28, 25, 11]. However, the need of large amount of annotated data hinders their application in real-life
scenarios. To alleviate this issue, meta learning [4], which employs knowledge from past tasks to
facilitate adaptation to the new task, has emerged as a promising direction to reduce annotation cost.
Traditional meta learning algorithms directly minimize the empirical error over all samples in the
training tasks [3, 34, 35, 38, 36]. To improve the generalization ability of meta learning algorithms,
recent works propose the support/query (S/Q) episodic training strategy [45, 20, 41]. Specifically, in
modern meta learning algorithms, each episode/task is split into two non-overlapped parts: support set
and query set. The support set is used to learn a hypothesis, and the query set is used to measure the
performance of the learned hypothesis on that episode. Therefore, the S/Q episodic strategy regards
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

