HyperMiner: Topic Taxonomy Mining with
Hyperbolic Embedding

Yishi Xu, Dongsheng Wang, Bo Chen∗, Ruiying Lu, Zhibin Duan
National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
xuyishi@stu.xidian.edu.cn, bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin, USA
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Embedded topic models are able to learn interpretable topics even with large and
heavy-tailed vocabularies. However, they generally hold the Euclidean embedding
space assumption, leading to a basic limitation in capturing hierarchical relations.
To this end, we present a novel framework that introduces hyperbolic embeddings
to represent words and topics. With the tree-likeness property of hyperbolic space,
the underlying semantic hierarchy among words and topics can be better exploited
to mine more interpretable topics. Furthermore, due to the superiority of hyperbolic
geometry in representing hierarchical data, tree-structure knowledge can also be
naturally injected to guide the learning of a topic hierarchy. Therefore, we further
develop a regularization term based on the idea of contrastive learning to inject prior
structural knowledge efficiently. Experiments on both topic taxonomy discovery
and document representation demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves
improved performance against existing embedded topic models.

1

Introduction

With a long track record of success in a variety of applications [1–6], topic models have emerged as
one of the most powerful tools for automatic text analysis. Typically, given a collection of documents,
a topic model aims to identify a group of salient topics by capturing common word co-occurrence
patterns. Despite their popularity, traditional topic models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
[7] and its variants [8–12] are plagued by complicated posterior inference, presenting a challenge to
create deeper and more expressive models of text. Fortunately, recent developments of Variational
AutoEncoders (VAEs) and Autoencoding Variational Inference (AVI) [13, 14] have shed light on this
problem, resulting in the proposal of a series of Neural Topic Models (NTMs) [15–18]. With better
flexibility and scalability, NTMs have gained increasing research interest over the past few years.
Parallel to neural topic modeling, the idea of bringing word embeddings [19, 20] into topic models
has also attracted much attention. Considering the large performance degradation over short texts due
to limited word co-occurrence information, some early works [21–23] exploit word embeddings as
complementary metadata and incorporate them into the generative process of topic models. Recently,
more flexible ways [24, 25] of combining word embeddings have been explored thanks to the
development of NTMs. For example, Bianchi et al. [26] use word embeddings directly as part of
the encoder’s input. In particular, a novel one called Embedded Topic Model (ETM) [27] stands
out for its performance as well as the elegant way it integrates word embeddings. Specifically, by
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

