When to Trust Your Simulator: Dynamics-Aware
Hybrid Offline-and-Online Reinforcement Learning

Haoyi Niu1∗ , Shubham Sharma1,2∗ , Yiwen Qiu1∗ , Ming Li1,3∗ ,
Guyue Zhou1 , Jianming Hu1,4 , Xianyuan Zhan1,5†
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India
3
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China
4
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Beijing, China
5
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{t6.da.thu,shubh.am1107z,qywmei,liming18739796090}@gmail.com
hujm@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
{zhouguyue,zhanxianyuan}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning effective reinforcement learning (RL) policies to solve real-world complex
tasks can be quite challenging without a high-fidelity simulation environment. In
most cases, we are only given imperfect simulators with simplified dynamics,
which inevitably lead to severe sim-to-real gaps in RL policy learning. The recently
emerged field of offline RL provides another possibility to learn policies directly
from pre-collected historical data. However, to achieve reasonable performance,
existing offline RL algorithms need impractically large offline data with sufficient
state-action space coverage for training. This brings up a new question: is it
possible to combine learning from limited real data in offline RL and unrestricted
exploration through imperfect simulators in online RL to address the drawbacks of
both approaches? In this study, we propose the Dynamics-Aware Hybrid Offlineand-Online Reinforcement Learning (H2O) framework to provide an affirmative
answer to this question. H2O introduces a dynamics-aware policy evaluation
scheme, which adaptively penalizes the Q-function learning on simulated stateaction pairs with large dynamics gaps, while also simultaneously allowing learning
from a fixed real-world dataset. Through extensive simulation and real-world tasks,
as well as theoretical analysis, we demonstrate the superior performance of H2O
against other cross-domain online and offline RL algorithms. H2O provides a brand
new hybrid offline-and-online RL paradigm, which can potentially shed light on
future RL algorithm design for solving practical real-world tasks.

1

Introduction

Over recent years, criticism against reinforcement learning (RL) continues to pour in regarding its poor
real-world applicability. Although RL has demonstrated superhuman performance in solving complex
tasks such as playing games [Mnih et al., 2013; Silver et al., 2017], its success is heavily dependent on
availability of an unbiased interactive environment, either the real system or a high-fidelity simulator,
as well as millions of unrestricted trials and errors. However, constructing high-fidelity simulators
can be extremely expensive or even impossible due to complex system dynamics and unobservable
information in the physical world. Less accurate simulators with simplifications, on the other hand,
are easy to build, however, also lead to severe visual and dynamics sim-to-real gaps when learning
∗
†

Work done during internships at Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

