Online Bipartite Matching with Advice: Tight
Robustness-Consistency Tradeoffs for the Two-Stage
Model
Billy Jin
Cornell University
bzj3@cornell.edu

Will Ma
Columbia University
wm2428@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
We study the two-stage vertex-weighted online bipartite matching problem of
Feng, Niazadeh, and Saberi (SODA ‘21) in a setting where the algorithm has access to a suggested matching that is recommended in the first stage. We evaluate
an algorithm by its robustness R, which is its performance relative to that of the
optimal offline matching, and its consistency C, which is its performance when
the advice or the prediction given is correct. We characterize for this problem the
Pareto-efficient frontier between robustness and consistency, which is rare in the
literature on advice-augmented algorithms, yet necessary for quantifying such an
algorithm to be optimal. Specifically, we propose an algorithm
that
p
p is R-robust
and C-consistent for any (R, C) with 0  R  34 and 1 R + 1 C = 1,
and prove that no other algorithm can achieve a better tradeoff.

1

Introduction

Online bipartite matching is a fundamental model used to assign incoming requests to servers, incoming workers to jobs, incoming impressions to online advertisers, etc. Traditionally, it has been
studied in either the adversarial setting, where nothing is assumed about the future; or the stochastic
setting, where future arrivals are assumed to follow a distributional model. However, algorithms for
the former tend to be overly conservative in their decisions; whereas algorithms for the latter can
perform terribly when the assumed model is wrong. Therefore, a recently budding literature has
studied advice-augmented online algorithms, which use a machine-learned prediction to refine their
decisions, but do not perform as terribly when the prediction is wrong.
In many problems including online matching, there is an inherent tradeoff between an algorithm’s
performance when the prediction is correct, called its consistency, and the algorithm’s performance
under the worst-case future, called its robustness. This is because a high consistency can only
be achieved by optimizing as if the predicted future was correct, resulting in a decision that can be
terrible in the worst case. Conversely, a high robustness requires hedging against all possible futures,
which does not sufficiently prioritize the one predicted to come true.
In this paper we characterize a tight robustness-consistency tradeoff for online bipartite matching,
by adding advice to the model of Feng et al. [1] where the online vertices arrive in two stages (but
many online vertices can arrive simultaneously). That is, we derive a continuum of algorithms for
two-stage online bipartite matching that define the Pareto-efficient frontier of the tradeoff between
performance when a prediction is right vs. performance when it is wrong. To our knowledge, Paretoefficiency results are rare in the literature on advice-augmented online algorithms, especially when
it comes to online matching (as we review in Subsection 1.3); yet, they are necessary for quantifying
an advice-augmented online algorithm to be optimal. We now concretely explain the model, our
algorithm, and the Pareto-efficient frontier it achieves between robustness and consistency.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

