Learning from Distributed Users in Contextual Linear
Bandits Without Sharing the Context
Osama A. Hanna
University of California, Los Angeles
ohanna@ucla.edu

Lin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ucla.edu

Christina Fragouli
University of California, Los Angeles
christina.fragouli@ucla.edu

Abstract
Contextual linear bandits is a rich and theoretically important model that has many
practical applications. Recently, this setup gained a lot of interest in applications
over wireless where communication constraints can be a performance bottleneck,
especially when the contexts come from a large d-dimensional space. In this paper,
we consider a distributed memoryless contextual linear bandit learning problem,
where the agents who observe the contexts and take actions are geographically
separated from the learner who performs the learning while not seeing the contexts.
We assume that contexts are generated from a distribution and propose a method
that uses ⇡ 5d bits per context for the case of unknown context distribution and
0 bits per context if the context distribution is known, while achieving nearly the
same regret bound as if the contexts were directly observable. The former bound
improves upon existing bounds by a log(T ) factor, where T is the length of the
horizon, while the latter achieves information theoretical tightness.

1

Introduction

Contextual linear bandits offer a sequential decision-making framework that combines fundamental
theoretical importance with significant practical popularity [8], as it offers a tractable way to capture
side information (context), as well as a potentially infinite set of decisions (actions). The most prominent application is in recommendation systems [30], but it has also been used in applications such
as virtual support agents [39], clinical trials [12], transportation systems [9], wireless optimization
[26, 25], health [10], robotics [31] and online education [34].
In this paper, we develop algorithms that support the deployment of contextual linear bandits in
distributed settings. In particular, we consider the case where a central learner wishes to solve a
contextual linear bandit problem with the help of transient agents. That is, we assume that the agents
do not keep memory of past actions and may not be present for the whole duration of learning;
learning in our setup can happen thanks to the persistent presence of the central learner. We view the
central learner as a “knowledge repository”, that accumulates knowledge from the experience of the
transient agents and makes it available to next agents. The central learner, through the information it
keeps, could help passing by devices decide how to perform an action, for example: passing by drones
decide how to perform a manoeuver; agricultural robots decide what amounts of substances such as
pesticids to release; and passing by mobile devices decide which local restaurants to recommend.
The main challenge we try to address in this paper is the efficient communication of the context the
agents experience. More specifically, in our setup, each time an agent joins, she receives from the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

