EnvPool: A Highly Parallel Reinforcement Learning
Environment Execution Engine

Jiayi Weng†∗ Min Lin† Shengyi Huang‡ Bo Liu§
Denys Makoviichuk♯ Viktor Makoviychuk△ Zichen Liu†□
Yufan Song♢ Ting Luo♢ Yukun Jiang♢
Zhongwen Xu† Shuicheng Yan†
†

Sea AI Lab
Drexel University
Peking University ♯ Snap △ NVIDIA
□
National University of Singapore ♢ Carnegie Mellon University
trinkle23897@gmail.com, {linmin,xuzw,yansc}@sea.com
‡

§

Abstract
There has been significant progress in developing reinforcement learning (RL)
training systems. Past works such as IMPALA, Apex, Seed RL, Sample Factory,
and others, aim to improve the system’s overall throughput. In this paper, we aim to
address a common bottleneck in the RL training system, i.e., parallel environment
execution, which is often the slowest part of the whole system but receives little
attention. With a curated design for paralleling RL environments, we have improved
the RL environment simulation speed across different hardware setups, ranging
from a laptop and a modest workstation, to a high-end machine such as NVIDIA
DGX-A100. On a high-end machine, EnvPool achieves one million frames per
second for the environment execution on Atari environments and three million
frames per second on MuJoCo environments. When running EnvPool on a laptop,
the speed is 2.8× that of the Python subprocess. Moreover, great compatibility
with existing RL training libraries has been demonstrated in the open-sourced
community, including CleanRL, rl_games, DeepMind Acme, etc. Finally, EnvPool
allows researchers to iterate their ideas at a much faster pace and has great potential
to become the de facto RL environment execution engine. Example runs show that
it only takes five minutes to train agents to play Atari Pong and MuJoCo Ant on a
laptop. EnvPool is open-sourced at https://github.com/sail-sg/envpool.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made remarkable progress in the past years. Notable
achievements include Deep Q-Network (DQN) [22], AlphaGo [27, 29, 30, 31], AlphaStar [35],
OpenAI Five [2], etc. Apart from the algorithmic innovations, the most significant improvements
aimed at enhancing the training throughput for RL agents, such as leveraging the computation power
of large-scale distributed systems and advanced AI chips like TPUs [16].
On the other hand, academic research has been accelerated dramatically by the shortened training
time. For example, DQN takes eight days and 200 million frames to train an agent to play a single
Atari game [22], while IMPALA [7] shortens this process to a few hours and Seed RL [6] continues
to push the boundary of training throughput. This allows the researchers to perform iterations of their
ideas at a much faster pace and benefits the research progress of the whole RL community.
∗

Currently at OpenAI. Detailed author contributions can be found in Appendix J.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

