Expected Frequency Matrices of Elections:
Computation, Geometry, and Preference Learning

Niclas Boehmer
Algorithmics and Computational Complexity
Technische Universität Berlin
niclas.boehmer@tu-berlin.de
Edith Elkind
University of Oxford
elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

Robert Bredereck
TU Clausthal
robert.bredereck@tu-clausthal.de

Piotr Faliszewski
AGH University
faliszew@agh.edu.pl

Stanisław Szufa
AGH University
Jagiellonian University
szufa@agh.edu.pl

Abstract
We use the “map of elections” approach of Szufa et al. (AAMAS-2020) to analyze
several well-known vote distributions. For each of them, we give an explicit formula or an efficient algorithm for computing its frequency matrix, which captures
the probability that a given candidate appears in a given position in a sampled
vote. We use these matrices to draw the “skeleton map” of distributions, evaluate
its robustness, and analyze its properties. Finally, we develop a general and unified framework for learning the distribution of real-world preferences using the
frequency matrices of established vote distributions.

1

Introduction

Computational social choice is a research area at the intersection of social choice (the science of
collective decision-making) and computer science, which focuses on the algorithmic analysis of
problems related to preference aggregation and elicitation (Brandt et al., 2013). Many of the early
papers in this field were primarily theoretical, focusing on establishing the worst-case complexity
of winner determination and strategic behavior under various voting rules—see, e.g., the papers of
Hemaspaandra et al. (1997), Dwork et al. (2001), and Conitzer et al. (2007)—but more recent work
often combines theoretical investigations with empirical analysis. For example, formal bounds on the
running time and/or approximation ratio of a winner determination algorithm can be complemented
by experiments that evaluate its performance on realistic instances; see, e.g., the works of Conitzer
(2006), Betzler et al. (2014), Faliszewski et al. (2018) and Wang et al. (2019).
However, performing high-quality experiments requires the ability to organize and understand the
available data. One way to achieve this is to form a so-called “map of elections,” recently introduced
by Szufa et al. (2020) and extended by Boehmer et al. (2021b). The idea is as follows. First, we
fix a distance measure between elections. Second, we sample a number of elections from various
distributions and real-life datasets—e.g., those collected in PrefLib (Mattei & Walsh, 2013)—and
measure the pairwise distances between them. Third, we embed these elections into the 2D plane,
mapping each election to a point so that the Euclidean distances between points are approximately
equal to the distances between the respective elections. Finally, we plot these points, usually coloring
them to indicate their origin (e.g., the distribution from which a given election was sampled); see
Figure 2 later in the paper for an example of such a map. A location of an election on a map provides
useful information about its properties. For example, Szufa et al. (2020) and Boehmer et al. (2021a,b)
have shown that it can be used to predict (a) the Borda score of the winner of the election, (b) the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

