Draft-and-Revise: Effective Image Generation with
Contextual RQ-Transformer
Doyup Lee∗
Kakao Brain
doyup.lee@kakaobrain.com
Saehoon Kim
Kakao Brain
shkim@kakaobrain.com

Chiheon Kim∗
Kakao Brain
chiheon.kim@kakaobrain.com

Minsu Cho
POSTECH
mscho@postech.ac.kr

Wook-Shin Han†
POSTECH
wshan@dblab.postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Although autoregressive models have achieved promising results on image generation, their unidirectional generation process prevents the resultant images from
fully reflecting global contexts. To address the issue, we propose an effective image
generation framework of Draft-and-Revise with Contextual RQ-transformer to
consider global contexts during the generation process. As a generalized VQ-VAE,
RQ-VAE first represents a high-resolution image as a sequence of discrete code
stacks. After code stacks in the sequence are randomly masked, Contextual RQTransformer is trained to infill the masked code stacks based on the unmasked
contexts of the image. Then, we propose the two-phase decoding, Draft-and-Revise,
for Contextual RQ-Transformer to generate an image, while fully exploiting the
global contexts of the image during the generation process. Specifically. in the
draft phase, our model first focuses on generating diverse images despite rather
low quality. Then, in the revise phase, the model iteratively improves the quality of
images, while preserving the global contexts of generated images. In experiments,
our method achieves state-of-the-art results on conditional image generation. We
also validate that the Draft-and-Revise decoding can achieve high performance by
effectively controlling the quality-diversity trade-off in image generation.

1

Introduction

Learning discrete representations of images enables
autoregressive (AR) models to achieve promising results on image generation. Here, an image is encoded
into a feature map, which is represented as a sequence
of discrete codes [13, 33] or code stacks [23]. Then,
an AR model generates a sequence of codes in the
raster scan order and decodes the codes into an image.
Consequently, AR models show high performance Figure 1: Examples of image inpainting by
and scalability on large-scale datasets [13, 23, 26].
an AR model (middle) and ours (right).
Despite the promising results of AR models, we postulate that the ability of AR models is limited due to the lack of considering global contexts in the
generation process. Specifically, since AR models generate images by sequentially predicting the
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

