A Non-asymptotic Analysis of Non-parametric
Temporal-Difference Learning
Eloïse Berthier
Inria & Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France
eloise.berthier@inria.fr

Ziad Kobeissi
Institut Louis Bachelier
Inria Paris
ziad.kobeissi@inria.fr

Francis Bach
Inria & Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
Temporal-difference learning is a popular algorithm for policy evaluation. In this
paper, we study the convergence of the regularized non-parametric TD(0) algorithm,
in both the independent and Markovian observation settings. In particular, when
TD is performed in a universal reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), we prove
convergence of the averaged iterates to the optimal value function, even when it
does not belong to the RKHS. We provide explicit convergence rates that depend
on a source condition relating the regularity of the optimal value function to the
RKHS. We illustrate this convergence numerically on a simple continuous-state
Markov reward process.

1

Introduction

One of the main ingredients of reinforcement learning (RL) is the ability to estimate the long-term
effect on future rewards of employing a given policy. This building block, known as policy evaluation,
already contains crucial features of more complex RL algorithms, such as SARSA or Q-learning [64].
Temporal-difference learning (TD), proposed by [62], is among the simplest algorithms for policy
evaluation. The estimation of the performance of the policy is made through a value function. It is
updated online, after each new observation of a couple composed of a state transition and a reward.
Although the formulation of TD is quite natural, its theoretical analysis has proved more challenging,
as it combines two difficulties. The first one is that TD bootstraps, in the sense that it uses its
previous – possibly inaccurate – predictions to correct its next predictions, because it does not
have access to a fixed ground truth. The second difficulty is that the observations are produced
along a trajectory following a fixed policy (on-policy), hence they are correlated, which calls for
more involved stochastic approximation tools compared to independent identically distributed (i.i.d.)
samples. Moreover, using off-policy samples, produced by a different policy than the one being
evaluated, can make the algorithm diverge [16]. Off-policy sampling is out of our scope in this paper.
A third element which is not inherent to TD further complicates the plot: function approximation.
While TD was originally proposed in a tabular setting, its large-scale applicability has been greatly
extended by its combination with parametric function approximation [17]. This enables the use of
any linear or non-linear function approximation method to model the value function, including neural
networks. However, one can exhibit unstable diverging behaviors of TD even with simple non-linear
approximation schemes [66]. This combination of difficulties (even with linear function approxima36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

