Models Out Of Line:
A Fourier Lens On Distribution Shift Robustness
Sara Fridovich-Keil†⇤, Brian R. Bartoldson‡ , James Diffenderfer‡ ,
Bhavya Kailkhura‡ , Peer-Timo Bremer‡
†
‡
University of California, Berkeley
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

Abstract
Improving the accuracy of deep neural networks on out-of-distribution (OOD)
data is critical to an acceptance of deep learning in real world applications. It has
been observed that accuracies on in-distribution (ID) versus OOD data follow a
linear trend and models that outperform this baseline are exceptionally rare (and
referred to as “effectively robust”). Recently, some promising approaches have been
developed to improve OOD robustness: model pruning, data augmentation, and
ensembling or zero-shot evaluating large pretrained models. However, there still is
no clear understanding of the conditions on OOD data and model properties that
are required to observe effective robustness. We approach this issue by conducting
a comprehensive empirical study of diverse approaches that are known to impact
OOD robustness on a broad range of natural and synthetic distribution shifts of
CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. In particular, we view the “effective robustness puzzle”
through a Fourier lens and ask how spectral properties of both models and OOD
data correlate with OOD robustness. We find this Fourier lens offers some insight
into why certain robust models, particularly those from the CLIP family, achieve
OOD robustness. However, our analysis also makes clear that no known metric is
consistently the best explanation of OOD robustness. Thus, to aid future research
into the OOD puzzle, we address the gap in publicly-available models with effective
robustness by introducing a set of pretrained CIFAR-10 models—RobustNets—
with varying levels of OOD robustness.

1

Introduction

Deep learning (DL) holds great promise for solving difficult real-world problems in domains such as
healthcare, autonomous driving, and cyber-physical systems. The major roadblock in adopting DL
for real-world applications is that real-world data often deviates from the training data due to noise,
corruptions, or other changes in distribution that may have temporal or spatial causes [3, 20, 41, 44].
DL models are known to be highly brittle under such distribution shifts, which raises the risk of
making incorrect predictions with harmful consequences. Designing approaches to learn models
that achieve both high accuracy on in-distribution data and high robustness to distribution shifts is
paramount to the safe adoption of DL in real-world applications.
Several recent works [1, 35] have noticed an intriguing phenomenon: accuracy on in-distribution
(ID) versus accuracy on distribution-shifted data obeys a linear trend across a wide range of models,
corruption benchmarks, and prediction tasks. Unfortunately, as nearly all current DL models bear
a substantial loss under distribution shifts, this linear relationship implies that our current training
strategies are insufficient to bridge the gap between ID and out-of-distribution (OOD) performance.
However, despite being exceedingly rare, models that break this linear trend to obtain effective
robustness [1] exist—such models defy explanation by the wisdom that OOD accuracy and ID
⇤

Corresponding author: sfk@eecs.berkeley.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

