Generalization Error Bounds on Deep Learning with
Markov Datasets
Lan V. Truong∗
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ
lt407@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we derive upper bounds on generalization errors for deep neural
networks with Markov datasets. These bounds are developed based on Koltchinskii
and Panchenko’s approach for bounding the generalization error of combined
classifiers with i.i.d. datasets. The development of new symmetrization inequalities
in high-dimensional probability for Markov chains is a key element in our extension,
where the absolute spectral gap of the infinitesimal generator of the Markov chain
plays a key parameter in these inequalities. We also propose a simple method
to convert these bounds and other similar ones in traditional deep learning and
machine learning to Bayesian counterparts for both i.i.d. and Markov datasets.
Extensions to m-order homogeneous Markov chains such as AR and ARMA
models and mixtures of several Markov data services are given.

1

Introduction

In statistical learning theory, understanding generalization for neural networks is among the most
challenging tasks. The standard approach to this problem was developed by Vapnik [1], and it is
based on bounding the difference between the prediction error and the training error. These bounds
are expressed in terms of the so called VC-dimension of the class. However, these bounds are very
loose when the VC-dimension of the class can be very large, or even infinite. In 1998, several authors
[2, 3] suggested another class of upper bounds on generalization error that are expressed in terms
of the empirical distribution of the margin of the predictor (the classifier). Later, Koltchinskii and
Panchenko [4] proposed new probabilistic upper bounds on generalization error of the combination of
many complex classifiers such as deep neural networks. These bounds were developed based on the
general results of the theory of Gaussian, Rademacher, and empirical processes in terms of general
functions of the margins, satisfying a Lipschitz condition. They improved previously known bounds
on generalization error of convex combination of classifiers.
In the context of supervised classification, PAC-Bayesian bounds have proved to be the tightest [5–7].
Several recent works have focused on gradient descent based PAC-Bayesian algorithms, aiming to
minimise a generalisation bound for stochastic classifiers [8–10]. Most of these studies use a surrogate
loss to avoid dealing with the zero-gradient of the misclassification loss. Several authors used other
methods to estimate of the misclassification error with a non-zero gradient by proposing new training
algorithms to evaluate the optimal output distribution in PAC-Bayesian bounds analytically [11–13].
Recently, there have been some interesting works which use information-theoretic approach to find
PAC-bounds on generalization errors for machine learning [14, 15] and deep learning [16].
∗

Use footnote for providing further information about author (webpage, alternative address)—not for
acknowledging funding agencies.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

