Characteristics of Harmful Text:
Towards Rigorous Benchmarking of Language Models
Maribeth Rauh⇤

John Mellor

Laura Weidinger
Iason Gabriel

Jonathan Uesato

Sumanth Dathathri
William Isaac

Po-Sen Huang

Amelia Glaese

Johannes Welbl
Geoffrey Irving

Lisa Anne Hendricks

DeepMind

Abstract
Large language models produce human-like text that drives a growing number of
applications. However, recent literature and, increasingly, real world observations,
have demonstrated that these models can generate language that is toxic, biased,
untruthful or otherwise harmful. Though work to evaluate language model harms
is under way, translating foresight about which harms may arise into rigorous
benchmarks is not straightforward. To facilitate this translation, we outline six ways
of characterizing harmful text which merit explicit consideration when designing
new benchmarks. We then use these characteristics as a lens to identify trends
and gaps in existing benchmarks. Finally, we apply them in a case study of the
Perspective API, a toxicity classifier that is widely used in harm benchmarks. Our
characteristics provide one piece of the bridge that translates between foresight and
effective evaluation.

1

Introduction

Pretrained autoregressive English language models (LMs) like GPT-3 [21], Jurassic-1 [72], and
Gopher [85] cover a vast space of possible use cases [19], from code generation to customer-service
chat.2 Text generated by LMs also has the potential to cause harm if models are not developed and
deployed carefully. In light of this, many works have documented both existing and potential harms
arising from generated text [11, 102, 62], ranging from misinformation [74] to the reinforcement of
social biases through the perpetuation of stereotypes [95].
An emerging body of work is already dedicated to benchmarking LM harms (see Table 1). However,
for many known or anticipated harms, current evaluation tools are imperfect [17, 106, 103, 95]. This
is supported by the work analyzing the Gopher model [85], in which the authors observed a variety
of shortcomings in benchmarks, such as unclear desiderata and poorly defined demographic groups.
Outside language modeling, the broader machine learning (ML) fairness community has documented
sociotechnical3 insights that can help bridge the gap between foresight and evaluation, drawing on
domains including medical applications [80], facial recognition [22], and recommender systems [41].
⇤

Corresponding author: mbrauh@deepmind.com
We refer to English language models as language models as all models and benchmarks in this study are in
English.
3
A term describing “systems that consist of a combination of technical and social components” [92].
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

