Parameter tuning and model selection in Optimal
Transport with semi-dual Brenier formulation
Adrien Vacher
LIGM, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS
MOKAPLAN, INRIA
adrien.vacher@univ-eiffel.fr

François-Xavier Vialard
LIGM, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS
francois-xavier.vialard@univ-eiffel.fr

Abstract
Over the past few years, numerous computational models have been developed to
solve Optimal Transport (OT) in a stochastic setting, where distributions are represented by samples and where the goal is to find the closest map to the ground truth
OT map, unknown in practical settings. So far, no quantitative criterion has yet
been put forward to tune the parameters of these models and select maps that best
approximate the ground truth. To perform this task, we propose to leverage the
Brenier formulation of OT. Theoretically, we show that this formulation guarantees that, up to sharp a distortion parameter depending on the smoothness/strong
convexity and a statistical deviation term, the selected map achieves the lowest
quadratic error to the ground truth. This criterion, estimated via convex optimization, enables parameter tuning and model selection among entropic regularization
of OT, input convex neural networks and smooth and strongly convex nearestBrenier (SSNB) models. We also use this criterion to question the use of OT in
Domain-Adaptation (DA). In a standard DA experiment, it enables us to identify
the potential that is closest to the true OT map between the source and the target.
Yet, we observe that this selected potential is far from being the one that performs
best for the downstream transfer classification task.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) is a tool to compare probability distributions that has found numerous applications ranging from economics [Galichon, 2016, Chiappori et al., 2010], unsupervised learning
[Sim et al., 2020], shape matching [Feydy et al., 2017], NLP [Chen et al., 2019, Alvarez-Melis and
Jaakkola, 2018] and biology [Schiebinger et al., 2019, Tong et al., 2020]. In its dual form, OT is a
linear maximization problem on functions, which are called potentials, subject to a cost constraint.
When the cost is chosen to be quadratic, the solutions of this problem are convex and their gradient
provide optimal maps that transport one distribution onto the other. In a significant part of the OT
applications, the transport map itself is the object of interest. For instance in Domain-Adaptation,
the source distribution is transported on the target [Courty et al., 2017], for color transfer one color
histogram is transported on the other [Rabin et al., 2014] and in biology, the RNA cell expression
profile is interpolated in time using OT maps [Schiebinger et al., 2019]. Over the past few years,
many models and computational methods [Cuturi, 2013, Genevay et al., 2016, Seguy et al., 2018,
Bonneel and Coeurjolly, 2019, Vacher et al., 2021] were proposed and implemented to estimate
these optimal transport maps. Under regularity assumptions, some of these models were shown to
accurately estimate the original transport map provided the models use optimal parameters [Pooladian and Niles-Weed, 2021, Manole et al., 2021]. When such results exist, either the parameters to
use are explicit but they are impractical as they rely on generic worst-case bounds, either they involve
unavailable constants. To the best of our knowledge, no quantitative criterion has yet been devised
to tune the parameters of OT models and later discriminate between calibrated models. The setting
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

