Inductive Logical Query Answering
in Knowledge Graphs
Mikhail Galkin
Mila, McGill University
mikhail.galkin@mila.quebec
Hongyu Ren
Stanford University
hyren@stanford.edu

Zhaocheng Zhu
Mila, Université de Montréal
zhuzhaoc@mila.quebec
Jian Tang
Mila, HEC Montréal, CIFAR AI Chair
jian.tang@hec.ca

Abstract
Formulating and answering logical queries is a standard communication interface
for knowledge graphs (KGs). Alleviating the notorious incompleteness of realworld KGs, neural methods achieved impressive results in link prediction and complex query answering tasks by learning representations of entities, relations, and
queries. Still, most existing query answering methods rely on transductive entity
embeddings and cannot generalize to KGs containing new entities without retraining the entity embeddings. In this work, we study the inductive query answering
task where inference is performed on a graph containing new entities with queries
over both seen and unseen entities. To this end, we devise two mechanisms leveraging inductive node and relational structure representations powered by graph
neural networks (GNNs). Experimentally, we show that inductive models are able
to perform logical reasoning at inference time over unseen nodes generalizing to
graphs up to 500% larger than training ones. Exploring the efficiency–effectiveness
trade-off, we find the inductive relational structure representation method generally
achieves higher performance, while the inductive node representation method is
able to answer complex queries in the inference-only regime without any training on queries and scales to graphs of millions of nodes. Code is available at
https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/InductiveQE.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, querying knowledge graphs (KGs) is performed via databases using structured query
languages like SPARQL. Databases can answer complex queries relatively fast under the assumption
of completeness, i.e., there is no missing information in the graph. In practice, however, KGs are
notoriously incomplete [32]. Embedding-based methods that learn vector representations of entities
and relations are known to be effective in simple link prediction predicting heads or tails of query
patterns (head, relation, ?), e.g., (Einstein, graduate, ?), as common in KG completion [1, 17].
Complex queries are graph patterns expressed in a subset of first-order logic (FOL) with operators such
as intersection (^), union (_), negation (¬) and existentially quantified (9) variables1 , e.g., ?U.9V :
Win(NobelPrize, V ) ^ Citizen(USA, V ) ^ Graduate(V, U ) (Fig. 1). Complex queries define a
superset of KG completion. The conventional KG completion (link prediction) task can be viewed
as a complex query with a single triplet pattern without logical operators, e.g., Citizen(USA, V ),
which we also denote as a projection query.
1

The universal quantifier (8) is often discarded as in real-world KGs there is no node connected to all others.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

