When Do Flat Minima Optimizers Work?

Jean Kaddour∗
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London

Linqing Liu∗
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London

Ricardo Silva
Department of Statistical Science
University College London

Matt J. Kusner
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London

Abstract
Recently, flat-minima optimizers, which seek to find parameters in low-loss neighborhoods, have been shown to improve a neural network’s generalization performance over stochastic and adaptive gradient-based optimizers. Two methods have
received significant attention due to their scalability: 1. Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA), and 2. Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM). However, there has
been limited investigation into their properties and no systematic benchmarking of
them across different domains. We fill this gap here by comparing the loss surfaces
of the models trained with each method and through broad benchmarking across
computer vision, natural language processing, and graph representation learning
tasks. We discover several surprising findings from these results, which we hope
will help researchers further improve deep learning optimizers, and practitioners
identify the right optimizer for their problem.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods are central to neural network optimization [6]. Recently,
one class of algorithms has focused on biasing SGD methods towards so-called ‘flat’ minima, which
are located in large weight space regions with very similar low loss values [43]. Theoretical and
empirical studies [21, 77, 9, 55, 49, 5, 12] postulate that such flatter regions generalize better than
sharper minima, e.g., due to the flat minimizer’s robustness against loss function shifts between
train and test data, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Two popular flat-minima optimization approaches are: 1.
Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA) [48], and 2. Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) [22].
While both strategies aim to find flatter minima, they operate much differently. On the one hand, SWA
is based on the intuition that, near a flat minimum, gradients are smaller, leaving many iterates in that
flat region. Therefore, averaging iterates will produce a solution that is pulled towards these flatter
regions, see Fig. 1, top. On the other hand, SAM minimizes the maximum loss around a neighborhood
of the current iterate. This way, a region around the iterate is designed to have uniformly low loss;
see Fig. 1, bottom. Crucially, SAM requires an additional forward/backward pass for each parameter
update, making it more expensive than SWA.
Despite the successes [76, 3, 51, 12, 4] of SWA and SAM in some domains, we are unaware of a
systematic comparison between them that would help practitioners to choose the right optimizer
for their problem and researchers to develop better optimizers. The SWA [48] paper was published
in 2018, and the SAM [22] paper in 2021; however, the SAM paper, and its most noticeable
follow-ups [65, 12, 103], do not compare against SWA. Further, there is very limited overlap in
∗

Equal contribution, correspondence to {jean.kaddour,linqing.liu}.20@ucl.ac.uk

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

