Sound and Complete Verification of
Polynomial Networks

Elias Abad Rocamora∗
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
abad.elias00@gmail.com

Mehmet Fatih Sahin
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
mehmet.sahin@epfl.ch

Grigorios G Chrysos
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
grigorios.chrysos@epfl.ch

Fanghui Liu
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
fanghui.liu@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
Polynomial Networks (PNs) have demonstrated promising performance on face
and image recognition recently. However, robustness of PNs is unclear and thus
obtaining certificates becomes imperative for enabling their adoption in real-world
applications. Existing verification algorithms on ReLU neural networks (NNs)
based on classical branch and bound (BaB) techniques cannot be trivially applied
to PN verification. In this work, we devise a new bounding method, equipped
with BaB for global convergence guarantees, called Verification of Polynomial
Networks or VPN for short. One key insight is that we obtain much tighter
bounds than the interval bound propagation (IBP) and DeepT-Fast [Bonaert et al.,
2021] baselines. This enables sound and complete PN verification with empirical
validation on MNIST, CIFAR10 and STL10 datasets. We believe our method
has its own interest to NN verification. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/megaelius/PNVerification.

1

Introduction

Polynomial Networks (PNs) have demonstrated promising performance across image recognition and
generation [Chrysos et al., 2021, Chrysos and Panagakis, 2020] being state-of-the-art on large-scale
face recognition2 .Unlike the conventional Neural Networks (NNs), where non-linearitiy is introduced
with the use of activation functions [LeCun et al., 2015], PNs are able to learn non-linear mappings
without the need of activation functions by exploiting multiplicative interactions (Hadamard products).
Recent works have uncovered interesting properties of PNs in terms of model expressivity [Fan et al.,
2021] and spectral bias [Choraria et al., 2022]. However, one critical issue before considering PNs
for real-world applications is their robustness.
Neural networks are prone to small (often imperceptible to the human eye), but malicious perturbations
in the input data points [Szegedy et al., 2014, Goodfellow et al., 2015]. Those perturbations can have
a detrimental effect on image recognition systems, e.g., as illustrated in face recognition [Goswami
et al., 2019, Zhong and Deng, 2019, Dong et al., 2019, Li et al., 2020]. Guarding against such
attacks has so far proven futile [Shafahi et al., 2019, Dou et al., 2018]. Instead, a flurry of research
∗
Work developed during an exchange coming from Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), Spain.
Currently at Universidad Carlos III de Madrid (UC3M).
2
https://paperswithcode.com/sota/face-verification-on-megaface

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

