Learning Active Camera for Multi-Object Navigation

Peihao Chen1,6 Dongyu Ji1 Kunyang Lin1,2 Weiwen Hu1 Wenbing Huang5
Thomas H. Li6 Mingkui Tan1,7˚ Chuang Gan3,4
1
South China University of Technology,
2
Pazhou Laboratory, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 4 UMass Amherst,
5
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China,
6
Information Technology R&D Innovation Center of Peking University,
7
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education,
phchencs@gmail.com, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Getting robots to navigate to multiple objects autonomously is essential yet difficult
in robot applications. One of the key challenges is how to explore environments
efficiently with camera sensors only. Existing navigation methods mainly focus on
fixed cameras and few attempts have been made to navigate with active cameras.
As a result, the agent may take a very long time to perceive the environment
due to limited camera scope. In contrast, humans typically gain a larger field
of view by looking around for a better perception of the environment. How to
make robots perceive the environment as efficiently as humans is a fundamental
problem in robotics. In this paper, we consider navigating to multiple objects more
efficiently with active cameras. Specifically, we cast moving camera to a Markov
Decision Process and reformulate the active camera problem as a reinforcement
learning problem. However, we have to address two new challenges: 1) how to
learn a good camera policy in complex environments and 2) how to coordinate
it with the navigation policy. To address these, we carefully design a reward
function to encourage the agent to explore more areas by moving camera actively.
Moreover, we exploit human experience to infer a rule-based camera action to
guide the learning process. Last, to better coordinate two kinds of policies, the
camera policy takes navigation actions into account when making camera moving
decisions. Experimental results show our camera policy consistently improves the
performance of multi-object navigation over four baselines on two datasets.

1

Introduction

In the multi-object navigation task, an intelligent embodied agent needs to navigate to multiple
goal objects in a 3D environment. Typically, no pre-computed map is available and the agent
needs to use a stream of egocentric observations to perceive the environment. This navigation
ability is the basis for indoor robots and embodied AI. Significant recent progress on this problem
can be attributed to the availability of large-scale visually rich 3D datasets [71, 7, 66, 69, 32, 29],
developments in high-quality 3D simulators [71, 61, 46, 2, 30], and research on deep memorybased architectures that combine geometry and semantics for learning representations of the 3D
environment [8, 68, 58, 19, 31].
Despite these advances, how to efficiently perceive the environment and locate goal objects is still an
unsolved problem. Agents in current research [9, 12, 49] perceive the environment via an RGB-D
camera. However, the camera is set to look forward and the range of its view is often limited. As a
˚

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

