Can Hybrid Geometric Scattering Networks Help
Solve the Maximum Clique Problem?

Yimeng Min∗
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
min@cs.cornell.edu

Michael A. Perlmutter
Department of Mathematics
University of California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
perlmutter@ucla.edu

Frederik Wenkel∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Université de Montréal
Mila – Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, QC, Canada
frederik.wenkel@umontreal.ca
Guy Wolf
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Université de Montréal
Mila – Quebec AI Institute
Montreal, QC, Canada
guy.wolf@umontreal.ca

Abstract
We propose a geometric scattering-based graph neural network (GNN) for approximating solutions of the NP-hard maximum clique (MC) problem. We construct
a loss function with two terms, one which encourages the network to find highly
connected nodes and the other which acts as a surrogate for the constraint that the
nodes form a clique. We then use this loss to train an efficient GNN architecture
that outputs a vector representing the probability for each node to be part of the
MC and apply a rule-based decoder to make our final prediction. The incorporation
of the scattering transform alleviates the so-called oversmoothing problem that is
often encountered in GNNs and would degrade the performance of our proposed
setup. Our empirical results demonstrate that our method outperforms representative GNN baselines in terms of solution accuracy and inference speed as well
as conventional solvers like Gurobi with limited time budgets. Furthermore, our
scattering model is very parameter efficient with only ∼ 0.1% of the number of
parameters compared to previous GNN baseline models.

1

Introduction

The success of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for a variety of machine learning tasks [Scarselli
et al., 2008, Gori et al., 2005, Kipf and Welling, 2016, Gilmer et al., 2017] has sparked interests in
using GNNs to solve graph combinatorial optimization (CO) problems [Li et al., 2018a, Karalias and
Loukas, 2020]. For example, Joshi et al. [2019] introduces a GNN-based method for approximately
solving the travelling salesman problem (TSP), while Karalias and Loukas [2020] approximate
solutions of the maximum clique (MC) problem. Solving such problems in an end-to-end fashion via
GNNs is challenging for several reasons. First of all, many CO problems are provably either NP-hard
or NP-complete. Therefore, learning CO solvers in a supervised or semi-supervised fashion can be
computationally infeasible since the cost of generating the ground truth labels grows exponentially
with the problem size. Second, the solution to the CO problems must satisfy a number of constraints
∗

Equal contribution; order determined alphabetically

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

