Learning Infinite-Horizon Average-Reward Restless
Multi-Action Bandits via Index Awareness
Guojun Xiong, Shufan Wang, Jian Li
SUNY-Binghamton University
{gxiong1,swang214,lij}@binghamton.edu

Abstract
We consider the online restless bandits with average-reward and multiple actions,
where the state of each arm evolves according to a Markov decision process
(MDP), and the reward of pulling an arm depends on both the current state of
the corresponding MDP and the action taken. Since finding the optimal control
is typically intractable for restless bandits, existing learning algorithms are often
computationally expensive or with a regret bound that is exponential in the number
of arms and states. In this paper, we advocate index-aware reinforcement learning
(RL) solutions to design RL algorithms operating on a much smaller dimensional
subspace by exploiting the inherent structure in restless bandits. Specifically, we
first propose novel index policies to address dimensionality concerns, which are
provably optimal. We then leverage the indices to develop two low-complexity
index-aware RL algorithms, namely, (i) GM-R2MAB, which has access to a generative
model; and (ii) UC-R2MAB, which learns the model using an upper confidence
style online exploitation method. We prove that both algorithms achieve a sublinear regret that is only polynomial in the number of arms and states. A key
differentiator between our algorithms and existing ones stems from the fact that our
RL algorithms contain a novel exploitation that leverages our proposed provably
optimal index policies for decision-makings.

1

Introduction

Restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) [64] have been used to model a variety of sequential decision
making problems such as congestion control [7, 6], job scheduling [51, 35, 13, 68], wireless communication [57, 21, 9, 20, 71], healthcare [23, 14, 44, 47, 48, 40], queueing systems [28, 32, 5, 16, 42, 41],
and cloud computing [17, 52, 67]. In RMAB, there is a collection of N arms, each of which is endowed
with a state that evolves independently according to a two-action Markov Decision Process (MDP)
[55]. If the arm is “pulled” or “activated” at any moment in time, it advances stochastically according
to one transition kernel, and if not, then it advances according to a different kernel. Rewards are
generated with each transition, and the goal is to maximize the expected total reward over an infinite
horizon, subject to a constraint on the number of arms activated at any moment in time.
A critical limitation of classical RMAB frameworks is that only two actions, either pulled or not pulled,
are allowed for each arm. This is restrictive since the decision maker in many applications often
has access to multiple actions for each arm [40, 18]. To this end, we consider an under-examined
generalization of RMAB that allows for multiple actions per arm with different degrees of costs, which
we call the restless multi-action multi-armed bandits, dubbed as R2MAB, in the infinite-horizon averagereward setting. Our objective is to develop simple reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to solve
R2MAB without knowing the underlying MDPs associated with each arm. Although RMAB or R2MAB has
found its success in many applications as aforementioned, the fundamental theoretical understanding
of how to develop low computation-complexity and order-of-optimal regret RL algorithms, two of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

