Benefits of Permutation-Equivariance in
Auction Mechanisms
Tian Qin1, 2∗ Fengxiang He2∗ Dingfeng Shi2 Wenbing Huang3, 4 Dacheng Tao2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 JD Explore Academy, JD.com Inc.
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
tqin@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fengxiang.f.he@gmail.com,
shidingfeng@buaa.edu.cn, hwenbing@126.com, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Designing an incentive-compatible auction mechanism that maximizes the auctioneer’s revenue while minimizes the bidders’ ex-post regret is an important yet
intricate problem in economics. Remarkable progress has been achieved through
learning the optimal auction mechanism by neural networks. In this paper, we
consider the popular additive valuation and symmetric valuation setting; i.e., the
valuation for a set of items is defined as the sum of all items’ valuations in the
set, and the valuation distribution is invariant when the bidders and/or the items
are permutated. We prove that permutation-equivariant neural networks have significant advantages: the permutation-equivariance decreases the expected ex-post
regret, improves the model generalizability, while maintains the expected revenue
invariant. This implies that the permutation-equivariance helps approach the theoretically optimal dominant strategy incentive compatible condition, and reduces
the required sample complexity for desired generalization. Extensive experiments
fully support our theory. To our best knowledge, this is the first work towards
understanding the benefits of permutation-equivariance in auction mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Optimal auction design [30] has wide applications in economics, including computational advertising
[18], resource allocation [16], and supply chain [4]. In an auction, every bidder has a private valuation
profile over all items, and accordingly, submits her bid profile. An auctioneer collects the bids from
all bidders, and determines a feasible item allocation to the bidders as well as the prices the bidders
need to pay. Consequently, every bidder receives her utility. From the auctioneer’s perspective, the
optimal auction mechanism is required to maximize her revenue, defined as the sum of all bidders’
payments. From the aspect of the bidders, the optimal auction mechanism needs to incentivize every
bidder to bid their truthful valuation profiles (truthful bidding). This is summarized as the dominant
strategy incentive compatible (DSIC) condition; i.e., truthful bidding is always the dominant strategy
for every bidder [25].
The optimal auction mechanism can be approximated via neural networks [12, 29, 10]. The “approximation error”, or the “distance” to the DSIC condition, is usually measured by the ex-post regret,
defined as the gap between the bidder’s utility of truthful bidding and the utility when her bid profile
is only the best to herself (selfish bidding), while the bid profiles of all other bidders are fixed in both
cases [12]. When a bidder’s ex-post regret is 0, truthful bidding is her dominant strategy. Therefore,
the optimal auction design can be modeled as a linear programming problem, where the object is to
maximize the expected revenue subject to the expected ex-post regret being 0 for all bidders [12].
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

