Diffusion-LM Improves Controllable Text Generation
Xiang Lisa Li
Stanford University
xlisali@stanford.edu

John Thickstun
Stanford University
jthickst@stanford.edu

Percy Liang
Stanford Univeristy
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Ishaan Gulrajani
Stanford Univeristy
igul@stanford.edu

Tatsunori B. Hashimoto
Stanford Univeristy
thashim@stanford.edu

Abstract
Controlling the behavior of language models (LMs) without re-training is a major
open problem in natural language generation. While recent works have demonstrated successes on controlling simple sentence attributes (e.g., sentiment), there
has been little progress on complex, fine-grained controls (e.g., syntactic structure).
To address this challenge, we develop a new non-autoregressive language model
based on continuous diffusions that we call Diffusion-LM. Building upon the recent
successes of diffusion models in continuous domains, Diffusion-LM iteratively
denoises a sequence of Gaussian vectors into word vectors, yielding a sequence
of intermediate latent variables. The continuous, hierarchical nature of these intermediate variables enables a simple gradient-based algorithm to perform complex,
controllable generation tasks. We demonstrate successful control of Diffusion-LM
for six challenging fine-grained control tasks, significantly outperforming prior
work.1

1

Introduction

Large autoregressive language models (LMs) are capable of generating high quality text [39, 3, 5, 56],
but in order to reliably deploy these LMs in real world applications, the text generation process needs
to be controllable: we need to generate text that satisfies desired requirements (e.g. topic, syntactic
structure). A natural approach for controlling a LM would be to fine-tune the LM using supervised
data of the form (control, text) [18]. However, updating the LM parameters for each control task
can be expensive and does not allow for compositions of multiple controls (e.g. generate text that
is both positive sentiment and non-toxic). This motivates light-weight and modular plug-and-play
approaches [6] that keep the LM frozen and steer the generation process using an external classifier
that measures how well the generated text satisfies the control. But steering a frozen autoregressive
LM has been shown to be difficult, and existing successes have been limited to simple, attribute-level
controls (e.g., sentiment or topic) [6, 25, 55].
In order to tackle more complex controls, we propose Diffusion-LM, a new language model based
on continuous diffusions. Diffusion-LM starts with a sequence of Gaussian noise vectors and
incrementally denoises them into vectors corresponding to words, as shown in Figure 1. These
gradual denoising steps produce a hierarchy of continuous latent representations. We find that
this hierarchical and continuous latent variable enables simple, gradient-based methods to perform
complex control tasks such as constraining the parse tree of a generated sequence.
Continuous diffusion models have been extremely successful in vision and audio domains [13, 24,
41, 8, 4], but they have not been applied to text because of the inherently discrete nature of text
1

Code is available at https://github.com/XiangLi1999/Diffusion-LM.git

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

