Memory Safe Computations with XLA Compiler

Artem Artemev
Imperial College London
Secondmind
a.artemev20@imperial.ac.uk
Tilman Roeder
Imperial College London
tilman.roeder17@imperial.ac.uk

Yuze An
Imperial College London
yuze.an21@imperial.ac.uk

Mark van der Wilk
Imperial College London
m.vdwilk@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Software packages like TensorFlow and PyTorch are designed to support linear
algebra operations, and their speed and usability determine their success. However,
by prioritising speed, they often neglect memory requirements. As a consequence,
the implementations of memory-intensive algorithms that are convenient in terms
of software design can often not be run for large problems due to memory overflows. Memory-efficient solutions require complex programming approaches with
significant logic outside the computational framework. This impairs the adoption
and use of such algorithms. To address this, we developed an XLA compiler
extension1 that adjusts the computational data-flow representation of an algorithm
according to a user-specified memory limit. We show that k-nearest neighbour,
sparse Gaussian process regression methods and Transformers can be run on a
single device at a much larger scale, where standard implementations would have
failed. Our approach leads to better use of hardware resources. We believe that
further focus on removing memory constraints at a compiler level will widen the
range of machine learning methods that can be developed in the future.

1

Introduction

Progress in science is inextricably linked with advances in scientific computing, in terms of both
software and hardware. This is particularly noticeable in machine learning through the huge impact
of numerical software packages supporting automatic differentiation (Baydin et al., 2018). Packages
such as TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016), PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), or JAX (Bradbury et al.,
2018) greatly accelerated 1) the implementation of gradient-based optimisation procedures by eliminating error-prone manual differentiation, and 2) the execution of code by leveraging modern and
heterogeneous hardware (e.g. GPU, TPU or IPU). A large portion of this impact is attributable to
the accessible and user-friendly form that these features were delivered in. This contributed to the
growth in the machine learning community, in terms of methodological researchers, as well as the
wider scientific audience and practitioners.
The aforementioned software frameworks work by chaining together efficient implementations of
mathematical operations (known as kernels). By providing implementations that are tailored to various
types of hardware, a speed-optimised implementation can be obtained. While speed is certainly
important to pursue, many algorithms face a different challenge: hardware memory constraints. Often,
these have a larger impact, as memory constraint violations can lead to the execution terminating
before an answer is obtained. This make-or-break property is particularly noticeable on GPUs, where
1

The code is available at https://github.com/awav/tensorflow.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

