A Mixture of Surprises for Unsupervised
Reinforcement Learning

Andrew Zhao 1∗

Matthieu Gaetan Lin 2∗

Yangguang Li3

Yong-Jin Liu2†

Gao Huang 1†
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science, BNRist, Tsinghua University
3
SenseTime
{zqc21,lyh21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
liyangguang@sensetime.com
{liuyongjin,gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
1

Abstract
Unsupervised reinforcement learning aims at learning a generalist policy in a
reward-free manner for fast adaptation to downstream tasks. Most of the existing
methods propose to provide an intrinsic reward based on surprise. Maximizing
or minimizing surprise drives the agent to either explore or gain control over its
environment. However, both strategies rely on a strong assumption: the entropy of
the environment’s dynamics is either high or low. This assumption may not always
hold in real-world scenarios, where the entropy of the environment’s dynamics
may be unknown. Hence, choosing between the two objectives is a dilemma. We
propose a novel yet simple mixture of policies to address this concern, allowing us
to optimize an objective that simultaneously maximizes and minimizes the surprise.
Concretely, we train one mixture component whose objective is to maximize
the surprise and another whose objective is to minimize the surprise. Hence,
our method does not make assumptions about the entropy of the environment’s
dynamics. We call our method a Mixture Of SurpriseS (MOSS) for unsupervised
reinforcement learning. Experimental results show that our simple method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on the URLB benchmark, outperforming previous
pure surprise maximization-based objectives. Our code is available at: https:
//github.com/LeapLabTHU/MOSS.

1

Introduction

Humans can learn meaningful behaviors without external supervision, i.e., in an unsupervised manner,
and then adapt those behaviors to new tasks [3]. Inspired by this, unsupervised reinforcement
learning decomposes the reinforcement learning (RL) problem into a pretraining phase and a finetune
phase [29]. During a pretraining phase, an agent prepares all possible tasks that a user might select.
Afterward, the agent tries to figure out the selected task as quickly as possible during finetuning [22].
Doing so allows solving the RL problem in a meaningful order [3], e.g., a cook first has to look at
what is in the fridge before deciding what to cook. Unsupervised representation learning has shown
great success in computer vision [25] and natural language processing [9]; however, one challenge is
that RL includes both behavior learning and representation learning [29, 49].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

