An Analytical Theory of Curriculum Learning in
Teacher-Student Networks
Luca Saglietti†,∗ , Stefano Sarao Mannelli‡,∗ , and Andrew Saxe‡,§

Abstract
In animals and humans, curriculum learning—presenting data in a curated order—
is critical to rapid learning and effective pedagogy. A long history of experiments
has demonstrated the impact of curricula in a variety of animals but, despite its
ubiquitous presence, a theoretical understanding of the phenomenon is still lacking.
Surprisingly, in contrast to animal learning, curricula strategies are not widely used
in machine learning and recent simulation studies reach the conclusion that curricula are moderately effective or even ineffective in most cases. This stark difference
in the importance of curriculum raises a fundamental theoretical question: when
and why does curriculum learning help? In this work, we analyse a prototypical
neural network model of curriculum learning in the high-dimensional limit, employing statistical physics methods. We study a task in which a sparse set of informative
features are embedded amidst a large set of noisy features. We analytically derive
average learning trajectories for simple neural networks on this task, which establish a clear speed benefit for curriculum learning in the online setting. However,
when training experiences can be stored and replayed the advantage of curriculum in standard neural networks disappears, in line with observations from the
deep learning literature. Inspired by synaptic consolidation techniques developed
to combat catastrophic forgetting, we propose curriculum-aware algorithms that
consolidate synapses at curriculum change points and investigate whether this can
boost the benefits of curricula. We derive generalisation performance as a function
of consolidation strength (implemented as an L2 regularisation/elastic coupling
connecting learning phases), and show that curriculum-aware algorithms can yield
a large improvement in test performance. Our reduced analytical descriptions help
reconcile apparently conflicting empirical results, trace regimes where curriculum
learning yields the largest gains, and provide experimentally-accessible predictions
for the impact of task parameters on curriculum benefits. More broadly, our results
suggest that fully exploiting a curriculum may require explicit adjustments in the
loss.

1

Introduction

Presenting learning materials in a meaningful order according to a curriculum greatly helps learning
in animals and humans [1, 2, 3, 4], and is considered an essential aspect of good pedagogy [5].
For example, humans have been shown to learn visual discriminations faster when presented with
examples that exaggerate the relevant difference between classes, a phenomenon known as “fading”
[6, 7, 8]. Beyond humans, curricula in the form of “shaping” or “staircase” procedures are a nearuniversal feature of task designs in animal studies, without which training often fails entirely. For
† Department of Computing Sciences, Bocconi University.
‡ Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit & Sainsbury Wellcome Centre, University College London.
§ FAIR, Meta AI
∗ Equal contributions.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

