LLM.int8(): 8-bit Matrix Multiplication
for Transformers at Scale
Tim Dettmersλ∗

Mike Lewis†

Younes Belkada§∓

Luke Zettlemoyer†λ

University of Washingtonλ
Facebook AI Research†
Hugging Face§
ENS Paris-Saclay∓

Abstract
Large language models have been widely adopted but require significant GPU
memory for inference. We develop a procedure for Int8 matrix multiplication for
feed-forward and attention projection layers in transformers, which cut the memory
needed for inference by half while retaining full precision performance. With our
method, a 175B parameter 16/32-bit checkpoint can be loaded, converted to Int8,
and used immediately without performance degradation. This is made possible
by understanding and working around properties of highly systematic emergent
features in transformer language models that dominate attention and transformer
predictive performance. To cope with these features, we develop a two-part quantization procedure, LLM.int8(). We first use vector-wise quantization with separate
normalization constants for each inner product in the matrix multiplication, to
quantize most of the features. However, for the emergent outliers, we also include
a new mixed-precision decomposition scheme, which isolates the outlier feature
dimensions into a 16-bit matrix multiplication while still more than 99.9% of values
are multiplied in 8-bit. Using LLM.int8(), we show empirically it is possible to
perform inference in LLMs with up to 175B parameters without any performance
degradation. This result makes such models much more accessible, for example
making it possible to use OPT-175B/BLOOM on a single server with consumer
GPUs. We open source our software.

1

Introduction

Large pretrained language models are widely adopted in NLP (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al.,
2019; Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022) but require significant memory for inference. For
large transformer language models at and beyond 6.7B parameters, the feed-forward and attention
projection layers and their matrix multiplication operations are responsible for 95%2 of consumed
parameters and 65-85% of all computation (Ilharco et al., 2020). One way to reduce the size of the
parameters is to quantize them to less bits and use low-bit-precision matrix multiplication. With this
goal in mind, 8-bit quantization methods for transformers have been developed (Chen et al., 2020;
Lin et al., 2020; Zafrir et al., 2019; Shen et al., 2020). While these methods reduce memory use,
they degrade performance, usually require tuning quantization further after training, and have only
been studied for models with less than 350M parameters. Degradation-free quantization up to 350M
parameters is poorly understood, and multi-billion parameter quantization remains an open challenge.
∗
2

Majority of research done as a visiting researcher at Facebook AI Research.
Other parameters come mostly from the embedding layer. A tiny amount comes from norms and biases.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

