Entropy-Driven Mixed-Precision Quantization for
Deep Network Design

Zhenhong Sun1

Ce Ge1

Hesen Chen1
1

Alibaba Group

2

Junyan Wang1,2,∗
Hao Li1

Ming Lin1,3∗

Xiuyu Sun1†

University of New South Wales

3

Amazon.com, Inc

Abstract
Deploying deep convolutional neural networks on Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices
is challenging due to the limited computational resources, such as limited SRAM
memory and Flash storage. Previous works re-design a small network for IoT
devices, and then compress the network size by mixed-precision quantization.
This two-stage procedure cannot optimize the architecture and the corresponding
quantization jointly, leading to sub-optimal tiny deep models. In this work, we
propose a one-stage solution that optimizes both jointly and automatically. The key
idea of our approach is to cast the joint architecture design and quantization as an
Entropy Maximization process. Particularly, our algorithm automatically designs
a tiny deep model such that: 1) Its representation capacity measured by entropy
is maximized under the given computational budget; 2) Each layer is assigned
with a proper quantization precision; 3) The overall design loop can be done on
CPU, and no GPU is required. More impressively, our method can directly search
high-expressiveness architecture for IoT devices within less than half a CPU hour.
Extensive experiments on three widely adopted benchmarks, ImageNet, VWW
and WIDER FACE, demonstrate that our method can achieve the state-of-the-art
performance in the tiny deep model regime. Code and pre-trained models are
available at https://github.com/alibaba/lightweight-neural-architecture-search.

1

Introduction

With the attention of many intelligent IoT applications that have grown recently, the demand for lowcost and low-energy IoT devices is significantly increasing, such as tiny NPUs and microcontroller
units (MCUs). These devices have tight-resources like hundreds KB on-chip memory (SRAM),
MB-level storage (Flash) and low speed computing ability. Thus, how to design and deploy efficient
tiny deep models for IoT devices is becoming a main topic in Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML) [1].
As most IoT devices have very limited on-chip memory, one of the most critical challenges in TinyML
is to control the peak memory during inference. Some works re-design the network architecture to
maintain the peak memory occupation [27, 39, 10, 17, 33, 16] by network transformed techniques, in
which an accessible and efficient technique is to slice input images into multiple patches so that the
inference can be split into multiple independent processes to meet the peak memory constraint for
once calculation. In addition, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a popular tool to re-design tiny
deep models automatically [10, 17, 33, 16] with an elaborate search space. After re-designing the
∗
†

Work done in Alibaba Group.
Correspondence to: Xiuyu Sun <xiuyu.sxy@alibaba-inc.com>.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

