On the inability of Gaussian process regression to
optimally learn compositional functions

Matteo Giordano∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
matteo.giordano@stats.ox.ac.uk

Kolyan Ray∗
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
kolyan.ray@imperial.ac.uk

Johannes Schmidt-Hieber∗
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Twente
a.j.schmidt-hieber@utwente.nl

Abstract
We rigorously prove that deep Gaussian process priors can outperform Gaussian
process priors if the target function has a compositional structure. To this end,
we study information-theoretic lower bounds for posterior contraction rates for
Gaussian process regression in a continuous regression model. We show that if
the true function is a generalized additive function, then the posterior based on
any mean-zero Gaussian process can only recover the truth at a rate that is strictly
slower than the minimax rate by a factor that is polynomially suboptimal in the
sample size n.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical methods are at the heart of modern machine learning and provide state of the art
performance for a variety of different problems. While the role of the depth in deep neural networks
has been extensively investigated [37, 44, 45, 24, 33], the theory underlying deep Gaussian process
priors is still in its infancy. In this work we identify a structured recovery problem for which deep
Gaussian process priors are known to achieve near optimal behavior. By proving that for this problem
any Gaussian process prior will lead to a sub-optimal posterior shrinkage behavior, we provide a
theoretical justification for the use of deep methods for Bayesians.
Gaussian process (GP) priors are arguably the most widely used Bayesian nonparametric priors in
machine learning, having found success in multiple settings [26]. Reasons for their popularity include
their interpretability, ability to flexibly model target functions, model spatial or temporal correlations,
incorporate prior knowledge such as stationarity, periodicity or smoothness, and their provision of
uncertainty quantification. This work establishes information-theoretic bounds on the inability of
GPs to optimally model generalized additive models, thereby quantifying certain limitations of GP
methods.
We will study the performance of GPs in a continuous analogue of nonparametric regression via
quantifying the speed of posterior concentration/contraction around the true regression function. This
is a frequentist assessment that measures the typical behaviour of the posterior distribution under
the true generative model. The performance of Bayesian methods is known to be sensitive to the
choice of prior, particularly in high- and infinite-dimensional settings [11, 20], and it is therefore
∗

All authors contributed equally.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

