Your Out-of-Distribution Detection
Method is Not Robust!
Mohammad Azizmalayeri, Arshia Soltani Moakhar, Arman Zarei,
Reihaneh Zohrabi, Mohammad Taghi Manzuri, Mohammad Hossein Rohban
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
{m.azizmalayeri, arshia.soltani, arman.zarei, zohrabi, manzuri, rohban}@sharif.edu

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has recently gained substantial attention due
to the importance of identifying out-of-domain samples in reliability and safety.
Although OOD detection methods have advanced by a great deal, they are still
susceptible to adversarial examples, which is a violation of their purpose. To
mitigate this issue, several defenses have recently been proposed. Nevertheless,
these efforts remained ineffective, as their evaluations are based on either small
perturbation sizes, or weak attacks. In this work, we re-examine these defenses
against an end-to-end PGD attack on in/out data with larger perturbation sizes, e.g.
up to commonly used ϵ = 8/255 for the CIFAR-10 dataset. Surprisingly, almost
all of these defenses perform worse than a random detection under the adversarial
setting. Next, we aim to provide a robust OOD detection method. In an ideal
defense, the training should expose the model to almost all possible adversarial
perturbations, which can be achieved through adversarial training. That is, such
training perturbations should based on both in- and out-of-distribution samples.
Therefore, unlike OOD detection in the standard setting, access to OOD, as well as
in-distribution, samples sounds necessary in the adversarial training setup. These
tips lead us to adopt generative OOD detection methods, such as OpenGAN, as
a baseline. We subsequently propose the Adversarially Trained Discriminator
(ATD), which utilizes a pre-trained robust model to extract robust features, and a
generator model to create OOD samples. We noted that, for the sake of training
stability, in the adversarial training of the discriminator, one should attack real
in-distribution as well as real outliers, but not generated outliers. Using ATD
with CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 as the in-distribution data, we could significantly
outperform all previous methods in the robust AUROC while maintaining high
standard AUROC and classification accuracy. The code repository is available at
https://github.com/rohban-lab/ATD.

1

Introduction

Advances in the deep neural networks have led to their widespread use in real-world applications, such
as object detection and image classification [1, 2]. These models have a high degree of generalizability
to the extent that they assign an arbitrarily high probability even to the samples not belonging to
the training set [3]. This phenomenon causes problems in safety-critical applications like medical
diagnosis or autonomous driving that should treat anomalous data differently.
The problem of identifying out-of-distribution data has been widely explored in different categories
such as Novelty Detection, Open-Set Recognition and Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection [4, 5, 6].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

