Understanding the Eluder Dimension

Gene Li
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
gene@ttic.edu

Pritish Kamath
Google Research
pritish@alum.mit.edu

Dylan J. Foster
Microsoft Research
dylanfoster@microsoft.com

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological
Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We provide new insights on eluder dimension, a complexity measure that has been
extensively used to bound the regret of algorithms for online bandits and reinforcement learning with function approximation. First, we study the relationship
between the eluder dimension for a function class and a generalized notion of
rank, defined for any monotone “activation” σ : R → R, which corresponds to the
minimal dimension required to represent the class as a generalized linear model.
It is known that when σ has derivatives bounded away from 0, σ-rank gives rise
to an upper bound on eluder dimension for any function class; we show however
that eluder dimension can be exponentially smaller than σ-rank. We also show that
the condition on the derivative is necessary; namely, when σ is the relu activation,
the eluder dimension can be exponentially larger than σ-rank. For binary-valued
function classes, we obtain a characterization of the eluder dimension in terms
of star number and threshold dimension, quantities which are relevant in active
learning and online learning respectively.

1

Introduction

Russo and Van Roy [37] introduced the notion of eluder dimension for a function class and used
it to analyze algorithms (based on the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) and Thompson Sampling
paradigms) for the multi-armed bandit problem with function approximation. Since then, eluder
dimension has been extensively used to construct and analyze the regret of algorithms for contextual
bandits and reinforcement learning (RL) with function approximation [see, e.g., 46, 36, 44, 6, 14, 19,
12, 16, 26, 24]. Even though the eluder dimension has become a central technique for reinforcement
learning theory, little is known about when exactly it is bounded. This paper makes progress toward
filling this gap in our knowledge.
Russo and Van Roy [37] established upper bounds on eluder dimension for (i) function classes for
which inputs have finite cardinality (the “tabular” setting), (ii) linear functions over Rd of bounded
norm, and (iii) generalized linear functions over Rd of bounded norm, with any activation that has
derivatives bounded away from 0. Apart from these function classes (and those that can be embedded
into these), understanding of eluder dimension has been limited. Indeed, one might wonder whether
a function class has “small” eluder dimension only if it can be realized as a class of (generalized)
linear functions! This leads us to our first motivating question:
Question 1. Are all function classes with small eluder dimension essentially generalized linear
models?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

