Retrieve, Reason, and Refine:
Generating Accurate and Faithful Patient Instructions

Fenglin Liu1∗, Bang Yang2∗, Chenyu You3 , Xian Wu4 , Shen Ge4 , Zhangdaihong Liu1,5
Xu Sun6†, Yang Yang7†, David A. Clifton1,5
1

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford 2 School of ECE, Peking University
3
Department of Electrical Engineering, Yale University 4 Tencent JARVIS Lab, China
5
Oxford-Suzhou Centre for Advanced Research, China
6
MOE Key Lab of Computational Linguistics, School of Computer Science, Peking University
7
School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, China
{fenglin.liu, david.clifton}@eng.ox.ac.uk, {bangyang, xusun}@pku.edu.cn
chenyu.you@yale.edu, jessie.liu@oxford-oscar.cn
{kevinxwu, shenge}@tencent.com, emma002@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The “Patient Instruction” (PI), which contains critical instructional information
provided both to carers and to the patient at the time of discharge, is essential for
the patient to manage their condition outside hospital. An accurate and easy-tofollow PI can improve the self-management of patients which can in turn reduce
hospital readmission rates. However, writing an appropriate PI can be extremely
time-consuming for physicians, and is subject to being incomplete or error-prone
for (potentially overworked) physicians. Therefore, we propose a new task that
can provide an objective means of avoiding incompleteness, while reducing clinical workload: the automatic generation of the PI, which is imagined as being a
document that the clinician can review, modify, and approve as necessary (rather
than taking the human “out of the loop”). We build a benchmark clinical dataset
and propose the Re3 Writer, which imitates the working patterns of physicians to
first retrieve related working experience from historical PIs written by physicians,
then reason related medical knowledge. Finally, it refines the retrieved working
experience and reasoned medical knowledge to extract useful information, which
is used to generate the PI for previously-unseen patient according to their health
records during hospitalization. Our experiments show that, using our method, the
performance of five different models can be substantially boosted across all metrics,
with up to 20%, 11% and 19% relative improvements in BLEU-4, ROUGE-L and
METEOR, respectively. Meanwhile, we show results from human evaluations to
measure the effectiveness in terms of its usefulness for clinical practice. 3

1

Introduction

At the time of discharge to home, the Patient Instruction (PI), which is a rich paragraph of text
containing multiple instructions, is provided by the attending clinician to the patient or guardian. PI
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.
3
The code is available at https://github.com/AI-in-Health/Patient-Instructions

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

