Decision-based Black-box Attack Against Vision
Transformers via Patch-wise Adversarial Removal
Yucheng Shi, Yahong Han∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, and Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
Engineering Research Center of City Intelligence and Digital Governance
Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China
{yucheng, yahong}@tju.edu.cn
Yu-an Tan
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
tan2008@bit.edu.cn
Xiaohui Kuang
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information System Security, Beijing, China
xiaohui_kuang@163.com

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) have demonstrated impressive performance and stronger
adversarial robustness compared to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). On
the one hand, ViTs’ focus on global interaction between individual patches reduces
the local noise sensitivity of images. On the other hand, the neglect of noise
sensitivity differences between image regions by existing decision-based attacks
further compromises the efficiency of noise compression, especially for ViTs.
Therefore, validating the black-box adversarial robustness of ViTs when the target
model can only be queried still remains a challenging problem. In this paper,
we theoretically analyze the limitations of existing decision-based attacks from
the perspective of noise sensitivity difference between regions of the image, and
propose a new decision-based black-box attack against ViTs, termed Patch-wise
Adversarial Removal (PAR). PAR divides images into patches through a coarseto-fine search process and compresses the noise on each patch separately. PAR
records the noise magnitude and noise sensitivity of each patch and selects the
patch with the highest query value for noise compression. In addition, PAR can be
used as a noise initialization method for other decision-based attacks to improve
the noise compression efficiency on both ViTs and CNNs without introducing
additional calculations. Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate that
PAR achieves a much lower noise magnitude with the same number of queries.

1

Introduction

Vision transformers (ViTs)[1] not only achieve significant performance improvement in a wide range
of computer vision tasks [2, 3, 4], but also show stronger robustness against adversarial examples
generated by different attack methods [5, 6, 7, 8]. The adversarial examples are generated by attackers
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

