Controllable Text Generation with
Neurally-Decomposed Oracle

Tao Meng∗
University of California, Los Angeles
tmeng@cs.ucla.edu

Sidi Lu∗
University of California, Los Angeles
sidilu@cs.ucla.edu

Nanyun Peng
University of California, Los Angeles
violetpeng@cs.ucla.edu

Kai-Wei Chang
University of California, Los Angeles
kwchang@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose a general and efficient framework to control auto-regressive generation
models with NeurAlly-Decomposed Oracle (NADO). Given a pre-trained base
language model and a sequence-level boolean oracle function, we propose to
decompose the oracle function into token-level guidance to steer the base model
in text generation. Specifically, the token-level guidance is approximated by a
neural model trained with examples sampled from the base model, demanding no
additional auxiliary labeled data. Based on posterior regularization, we present
the closed-form optimal solution to incorporate the token-level guidance into the
base model for controllable generation. We further provide a theoretical analysis
of how the approximation quality of NADO affects the controllable generation
results. Experiments conducted on two tasks: (1) text generation with lexical
constraints and (2) machine translation with formality control demonstrate that
our framework efficiently guides the base model towards the given control factors
while maintaining high generation quality.

1

Introduction

Auto-regressive language models have been widely used for text generation. With the recent development of large-scale pre-trained language models (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Raffel
et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020), they have achieved state-of-the-art performances in applications
such as machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015), image captioning (Anderson
et al., 2018; You et al., 2016) and open domain text generation (Zhang and Lapata, 2014; Yao et al.,
2019; Vinyals and Le, 2015; Shang et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2018). However, many applications such
as open-domain creative generation (Yao et al., 2019; Goldfarb-Tarrant et al., 2020; Tian and Peng,
2022; Han et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022; Spangher et al., 2022) require to control model output with
specific sequence-level attributes. The attributes can be specified by a set of rules2 or by an abstract
concept (e.g., the generated text follows a particular writing style). How to control auto-regressive
language models to satisfy these attributes is an open challenge.
In this paper, we propose a general and flexible framework for controllable text generation. Given a
base pre-trained language model and a sequence-level oracle function indicating whether an attribute
is satisfied, our goal is to guide the text generation to satisfy certain attributes using the oracle. To
∗

equal contribution
For example, lexical constraints require certain words to appear in the generated text (Hokamp and Liu,
2017; Lin et al., 2020)
2

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

