Consistent Interpolating Ensembles
via the Manifold-Hilbert Kernel
Yutong Wang
University of Michigan
yutongw@umich.edu

Clayton D. Scott
University of Michigan
clayscot@umich.edu

Abstract
Recent research in the theory of overparametrized learning has sought to establish
generalization guarantees in the interpolating regime. Such results have been established for a few common classes of methods, but so far not for ensemble methods.
We devise an ensemble classification method that simultaneously interpolates the
training data, and is consistent for a broad class of data distributions. To this
end, we define the manifold-Hilbert kernel for data distributed on a Riemannian
manifold. We prove that kernel smoothing regression and classification using
the manifold-Hilbert kernel are weakly consistent in the setting of Devroye et al.
[22]. For the sphere, we show that the manifold-Hilbert kernel can be realized
as a weighted random partition kernel, which arises as an infinite ensemble of
partition-based classifiers.

1

Introduction

Ensemble methods are among the most often applied learning algorithms, yet their theoretical
properties have not been fully understood [12]. Based on empirical evidence, Wyner et al. [42]
conjectured that interpolation of the training data plays a key role in explaining the success of
AdaBoost and random forests. However, while a few classes of learning methods have been analyzed
in the interpolating regime [6, 4], ensembles have not.
Towards developing the theory of interpolating ensembles, we examine an ensemble classification
method for data distributed on the sphere, and show that this classifier interpolates the training data
and is consistent for a broad class of data distributions. To show this result, we develop two additional
contributions that may be of independent interest. First, for data distributed on a Riemannian manifold
H
M , we introduce the manifold-Hilbert kernel KM
, a manifold extension of the Hilbert kernel [39].
H
Under the same setting as Devroye et al. [22], we prove that kernel smoothing regression with KM
is weakly consistent while interpolating the training data. Consequently, the classifier obtained by
taking the sign of the kernel smoothing estimate has zero training error and is consistent.
Second, we introduce a class of kernels called weighted random partition kernels. These are kernels
that can be realized as an infinite, weighted ensemble of partition-based histogram classifiers. Our
main result is established by showing that when M = Sd , the d-dimensional sphere, the manifoldHilbert kernel is a weighted random partition kernel. In particular, we show that on the sphere, the
manifold-Hilbert kernel is a weighted ensemble based on random hyperplane arrangements. This
implies that the kernel smoothing classifier is a consistent, interpolating ensemble on Sd . To our
knowledge, this is the first demonstration of an interpolating ensemble method that is consistent for a
broad class of distributions in arbitrary dimensions.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

