Precise Learning Curves and Higher-Order Scaling
Limits for Dot Product Kernel Regression
Lechao Xiao⇤
Google Research, Brain Team
xlc@google.com

Hong Hu⇤
University of Pennsylvania
huhong@wharton.upenn.edu

Yue M. Lu
Harvard University
yuelu@seas.harvard.edu

Theodor Misiakiewicz⇤
Stanford University
misiakie@stanford.edu

Jeffrey Pennington
Google Research, Brain Team
jpennin@google.com

Abstract
As modern machine learning models continue to advance the computational frontier, it has become increasingly important to develop precise estimates for expected
performance improvements under different model and data scaling regimes. Currently, theoretical understanding of the learning curves that characterize how the
prediction error depends on the number of samples is restricted to either largesample asymptotics (m ! 1) or, for certain simple data distributions, to the
high-dimensional asymptotics in which the number of samples scales linearly with
the dimension (m / d). There is a wide gulf between these two regimes, including
all higher-order scaling relations m / dr , which are the subject of the present
paper. We focus on the problem of kernel ridge regression for dot-product kernels
and present precise formulas for the mean of the test error, bias, and variance, for
data drawn uniformly from the sphere with isotropic random labels in the rth-order
asymptotic scaling regime m ! 1 with m/dr held constant. We observe a peak
in the learning curve whenever m ⇡ dr /r! for any integer r, leading to multiple
sample-wise descent and nontrivial behavior at multiple scales. We include a colab2
notebook that reproduces the essential results of the paper.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning has entered an era in which scaling is arguably the most critical ingredient
to improve performance. Recent breakthroughs such as GPT-3 [24] and PaLM [11] have demonstrated
that performance of various learning algorithms improves in a predictable manner as the amount of
data and computational resources used in training increases. The functional relationships between
performance and resources are loosely referred to as learning curves. While extrapolation of empirical
learning curves is widely used to make predictions about how a model might perform when extra
resources become available, a rigorous theoretical understanding is lacking. A fundamental obstacle
in developing a detailed theoretical model of such learning curves is that they depend on many moving
parts, e.g. the data distribution, the network architecture, the training algorithm, among others. In
addition, even in the simplest possible settings, the learning curves can exhibit non-trivial structure
that naive scaling laws fail to model, e.g. the well-known double-descent phenomenon [7, 3].
In the past couple years, a large amount of effort from the community has improved our theoretical
understanding of such phenomena and in some cases precise characterizations of learning curves
⇤

2

LX, HH and TM contributed equally. HH’s work was done while at Harvard University.
Available at: https://tinyurl.com/2nzym7ym

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

