Learning to Generate Inversion-Resistant
Model Explanations

Hoyong Jeong, Suyoung Lee, Sung Ju Hwang, Sooel Son
KAIST
{yongari38, suyoung.lee, sjhwang82, sl.son}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The wide adoption of deep neural networks (DNNs) in mission-critical applications
has spurred the need for interpretable models that provide explanations of the
model’s decisions. Unfortunately, previous studies have demonstrated that model
explanations facilitate information leakage, rendering DNN models vulnerable to
model inversion attacks. These attacks enable the adversary to reconstruct original
images based on model explanations, thus leaking privacy-sensitive features. To
this end, we present Generative Noise Injector for Model Explanations (GNIME),
a novel defense framework that perturbs model explanations to minimize the risk
of model inversion attacks while preserving the interpretabilities of the generated
explanations. Specifically, we formulate the defense training as a two-player
minimax game between the inversion attack network on the one hand, which aims
to invert model explanations, and the noise generator network on the other, which
aims to inject perturbations to tamper with model inversion attacks. We demonstrate
that GNIME significantly decreases the information leakage in model explanations,
decreasing transferable classification accuracy in facial recognition models by up
to 84.8% while preserving the original functionality of model explanations.

1

Introduction

The recent widespread adoption of deep neural networks (DNNs) in building practical real-world
applications has led to a surge of interest in explainable AI (XAI) since mission-critical tasks (e.g.,
medical diagnosis) often request explanations of the model’s predictions. Such explanations are
not only helpful in debugging the model but also in providing explanations to end-users on how
predictions are made. They are often provided in the form of a feature attribution map, which shows
the importance of each feature computed based on the gradients of a target model.
Unfortunately, recent studies have demonstrated that such explanations cause additional information
leakage, which can be exploited by an adversary [1, 8, 19, 22, 32]. Specifically, Zhao et al. [32]
presented a novel black-box model inversion (MI) attack which reconstructs an input image given
its prediction vector and the model explanation from a target DNN model. They demonstrated that
additional information leaked through model explanations (e.g., Grad or Grad-CAM) increases the
performance of MI attacks by a factor of 2.4 in terms of transferable classification accuracy, enabling
high-fidelity attacks.
Figure 1 compares the result of MI attacks using model predictions alone (PredMI) and explanationaware MI attacks using model predictions and explanations together (ExpMI). The examples reconstructed via ExpMI show high-quality faces compared to those via PredMI, leaking additional
information, such as facial expressions and accessories. However, previous works have only proposed
the attacks exploiting the information leakage, without providing any defenses against them.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

