Outsourcing Training without Uploading Data
via Efficient Collaborative Open-Source Sampling
Junyuan Hong⇤
Michigan State University
hongju12@msu.edu
Jiayu Zhou
Michigan State University
jiayuz@msu.edu

Lingjuan Lyu
Sony AI
lingjuan.lv@sony.com
Michael Spranger
Sony AI
michael.spranger@sony.com

Abstract
As deep learning blooms with growing demand for computation and data resources,
outsourcing model training to a powerful cloud server becomes an attractive alternative to training at a low-power and cost-effective end device. Traditional outsourcing requires uploading device data to the cloud server, which can be infeasible in
many real-world applications due to the often sensitive nature of the collected data
and the limited communication bandwidth. To tackle these challenges, we propose
to leverage widely available open-source data, which is a massive dataset collected
from public and heterogeneous sources (e.g., Internet images). We develop a novel
strategy called Efficient Collaborative Open-source Sampling (ECOS) to construct
a proximal proxy dataset from open-source data for cloud training, in lieu of client
data. ECOS probes open-source data on the cloud server to sense the distribution
of client data via a communication- and computation-efficient sampling process,
which only communicates a few compressed public features and client scalar responses. Extensive empirical studies show that the proposed ECOS improves the
quality of automated client labeling, model compression, and label outsourcing
when applied in various learning scenarios.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, powerful machine learning services are essential in many devices that supports our daily
routines. Delivering such services is typically done through client devices that are power-efficient
and thus very restricted in computing capacity. The client devices can collect data through built-in
sensors and make predictions by machine learning models. However, their stringent computing
power often makes the local training prohibitive, especially for high-capacity deep models. One
widely adopted solution is to outsource the cumbersome training to cloud servers equipped with massive computational power, using machine-learning-as-a-service (MLaaS). Amazon Sagemaker [29],
Google ML Engine [6], and Microsoft Azure ML Studio [4] are among the most successful industrial
adoptions, where users upload training data to designated cloud storage, and the optimized machine
learning engines then handle the training. One major challenge of the outsourcing solution in many
applications is that the local data collected are sensitive and protected by regulations, therefore
prohibiting data sharing. Notable examples include General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [1]
and Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) [2].
⇤

Work done during internship at Sony AI. Corresponding to: Lingjuan Lyu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

