Learning Distinct and Representative Modes
for Image Captioning

Qi Chen∗ Chaorui Deng∗ Qi Wu†
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
{qi.chen04, chaorui.deng, qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Over the years, state-of-the-art (SoTA) image captioning methods have achieved
promising results on some evaluation metrics (e.g., CIDEr). However, recent
findings show that the captions generated by these methods tend to be biased
toward the “average” caption that only captures the most general mode (a.k.a,
language pattern) in the training corpus, i.e., the so-called mode collapse problem.
Affected by it, the generated captions are limited in diversity and usually less
informative than natural image descriptions made by humans. In this paper, we seek
to avoid this problem by proposing a Discrete Mode Learning (DML) paradigm
for image captioning. Our innovative idea is to explore the rich modes in the
training caption corpus to learn a set of “mode embeddings”, and further use them
to control the mode of the generated captions for existing image captioning models.
Specifically, the proposed DML optimizes a dual architecture that consists of an
image-conditioned discrete variational autoencoder (CdVAE) branch and a modeconditioned image captioning (MIC) branch. The CdVAE branch maps each image
caption to one of the mode embeddings stored in a learned codebook, and is trained
with a pure non-autoregressive generation objective to make the modes distinct
and representative. The MIC branch can be simply modified from an existing
image captioning model, where the mode embedding is added to the original word
embeddings as the control signal. In the experiments, we apply the proposed DML
to two widely used image captioning models, Transformer and AoANet. The
results show that the learned mode embedding successfully facilitates these models
to generate high-quality image captions with different modes, further leading to
better performance for both diversity and quality on the MSCOCO dataset1 .

1

Introduction

Image captioning aims to generate natural descriptions for a given image. It is widely used in many
real-world applications such as human-computer interaction, multi-modal recommendation, and hence
has attracted lots of research attention. Recently, many state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods [20, 26, 57]
have achieved promising results w.r.t. evaluation metrics like CIDEr [47], BLEU [38], and SPICE [1].
However, as discussed in [52], focusing on achieving higher scores on these metrics usually biases
the image captioning models towards using only the common words, phrases and language patterns
in the training corpus when describing the images (see Figure 1 for an example). In other words, the
model automatically finds the most general mode to perform captioning. As a result, the generated
captions are limited in diversity both semantically and syntactically. This is far away from the ability
of human beings as humans are able to describe the image in various ways.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/bladewaltz1/ModeCap
∗
Authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

