Enabling Detailed Action Recognition Evaluation
Through Video Dataset Augmentation

Jihoon Chung
Princeton University
jc5933@princeton.edu

Yu Wu
Princeton University
yuwu@princeton.edu

Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University
olgarus@princeton.edu

Abstract
It is well-known in the video understanding community that human action recognition models suffer from background bias, i.e., over-relying on scene cues in making
their predictions. However, it is difficult to quantify this effect using existing evaluation frameworks. We introduce the Human-centric Analysis Toolkit (HAT), which
enables evaluation of learned background bias without the need for new manual
video annotation. It does so by automatically generating synthetically manipulated
videos and leveraging the recent advances in image segmentation and video inpainting. Using HAT we perform an extensive analysis of 74 action recognition
models trained on the Kinetics dataset. We confirm that all these models focus
more on the scene background than on the human motion; further, we demonstrate
that certain model design decisions (such as training with fewer frames per video
or using dense as opposed to uniform temporal sampling) appear to worsen the
background bias. We open-source HAT to enable the community to design more
robust and generalizable human action recognition models. 1

1

Introduction

Human action recognition is about understanding what the human in the video is doing; however,
human action recognition models frequently rely on background cues to make their predictions. Prior
works [6, 33, 59, 60, 71] have leveraged visualization tools like GradCam [46] to demonstrate that
the video background significantly influences the prediction of human action recognition models.
This occurs due to representation bias in the dataset, where particular actions (e.g., eating) tend to
occur in particular environments (e.g., kitchens). Such concerns limit the practical usability and
generalizability of models despite the impressive overall progress in the field [36, 61, 67].
While it is known that this background bias phenomenon is occurring, quantifying the degree to which
it is occurring is still necessary. Being able to accurately assess how much human action recognition
models rely on human features rather than background scene cues would allow researchers to compare
different model designs and select the ones that would be robust to their unique test domains. Efforts
such as [34, 63] have introduced datasets for quantifying background bias; however, scaling up their
approaches may be prohibitively expensive due to the reliance on manual annotation.
In this work, we introduce the Human-centric Analysis Toolkit (HAT) to measure background bias in
human action recognition models without the need for costly human annotation. We leverage recent
1

https://github.com/princetonvisualai/HAT

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

