Black-box Coreset Variational Inference
Dionysis Manousakas⇤
Meta†
dm754@cantab.ac.uk

Hippolyt Ritter⇤
Meta
hippolyt@meta.com

Theofanis Karaletsos
Insitro‡
theofanis@karaletsos.com

Abstract
Recent advances in coreset methods have shown that a selection of representative
datapoints can replace massive volumes of data for Bayesian inference, preserving
the relevant statistical information and significantly accelerating subsequent downstream tasks. Existing variational coreset constructions rely on either selecting
subsets of the observed datapoints, or jointly performing approximate inference
and optimizing pseudodata in the observed space akin to inducing points methods
in Gaussian Processes. So far, both approaches are limited by complexities in
evaluating their objectives for general purpose models, and require generating
samples from a typically intractable posterior over the coreset throughout inference
and testing. In this work, we present a black-box variational inference framework
for coresets that overcomes these constraints and enables principled application
of variational coresets to intractable models, such as Bayesian neural networks.
We apply our techniques to supervised learning problems, and compare them with
existing approaches in the literature for data summarization and inference.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are widely trained using mini-batches of data [8, 22], enabling practitioners
to leverage large scale data for increasingly accurate models. However, repeatedly processing these
accumulating amounts of data becomes more and more hardware-intensive over time and therefore
costly. Thus, efficient techniques for extracting and representing the relevant information of a dataset
for a given model are urgently needed.
Recent work on coresets for probabilistic models has demonstrated that Bayesian posteriors on large
scale datasets can be sparsely represented via surrogate densities defined through a weighted subset
of the training data (Sparse Variational Inference; Sparse VI) [10] or a set of learnable weighted
pseudo-observations in data space (Pseudodata Sparse Variational Inference; PSVI) [31]. Similar to
inducing points in Gaussian Processes [50], these target to parsimoniously represent the sufficient
statistics of the observed dataset that are required for inference in the model. Replacing the original
data via the reduced set of (pseudo-) observations unlocks the potential of scaling up downstream
learning tasks, compressing for efficient storage and visualisation, and accelerating model exploration.
Unfortunately, Sparse VI and PSVI rely on access to exact samples from the model posterior and
closed form gradients of it to be evaluated and updated. Yet, the posterior for most common
probabilistic models is intractable, limiting their use to the class of tractable models or necessitating
the use of heuristics deviating from the core objective. Dealing with intractable models typically
necessitates the use of approximate methods such as variational inference, which has been increasingly
popular with the development of black-box techniques for arbitrary models [43].
In this work, we overcome these challenges and introduce a principled framework for performing
approximate inference with variational families based on weighted coreset posteriors. This leads
⇤

Equal contribution † Now at Amazon ‡ Research supporting this publication done at Meta

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

