Fully Convolutional One-Stage 3D Object Detection on
LiDAR Range Images

Zhi Tian1 ,
1

Xiangxiang Chu1 ,

Meituan Inc.
1

2

Xiaoming Wang2∗, Xiaolin Wei1 ,

Northwestern Polytechnical University

3

Chunhua Shen3†

Zhejiang University

{tianzhi02,chuxiangxiang,weixiaolin02}@meituan.com
2
chunhua@me.com 3 xiaomingwang80@163.com

Abstract
We present a simple yet effective fully convolutional one-stage 3D object detector
for LiDAR point clouds of autonomous driving scenes, termed FCOS-LiDAR.
Unlike the dominant methods that use the bird-eye view (BEV), our proposed
detector detects objects from the range view (RV, a.k.a. range image) of the LiDAR
points. Due to the range view’s compactness and compatibility with the LiDAR
sensors’ sampling process on self-driving cars, the range view-based object detector
can be realized by solely exploiting the vanilla 2D convolutions, departing from
the BEV-based methods which often involve complicated voxelization operations
and sparse convolutions.
For the first time, we show that an RV-based 3D detector with standard 2D convolutions alone can achieve comparable performance to state-of-the-art BEV-based
detectors while being significantly faster and simpler. More importantly, almost
all previous range view-based detectors only focus on single-frame point clouds,
since it is challenging to fuse multi-frame point clouds into a single range view.
In this work, we tackle this challenging issue with a novel range view projection
mechanism, and for the first time demonstrate the benefits of fusing multi-frame
point clouds for a range-view based detector. Extensive experiments on nuScenes
show the superiority of our proposed method and we believe that our work can be
strong evidence that an RV-based 3D detector can compare favourably with the
current mainstream BEV-based detectors. Code will be made publicly available.

1

Introduction

With the rise of autonomous driving, 3D object detection from the LiDAR point cloud has been
recently drawing increasing attention. Similar to the 2D image object detection [RHGS15, TSCH19,
LAE+ 16, RF17, RDGF16], 3D object detection requires the model to predict the (3D) locations of
the objects of interest and the associated properties (e.g., categories, sizes, heading, and the state of
motion). In spite of the unprecedented success that the computer vision community has attained on
the 2D image object detection, it is still intractable to transfer the success to the 3D object detection
task.
Most previous 3D object detection methods consider that the point cloud is amorphous and consists
of a set of unordered points. Thus, this task is considered significantly different from its 2D detection
counterpart, which works on structured RGB images. Moreover, the cornerstones of modern computer
vision—CNNs or CNN-like vision transformers (e.g., Swin Transformers [LLC+ 21]) also assume
∗
†

Work done as an intern at Meituan Inc.
Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

