Lottery Tickets on a Data Diet:
Finding Initializations with Sparse Trainable Networks

Surya Ganguli
Stanford 2 Meta AI

1,2

1

Mansheej Paul1⇤ Brett W. Larsen1⇤
Jonathan Frankle3,4,5
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite6,7
3
MIT 4 MosaicML 5 Harvard 6 Google Brain 7 Mila; McGill

Abstract
A striking observation about iterative magnitude pruning (IMP; Frankle et al. 10)
is that—after just a few hundred steps of dense training—the method can find a
sparse sub-network that can be trained to the same accuracy as the dense network.
However, the same does not hold at step 0, i.e., random initialization. In this
work, we seek to understand how this early phase of pre-training leads to a good
initialization for IMP both through the lens of the data distribution and the loss
landscape geometry. Empirically we observe that, holding the number of pretraining iterations constant, training on a small fraction of (randomly chosen) data
suffices to obtain an equally good initialization for IMP. We additionally observe
that by pre-training only on “easy” training data we can decrease the number of
steps necessary to find a good initialization for IMP compared to training on the
full dataset or a randomly chosen subset. Finally, we identify novel properties
of the loss landscape of dense networks that are predictive of IMP performance,
showing in particular that more examples being linearly mode connected in the
dense network correlates well with good initializations for IMP. Combined, these
results provide new insight into the role played by the early phase training in IMP.

1

Introduction

Modern deep neural networks are often trained in the massively over-parameterized regime. Though
these networks can eventually be pruned, quantized, or distilled into smaller networks, the resources
required for the initial over-parameterized training poses a challenge to the democratization and
sustainability of AI. This raises a fundamental question: under what circumstances can we efficiently
train sparse networks? Recent work on the lottery ticket hypothesis [9, 10] has shown that, after just a
few hundred steps of pre-training, a dense network contains a sparse sub-network that can be trained
without any loss in performance. Finding this sparse sub-network currently requires multiple rounds
of training to convergence, pruning, and rewinding to the pre-train point, a procedure termed iterative
magnitude pruning (IMP, Figure 1; [9, 10]), Remarkably, even after all these rounds of training, we
do not find trainable sparse sub-networks if we rewind to the random initialization; the first few
hundred steps of dense network training is essential for finding sparse networks through IMP. In
this work, we seek to understand this very short but critical phase of pre-training. In particular, we
investigate the effect of training data and number of steps used during pre-training on the accuracy
achieved by IMP. We also explain how certain properties of the loss landscape allow us to predict
whether we will find a matching initialization (i.e., an initialization from which IMP “succeeds” in
finding a subnetwork that can match the accuracy of the unpruned network, to be formalized later).
IMP proceeds in three phases: an initial pre-training phase where (1) the dense weights are trained
for a few hundred steps, followed by (2) the resource-intensive mask search phase, during which we
⇤

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: {mansheej,bwlarsen}@stanford.edu; gkdz@google.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

