AnimeSR: Learning Real-World Super-Resolution
Models for Animation Videos

1

Yanze Wu∗ 1
Xintao Wang∗†1
Gen Li2
Ying Shan1
2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG
Platform Technologies, Tencent Online Video
{yanzewu, xintaowang, enochli, yingsshan}@tencent.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of real-world video super-resolution (VSR) for
animation videos, and reveals three key improvements for practical animation VSR.
First, recent real-world super-resolution approaches typically rely on degradation
simulation using basic operators without any learning capability, such as blur,
noise, and compression. In this work, we propose to learn such basic operators
from real low-quality animation videos, and incorporate the learned ones into the
degradation generation pipeline. Such neural-network-based basic operators could
help to better capture the distribution of real degradations. Second, a large-scale
high-quality animation video dataset, AVC, is built to facilitate comprehensive
training and evaluations for animation VSR. Third, we further investigate an
efficient multi-scale network structure. It takes advantage of the efficiency of
unidirectional recurrent networks and the effectiveness of sliding-window-based
methods. Thanks to the above delicate designs, our method, AnimeSR, is capable
of restoring real-world low-quality animation videos effectively and efficiently,
achieving superior performance to previous state-of-the-art methods. Codes and
models are available at https://github.com/TencentARC/AnimeSR.

1

Introduction

As a special category of video super-resolution (VSR) [5, 41, 47, 6], animation VSR aims at recovering
high-resolution (HR) animation videos from their low-resolution (LR) counterparts. With the advent
of the 4K/8K HD Era, people enjoy watching classic animation videos on HD devices. However,
existing animation videos are mostly of low quality and have disturbing artifacts, which are usually
caused by the production aging, lossy compression and transmission. Hence, it is highly desirable
to develop practical animation VSR techniques to improve the resolution and quality of existing
animation videos. Directly applying existing real-world SR methods (e.g., Real-ESRGAN [48],
RealBasicVSR [8]) produces unsatisfying and unnatural results with artifacts, such as “hollow line”
artifacts, annoying noises, etc, as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 5.
In this paper, we thoroughly study and improve the key components in animation VSR.
• Degradation synthesis process. Real-world animation VSR is a blind SR task, whose LR videos
have unknown and complex degradations, e.g., blur, noise and compression artifacts. Recent methods
sort to simulate degradations as close to the real-world ones as possible. The methods can be classified
into two categories. One is to employ several classic basic operators together to form a complex
degradation generation process [53, 48]. Those basic operators are usually “atomic” and have a clear
physical meaning, including blur filters, noise generators, JPEG/FFMPEG compressor, etc. However,
relying on simple basic operators without any learning capability largely limits its synthesis ability
of real-world degradations.
The other category is to incorporate neural networks to synthesize LR samples with cycle consistency [57, 52, 13, 50] or self-supervision based on patch recurrence [58, 2]. Nevertheless, it is very
∗

Equal contributions. † Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

