Reduced Representation of Deformation Fields for
Effective Non-rigid Shape Matching
Ramana Sundararaman1 , Riccardo Marin2,3 , Emanuele Rodolà3 , and Maks Ovsjanikov1
1

LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
2
University of Tübingen
3
Sapienza University of Rome

Abstract
In this work we present a novel approach for computing correspondences between
non-rigid objects, by exploiting a reduced representation of deformation fields.
Different from existing works that represent deformation fields by training a generalpurpose neural network, we advocate for an approximation based on mesh-free
methods. By letting the network learn deformation parameters at a sparse set
of positions in space (nodes), we reconstruct the continuous deformation field
in a closed-form with guaranteed smoothness. With this reduction in degrees of
freedom, we show significant improvement in terms of data-efficiency thus enabling
limited supervision. Furthermore, our approximation provides direct access to
first-order derivatives of deformation fields, which facilitates enforcing desirable
regularization effectively. Our resulting model has high expressive power and is
able to capture complex deformations. We illustrate its effectiveness through stateof-the-art results across multiple deformable shape matching benchmarks. Our
code and data are publicly available at: https://github.com/Sentient07/
DeformationBasis.

1

Introduction

Shape correspondence is a central problem in computer vision and computer graphics as it facilitates
many downstream tasks, such as tracking [1], texture transfer [2] and statistical modeling [3] to name
a few. Due to its ubiquitous applicability, a wide range of techniques have been developed over the
past several years [4]. While early approaches relied on axiomatic modeling, recent methods follow
data-driven techniques based on different input signals [5, 6, 7, 8] within a shape collection.
A key question in this context is the choice of representation used to model the non-rigid shape
matching problem. Approaches based on intrinsic or pose invariant representations have established
a gold standard in the context where surfaces are well-defined [9, 10, 11]. Such methods, however,
strongly rely on the presence of clean shapes and struggle when acquisition comes from noisy and
non-uniform discretization [12]. In contrast, extrinsic techniques which directly operate on Euclidean
space (R3 ) show strong resilience to artifacts. Unfortunately, this robustness of extrinsic methods often
comes at the cost of relying on significant amounts of annotated training data [7, 5]. The main limiting
factor arises in the representation of the deformation fields. The standard approach is to use generalpurpose MLPs to learn deformation fields that can fit an arbitrary shape deformation [13, 14, 5].
However, given the fact that MLPs are general-purpose networks, they require significant amounts of
training data to learn both coarse and fine details [5].
To overcome this limitation, we propose to learn a coarse representation of deformation parameters
at fixed positions in space called “nodes”. By learning a reduced representation of deformation fields,
intuitively, we restrict the learning process to global patterns of the input signal. Then, to recover
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

