Learning Graph-embedded Key-event Back-tracing
for Object Tracking in Event Clouds
Zhiyu ZHU, Junhui HOU∗, Xianqiang LYU
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
zhiyuzhu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk,
xianqialv2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Event data-based object tracking is attracting attention increasingly. Unfortunately, the unusual data structure caused by the unique sensing mechanism poses
great challenges in designing downstream algorithms. To tackle such challenges,
existing methods usually re-organize raw event data (or event clouds) with the
event frame/image representation to adapt to mature RGB data-based tracking
paradigms, which compromises the high temporal resolution and sparse characteristics. By contrast, we advocate developing new designs/techniques tailored
to the special data structure to realize object tracking. To this end, we make the
first attempt to construct a new end-to-end learning-based paradigm that directly
consumes event clouds. Specifically, to process a non-uniformly distributed largescale event cloud efficiently, we propose a simple yet effective density-insensitive
downsampling strategy to sample a subset called key-events. Then, we employ a
graph-based network to embed the irregular spatio-temporal information of keyevents into a high-dimensional feature space, and the resulting embeddings are
utilized to predict their target likelihoods via semantic-driven Siamese-matching.
Besides, we also propose motion-aware target likelihood prediction, which learns
the motion flow to back-trace the potential initial positions of key-events and
measures them with the previous proposal. Finally, we obtain the bounding box
by adaptively fusing the two intermediate ones separately regressed from the
weighted embeddings of key-events by the two types of predicted target likelihoods. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real event datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed framework over state-of-the-art methods in
terms of both the tracking accuracy and speed. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/ZHU-Zhiyu/Event-tracking.

1

Introduction

Event cameras, the bio-inspired silicon retinas, have been widely adopted in computer vision and
robotics communities [57, 37, 18, 31, 28, 47]. Different from traditional RGB cameras, which
synchronously record the light intensity of each pixel, event cameras [13] only sense the changes in
dynamic scenes, i.e., if an event senor captures an intensity increment (resp. decrement) larger than a
threshold, it would trigger an event, composed of the corresponding pixel location, the timestamp,
and the polarity indicating brightness increase or decrease. With the concise information flow, event
cameras enjoy numerous advantages, such as high temporal resolution, low latency, high dynamic
range, and low power consumption. Moreover, recent works show that even without being associated
with RGB images, only event data could also realize various vision tasks, such as depth estimation
[14], semantic segmentation [1], and object detection [32].
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

