CryptoGCN: Fast and Scalable Homomorphically
Encrypted Graph Convolutional Network Inference

Ran Ran
Lehigh University
rar418@lehigh.edu
Gang Quan
Florida International University
gaquan@fiu.edu

Nuo Xu
Lehigh University
nux219@lehigh.edu

Wei Wang
Microsoft
wewang3@microsoft.com

Jieming Yin
Nanjing University of
Posts and Telecommunications
jieming.yin@njupt.edu.cn

Wujie Wen
Lehigh University
wuw219@lehigh.edu

Abstract
Recently cloud-based graph convolutional network (GCN) has demonstrated great
success and potential in many privacy-sensitive applications such as personal healthcare and financial systems. Despite its high inference accuracy and performance on
the cloud, maintaining data privacy in GCN inference, which is of paramount importance to these practical applications, remains largely unexplored. In this paper,
we take an initial attempt towards this and develop CryptoGCN–a homomorphic
encryption (HE) based GCN inference framework. A key to the success of our
approach is to reduce the tremendous computational overhead for HE operations,
which can be orders of magnitude higher than its counterparts in the plaintext space.
To this end, we develop a solution that can effectively take advantage of the sparsity of matrix operations in GCN inference to significantly reduce the encrypted
computational overhead. Specifically, we propose a novel Adjacency MatrixAware (AMA) data formatting method along with the AMA assisted patterned
sparse matrix partitioning, to exploit the complex graph structure and perform
efficient matrix-matrix multiplication in HE computation. In this way, the number
of HE operations can be significantly reduced. We also develop a co-optimization
framework that can explore the trade-offs among the accuracy, security level, and
computational overhead by judicious pruning and polynomial approximation of
activation modules in GCNs. Based on the NTU-XVIEW skeleton joint dataset, i.e.,
the largest dataset evaluated homomorphically by far as we are aware of, our experimental results demonstrate that CryptoGCN outperforms state-of-the-art solutions
in terms of the latency and number of homomorphic operations, i.e., achieving as
much as a 3.10× speedup on latency and reduces the total Homomorphic Operation
Count (HOC) by 77.4% with a small accuracy loss of 1-1.5%. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/ranran0523/CryptoGCN.

1

Introduction

Graph Convolutional Neural Networks [23] (GCNs) have recently emerged in machine learning
and demonstrated superior performance in various privacy-sensitive applications such as human
action recognition [35, 38], financial recommendation system [37], and autonomous driving [25].
While it has been increasingly popular to deploy machine learning services on the cloud, the cloud
environment raises critical concerns for GCN-based privacy-sensitive services, since graph data
usually contain a considerable amount of sensitive information.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

