O CC G EN: Selection of Real-world Multilingual
Parallel Data Balanced in Gender within Occupations

Marta R. Costa-jussà
Meta AI
costajussa@meta.com

Oriol Domingo
Batou XYZ
oriol@batou.xyz

Christine Basta
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
IGSR, Alexandria University, Egypt
christine.raouf.saad.basta@upc.edu
Andre Niyongabo Rubungo∗
Princeton University
rn3004@princeton.edu

Abstract
This paper describes the O CC G EN toolkit, which allows extracting multilingual
parallel data balanced in gender within occupations. O CC G EN can extract datasets
that reflect gender diversity (beyond binary) more fairly in society to be further
used to explicitly mitigate occupational gender stereotypes. We propose two use
cases that extract evaluation datasets for machine translation in four high-resource
languages from different linguistic families and in a low-resource African language.
Our analysis of these use cases shows that translation outputs in high-resource
languages tend to worsen in feminine subsets (compared to masculine), specially in
the directions containing English. This is confirmed by the human evaluation. We
hypothesize that a sound language generation may contribute to pay less attention
to the source sentence and to overgeneralize to the most frequent gender forms.

1

Introduction

Biased NLP systems can mainly cause harm in allocations (e.g., giving job opportunities to particular
social groups) and in representation (e.g., by propagating and amplifying stereotypes) Blodgett et al.
[2020]. Typical examples are associating neutral words with one gender Bolukbasi et al. [2016] or
wrongly translating the gender of an entity because of the influenced of a social stereotype Prates
et al. [2020], e.g., The doctor decided to bring her phone. to El* doctor* decidió llevar su teléfono.
instead of translating to the correct form La doctora decidió llevar su teléfono..
NLP biases have several dimensions that should be tackled, including detection, evaluation, and
mitigation. This paper focuses on generating balanced datasets to address evaluation and mitigation
issues. Our motivation to create balanced datasets for training purposes comes from the fact that
previous works have shown that fine-tuning with balanced data Saunders and Byrne [2020], Costajussà and de Jorge [2020] mitigates gender bias, while creating balanced datasets for evaluation
aligns to further progress in responsible artificial intelligence evaluation2 . Therefore, we propose
a methodology to collect monolingual, bilingual, and multilingual datasets balanced in gender and
occupations to train or evaluate Machine Translation (MT) models. The outcomes of this paper
are two-fold. On the one hand, the O CC G EN toolkit can be customized according to research and
development needs towards languages and gender definition (beyond binary). On the other hand, two
use-cases of this toolkit are presented in this paper, which provide two evaluation benchmarks for
∗
2

Work done while at Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
https://ai.facebook.com/blog/facebooks-five-pillars-of-responsible-ai

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

