If Influence Functions are the Answer,
Then What is the Question?

Juhan Bae1,2 , Nathan Ng1,2,3 , Alston Lo1,2 , Marzyeh Ghassemi3 , Roger Grosse1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{jbae, nng, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu
alston.lo@mail.utoronto.ca
mghassem@mit.edu

Abstract
Influence functions efficiently estimate the effect of removing a single training data
point on a model’s learned parameters. While influence estimates align well with
leave-one-out retraining for linear models, recent works have shown this alignment
is often poor in neural networks. In this work, we investigate the specific factors
that cause this discrepancy by decomposing it into five separate terms. We study
the contributions of each term on a variety of architectures and datasets and how
they vary with factors such as network width and training time. While practical
influence function estimates may be a poor match to leave-one-out retraining for
nonlinear networks, we show that they are often a good approximation to a different
object we term the proximal Bregman response function (PBRF). Since the PBRF
can still be used to answer many of the questions motivating influence functions
such as identifying influential or mislabeled examples, our results suggest that
current algorithms for influence function estimation give more informative results
than previous error analyses would suggest.

1

Introduction

The influence function [Hampel, 1974, Cook, 1979] is a classic technique from robust statistics that
estimates the effect of deleting a single data example (or a group of data examples) from a training
dataset. Formally, given a neural network with learned parameters θ ⋆ trained on a dataset D, we are
interested in the parameters θ ⋆−z learned by training on a dataset D − {z} constructed by deleting
a single training example z from D. By taking the second-order Taylor approximation to the cost
function around θ ⋆ , influence functions approximate the parameters θ ⋆−z without the computationally
prohibitive cost of retraining the model. Since Koh and Liang [2017] first deployed influence
functions in machine learning, influence functions have been used to solve various tasks such as
explaining model’s predictions [Koh and Liang, 2017, Han et al., 2020], relabelling harmful training
examples [Kong et al., 2021], carrying out data poisoning attacks [Koh et al., 2022], increasing
fairness in models’ predictions [Brunet et al., 2019, Schulam and Saria, 2019], and learning data
augmentation techniques [Lee et al., 2020].
When the training objective is strongly convex (e.g., as in logistic regression with L2 regularization),
influence functions are expected to align well with leave-one-out (LOO) or leave-k-out retraining [Koh
and Liang, 2017, Koh et al., 2019, Izzo et al., 2021]. However, Basu et al. [2020a] showed that
influence functions in neural networks often do not accurately predict the effect of retraining the
model and concluded that influence estimates are often “fragile” and “erroneous”. Because of the
poor match between influence estimates and LOO retraining, influence function methods are often
evaluated with alternative metrics such as the detection rate of maliciously corrupted examples using
influence scores [Khanna et al., 2019, Koh and Liang, 2017, Schioppa et al., 2021, K and Søgaard,
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

