CHIMLE: Conditional Hierarchical IMLE for
Multimodal Conditional Image Synthesis
Shichong Peng1 , Alireza Moazeni1 , Ke Li1,2
1
APEX Lab
2
School of Computing Science
Google
Simon Fraser University
{shichong_peng,seyed_alireza_moazenipourasil,keli}@sfu.ca

Abstract
A persistent challenge in conditional image synthesis has been to generate diverse
output images from the same input image despite only one output image being
observed per input image. GAN-based methods are prone to mode collapse, which
leads to low diversity. To get around this, we leverage Implicit Maximum Likelihood Estimation (IMLE) which can overcome mode collapse fundamentally. IMLE
uses the same generator as GANs but trains it with a different, non-adversarial
objective which ensures each observed image has a generated sample nearby. Unfortunately, to generate high-fidelity images, prior IMLE-based methods require
a large number of samples, which is expensive. In this paper, we propose a new
method to get around this limitation, which we dub Conditional Hierarchical IMLE
(CHIMLE), which can generate high-fidelity images without requiring many samples. We show CHIMLE significantly outperforms the prior best IMLE, GAN and
diffusion-based methods in terms of image fidelity and mode coverage across four
tasks, namely night-to-day, 16⇥ single image super-resolution, image colourization
and image decompression. Quantitatively, our method improves Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) by 36.9% on average compared to the prior best IMLE-based
method, and by 27.5% on average compared to the best non-IMLE-based generalpurpose methods. More results and code are available on the project website at
https://niopeng.github.io/CHIMLE/.

1

Introduction

Impressive advances in image synthesis have been made by generative models [9, 40, 83, 15, 78,
31, 38]. Generative models are probabilistic models; in the context of image synthesis, they aim to
learn the probability distribution over natural images from examples of natural images. Whereas
unconditional generative models learn the marginal distribution over images, conditional generative
models learn the conditional distribution over images given a conditioning input, such as a class label,
textual description or image.
Conditional generative modelling is more challenging than unconditional generative modelling, due
to the need to ensure consistency between the conditioning input and the generated output while still
ensuring image fidelity and diversity. As the conditioning input becomes more specific, there are
fewer images in the training set that are consistent with the conditioning input, resulting in weaker
supervision. So, in the order of decreasing supervision are class, text and image-conditional generative
models – in class conditioning, many images correspond to each class; in text conditioning, multiple
images can at times share the same textual description; in image conditioning (e.g., a grayscale image
as the input and a colour image as the output), typically only one output image that corresponds
to each input image is observed (e.g., only one way to colour a grayscale image is observed). We
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

