Using natural language and program abstractions to
instill human inductive biases in machines
Sreejan Kumar1 , Carlos G. Correa1 , Ishita Dasgupta2 , Raja Marjieh3 , Michael Y. Hu4 ,
Robert D. Hawkins1,3 , Nathaniel D. Daw1,3 , Jonathan D. Cohen1,3 , Karthik Narasimhan4 , and
Thomas L. Griffiths3,4
1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute
2
DeepMind
3
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
4
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University

Abstract
Strong inductive biases give humans the ability to quickly learn to perform a
variety of tasks. Although meta-learning is a method to endow neural networks
with useful inductive biases, agents trained by meta-learning may sometimes
acquire very different strategies from humans. We show that co-training these
agents on predicting representations from natural language task descriptions
and programs induced to generate such tasks guides them toward more humanlike inductive biases. Human-generated language descriptions and program
induction models that add new learned primitives both contain abstract concepts
that can compress description length. Co-training on these representations result
in more human-like behavior in downstream meta-reinforcement learning agents
than less abstract controls (synthetic language descriptions, program induction
without learned primitives), suggesting that the abstraction supported by these
representations is key.

1

Introduction

Humans are able to rapidly perform a variety of tasks without extensive experience [1]. This may
be because of strong inductive biases towards abstract structured knowledge (e.g. hierarchies,
compositionality) [2, 3] that act as strong prior knowledge, enabling generalization to novel environments with little new data. These biases present one of the most salient differences between humans and neural network-based learners [4] and may be one of the keys to building artificial agents
with human-like generalization capabilities. For this reason, there has been interest among machine learning researchers in identifying and instilling these inductive biases into neural networkbased agents [5–7].
One emerging approach to implicitly bestowing inductive biases on neural networks is metalearning [8, 9]. In meta-learning paradigms, an agent is trained not just on a single task but on
a distribution of tasks, with the aim of acquiring the underlying abstractions that these tasks have
in common. However, since neural networks are not easily interpretable, it can be difficult to tell
if the resulting neural networks actually acquired this abstract knowledge, or whether they have
instead learned statistical artifacts correlated with abstract rules [10].
What representations can give our artificial agents access to human inductive biases? Previous
work in reinforcement learning has shown that neural networks can improve performance through
auxiliary tasks [11–13]. We build on this insight to construct auxiliary tasks that require reproduc36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

