Robust Testing in High-Dimensional Sparse Models

Anand Jerry George
School of Computer and Communication Sciences
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
anand.george@epfl.ch

Clément L. Canonne
School of Computer Science
The University of Sydney
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We consider the problem of robustly testing the norm of a high-dimensional sparse
signal vector under two different observation models. In the first model, we
are given n i.i.d. samples from the distribution N (θ, Id ) (with unknown θ), of
which a small fraction has been arbitrarily corrupted. Under the promise that
∥θ∥0 ≤ s, we want to correctly distinguish whether ∥θ∥2 = 0 or ∥θ∥2 > γ, for
some input parameter
γ > 0. We show that any algorithm for this task requires

n = Ω s log ed
samples,
which is tight up to logarithmic factors. We also
s
extend our results to other common notions of sparsity, namely, ∥θ∥q ≤ s for
any 0 < q < 2. In the second observation model that we consider, the data is
generated according to a sparse linear regression model, where the covariates are
i.i.d. Gaussian and the regression coefficient (signal) is known to be s-sparse. Here
too we assume that an ε-fraction of the data is arbitrarily corrupted. We show that
any algorithm that reliably teststhe norm of the regression coefficient requires at
least n = Ω min(s log d, 1/γ 4 ) samples. Our results show that the complexity of
testing in these two settings significantly increases under robustness constraints.
This is in line with the recent observations made in robust mean testing and robust
covariance testing.

1

Introduction

Hypothesis testing is a fundamental task in statistics and a staple of the scientific method, in which we
seek to test the validity of a pre-specified hypothesis based on empirical observations. In this work,
we are concerned with the problem of testing whether a given high-dimensional sparse signal vector
is zero under two common and well-studied observation models: 1) the Gaussian location model and
2) the Gaussian linear regression model. Specifically, in the Gaussian location model, we observe
i.i.d. samples from a d-dimensional spherical Gaussian distribution with an unknown sparse mean
vector, and seek to detect whether its ℓ2 norm is large (equivalently, we observe a set of measurements
subject to white noise, and seek to determine whether there exists an underlying (sparse) signal).
Similarly, in the Gaussian linear regression model we seek to detect whether the ℓ2 norm of the
sparse regression coefficient is large. We further assume that our samples are imperfect or even
corrupted, allowing an adversary to arbitrarily tamper with up to an ε-fraction of the observations.
Our objective is to characterize the minimum number of samples required to perform these testing
tasks, and, crucially, to understand the effect that requiring robustness to this adversarial corruption
has on the complexity of the problems.
It is known [DKS17, DK21] that, for a variety of high-dimensional tasks, robust testing becomes as
costly (in terms of sample complexity) as the corresponding estimation task. This is in contrast to the
non-robust version, where testing is typically much more efficient – often by a quadratic factor in
the dimension. However, it is unclear how sparsity enters the picture, and for instance if robustness
only starts becoming “costly” when the signal vector is sufficiently dense – i.e., whether the problem
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

