Regularized Gradient Descent Ascent for Two-Player
Zero-Sum Markov Games
Sihan Zeng
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30318
szeng30@gatech.edu

Thinh Doan
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
thinhdoan@vt.edu

Justin Romberg
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30318
jrom@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of finding the Nash equilibrium in a two-player zero-sum
Markov game. Due to its formulation as a minimax optimization program, a natural
approach to solve the problem is to perform gradient descent/ascent with respect
to each player in an alternating fashion. However, due to the non-convexity/nonconcavity of the underlying objective function, theoretical understandings of this
method are limited. In our paper, we consider solving an entropy-regularized
variant of the Markov game. The regularization introduces structure into the optimization landscape that make the solutions more identifiable and allow the problem
to be solved more efficiently. Our main contribution is to show that under proper
choices of the regularization parameter, the gradient descent ascent algorithm
converges to the Nash equilibrium of the original unregularized problem. We explicitly characterize the finite-time performance of the last iterate of our algorithm,
which vastly improves over the existing convergence bound of the gradient descent
ascent algorithm without regularization. Finally, we complement the analysis with
numerical simulations that illustrate the accelerated convergence of the algorithm.

1

Introduction

The two-player zero-sum Markov game is a special case of competitive multi-agent reinforcement
learning where two agents driven by opposite reward functions jointly determine the state transition
in an environment. Usually cast as a non-convex non-concave minimax optimization program, this
framework finds applications in many practical problems including game playing [Lanctot et al.,
2019, Vinyals et al., 2019], robotics [Riedmiller and Gabel, 2007, Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016], and
robust policy optimization [Pinto et al., 2017].
A convenient class of methods frequently used to solve multi-agent reinforcement learning problems
is the independent learning approach. Independent learning algorithms proceed iteratively with each
player taking turns to optimize its own objective while pretending that the other players’ policies are
fixed to their current iterates. In the context of two-player zero-sum Markov games, the independent
learning algorithm performs gradient descent ascent (GDA), which alternates between the gradient
updates of the two agents that seek to maximize and minimize the same value function. Despite
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

