Active Learning Through a Covering Lens

Ofer Yehuda† , Avihu Dekel† , Guy Hacohen†‡ , Daphna Weinshall†
School of Computer Science & Engineering†
Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences‡
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem 91904, Israel
{ofer.yehuda,avihu.dekel,guy.hacohen,daphna}@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Deep active learning aims to reduce the annotation cost for the training of deep
models, which is notoriously data-hungry. Until recently, deep active learning
methods were ineffectual in the low-budget regime, where only a small number
of examples are annotated. The situation has been alleviated by recent advances
in representation and self-supervised learning, which impart the geometry of the
data representation with rich information about the points. Taking advantage of
this progress, we study the problem of subset selection for annotation through a
“covering” lens, proposing ProbCover – a new active learning algorithm for the low
budget regime, which seeks to maximize Probability Coverage. We then describe
a dual way to view the proposed formulation, from which one can derive strategies
suitable for the high budget regime of active learning, related to existing methods
like Coreset. We conclude with extensive experiments, evaluating ProbCover
in the low-budget regime. We show that our principled active learning strategy
improves the state-of-the-art in the low-budget regime in several image recognition
benchmarks. This method is especially beneficial in the semi-supervised setting,
allowing state-of-the-art semi-supervised methods to match the performance of
fully supervised methods, while using much fewer labels nonetheless. Code is
available at https://github.com/avihu111/TypiClust.

1

Introduction

For the most part, deep learning technology critically depends on access to large amounts of annotated
data. Yet annotations are costly and remain so even in our era of Big Data. Deep active learning (AL)
aims to alleviate this problem by improving the utility of the annotated data. Specifically, given a
fixed budget b of examples that can be annotated, and some deep learner, AL algorithms aim to query
those b examples that will most benefit this learner.
In order to optimally choose unlabeled examples to be annotated, most deep AL strategies follow
some combination of two main principles: 1) Uncertainty sampling [e.g., 26, 48, 3, 14, 15, 36, 25], in
which examples that the learner is most uncertain about are picked, to maximize the added value of
the new annotations. 2) Diversity Sampling [e.g., 1, 22, 16, 38, 18, 40, 37, 17, 47, 42, 46], in which
examples are chosen from diverse regions of the data distribution, to represent it wholly and reduce
redundancy in the annotation.
Most AL methods fail to improve over random selection when the annotation budget is very small
[35, 39, 7, 32, 55, 21, 2], a phenomenon sometimes termed "cold start" [8, 49, 16, 50, 23]. When the
budget contains only a few examples, they struggle to improve the model’s performance, and even
fail to reach the accuracy of the random baseline. Recently, it was shown that uncertainty sampling is
inherently unsuited for the low-budget regime, which may explain the cold start phenomenon [19].
The low-budget scenario is relevant in many applications, especially those requiring an expert tagger
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

