Target alignment in truncated kernel ridge regression

Arash A. Amini1 ,

Richard Baumgartner2 ,

Dai Feng3

1

2

University of California, Los Angeles
Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, New Jersey, USA
3
Data and Statistical Sciences, AbbVie Inc.

aaamini@ucla.edu, richard_baumgartner@merck.com,
dai.feng@abbvie.com

Abstract
Kernel ridge regression (KRR) has recently attracted renewed interest due to its
potential for explaining the transient effects, such as double descent, that emerge
during neural network training. In this work, we study how the alignment between
the target function and the kernel affects the performance of the KRR. We focus on
the truncated KRR (TKRR) which utilizes an additional parameter that controls the
spectral truncation of the kernel matrix. We show that for polynomial alignment,
there is an over-aligned regime, in which TKRR can achieve a faster rate than
what is achievable by full KRR. The rate of TKRR can improve all the way to
the parametric rate, while that of full KRR is capped at a sub-optimal value. This
shows that target alignment can be better leveraged by utilizing spectral truncation
in kernel methods. We also consider the bandlimited alignment setting and show
that the regularization surface of TKRR can exhibit transient effects including
multiple descent and non-monotonic behavior. Our results show that there is a
strong and quantifiable relation between the shape of the alignment spectrum and
the generalization performance of kernel methods, both in terms of rates and in
finite samples.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods have become a time-proven popular mainstay in machine learning [23, 27, 22].
Implicit transformation of a learning problem via a suitable kernel with subsequent development of
regularized linear models in the associated reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) is amenable to
applications and allow for investigation of theoretical properties of the kernel methods [12]. Recently,
there has been a revived interest and increased research into the kernel methods [14, 17, 7, 12, 8].
These efforts have been motivated by the connections between neural network and kernel learning
[14]. In particular, the discovery of transient effects such as double descent that emerge in neural
networks training [6, 20] has attracted a lot of attention.
In this paper, we study the effect of target-model alignment on the performance of kernel ridge
regression (KRR) estimators. KRR is a well-known nonparametric regression estimator with desirable
theoretical performance guarantees. We focus on a generalization of the KRR, which we refer to
as the Truncated Kernel Ridge Regression (TKRR), that introduces an additional parameter, r, for
truncating the eigenvalues of the underlying kernel matrix. TKRR is often used as an approximation
to the full KRR to scale the computations to large sample sizes. TKRR itself is often approximated
in practice by various sampling and sketching schemes [30, 33, 18, 19, 24, 1, 32]. One of our main
contributions in this paper is that TKRR can, in fact, improve the statistical rate of convergence in
cases where the target function is well-aligned with the underlying RKHS. Roughly speaking, target
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

