Transformer-based Working Memory for Multiagent
Reinforcement Learning with Action Parsing

Yaodong Yang1 , Guangyong Chen2,3∗, Weixun Wang4 , Xiaotian Hao4 , Jianye Hao4 , Pheng Ann Heng1,5
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2 Zhejiang Lab 3 Zhejiang University 4 Tianjin University
5 Institute of Medical Intelligence and XR, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

yydapple@gmail.com, gychen@zhejianglab.com,
{wxwang,xiaotianhao,jianye.hao}@tju.edu.cn, pheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Learning in real-world multiagent tasks is challenging due to the usual partial
observability of each agent. Previous efforts alleviate the partial observability by
historical hidden states with Recurrent Neural Networks, however, they do not
consider the multiagent characters that either the multiagent observation consists
of a number of object entities or the action space shows clear entity interactions.
To tackle these issues, we propose the Agent Transformer Memory (ATM) network
with a transformer-based memory. First, ATM utilizes the transformer to enable
the unified processing of the factored environmental entities and memory. Inspired
by the human’s working memory process where a limited capacity of information
temporarily held in mind can effectively guide the decision-making, ATM updates
its fixed-capacity memory with the working memory updating schema. Second, as
agents’ each action has its particular interaction entities in the environment, ATM
parses the action space to introduce this action’s semantic inductive bias by binding
each action with its specified involving entity to predict the state-action value or
logit. Extensive experiments on the challenging SMAC and Level-Based Foraging
environments validate that ATM could boost existing multiagent RL algorithms
with impressive learning acceleration and performance improvement.

1

Introduction

Multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a way of learning how to make sequential decisions
when multiple agents interact with the environment given the constraints of partial observability
[25]. There are many representative real-world applications of MARL including wireless network
optimization [7], autonomous driving [5] and energy distribution [29]. Partial observability has been
a long-standing challenge for reinforcement learning (RL) since the real environment state can be
partially hidden from the agent [2], and this issue becomes even worse for MARL as the involving
dynamics are more complex than single-agent RL with teammates concurrently exploring.
Typically, to tackle the partial observability, most previous efforts propose to summarize the historical
observation trajectories to provide additional information for the current local observation. For
instance, in a navigation task, the only way to distinguish two T-junctions that look identical is to
remember the past key observations before entering into either T-junction [2]. Among them, gated
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [33] serve as the most popular mechanism to represent memory
for RL [19, 10, 13] and so does for MARL [26, 31]. Given the superior performance achieved
by the transformer on sequential modeling tasks over RNNs [34], some pioneer efforts have been
∗ Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

