LBD: Decouple Relevance and Observation for
Individual-Level Unbiased Learning to Rank

Mouxiang Chen1,4∗ , Chenghao Liu2∗ † , Zemin Liu3 , Jianling Sun1,4†
Zhejiang University, 2 Salesforce Research Asia, 3 National University of Singapore,
4
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{chenmx,sunjl}@zju.edu.cn, chenghao.liu@salesforce.com, zeminliu@nus.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Using Unbiased Learning to Rank (ULTR) to train the ranking model with biased click logs has attracted increased research interest. The key idea is to explicitly model the user’s observation behavior when building the ranker with a
large number of click logs. Considering the simplicity, recent efforts are mainly
based on the position bias hypothesis, in which the observation only depends
on the position. However, this hypothesis does not hold in many scenarios
due to the neglect of the distinct characteristics of individuals in the same position. On the other hand, directly modeling observation bias for each individual is quite challenging, since the effects of each individual’s features on relevance and observation are entangled. It is difficult to ravel out this coupled
effect and thus obtain a correct relevance model from click data. To address
this issue, we first present the concept of coupling effect for individual-level
ULTR. Then, we develop the novel Lipschitz and Bernoulli Decoupling (LBD)
model to decouple the effects on relevance and observation at the individual level.
We prove theoretically that our proposed method could recover the correct relevance order for the ranking objective. Empirical results on two LTR benchmark datasets show that the proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines and verify its effectiveness in debiasing data. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/Keytoyze/Lipschitz-Bernoulli-Decoupling.

1

Introduction

Learning to Rank (LTR) has been widely used in modern information retrieval systems, which aims
to learn a ranking model that sorts documents with their relevance. Recently, using implicit feedback
(e.g. clicks) instead of relevance labels (typically obtained by human annotation) to train the ranking
model has become popular since implicit feedback is an attractive proxy of relevance, which is cheap
and relatively easy to obtain on a large scale [38]. However, they inherently contain a lot of bias from
user behavior [28]. Using Unbiased Learning to Rank (ULTR) to remove these biases has attracted
increasing research interest [1, 29]. The key is to factorize the clicks into relevance probabilities and
observation probabilities and model a user’s observation probability on an item in a ranking list. By
reweighing the click signals based on the reciprocal of observation probabilities, ULTR provides an
unbiased estimate of the ranking objective.
Most of the existing ULTR methods are based on the position bias hypothesis [29, 4, 43, 17, 3,
14], which assumes that the observation only depends on the position. We refer to this method
as group-level ULTR method, in which various heterogeneous features (typically encoded with the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

