Continuously-Tempered PDMP samplers

Matthew Sutton
Centre for Data Science
Queensland University of Technology
matt.sutton@qut.edu.au

Robert Salomone
Centre for Data Science
Queensland University of Technology
robert.salomone@qut.edu.au

Augustin Chevallier
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University
a.chevallier@lancaster.ac.uk

Paul Fearnhead ∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University
p.fearnhead@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
New sampling algorithms based on simulating continuous-time stochastic processes called piecewise deterministic Markov processes (PDMPs) have shown
considerable promise. However, these methods can struggle to sample from multimodal or heavy-tailed distributions. We show how tempering ideas can improve
the mixing of PDMPs in such cases. We introduce an extended distribution defined
over the state of the posterior distribution and an inverse temperature, which interpolates between a tractable distribution when the inverse temperature is 0 and
the posterior when the inverse temperature is 1. The marginal distribution of the
inverse temperature is a mixture of a continuous distribution on [0, 1) and a point
mass at 1: which means that we obtain samples when the inverse temperature is 1,
and these are draws from the posterior, but sampling algorithms will also explore
distributions at lower temperatures which will improve mixing. We show how
PDMPs, and particularly the Zig-Zag sampler, can be implemented to sample from
such an extended distribution. The resulting algorithm is easy to implement and
we show empirically that it can outperform existing PDMP-based samplers on
challenging multimodal posteriors.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been considerable interest in developing sampling algorithms based on simulating
continuous time stochastic processes called piecewise deterministic processes (PDMPs) Davis [1993].
These sampling algorithms are qualitatively similar to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo algorithms Neal
[2011]. To simulate from some target distribution π, they work with an augmented state-space (x, v),
where the x component can be viewed as position, and the v component as a velocity. The motivation
for this is that these processes will encourage exploration of π by simulating continuous velocity
paths in between random event times at which the velocity changes. Examples of such sampling
algorithms include the Bouncy Particle Sampler [Peters and de With, 2012, Bouchard-Côté et al.,
2018], the Zig-Zag algorithm [Bierkens et al., 2019], the Coordinate Sampler [Wu and Robert, 2020]
and the Boomerang Sampler [Bierkens et al., 2020]. See Fearnhead et al. [2018] for an overview of
these methods. Importantly, it is simple to write down the event rate, and how the velocity should
change at each event, to ensure these PDMPs have π as their invariant distribution. These samplers
depend on π only through the gradient of log π, and thus π only needs to be known up to a constant
of proportionality.
∗

The authors acknowledge funding through EPSRC grants EP/R018561/1 and EP/R034710/1

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

