Learning the Structure of Large Networked Systems
Obeying Conservation Laws⇤
Anirudh Rayas
Arizona State University
ahrayas@asu.edu

Rajasekhar Anguluri
Arizona State University
rangulur@asu.edu

Gautam Dasarathy
Arizona State University
gautamd@asu.edu

Abstract
Many networked systems such as electric networks, the brain, and social networks
of opinion dynamics are known to obey conservation laws. Examples of this
phenomenon include the Kirchoff laws in electric networks and opinion consensus
in social networks. Conservation laws in networked systems are modeled as
balance equations of the form X = B ⇤ Y , where the sparsity pattern of B ⇤ 2 Rp⇥p
captures the connectivity of the network on p nodes, and Y, X 2 Rp are vectors
of potentials and injected flows at the nodes respectively. The node potentials Y
cause flows across edges which aim to balance out the potential difference, and the
flows X injected at the nodes are extraneous to the network dynamics. In several
practical systems, the network structure is often unknown and needs to be estimated
from data to facilitate modeling, management, and control. To this end, one has
access to samples of the node potentials Y , but only the statistics of the node
injections X. Motivated by this important problem, we study the estimation of
the sparsity structure of the matrix B ⇤ from n samples of Y under the assumption
that the node injections X follow a Gaussian distribution with a known covariance
⌃X . We propose a new `1 -regularized maximum likelihood estimator for tackling
this problem in the high-dimensional regime where the size of the network may
be vastly larger than the number of samples n. We show that this optimization
problem is convex in the objective and admits a unique solution. Under a new
mutual incoherence condition, we establish sufficient conditions on the triple
(n, p, d) for which exact sparsity recovery of B ⇤ is possible with high probability;
and d is the degree of the underlying graph. We also establish guarantees for the
recovery of B ⇤ in the element-wise maximum, Frobenius, and operator norms.
Finally, we complement our theoretical results with experimental validation of the
performance of the proposed estimator on synthetic and real-world data.

1

Introduction

Let G = ([p], E) be a directed graph on the vertex set [p] , {1, 2, . . . , p} with a size m edge set
E ⇢ [p] ⇥ [p]. Let D denote the p ⇥ m incidence matrix that encodes the edges of G as follows: each
column of D is associated with an edge (i, j) 2 E and is a vector of zeros except at the locations
i and j where it is 1 and +1 respectively. Let X 2 Rp be a vector of injected flows or signals at
the vertices and let f 2 Rm be the vector of flows through the edges. Then, the basic conservation
law between these flows may be expressed as Df + X = 0; that is, at each vertex, the flow (which
is a linear combination of flows at the edges incident on the vertex) has to balance the injections.
In physical systems, edge flows f often arise as a way to balance the differences between certain
potentials Y 2 Rp at the vertices. That is, the flows satisfy f = DT Y ; notice that this implies that
⇤
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under the grants CCF-2048223
and OAC-1934766, and by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under the grant 1R01GM140468-01.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

