Self–Similarity Priors: Neural Collages as
Differentiable Fractal Representations

Michael Poli∗
Stanford University
DiffeqML

Winnie Xu∗
University of Toronto

Stefano Massaroli∗
Mila
DiffeqML

Chenlin Meng
Stanford University

Kuno Kim
Stanford University

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
CZ Biohub

Abstract
Many patterns in nature exhibit self-similarity: they can be compactly described
via self-referential transformations. Said patterns commonly appear in natural
and artificial objects, such as molecules, shorelines, galaxies and even images.
In this work, we investigate the role of learning in the automated discovery of
self-similarity and in its utilization for downstream tasks. To this end, we design a
novel class of implicit neural operators, Neural Collages, which (1) represent data
as the parameters of a self-referential, structured transformation, and (2) employ
hypernetworks to amortize the cost of finding these parameters to a single forward
pass. We detail how to leverage the representations produced by Neural Collages
in various tasks, including data compression and generation. Neural Collage
image compressors are orders of magnitude faster than other self–similarity–based
algorithms during encoding and offer compression rates competitive with implicit
methods. Finally, we showcase applications of Neural Collages in fractal art and
as deep generative models.

1

Introduction

Given a specified image, can one come up with a dynamical system with it as its attractor? (Welstead, 1999)

Scientific fields are underpinned by a search for structure. Geometry, sparsity and invariances, when
appropriately introduced in a mechanistic model, allow us to concisely describe phenomena. To this
end, machine learning has been introduced as a means to fix partial priors in a model, and discover
the rest through data (Rackauckas et al., 2020; Dao et al., 2020; Bronstein et al., 2021). In general,
the notion of structure is also essential for compression: through a suitable choice of language, one
can explain phenomena in fewer symbols, yielding shorter representations of the observables (Tishby
et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2007). Objects exhibiting self-similarity structure are composed of patterns
that appear similar to themselves at multiple scales, as shown in Figure 1. This type of structure
frequently appears in nature, at different degrees: shorelines, molecules, plants, turbulent flows and
basins of attraction of dynamical systems all display elements of self-similarity (Mandelbrot and
Mandelbrot, 1982; Song et al., 2005; Vulpiani et al., 2009; Barnsley, 2014). In this work, we explore
the role of learning in the automatic discovery of self-similarity structure in data, and how it can serve
as an inductive bias in machine learning models.
The mathematical embodiment of this idea is found in fractal patterns, which often arise by characterizing limit sets of nonlinear maps e.g. iterations of complex numbers for Julia and Mandelbrot
∗

Equal contribution authors. Contact email: poli@stanford.edu.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

