Contrastive and Non-Contrastive Self-Supervised
Learning Recover Global and Local Spectral
Embedding Methods

Randall Balestriero
Meta AI Research, FAIR
NYC, USA
rbalestriero@meta.com

Yann LeCun
Meta AI Research, FAIR, NYU
NYC, USA
ylecun@meta.com

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) surmises that inputs and pairwise positive relationships are enough to learn meaningful representations. Although SSL has recently
reached a milestone: outperforming supervised methods in many modalities. . . the
theoretical foundations are limited, method-specific, and fail to provide principled
design guidelines to practitioners. In this paper, we propose a unifying framework
under the helm of spectral manifold learning to address those limitations. Through
the course of this study, we will rigorously demonstrate that VICReg, SimCLR,
BarlowTwins et al. correspond to eponymous spectral methods such as Laplacian
Eigenmaps, Multidimensional Scaling et al. This unification will then allow us to
obtain (i) the closed-form optimal representation for each method, (ii) the closedform optimal network parameters in the linear regime for each method, (iii) the
impact of the pairwise relations used during training on each of those quantities
and on downstream classification task performances, and most importantly, (iv) the
first theoretical bridge between contrastive and non-contrastive methods towards
global and local spectral embedding methods respectively, hinting at the benefits
and limitations of each. For example, (i) if the pairwise relation is aligned with the
downstream task, any SSL method can be employed successfully and will recover
the supervised method, but in the low data regime, SimCLR or VICReg with high
invariance hyper-parameter should be preferred; (ii) if the pairwise relation is misaligned with the downstream task, BarlowTwins or VICReg with small invariance
hyper-parameter should be preferred.

1

Introduction

Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) is one of the most promising method to learn data representations
that generalize across downstream tasks. SSL places itself in-between supervised and unsupervised
learning as it does not require labels but does require knowledge of what makes some samples
semantically close to others. Hence, where unsupervised learning relies on a collection of inputs (X),
and supervised learning relies on inputs and outputs (X, Y ), SSL relies on inputs and inter-sample
relations (X, G) that indicate semantic similarity. The latter matrix G is often constructed by
augmenting X through data-augmentations known to preserve input semantics [1–3] e.g. horizontal
flip for an image, although recent methods have went away from Data-Augmentation (DA)by using
videos from which consecutive frames can be seen as semantically equivalent [4–6].
Although SSL originated decades ago [7], recent advances have pushed SSL performances beyond
expectations [8–10]. Due to those rapid empirical advances, an urgent need for a principled theoretical
understanding of those methods has emerged [11, 12]. Studies in this direction often take one of
the three following approaches: (i) studying the training dynamics and optimization landscapes of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

