Online PAC-Bayes Learning
Maxime Haddouche
Inria and University College London
France and UK

Benjamin Guedj
Inria and University College London
France and UK

Abstract
Most PAC-Bayesian bounds hold in the batch learning setting where data is collected at once, prior to inference or prediction. This somewhat departs from many
contemporary learning problems where data streams are collected and the algorithms must dynamically adjust. We prove new PAC-Bayesian bounds in this online
learning framework, leveraging an updated definition of regret, and we revisit classical PAC-Bayesian results with a batch-to-online conversion, extending their remit
to the case of dependent data. Our results hold for bounded losses, potentially
non-convex, paving the way to promising developments in online learning.

1

Introduction

Batch learning is somewhat the dominant learning paradigm in which we aim to design the best
predictor by collecting a training dataset which is then used for inference or prediction. Classical
algorithms such as SVMs [see Cristianini et al., 2000, among many others] or feedforward neural
networks [Svozil et al., 1997] are popular examples of efficient batch learning. While the mathematics
of batch learning constitute a vivid and well understood research field, in practice this might not be
aligned with the way practitionners collect data, which can be sequential when too much information
is available at a given time (e.g. the number of micro-transactions made in finance on a daily basis).
Indeed batch learning is not designed to properly handle dynamic systems.
Online learning (OL) [Zinkevich, 2003, Shalev-Shwartz, 2012, Hazan, 2016] fills this gap by treating
data as a continuous stream with a potentially changing learning goal. OL has been studied with
convex optimisation tools and the celebrated notion of regret which measures the discrepancy between
the cumulative sum of losses for a specific algorithm at each datum and the optimal strategy. It led
to many fruitful results comparing the efficiency of prediction for optimisation algorithms such that
Online Gradient Descent (OGD), Online Newton Step through static regret [Zinkevich, 2003, Hazan
et al., 2007]. OL is flexible enough to incorporate external expert advice onto classical algorithms
with the optimistic point of view that such advices are useful for training [Rakhlin and Sridharan,
2013a,b] and then having optimistic regret bounds. Modern extensions also allow to compare to
moving strategies through dynamic regret [see e.g. Yang et al., 2016, Zhang et al., 2018, Zhao et al.,
2020]. However, this notion of regret has been challenged recently: for instance, Wintenberger [2021]
chose to control an expected cumulative loss through PAC inequalities in order to deal with the case
of stochastic loss functions.
Statements holding with arbitrarily large probability are widely used in learning and especially within
the PAC-Bayes theory. Since its emergence in the late 90s, the PAC-Bayes theory (see the seminal
works of Shawe-Taylor and Williamson, 1997, McAllester, 1998, 1999 and the recent surveys by
Guedj, 2019, Alquier, 2021) has been a powerful tool to obtain generalisation bounds and to derive
efficient learning algorithms. Classical PAC-Bayes generalisation bounds help to understand how
a learning algorithm may perform on future similar batches of data. More precisely, PAC-Bayes
learning exploits the Bayesian paradigm of explaining a learning problem through a meaningful
distribution over a space of candidate predictors [see e.g. Maurer, 2004, Catoni, 2007, Tolstikhin
and Seldin, 2013, Mhammedi et al., 2019]. An active line of research in PAC-Bayes learning is to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

