GRASP: Navigating Retrosynthetic Planning with
Goal-driven Policy
Yemin Yu1,2 , Ying Wei1 , Kun Kuang2 , Zhengxing Huang2 , Huaxiu Yao3 , Fei Wu2,4
3

1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Zhejiang University
Stanford University, 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
1
{yeminyu2-c,yingwei}@cityu.edu.hk
2
{kunkuang,zhengxinghuang,wufei}@zju.edu.cn
3
{huaxiu}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Retrosynthetic planning occupies a crucial position in synthetic chemistry and,
accordingly, drug discovery, which aims to find synthetic pathways of a target
molecule through a sequential decision-making process on a set of feasible reactions. While the majority of recent works focus on the prediction of feasible
reactions at each step, there have been limited attempts toward improving the
sequential decision-making policy. Existing strategies rely on either the expensive
and high-variance value estimation by online rollout, or a settled value estimation
neural network pre-trained with simulated pathways of limited diversity and no
negative feedback. Besides, how to return multiple candidate pathways that are not
only diverse but also desirable for chemists (e.g., affordable building block materials) remains an open challenge. To this end, we propose a Goal-dRiven Actor-critic
retroSynthetic Planning (GRASP) framework, where we identify the policy that performs goal-driven retrosynthesis navigation toward a user-demand objective. Our
experiments on the benchmark Pistachio dataset and a chemists-designed dataset
demonstrate that the framework outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches
by up to 32.2% on search efficiency and 5.6% on quality. Remarkably, our user
studies show that GRASP successfully plans pathways that accomplish the goal
prescribed with a goal (building block materials).

1

Introduction

Retrosynthetic planning has significantly advanced chemical synthesis, bringing in increasingly
sophisticated medicines that cure diseases and materials that improve life. A retrosynthetic planner
takes the structure of a target molecule as input and recursively selects feasible reactions to unsolved
intermediate molecules until eventually reaching building block molecules. Since an unsolved intermediate molecule usually requires multiple steps of reactions to synthesize and at each step has up
to hundreds of feasible reaction candidates, retrosynthetic planning with an enormous search space
is very challenging even for experienced chemists. Consequently, computer-aided synthesis planning (CASP) enters the scene to assist chemists in accelerating the process of designing retrosynthetic
pathways.
Computer-aided retrosynthesis planning consists of: 1) a single-step retrosynthesis prediction which
predicts a list of feasible reaction candidates that connect a target molecule to its respective precursors,
and 2) a multi-step planning policy that searches for the optimal synthetic pathway by recursively
applying the single-step prediction model. Recent years have witnessed a plethora of advancements in
single-step prediction models [25, 31, 19, 10], while in this work we are pursuing a more efficient and
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

