Expectation-Maximization Contrastive Learning for
Compact Video-and-Language Representations

Peng Jin1,3∗ Jinfa Huang1,3∗

Fenglin Liu4

David A. Clifton4,6

Xian Wu5

Shen Ge5

Guoli Song2†

Jie Chen1,2,3†

1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
AI for Science (AI4S)-Preferred Program, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, China
4
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK 5 Tencent JARVIS Lab, China
6
Oxford-Suzhou Centre for Advanced Research, Suzhou, China
{jp21, jinfahuang}@stu.pku.edu.cn {songgl, chenj}@pcl.ac.cn
{shenge, kevinxwu}@tencent.com {fenglin.liu, david.clifton}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Most video-and-language representation learning approaches employ contrastive
learning, e.g., CLIP [53], to project the video and text features into a common
latent space according to the semantic similarities of text-video pairs. However,
such learned shared latent spaces are not often optimal, and the modality gap
between visual and textual representation can not be fully eliminated. In this paper,
we propose Expectation-Maximization Contrastive Learning (EMCL) to learn
compact video-and-language representations. Specifically, we use the ExpectationMaximization algorithm to find a compact set of bases for the latent space, where
the features could be concisely represented as the linear combinations of these bases.
Such feature decomposition of video-and-language representations reduces the
rank of the latent space, resulting in increased representing power for the semantics.
Extensive experiments on three benchmark text-video retrieval datasets prove that
our EMCL can learn more discriminative video-and-language representations than
previous methods, and significantly outperform previous state-of-the-art methods
across all metrics. More encouragingly, the proposed method can be applied to
boost the performance of existing approaches either as a jointly training layer or
an out-of-the-box inference module with no extra training, making it easy to be
incorporated into any existing methods‡ .

1

Introduction

Text-video retrieval [76], which aims to fetch relevant videos using textual queries or vice versa,
is an important yet challenging cross-modal task. The dominating paradigm of text-video retrieval
is contrastive learning [67, 24, 9, 23, 11, 10], which is a commonly adopted framework for videoand-language representation learning. The core idea of contrastive learning is to pull the textual
and visual representations of matched text-video pairs together and push the representations of
unmatched text-video pairs apart. In this manner, contrastive learning enables neural networks to
learn discriminative video-and-language representations.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Guoli Song, Jie Chen.
‡
Code : https://github.com/jpthu17/EMCL

†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

