Domain Adaptation under Open Set Label Shift

Saurabh Garg, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Zachary C. Lipton
Machine Learning Department,
Department of Statistics and Data Science,
Carnegie Mellon University
{sgarg2,sbalakri,zlipton}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We introduce the problem of domain adaptation under Open Set Label Shift (OSLS)
where the label distribution can change arbitrarily and a new class may arrive during deployment, but the class-conditional distributions ppx|yq are domain-invariant.
OSLS subsumes domain adaptation under label shift and Positive-Unlabeled (PU)
learning. The learner’s goals here are two-fold: (a) estimate the target label distribution, including the novel class; and (b) learn a target classifier. First, we establish
necessary and sufficient conditions for identifying these quantities. Second, motivated by advances in label shift and PU learning, we propose practical methods
for both tasks that leverage black-box predictors. Unlike typical open set domain
adaptation problems, which tend to be ill-posed and amenable only to heuristics,
OSLS offers a well-posed problem amenable to more principled machinery. Experiments across numerous semi-synthetic benchmarks on vision, language, and
medical datasets demonstrate that our methods consistently outperform open set
domain adaptation baselines, achieving 10–25% improvements in target domain
accuracy. Finally, we analyze the proposed methods, establishing finite-sample
convergence to the true label marginal and convergence to optimal classifier for
linear models in a Gaussian setup1 .

1

Introduction

Suppose that we wished to deploy a machine learning system to recognize diagnoses based on their
clinical manifestations. If the distribution of data were static over time, then we could rely on the
standard machinery of statistical prediction. However, disease prevalences are constantly changing,
violating the assumption of independent and identically distributed (iid) data. In such scenarios,
we might reasonably apply the label shift assumption, where prevalences can change but clinical
manifestations cannot. When only the relative proportion of previously seen diseases can change,
principled methods can detect and correcting for label shift on the fly [56, 78, 45, 4, 1, 27]. But what
if a new disease, like COVID-19, were to arrive suddenly?
Traditional label shift adaptation techniques break when faced with a previously unseen class. A
distinct literature on Open Set Domain Adaptation (OSDA) seeks to handle such cases [51, 5, 14,
70, 43, 73, 58, 59, 25]). Given access to labeled source data and unlabeled target data, the goal in
OSDA is to adapt classifiers in general settings where previous classes can shift in prevalence (and
even appearance), and novel classes separated out from those previously seen can appear. Most
work on OSDA is driven by the creation of and progress on benchmark datasets (e.g., DomainNet,
OfficeHome). Existing OSDA methods are heuristic in nature, addressing settings where the right
answers seem intuitive but are not identified mathematically. However, absent assumptions on: (i)
the nature of distribution shift among source classes and (ii) the relation between source classes and
novel class, standard impossibility results for domain adaptation condemn us to guesswork [8].
1

Code is available at https://github.com/acmi-lab/Open-Set-Label-Shift.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

