Low-rank lottery tickets: finding efficient low-rank
neural networks via matrix differential equations

Steffen Schotthöfer∗
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
76131 Karlsruhe (Germany)
steffen.schotthoefer@kit.edu
Jonas Kusch
University of Innsbruck
6020 Innsbruck (Austria)
jonas.kusch1@gmail.com

Emanuele Zangrando∗
Gran Sasso Science Institute
67100 L’Aquila (Italy)
emanuele.zangrando@gssi.it

Gianluca Ceruti
EPF Lausanne
1015 Lausanne (Switzerland)
gianluca.ceruti@epfl.ch

Francesco Tudisco
Gran Sasso Science Institute
67100 L’Aquila (Italy)
francesco.tudisco@gssi.it

Abstract
Neural networks have achieved tremendous success in a large variety of applications. However, their memory footprint and computational demand can render
them impractical in application settings with limited hardware or energy resources.
In this work, we propose a novel algorithm to find efficient low-rank subnetworks.
Remarkably, these subnetworks are determined and adapted already during the
training phase and the overall time and memory resources required by both training
and evaluating them are significantly reduced. The main idea is to restrict the
weight matrices to a low-rank manifold and to update the low-rank factors rather
than the full matrix during training. To derive training updates that are restricted
to the prescribed manifold, we employ techniques from dynamic model order
reduction for matrix differential equations. This allows us to provide approximation, stability, and descent guarantees. Moreover, our method automatically and
dynamically adapts the ranks during training to achieve the desired approximation
accuracy. The efficiency of the proposed method is demonstrated through a variety
of numerical experiments on fully-connected and convolutional networks.

1

Introduction

While showing great performance in terms of classification records, most state-of-the-art neural
networks require an enormous amount of computation and memory storage both for the training and
the evaluation phases [27]. These requirements not only increase infrastructure costs and energy
consumption, but also make the deployment of artificial neural networks to infrastructures with
limited resources such as mobile phones or smart devices prohibitive. On the other hand, it is
well-known that networks’ weights contain structures and redundancies that can be exploited for
reducing the parameter space dimension without significantly affecting the overall accuracy [3, 9, 17].
Network pruning is a popular line of research that addresses this problem by removing redundant
parameters from pre-trained models. Typically, the initial network is large and accurate, and the
goal is to produce a smaller network with similar accuracy. Methods within this area include weight
sparsification [20, 24, 49] and quantization [10, 60], with different pruning techniques, including
search-based heuristics [24], reinforcement learning [2, 23] and genetic algorithms [43]. More recent
work has considered pruning during training, by formulating pruning as a data-driven optimization
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

