Neurosymbolic Deep Generative Models for Sequence
Data with Relational Constraints
Halley Young
Department of Computer Science
University of Pennsylvania
halleyy@seas.upenn.edu

Maxwell Du
Department of Computer Science
University of Pennsylvania
mdu@seas.upenn.edu

Osbert Bastani
Department of Computer Science
University of Pennsylvania
obastani@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
There has been significant recent progress designing deep generative models that
generate realistic sequence data such as text or music. Nevertheless, it remains
difficult to incorporate high-level structure to guide the generative process, and
many such models perform well on local coherence, but less so on global coherence.
We propose a novel approach for incorporating global structure in the form of
relational constraints between different subcomponents of an example (e.g., lines of
a poem or measures of music). Our generative model has two parts: (i) one model to
generate a realistic set of relational constraints, and (ii) a second model to generate
realistic data satisfying these constraints. For model (i), we propose a program
synthesis algorithm that infers the relational constraints present in the training data,
and then learn a generative model based on the resulting constraint data. In our
experiments, we show that our approach significantly improves over state-of-the-art
in terms of capturing high-level structure in the data, while performing comparably
or better in terms of low-level structure.

1

Introduction

There has been tremendous recent progress in designing deep generative models for generating
sequence data such as natural language (Vaswani et al., 2017) or music (Huang et al., 2019). These
approaches leverage the vast quantities of data available in conjunction with unsupervised and selfsupervised learning to learn probabilistic models of the data; then, new examples can be generated by
sampling from these models, with the possibility of conditioning on initial elements of the sequence.
A key challenge facing deep generative models is the difficulty incorporating high-level structure
into the generated examples—e.g., rhyming and meter across lines of a poem, or repetition across
measures of a piece of music. Capturing high-level structure is important for improving the quality
of the generated data, especially in low-data regimes where only small numbers of examples are
available; intuitively, knowledge of the structure compresses the amount of information the generative
model has to learn. Furthermore, explicit representations of structure (i.e., symbolically rather than as
a vector embedding) has the benefit that users can modify the structure to guide generation.
Recently, Young et al. (2019) proposed neurosymbolic generative models for incorporating high-level
structure into image generation, focusing on simple 2D repeating patterns in images of building
facades (e.g., repeating windows). The basic idea is to leverage program synthesis to extract structure
from data—in particular, given an example image x, they devise an algorithm A that extracts a
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

