Unsupervised Cross-Task Generalization
via Retrieval Augmentation
Bill Yuchen Lin† Kangmin Tan† Chris Miller† Beiwen Tian‡ Xiang Ren†
†
‡
University of Southern California
Tsinghua University
{yuchen.lin,kangmint,millercs,xiangren}@usc.edu

Abstract
Humans can perform unseen tasks by recalling relevant skills acquired previously
and then generalizing them to the target tasks, even if there is no supervision at all.
In this paper, we aim to improve this kind of cross-task generalization ability of
massive multi-task language models, such as T0 and FLAN, in an unsupervised
setting. We propose a retrieval-augmentation method named ReCross that takes a
few unlabelled examples as queries to retrieve a small subset of upstream data and
uses them to update the multi-task model for better generalization. ReCross is a
straightforward yet effective retrieval method that combines both efficient dense
retrieval and effective pair-wise reranking. Our results and analysis show that it
significantly outperforms both non-retrieval methods and other baseline methods. 1

1

Introduction

Advances in pre-training techniques for large language models (LMs) have considerably improved
natural language processing (NLP) models on various important tasks via fine-tuning with labeled
data. While these fine-tuned models are impressive in their target tasks, they can hardly generalize
to unseen tasks. This thus makes it difficult to approach the general linguistic intelligence that we
ultimately want an NLP model to enjoy. A promising avenue is to train a massively multi-task
model that learns a large set of NLP tasks. However, in real-world applications, users often expect a
multi-task NLP model can also perform unseen tasks that they are interested in. These users may
only be able to provide a few unlabeled examples (i.e., the input-only data) of the target tasks with
natural-language instructions. How can we generalize the multi-task model to unseen tasks without
labels? This desirable ability is dubbed “unsupervised cross-task generalization.”
Recent studies show that multi-task prompted training makes language models better in cross-task
generalization, especially when natural-language instructions are used for formatting the training
data (Ye et al., 2021; Sanh et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021). The general recipe is to first fine-tune a textto-text language model such as T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) on a multi-task mixture of diverse NLP datasets
that are converted to sequence-to-sequence formats. We use the term upstream learning to refer to
this multi-task training stage. Given a target task that is unseen during upstream learning, we want the
upstream multi-task model to also perform well on it via reusing the previously acquired knowledge.
FLAN (Wei et al., 2021) and T0 (Sanh et al., 2021) both use natural language (NL) instructions as
prompts to reformat the data of various NLP tasks for upstream learning and generalization. Their
results suggest that NL instructions are keys to unsupervised cross-task generalization.
Despite of the exciting results from Wei et al. (2021) and Sanh et al. (2021), their studies are limited
to the analysis of the task generalization performance of the frozen, target-agnostic upstream models
(i.e., FLAN and T0). We argue that the generalization performance can be further improved if we
can exploit the unlabeled data of target tasks as hints for adjusting the upstream model to a more
1

Our data, code, and supplementary materials are at https://inklab.usc.edu/ReCross/.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

