ESCADA: Efficient Safety and Context Aware
Dose Allocation for Precision Medicine
Ilker Demirel∗
Bilkent University
ilkerd@ee.bilkent.edu.tr

A. Alparslan Celik
Bilkent University
acelik@ee.bilkent.edu.tr

Cem Tekin
Bilkent University
cemtekin@ee.bilkent.edu.tr

Abstract
Finding an optimal individualized treatment regimen is considered one of the most
challenging precision medicine problems. Various patient characteristics influence
the response to the treatment, and hence, there is no one-size-fits-all regimen.
Moreover, the administration of an unsafe dose during the treatment can have
adverse effects on health. Therefore, a treatment model must ensure patient safety
while efficiently optimizing the course of therapy. We study a prevalent medical
problem where the treatment aims to keep a physiological variable in a safe range
and preferably close to a target level, which we refer to as leveling. Such a task
may be relevant in numerous other domains as well. We propose ESCADA, a
novel and generic multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithm tailored for the leveling
task, to make safe, personalized, and context-aware dose recommendations. We
derive high probability upper bounds on its cumulative regret and safety guarantees.
Following ESCADA’s design, we also describe its Thompson sampling-based
counterpart. We discuss why the straightforward adaptations of the classical MAB
algorithms such as GP-UCB may not be a good fit for the leveling task. Finally, we
make in silico experiments on the bolus-insulin dose allocation problem in type-1
diabetes mellitus disease and compare our algorithms against the famous GP-UCB
algorithm, the rule-based dose calculators, and a clinician.

1

Introduction

Precision medicine aims to provide the best possible treatment on an individual level by considering
patient characteristics’ variability [3, 30]. Many healthcare problems require keeping a physiological
variable (e.g., blood glucose level) in a safe range and preferably close to a target level. One such
example is electrolyte disorders, common among intensive care unit patients. When the blood sodium
level falls below 135 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) or goes beyond 145 mEq/L, the patient
experiences hypo-/hyper-natremia with adverse effects on health [24]. Therefore, correct dosing of
electrolytes is crucial to ensure patient safety, and there is no consensus on how to assess the correct
dosage for different patient characteristics. Another critical problem is blood pressure disorder. These
are hypo-/hyper-tension events where the blood pressure deviates from its standard value and needs to
be corrected. Patient characteristics play an essential role in determining the blood pressure response
to the therapeutic agent, and they should be taken into account in the dosing process [33].
Related work and background A fair amount of research is dedicated to adaptive clinical trials
which aim to identify a drug’s effectiveness within a group, including a tradeoff between efficacy and
∗

Now a graduate student at MIT CSAIL. Email: demirel@mit.edu

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

