Stochastic Online Learning with Feedback Graphs:
Finite-Time and Asymptotic Optimality

Teodor V. Marinov
Google Research
tvmarinov@google.com

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research
& Courant Institute
mohri@google.com

Julian Zimmert
Google Research
zimmert@google.com

Abstract
We revisit the problem of stochastic online learning with feedback graphs, with the
goal of devising algorithms that are optimal, up to constants, both asymptotically
and in finite time. We show that, surprisingly, the notion of optimal finite-time
regret is not a uniquely defined property in this context and that, in general, it is
decoupled from the asymptotic rate. We discuss alternative choices and propose
a notion of finite-time optimality that we argue is meaningful. For that notion,
we give an algorithm that admits quasi-optimal regret both in finite-time and
asymptotically.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a sequential decision making game in which, at each round, the learner selects one
arm (or expert) out of a finite set of K arms. In the stochastic setting, each arm admits some reward
distribution and the learner receives a reward drawn from the distribution corresponding to the arm
selected. In the bandit setting, the learner observes only that reward [Lai et al., 1985, Auer et al.,
2002a,b], while in the full information setting, the rewards of all K arms are observed [Littlestone
and Warmuth, 1994, Freund and Schapire, 1997].
Both settings are special instances of a more general model of online learning with side information
introduced by Mannor and Shamir [2011], where the information supplied to the learner is specified
by a feedback graph. In an undirected feedback graph, each vertex represents an arm and an edge
between between arm v and w indicates that the reward of w is observed when v is selected and
vice-versa. The bandit setting corresponds to a graph reduced to self-loops at each vertex, the full
information to a fully connected graph. The problem of online learning with stochastic rewards and
feedback graphs has been studied by several publications in the last decade or so. The performance of
an algorithm in this problem is expressed in terms of its pseudo-regret, that is the difference between
the expected reward achieved by always pulling the best arm and the expected cumulative reward
obtained by the algorithm.
The UCB algorithm of Auer et al. [2002a] designed for the bandit setting forms a baseline for this
scenario. For general feedback graphs, Caron et al. [2012] designed a UCB-type algorithm, UCB - N,
as well as a closely related variant. The pseudo-regret guarantee of UCB - N is expressed in terms of
the most favorable clique covering of the graph, that is its partitioning into cliques. This guarantee is
always at least as favorable as the bandit one [Auer et al., 2002a], which coincides with the specific
choice of the trivial clique covering. However, the bound depends on the ratio of the maximum and
minimum mean reward gaps within each clique, which, in general, can be quite large.
Cohen et al. [2016] presented an action-elimination-type algorithm [Even-Dar et al., 2006], whose
guarantee depends on the least favorable maximal independent set. While there are instances in
which this guarantee is worse compared to the bound presented in Caron et al. [2012], in general it
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

