Training and Inference on
Any-Order Autoregressive Models the Right Way
Andy Shih
Stanford University
andyshih@cs.stanford.edu

Dorsa Sadigh
Stanford University
dorsa@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Conditional inference on arbitrary subsets of variables is a core problem in probabilistic inference with important applications such as masked language modeling
and image inpainting. In recent years, the family of Any-Order Autoregressive
Models (AO-ARMs) – closely related to popular models such as BERT and XLNet – has shown breakthrough performance in arbitrary conditional tasks across a
sweeping range of domains. But, in spite of their success, in this paper we identify
significant improvements to be made to previous formulations of AO-ARMs. First,
we show that AO-ARMs suffer from redundancy in their probabilistic model, i.e.,
they define the same distribution in multiple different ways. We alleviate this redundancy by training on a smaller set of univariate conditionals that still maintains
support for efficient arbitrary conditional inference. Second, we upweight the
training loss for univariate conditionals that are evaluated more frequently during
inference. Our method leads to improved performance with no compromises on
tractability, giving state-of-the-art likelihoods in arbitrary conditional modeling on
text (Text8), image (CIFAR10, ImageNet32), and continuous tabular data domains.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling has seen tremendous progress in building highly expressive models [2, 31], but
relatively little effort has been put into supporting efficient probabilistic inference. Most existing
models with deep neural architectures do not admit efficient inference on conditional queries of
the form p(xu |xv ), where u and v are disjoint subsets of the variables of the joint distribution.
Such queries, however, have many important applications such as masked language modeling [42],
image inpainting [43], and more. For example, multi-modal models learn a joint distribution over
all data modalities, and at test time may only be presented with some subset (unknown in advance)
of modalities [41, 20]. In robot shared-autonomy, an operator at test time may choose to provide a
subset of the action inputs, leaving the model to fill in the remaining action dimensions [8, 23].
Evidently, expressive generative models that can support efficient conditional inference can bring
progress to many applications. Towards this end, the family of Any-Order Autoregressive Models
(AO-ARMs) [37, 42, 35, 14] has shown surprising success. AO-ARMs are built on the following
insights. An autoregressive model defines an ensemble of univariate conditionals p(xt |x<t ) that
leads to efficient inference on certain conditional queries: ones whose variables form a prefix of the
ordering (Fig. 1a). However, in standard autoregressive models, all other conditionals are defined
only implicitly through Bayes’ rule, and hence do not admit efficient inference routines. To fix this,
consider training another autoregressive model on the reverse ordering, which now defines a larger
set of univariate conditionals that can answer queries of either the prefix or the suffix of the ordering
(Fig. 1b). AO-ARMs take this insight to the extreme by training on all possible orderings, enabling
efficient inference on all possible conditionals. Remarkably, recent efforts in scaling up AO-ARMs
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

