Asymptotics of ℓ2 Regularized Network Embeddings

Andrew Davison
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
ad3395@columbia.edu

Abstract
A common approach to solving prediction tasks on large networks, such as node
classification or link prediction, begins by learning a Euclidean embedding of the
nodes of the network, from which traditional machine learning methods can then
be applied. This includes methods such as DeepWalk and node2vec, which learn
embeddings by optimizing stochastic losses formed over subsamples of the graph
at each iteration of stochastic gradient descent. In this paper, we study the effects of
adding an ℓ2 penalty of the embedding vectors to the training loss of these types of
methods. We prove that, under some exchangeability assumptions on the graph, this
asymptotically leads to learning a graphon with a nuclear-norm-type penalty, and
give guarantees for the asymptotic distribution of the learned embedding vectors.
In particular, the exact form of the penalty depends on the choice of subsampling
method used as part of stochastic gradient descent. We also illustrate empirically
that concatenating node covariates to ℓ2 regularized node2vec embeddings leads to
comparable, when not superior, performance to methods which incorporate node
covariates and the network structure in a non-linear manner.

1

Introduction

Network embedding methods [see e.g 6, 24–27, 48, 58, 64] aim to find a latent representation of the
nodes of the network within Euclidean space, in order to facilitate the solution of tasks such as node
classification and link prediction, by using the produced embeddings as features for machine learning
algorithms designed for Euclidean data. For example, they can be used for recommender systems in
social networks, or to predict whether two proteins should be linked in a protein-protein interaction
graph. Generally, such methods obtain state-of-the-art performance on these type of tasks.
A classical approach to representation learning is to use the principal components of the Laplacian of
the network [6]; however, this approach is computationally prohibitive for large datasets. In order
to scale to large datasets, methods such as DeepWalk [48] and node2vec [25] learn embeddings
via optimizing a loss formed over stochastic subsamples of the graph. Letting G = (V, E) denote
an undirected graph, and writing ωu ∈ Rd for the embedding of a vertex u ∈ V with embedding
dimension d such that d ≪ |V|, these methods learn embeddings by iterating over the following
process: we take a random walk (ui )i≤k over the graph, form a loss
L=−

k
X

X

i=1 j : |j−i|≤W

log(σ⟨ωui , ωuj ⟩) −

k X
L
X

h
i
Evl ∼N (·|ui ) log(1 − σ(⟨ωui , ωvl ⟩)) ,

(1)

i=1 l=1

and then perform gradient updates of the form ωu ← ωu − η∇ωu L for some step size η > 0.
Here ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the Euclidean inner product, W is a window size, N (·|v) a negative sampling
distribution for vertex v and σ(y) := (1 + e−y )−1 the sigmoid function.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

