TaSIL: Taylor Series Imitation Learning

Daniel Pfrommer∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology†
Cambridge, MA
dpfrom@mit.edu
Stephen Tu
Robotics at Google
New York, NY
stephentu@google.com

Thomas T.C.K. Zhang∗
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
ttz2@seas.upenn.edu
Nikolai Matni
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
nmatni@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We propose Taylor Series Imitation Learning (TaSIL), a simple augmentation to
standard behavior cloning losses in the context of continuous control. TaSIL penalizes deviations in the higher-order Taylor series terms between the learned and
expert policies. We show that experts satisfying a notion of incremental input-tostate stability are easy to learn, in the sense that a small TaSIL-augmented imitation
loss over expert trajectories guarantees a small imitation loss over trajectories generated by the learned policy. We provide generalization bounds for TaSIL that scale
as Õ(1/n) in the realizable setting, for n the number of expert demonstrations.
Finally, we demonstrate experimentally the relationship between the robustness of
the expert policy and the order of Taylor expansion required in TaSIL, and compare standard Behavior Cloning, DART, and DAgger with TaSIL-loss-augmented
variants. In all cases, we show significant improvement over baselines across a
variety of MuJoCo tasks.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL), wherein expert demonstrations are used to train a policy [1, 2], has been
successfully applied to a wide range of tasks, including self-driving cars [3, 4], robotics [5], and video
game playing [6]. While IL is typically more sample-efficient than reinforcement learning-based
alternatives, it is also known to be sensitive to distribution shift: small errors in the learned policy can
lead to compounding errors and ultimately, system failure [3, 6]. In order to mitigate the effects of
distribution shift caused by policy error, two broad approaches have been taken by the community.
On-policy approaches such as DAgger [6] augment the data-set with expert-labeled or corrected
trajectories generated by learned policies. In contrast, off-policy approaches such as DART [7] and
GAIL [8] augment the data-set by perturbing the expert controlled system. In both cases, the goal is
to provide examples to the learned policy of how the expert recovers from errors. While effective,
these methods either require an interactive expert (on-policy), or access to a simulator for policy
rollouts during training (off-policy), which may not always be practically feasible.
In this work, we take a more direct approach towards mitigating distribution shift. Rather than
providing examples of how the expert policy recovers from error, we seek to endow a learned policy
with the robustness properties of the expert directly. In particular, we make explicit the underlying
assumption in previous work that a good expert is able to recover from perturbations through
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
This work was done while affiliated with the University of Pennsylvania.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

