An Empirical Study on Disentanglement of
Negative-free Contrastive Learning

Jinkun Cao3

Ruiqian Nai1
Qing Yang4
Jialei Huang1
Yang Gao1,2∗
Tsinghua University1 Shanghai Qi-Zhi Institute2
Carnegie Mellon University3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University4

Abstract
Negative-free contrastive learning methods have attracted a lot of attention with
simplicity and impressive performances for large-scale pretraining. However,
its disentanglement property remains unexplored. In this paper, we examine
negative-free contrastive learning methods to study the disentanglement property
empirically. We find that existing disentanglement metrics fail to make meaningful
measurements for high-dimensional representation models, so we propose a new
disentanglement metric based on Mutual Information between latent representations
and data factors. With this proposed metric, we benchmark the disentanglement
property of negative-free contrastive learning on both popular synthetic datasets
and a real-world dataset CelebA. Our study shows that the investigated methods
can learn a well-disentangled subset of representation. As far as we know, we
are the first to extend the study of disentangled representation learning to highdimensional representation space and introduce negative-free contrastive learning
methods into this area. The source code of this paper is available at https:
//github.com/noahcao/disentanglement_lib_med.

1

Introduction

Existing disentangled representation learning methods are mostly generative models (25; 15; 24;
10; 8; 31). They are evaluated only on simple synthetic datasets (36; 5) and low representation
dimensions, e.g., no more than 20-d. In contrast, contrastive learning is a class of discriminative
methods, trained by pulling the representation of two augmentations of the same image close. This
usually requires a much higher representation dimension for training, e.g., at least 1000-d.
Despite the success of contrastive learning, it remains unknown whether it can lead to disentangled
representations. Recently, some works (50; 53) reveal that contrastive learning can approximately
invert the data generation process and allow the learned representation to have identifiability, which
is related to the disentanglement property. However, all these advances necessarily rely on the
contrast provided by negative samples. The disentanglement property of contrastive learning without
negatives, or “non-contrastive self-supervised learning”, remains unexplored. And no contrastive
learning methods have been evaluated on the standard disentanglement benchmarks (36; 5) yet.
Representation disentanglement requires each single dimension of a representation vector to be
correlated to only one independent variable of the input data, which we call a data factor. There lacks
a uniform convention of measuring “correlation” here, so multiple disentanglement metrics (9; 15; 13)
have been proposed for the quantitative evaluation. Their shared principle is that a well-disentangled
representation model should not have a representation dimension responding to the change of more
than one data factor. We find although multiple disentanglement metrics’ (15; 24; 6; 9; 27) evaluations
are in agreement for low-dimensional space (34), they disagree in high-dimensional space. Moreover,
their design limitation makes the measurement not meaningful in high-dimensional space. We thus
propose a new disentanglement evaluation metric that is robust to representation dimension scaling
∗

corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

