BadPrompt: Backdoor Attacks on Continuous
Prompts

Xiangrui Cai
TKLNDST, TMCC
College of Computer Science
Nankai University
caixr@nankai.edu.cn
Sihan Xu∗
TKLNDST, TMCC
College of Cyber Science
Nankai University
xusihan@nankai.edu.cn

Haidong Xu
TKLNDST
College of Cyber Science
Nankai University
xuhaidong@mail.nankai.edu.cn

Ying Zhang
TMCC
College of Computer Science
Nankai University
yingzhang@nankai.edu.cn

Xiaojie Yuan
TKLNDST, TMCC
College of Cyber Science
Nankai University
yuanxj@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
The prompt-based learning paradigm has gained much research attention recently.
It has achieved state-of-the-art performance on several NLP tasks, especially in the
few-shot scenarios. While steering the downstream tasks, few works have been
reported to investigate the security problems of the prompt-based models. In this
paper, we conduct the first study on the vulnerability of the continuous prompt
learning algorithm to backdoor attacks. We observe that the few-shot scenarios
have posed a great challenge to backdoor attacks on the prompt-based models,
limiting the usability of existing NLP backdoor methods. To address this challenge,
we propose BadPrompt, a lightweight and task-adaptive algorithm, to backdoor
attack continuous prompts. Specially, BadPrompt first generates candidate triggers
which are indicative for predicting the targeted label and dissimilar to the samples
of the non-targeted labels. Then, it automatically selects the most effective and
invisible trigger for each sample with an adaptive trigger optimization algorithm.
We evaluate the performance of BadPrompt on five datasets and two continuous
prompt models. The results exhibit the abilities of BadPrompt to effectively
attack continuous prompts while maintaining high performance on the clean test
sets, outperforming the baseline models by a large margin. The source code of
BadPrompt is publicly available 1 .

1

Introduction

Natural language processing (NLP) is being revolutionized by the prompt-based learning paradigm [1,
7, 15, 29, 49], which has achieved new state-of-the-art performance on several NLP tasks, especially
in the few-shot scenarios. Unlike the fine-tuning paradigm that adapts pretrained language models
(PLMs) to different downstream tasks, the prompt-based learning paradigm reformulates the downstream task by prepending a sequence of vectors to the input, and generates the output from the PLMs.
For instance, when analyzing the sentiment of a movie review, “I like this movie”, we may append a
prompt “The movie is
” and utilize the PLM to predict a word of sentiment polarity.
∗
1

The corresponding author.
Project site: https://github.com/papersPapers/BadPrompt

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

