Learning Tractable Probabilistic Models from
Inconsistent Local Estimates
Shasha Jin, Vasundhara Komaragiri, Tahrima Rahman, and Vibhav Gogate
The University of Texas at Dallas

Abstract
Tractable probabilistic models such as cutset networks which admit exact linear
time posterior marginal inference are often preferred in practice over intractable
models such as Bayesian and Markov networks. This is because although tractable
models, when learned from data, are slightly inferior to the intractable ones in terms
of goodness-of-fit measures such as log-likelihood, they do not use approximate
inference at prediction time and as a result exhibit superior predictive performance.
In this paper, we consider the problem of improving a tractable model using a large
number of local probability estimates, each defined over a small subset of variables
that are either available from experts or via an external process. Given a model
learned from fully-observed, but small amount of possibly noisy data, the key idea
in our approach is to update the parameters of the model via a gradient descent
procedure that seeks to minimize a convex combination of two quantities: one
that enforces closeness via KL divergence to the local estimates and another that
enforces closeness to the given model. We show that although the gradients are NPhard to compute on arbitrary graphical models, they can be efficiently computed
over tractable models. We show via experiments that our approach yields tractable
models that are significantly superior to the ones learned from small amount of
possibly noisy data, even when the local estimates are inconsistent.

1

Introduction

A major issue with probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) [3, 8] such as Bayesian and Markov
networks is that in most real-world domains, exact inference is computationally infeasible. As a result,
approximate inference algorithms are often used in practice, but these algorithms can be inaccurate
and may exhibit high variability. Thus, even if a PGM performs well on goodness-of-fit measures such
as test set log-likelihood, its predictive performance, because of the use of approximate inference
methods, can be quite poor.
To combat this problem, the field of tractable probabilistic models (TPMs) or probabilistic circuits
(PCs) [9, 11, 20] seeks to learn probabilistic models that admit polynomial time exact inference
algorithms. TPMs are more biased or less expressive than general probabilistic models (because they
enforce tractability) and as a result may yield a slightly inferior (model) fit. But, the hope is that
because no approximations are used at prediction time the slight drop in goodness-of-fit measures is
offset by superior predictive performance. This hope is often realized in practice, and demonstrated
in numerous empirical studies in literature (for example, see [18, 20]).
To date, algorithms for learning the structure and parameters of tractable probabilistic models such
as cutset networks [17], sum-product networks [14] and probabilistic sentential decision diagrams
[9] assume access to either full data which has no missing values or almost full data in which only a
few variables have missing values. Often in the real world, however, the following scenario is quite
common. The learning algorithm has access to a small amount of full, possibly noisy data and a large
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

