TAP-Vid: A Benchmark for Tracking Any Point in a
Video
Carl Doersch∗
Ankush Gupta∗
Larisa Markeeva∗
Adrià Recasens∗
∗
∗
∗
Lucas Smaira
Yusuf Aytar
João Carreira
Andrew Zisserman∗†
Yi Yang∗
∗

DeepMind

†

VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
Generic motion understanding from video involves not only tracking objects, but
also perceiving how their surfaces deform and move. This information is useful to
make inferences about 3D shape, physical properties and object interactions. While
the problem of tracking arbitrary physical points on surfaces over longer video
clips has received some attention, no dataset or benchmark for evaluation existed,
until now. In this paper, we first formalize the problem, naming it tracking any
point (TAP). We introduce a companion benchmark, TAP-Vid, which is composed
of both real-world videos with accurate human annotations of point tracks, and
synthetic videos with perfect ground-truth point tracks. Central to the construction
of our benchmark is a novel semi-automatic crowdsourced pipeline which uses
optical flow estimates to compensate for easier, short-term motion like camera
shake, allowing annotators to focus on harder sections of video. We validate our
pipeline on synthetic data and propose a simple end-to-end point tracking model
TAP-Net, showing that it outperforms all prior methods on our benchmark when
trained on synthetic data. Code and data are available at the following URL:
https://github.com/deepmind/tapnet.

1

Introduction

Motion is essential for scene understanding: perceiving how people and objects move, accelerate,
turn, and deform improves understanding physical properties, taking actions, and inferring intentions.
It becomes even more crucial for embodied agents (i.e. robots), as many tasks require precise spatial
control of objects over time. While substantial attention has been given to motion estimation, e.g.,
through algorithms for correspondence and tracking, this paper addresses one particularly understudied problem: long-term motion estimation of points on generic physical surfaces in real scenes.
There is a multitude of tracking algorithms which address this problem, but partially and with
different weaknesses, illustrated in Figure 2. Popular box and segment tracking algorithms provide
limited information about deformation and rotation of surfaces. Optical flow can track any point
on any surface, but only over pairs of frames, with limited ability to estimate occlusion. Keypoint
matching algorithms common in structure from motion typically detect sparse interest points and are
not designed for deformable and weakly-textured objects. For some of the most common tracking
problems (e.g. faces, hands, and human poses), researchers thus build trackers for hand-chosen
semantic keypoints, which is extremely useful but not scalable to arbitrary objects and surfaces.
Our work aims to formalize the problem of long-term physical point tracking directly. Our formulation,
Tracking Any Point (TAP) is shown in Figure 1. We require only that the target point and surface
can be determined unambiguously from a single pixel query (i.e. we don’t deal with transparent
objects, liquids, or gasses), and directly estimate how it moves across a video. Our task can be seen
as an extension of optical flow to longer timeframes with occlusion estimation, or an extension of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

