Measuring and Reducing Model Update Regression in
Structured Prediction for NLP
Deng Cai⇤
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
thisisjcykcd@gmail.com

Yixuan Su⇤
University of Cambridge
ys484@cam.ac.uk

Elman Mansimov
Amazon AWS AI Labs
mansimov@amazon.com

Lei Shu
Amazon AWS AI Labs
leishu@amazon.com

Yi-An Lai
Amazon AWS AI Labs
yianl@amazon.com

Yi Zhang
Amazon AWS AI Labs
yizhngn@amazon.com

Abstract
Recent advance in deep learning has led to the rapid adoption of machine learningbased NLP models in a wide range of applications. Despite the continuous gain
in accuracy, backward compatibility is also an important aspect for industrial
applications, yet it received little research attention. Backward compatibility
requires that the new model does not regress on cases that were correctly handled by
its predecessor. This work studies model update regression in structured prediction
tasks. We choose syntactic dependency parsing and conversational semantic parsing
as representative examples of structured prediction tasks in NLP. First, we measure
and analyze model update regression in different model update settings. Next, we
explore and benchmark existing techniques for reducing model update regression
including model ensemble and knowledge distillation. We further propose a simple
and effective method, Backward-Congruent Re-ranking (BCR), by taking into
account the characteristics of structured prediction. Experiments show that BCR
can better mitigate model update regression than model ensemble and knowledge
distillation approaches.

1

Introduction

Model update regression refers to the deterioration of performance in some test cases after a model
update, even if the new model has on average better performance than the old model. For example, on
a fixed test set, the new model may achieve 1% absolute improvement in accuracy. However, it does
not necessarily mean that the new model gets 1% extra test cases correct. Instead, it may correct 6%
mistakes made by its predecessor but also introduce 5% new errors. The occasional worse behavior
of the new model can overshadow the benefits of overall performance gains and hinder its adoption.
Imagine a newly updated virtual assistant stops understanding a user’s favorite ways to inquire about
the local traffic. This can severely degrade the user experience even if the assistant has been improved
in other aspects.
Prior research (Shen et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021) has investigated model update
regression in classification problems of computer vision and natural language processing (NLP).
However, the formalization of classification only has limited coverage of real-world NLP applications.
For instance, the natural language understanding component behind modern virtual assistants aims
to transform user utterances into semantic graphs, a task known as conversational semantic paring
⇤

Most of the work was done during an internship at Amazon AWS AI Labs.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

