Bayesian Optimistic Optimization: Optimistic
Exploration for Model-based Reinforcement Learning

Chenyang Wu1 , Tianci Li1 , Zongzhang Zhang1∗, Yang Yu1, 2
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
{wucy, litc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, {zzzhang, yuy}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a general framework for modeling sequential
decision making problems, at the core of which lies the dilemma of exploitation
and exploration. An agent failing to explore systematically will inevitably fail to
learn efficiently. Optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) is a conventionally
successful strategy for efficient exploration. An agent following the OFU principle
explores actively and efficiently. However, when applied to model-based RL, it
involves specifying a confidence set of the underlying model and solving a series
of nonlinear constrained optimization, which can be computationally intractable.
This paper proposes an algorithm, Bayesian optimistic optimization (BOO), which
adopts a dynamic weighting technique for enforcing the constraint rather than
explicitly solving a constrained optimization problem. BOO is a general algorithm
proved to be sample-efficient for models in a finite-dimensional reproducing kernel
Hilbert space. We also develop techniques for effective optimization and show
through some simulation experiments that BOO is competitive with the existing
algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a sequential decision-making problem in which an agent acts in an
unknown environment while maximizing the cumulative rewards it receives [1, 2]. In this paper,
we consider the RL in Markov decision processes (MDPs), where the agent observes the state
of the environment at each timestep and makes decisions accordingly. Since the environment is
unknown, maximizing the cumulative rewards naturally involves a trade-off between exploration and
exploitation. Exploitation is to make the best-rewarding decision based on the agent’s information, and
exploration means actively gathering information about the environment so that the agent understands
better about the environment and thus makes better decisions in the future. An algorithm cannot be
sample-efficient without balancing them properly.
Theoretically, the exploration and exploitation dilemma admits a Bayesian optimal solution [3].
That is to consider the RL problem a so-called Bayes-Adaptive MDP (BAMDP), a special case of
partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs), where the parameter of the dynamics
is unobservable. Although this formulation provides useful insights, the POMDP formulation is
computationally intractable [4–6]. Therefore, all practical algorithms [7–10] resolve this dilemma by
achieving a delicate balance between seeking rewards and gathering information. Optimism in the
face of uncertainty (OFU) is one of the conventionally successful approaches for this balance and is
established as an efficient learning principle in various cases [11–13].
∗

Corresponding Author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

