A Unified Sequence Interface for Vision Tasks

Ting Chen† Saurabh Saxena† Lala Li†
Tsung-Yi Lin∗ David J. Fleet Geoffrey Hinton
Google Research, Brain Team
{iamtingchen,srbs,lala}@google.com

Abstract
While language tasks are naturally expressed in a single, unified, modeling framework, i.e., generating sequences of tokens, this has not been the case in computer
vision. As a result, there is a proliferation of distinct architectures and loss functions for different vision tasks. In this work we show that a diverse set of “core”
computer vision tasks can also be unified if formulated in terms of a shared pixelto-sequence interface. We focus on four tasks, namely, object detection, instance
segmentation, keypoint detection, and image captioning, all with diverse types of
outputs, e.g., bounding boxes or dense masks. Despite that, by formulating the
output of each task as a sequence of discrete tokens with a unified interface, we
show that one can train a neural network with a single model architecture and loss
function on all these tasks, with no task-specific customization. To solve a specific
task, we use a short prompt as task description, and the sequence output adapts
to the prompt so it can produce task-specific output. We show that such a model
can achieve competitive performance compared to well-established task-specific
models.

1

Introduction

Training a single neural network model capable of performing myriad tasks is a major step towards
artificial general intelligence. In recent years, with the rise of big language models [34, 35, 2] using
Transformers [41], many different language and related tasks are unified under a single modeling
framework, where a language model is trained to predict the solution (in text tokens) given a prompt of
a task description (also in text tokens). This is only possible because these tasks (both task description
and solution) can be expressed in the same, rich language interface.
This can be naturally extended to some vision tasks such as image captioning or visual question
answering where the solution is given in natural language, but the majority of “core” computer
vision tasks have diverse outputs that are not readily expressed in terms of natural language. The
object detection task produces a set of bounding boxes and their corresponding class labels, often
associated with scores for ranking. The output for instance segmentation is a set of segmentation
masks corresponding to image regions. The output of keypoint detection is a set of keypoints in an
image. As such, existing methods [13, 37, 15, 28, 4, 15] have developed specialized architectures
and sophisticated loss functions for each of these complex tasks.
An ambitious goal, in the pursuit of artificial general intelligence, is a simple interface that allows
one to express seemingly disparate vision tasks in a unified framework. This would simplify the
design of architectures and loss functions for new tasks. It would enable greater degrees of feature/representation sharing across many different tasks, thereby avoiding the need for a sophisticated
†

Equal contributions. ∗ Work done at Google.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

