Redistribution of Weights and Activations for
AdderNet Quantization

Ying Nie1 Kai Han1,2 Haikang Diao3 Chuanjian Liu1 Enhua Wu2,4 Yunhe Wang1∗
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2
State Key Lab of Computer Science, ISCAS & UCAS
3
School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University 4 University of Macau
{ying.nie, kai.han, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Adder Neural Network (AdderNet) provides a new way for developing energyefficient neural networks by replacing the expensive multiplications in convolution
with cheaper additions (i.e., `1 -norm). To achieve higher hardware efficiency, it
is necessary to further study the low-bit quantization of AdderNet. Due to the
limitation that the commutative law in multiplication does not hold in `1 -norm, the
well-established quantization methods on convolutional networks cannot be applied
on AdderNets. Thus, the existing AdderNet quantization techniques propose to
use only one shared scale to quantize both the weights and activations simultaneously. Admittedly, such an approach can keep the commutative law in the `1 -norm
quantization process, while the accuracy drop after low-bit quantization cannot be
ignored. To this end, we first thoroughly analyze the difference on distributions
of weights and activations in AdderNet and then propose a new quantization algorithm by redistributing the weights and the activations. Specifically, the pre-trained
full-precision weights in different kernels are clustered into different groups, then
the intra-group sharing and inter-group independent scales can be adopted. To
further compensate the accuracy drop caused by the distribution difference, we
then develop a lossless range clamp scheme for weights and a simple yet effective
outliers clamp strategy for activations. Thus, the functionality of full-precision
weights and the representation ability of full-precision activations can be fully
preserved. The effectiveness of the proposed quantization method for AdderNet
is well verified on several benchmarks, e.g. , our 4-bit post-training quantized
adder ResNet-18 achieves an 66.5% top-1 accuracy on the ImageNet with comparable energy efficiency, which is about 8.5% higher than that of the previous
AdderNet quantization methods. Code will be available at https://gitee.com/
mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/AdderQuant.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved extraordinary performance on many vision
tasks. However, the huge energy consumption of massive multiplications makes it difficult to deploy
CNNs on portable devices like mobile phones and embedded devices. As a result, substantial research
efforts have been devoted to reducing the energy consumption of CNNs [12, 16, 8, 7, 32, 37, 29].
Beyond pioneering model compression approaches, Chen et al. [4] advocate the use of `1 -norm
instead of cross-correlation for similarity measure between weights and activations in conventional
convolution operation, thus produces a series of adder neural networks (AdderNets) without massive
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

