Antigen-Specific Antibody Design and Optimization
with Diffusion-Based Generative Models
for Protein Structures
Shitong Luo1∗ , Yufeng Su2∗ , Xingang Peng3 , Sheng Wang4 , Jian Peng1,2 , Jianzhu Ma1,5
1
Helixon Research
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science, University of Washington
5
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University
luost@helixon.com,luost26@gmail.com
swang@cs.washington.edu,jianpeng@illinois.edu,majianzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Antibodies are immune system proteins that protect the host by binding to specific
antigens such as viruses and bacteria. The binding between antibodies and antigens
is mainly determined by the complementarity-determining regions (CDR) of the
antibodies. In this work, we develop a deep generative model that jointly models
sequences and structures of CDRs based on diffusion probabilistic models and
equivariant neural networks. Our method is the first deep learning-based method
that generates antibodies explicitly targeting specific antigen structures and is one
of the earliest diffusion probabilistic models for protein structures. The model is
a “Swiss Army Knife” capable of sequence-structure co-design, sequence design
for given backbone structures, and antibody optimization. We conduct extensive
experiments to evaluate the quality of both sequences and structures of designed
antibodies. We find that our model could yield competitive results in binding
affinity measured by biophysical energy functions and other protein design metrics.

1

Introduction

Antibodies are important immune proteins generated during an immune response to recognize and
neutralize the pathogen [Janeway et al., 2001]. As illustrated in Figure 1a, an antibody contains two
heavy chains and two light chains, and their overall structure is similar. Six variable regions determine
the specificity of an antibody to the antigens. They are called the Complementarity Determining
Regions (CDRs), denoted as H1, H2, H3, L1, L2, and L3. Therefore, the most important step for
developing effective therapeutic antibodies is to design CDRs that bind to the specific antigen [Presta,
1992, Akbar et al., 2022a].
Similar to other protein design tasks, the search space of CDRs is vast. A CDR sequence with L amino
acids has up to 20L possible protein sequences. It is not feasible to test all the possible sequences
using experimental approaches, so computational methods are needed. Traditional computational
approaches rely on sampling protein sequences and structures from complex biophysical energy
functions [Pantazes and Maranas, 2010, Lapidoth et al., 2015, Adolf-Bryfogle et al., 2018, Warszawski
et al., 2019]. They are generally time-consuming and are prone to get trapped in local optima.
Recently, various deep generative models have been developed to design antibodies [Saka et al., 2021,
Akbar et al., 2022b, Jin et al., 2022]. Compared to conventional algorithms, deep generative models
∗

Equal contribution.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

