A Lower Bound of Hash Codes’ Performance
Xiaosu Zhu1
xiaosu.zhu@outlook.com

Jingkuan Song1∗
jingkuan.song@gmail.com

Lianli Gao1
lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn
1

Yu Lei1
leiyu6969@gmail.com

Heng Tao Shen1,2
shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
As a crucial approach for compact representation learning, hashing has achieved
great success in effectiveness and efficiency. Numerous heuristic Hamming space
metric learning objectives are designed to obtain high-quality hash codes. Nevertheless, a theoretical analysis of criteria for learning good hash codes remains
largely unexploited. In this paper, we prove that inter-class distinctiveness and
intra-class compactness among hash codes determine the lower bound of hash
codes’ performance. Promoting these two characteristics could lift the bound and
improve hash learning. We then propose a surrogate model to fully exploit the
above objective by estimating the posterior of hash codes and controlling it, which
results in a low-bias optimization. Extensive experiments reveal the effectiveness of
the proposed method. By testing on a series of hash-models, we obtain performance
improvements among all of them, with an up to 26.5% increase in mean Average
Precision and an up to 20.5% increase in accuracy. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/VL-Group/LBHash.

1

Introduction

The explosive increase of multimedia digital content requires people to develop large-scale processing
techniques for effective and efficient multimedia understanding [47, 50, 52, 53]. Meanwhile, growing
focus on carbon neutrality initiatives urges researchers to handle above issues with low power and
memory consumption [30, 31]. Fortunately, hashing, as a key role in compact representation learning,
has demonstrated efficiency and effectiveness over the past few decades towards above demands [22].
By digesting multimedia contents into short binary codes, hashing is able to significantly reduce
storage, boost speed, and preserve key information [15, 21, 25, 27, 56].
In recent years, learning to hash has shown its advantages in alleviating information loss by performing
data-dependent Hamming space projection with a non-linear model [24, 32, 46] compared to handcrafted hashing functions. The purpose of optimizing hash-models is to generate semantically
meaningful hash codes for downstream tasks. A practical convention is to increase similarities among
codes of the same category, otherwise the opposite. Such convention is validated to be effective in
many applications [8, 26, 33, 40, 41, 48].
Practices in current advances still leave two questions which remain primarily unexploited: When
should we determine a hash-model for producing good codes, and by what means to achieve this
goal? Taking a comprehensive study on the above questions is essential since it not only guides us to
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

