Bi-directional Weakly Supervised Knowledge
Distillation for Whole Slide Image Classification

Linhao Qu∗
Digital Medical Research Center,
School of Basic Medical Science,
Fudan University
lhqu20@fudan.edu.cn

Xiaoyuan Luo∗
Digital Medical Research Center,
School of Basic Medical Science,
Fudan University
19111010030@fudan.edu.cn

Manning Wang†
Digital Medical Research Center,
School of Basic Medical Science,
Fudan University
mnwang@fudan.edu.cn

Zhijian Song†
Digital Medical Research Center,
School of Basic Medical Science,
Fudan University
zjsong@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Computer-aided pathology diagnosis based on the classification of Whole Slide
Image (WSI) plays an important role in clinical practice, and it is often formulated
as a weakly-supervised Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) problem. Existing methods solve this problem from either a bag classification or an instance classification
perspective. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end weakly supervised knowledge
distillation framework (WENO) for WSI classification, which integrates a bag classifier and an instance classifier in a knowledge distillation framework to mutually
improve the performance of both classifiers. Specifically, an attention-based bag
classifier is used as the teacher network, which is trained with weak bag labels,
and an instance classifier is used as the student network, which is trained using
the normalized attention scores obtained from the teacher network as soft pseudo
labels for the instances in positive bags. An instance feature extractor is shared
between the teacher and the student to further enhance the knowledge exchange
between them. In addition, we propose a hard positive instance mining strategy
based on the output of the student network to force the teacher network to keep
mining hard positive instances. WENO is a plug-and-play framework that can be
easily applied to any existing attention-based bag classification methods. Extensive experiments on five datasets demonstrate the efficiency of WENO. Code is
available at https://github.com/miccaiif/WENO.

1

Introduction

Histopathological images play an important role in cancer diagnosis and prognosis prediction [23, 33,
32, 20, 27, 26], and they can be scanned by digital slide scanners into Whole Slide Images (WSIs),
which facilitates the development of deep learning-based automatic analysis techniques. However,
there are two challenges in deep learning-based WSI analysis. First, WSIs have huge resolutions,
typically reaching 100,000 × 100,000 pixels, and thus cannot be directly input into deep models.
For this reason, WSIs are usually tiled into many small patches for processing. Second, fine-grained
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors. All authors are also from Shanghai Key Lab of Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention.
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

