Optimistic Mirror Descent Either Converges to Nash or to Strong
Coarse Correlated Equilibria in Bimatrix Games

Ioannis Anagnostides
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu

Gabriele Farina
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Ioannis Panageas
University of California Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
ipanagea@ics.uci.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We show that, for any sufficiently small fixed ϵ > 0, when both players in a generalsum two-player (bimatrix) game employ optimistic mirror descent (OMD) with
smooth regularization, learning rate η = O(ϵ2 ) and T = Ω(poly(1/ϵ)) repetitions,
either the dynamics reach an ϵ-approximate Nash equilibrium (NE), or the average
correlated distribution of play is an Ω(poly(ϵ))-strong coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE): any possible unilateral deviation does not only leave the player worse,
but will decrease its utility by Ω(poly(ϵ)). As an immediate consequence, when
the iterates of OMD are bounded away from being Nash equilibria in a bimatrix
game, we guarantee convergence to an exact CCE after only O(1) iterations. Our
results reveal that uncoupled no-regret learning algorithms can converge to CCE in
general-sum games remarkably faster than to NE in, for example, zero-sum games.
To establish this, we show that when OMD does not reach arbitrarily close to a NE,
the (cumulative) regret of both players is not only negative, but decays linearly
with time. Given that regret is the canonical measure of performance in online
learning, our results suggest that cycling behavior of no-regret learning algorithms
in games can be justified in terms of efficiency.

1

Introduction

The last few years have seen a tremendous amount of progress in computational game solving,
witnessed over a series of breakthrough results on benchmark applications in AI [Bowling et al.,
2015, Brown and Sandholm, 2017, Moravčı́k et al., 2017, Silver et al., 2016, Vinyals et al., 2019].
Most of these advances rely on algorithms for approximating a Nash equilibrium (NE) [Nash, 1950]
in two-player zero-sum games. Indeed, in that regime it is by now well-understood how to compute a
NE at scale. However, many real-world interactions are not zero-sum, but instead have general-sum
utilities, and often more than two players. In such settings, Nash equilibria suffer from several
drawbacks. First, finding even an approximate NE is computationally intractable [Daskalakis et al.,
2008, Etessami and Yannakakis, 2007, Chen et al., 2009, Rubinstein, 2016]—subject to well-believed
complexity-theoretic assumptions. Furthermore, even if we were to reach one, NE outcomes can
be dramatically more inefficient in terms of the social welfare compared to other more permissive
equilibrium concepts [Moulin and Vial, 1978]. Finally, NE suffer from equilibrium selection issues:
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

