Motion Transformer with Global Intention
Localization and Local Movement Refinement
Shaoshuai Shi, Li Jiang, Dengxin Dai, Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
{sshi, lijiang, ddai, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Predicting multimodal future behavior of traffic participants is essential for robotic
vehicles to make safe decisions. Existing works explore to directly predict future
trajectories based on latent features or utilize dense goal candidates to identify
agent’s destinations, where the former strategy converges slowly since all motion
modes are derived from the same feature while the latter strategy has efficiency
issue since its performance highly relies on the density of goal candidates. In
this paper, we propose the Motion TRansformer (MTR) framework that models
motion prediction as the joint optimization of global intention localization and
local movement refinement. Instead of using goal candidates, MTR incorporates
spatial intention priors by adopting a small set of learnable motion query pairs.
Each motion query pair takes charge of trajectory prediction and refinement for a
specific motion mode, which stabilizes the training process and facilitates better
multimodal predictions. Experiments show that MTR achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both the marginal and joint motion prediction challenges, ranking
1st on the leaderboards of Waymo Open Motion Dataset. Code will be available at
https://github.com/sshaoshuai/MTR.

1

Introduction

Motion forecasting is a fundamental task of modern autonomous driving systems. It has been
receiving increasing attention in recent years [19, 46, 29, 57, 35] as it is crucial for robotic vehicles
to understand driving scenes and make safe decisions. Motion forecasting requires to predict future
behaviors of traffic participants by jointly considering the observed agent states and road maps, which
is challenging due to inherently multimodal behaviors of the agent and complex scene environments.
To cover all potential future behaviors of the agent, existing approaches mainly fall into two different
lines: the goal-based methods and the direct-regression methods. The goal-based methods [19, 61]
adopt dense goal candidates to cover all possible destinations of the agent, predicting the probability
of each candidate being a real destination and then completing the full trajectory for each selected
candidate. Although these goal candidates alleviate the burden of model optimization by reducing
trajectory uncertainty, their density largely affects the performance of these methods: fewer candidates
will decrease the performance while more candidates will greatly increase computation and memory
cost. Instead of using goal candidates, the direct-regression methods [35, 47] directly predict a set
of trajectories based on the encoded agent feature, covering the agent’s future behavior adaptively.
Despite the flexibility in predicting a broad range of agent behaviors, they generally converge slowly
as various motion modes are required to be regressed from the same agent feature without utilizing
any spatial priors. They also tend to predict the most frequent modes of training data since these
frequent modes dominate the optimization of the agent feature. In this paper, we present a unified
framework, namely Motion TRansformer (MTR), which takes the best of both types of methods.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

