Deep Equilibrium Approaches to Diffusion Models
Ashwini Pokle
Carnegie Mellon University
apokle@cs.cmu.edu

Zhengyang Geng
Carnegie Mellon University
zgeng2@cs.cmu.edu

Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models are extremely effective in generating highquality images, with generated samples often surpassing the quality of those produced by other models under several metrics. One distinguishing feature of these
models, however, is that they typically require long sampling chains to produce
high-fidelity images. This presents a challenge not only from the lenses of sampling time, but also from the inherent difficulty in backpropagating through these
chains in order to accomplish tasks such as model inversion, i.e., approximately
finding latent states that generate known images. In this paper, we look at diffusion
models through a different perspective, that of a (deep) equilibrium (DEQ) fixed
point model. Specifically, we extend the recent denoising diffusion implicit model
(DDIM) [68], and model the entire sampling chain as a joint, multi-variate fixed
point system. This setup provides an elegant unification of diffusion and equilibrium models, and shows benefits in 1) single image sampling, as it replaces the
fully-serial typical sampling process with a parallel one; and 2) model inversion,
where we can leverage fast gradients in the DEQ setting to much more quickly find
the noise that generates a given image. The approach is also orthogonal and thus
complementary to other methods used to reduce the sampling time, or improve
model inversion. We demonstrate our method’s strong performance across several
datasets, including CIFAR10, CelebA, and LSUN Bedroom and Churches.1

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as a promising class of generative models that can generate high
quality images [69, 68, 57], outperforming GANs on perceptual quality metrics [19], and likelihoodbased models on density estimation [42]. One of the limitations of these models, however, is the
fact that they require a long diffusion chain (many repeated applications of a denoising process), in
order to generate high-fidelity samples. Several recent papers have focused on tackling this limitation,
e.g., by shortening the length of diffusion process through an alternative parameterization [68, 44], or
through progressive distillation of a sampler with large diffusion chain into a smaller one [54, 65].
However, all of these methods still rely on a fundamentally sequential sampling process, imposing
challenges on accelerating the sampling and for other applications like differentiating through the
entire generation process.
In this paper, we propose an alternative approach that also begins to address such challenges from a
different perspective. Specifically, we propose to model the generative process of a specific class of
1

Code is available at https://github.com/ashwinipokle/deq-ddim

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

