Counterfactual harm
Jonathan G. Richens⇤
DeepMind

Rory Beard
Comind

Daniel H. Thompson
Babylon

Abstract
To act safely and ethically in the real world, agents must be able to reason about
harm and avoid harmful actions. However, to date there is no statistical method
for measuring harm and factoring it into algorithmic decisions. In this paper we
propose the first formal definition of harm and benefit using causal models. We
show that any factual definition of harm is incapable of identifying harmful actions
in certain scenarios, and show that standard machine learning algorithms that
cannot perform counterfactual reasoning are guaranteed to pursue harmful policies
following distributional shifts. We use our definition of harm to devise a framework
for harm-averse decision making using counterfactual objective functions. We
demonstrate this framework on the problem of identifying optimal drug doses
using a dose-response model learned from randomized control trial data. We
find that the standard method of selecting doses using treatment effects results in
unnecessarily harmful doses, while our counterfactual approach identifies doses
that are significantly less harmful without sacrificing efficacy.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly used for making highly consequential decisions in
areas such as medicine [1, 2, 3], criminal justice [4, 5, 6], finance [7, 8, 9], and autonomous vehicles
[10]. These algorithms optimize for outcomes such as survival time, recidivism rate, and financial
cost. However, these are purely factual objectives, depending only on what outcome occurs. On the
other hand, human decision making incorporates preferences that depend not only on the outcome,
but why it occurred.
For example, consider two treatments for a disease which, when left untreated, has a 50% mortality
rate. Treatment 1 has a 60% chance of curing a patient, and a 40% chance of having no effect, with
the disease progressing as if untreated. Treatment 2 has an 80% chance of curing a patient and a 20%
chance of killing them. Treatments 1 and 2 have identical recovery rates, hence any agent that selects
actions based solely on the factual outcome statistics (e.g. the effect of treatment on the treated [11])
will not be able to distinguish between these two treatments. However, doctors systematically favour
treatment 1 as it achieves the same recovery rate but never harms the patient—there are no patients
that would have survived had they not been treated. On the other hand, doctors who administer
treatment 2 risk harming their patients—there are patients who die following treatment who would
have lived had they not been treated. While treatments 1 and 2 have the same mortality rates, the
resulting deaths have different causes (doctor or disease) which have different ethical implications.
Determining what would have happened to a patient if the doctor hadn’t treated them is a counterfactual inference, which cannot be identified from outcome statistics alone but requires knowledge
of the functional causal relation between actions and outcomes [12]. However, standard machine
⇤

jonrichens@deepmind.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

