SQ Lower Bounds for Learning Single Neurons
with Massart Noise
Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Lisheng Ren
University of Wisconsin-Madison
lren29@wisc.edu

Yuxin Sun
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yxsun@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of PAC learning a single neuron in the presence of Massart
noise. Specifically, for a known activation function f : R → R, the learner is given
access to labeled examples (x, y) ∈ Rd × R, where the marginal distribution of
x is arbitrary and the corresponding label y is a Massart corruption of f (hw, xi).
The goal of the learner is to output a hypothesis h : Rd → R with small squared
loss. For a range of activation functions, including ReLUs, we establish superpolynomial Statistical Query (SQ) lower bounds for this learning problem. In
more detail, we prove that no efficient SQ algorithm can approximate the optimal
error within any constant factor. Our main technical contribution is a novel SQhard construction for learning {±1}-weight Massart halfspaces on the Boolean
hypercube that is interesting on its own right.

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning has served as a motivation for understanding the complexity of learning
simple classes of neural networks. Here we study arguably the simplest possible setting of learning a
single neuron, i.e., a real-valued function of the form x 7→ f (hw, xi), where w is the weight vector of
parameters and f : R 7→ R is a non-linear and monotone activation. The underlying learning problem
is the following: Given i.i.d. samples from a distribution D on (x, y), where x ∈ Rd is the example
and y ∈ R is the corresponding label, the goal is to learn the target function in L22 -loss. That is, the
objective of the learner is to output a hypothesis h : Rd 7→ R such that E(x,y)∼D [(h(x) − y)2 ] is as
small as possible, compared to the optimal loss value OPT := minw∈Rd E(x,y)∼D [(f (hw, xi)−y)2 ].
A learning algorithm in this context is called proper if the hypothesis h is restricted to be of the
b ∈ Rd . One of the most popular activations is the ReLU
form hw
w, xi), for some w
b (x) = f (h b
def

function, corresponding to f (u) = ReLU(u) = max{0, u}. In this work, we study the complexity
of improperly learning single neurons, where the marginal distribution on examples is fixed but
arbitrary and the hypothesis h is allowed to be any efficiently computable function.
In the realizable case, i.e., when the labels are consistent with a function in the target concept
class, the above learning problem is known to be efficiently solvable for various activation functions. A
line of work, see, e.g., [KS09, Sol17, YS20] and references therein, has shown that simple algorithms
like gradient-descent efficiently converge to an optimal solution (in some cases under assumptions on
the marginal distribution on examples). On the other hand, in the adversarial label noise (aka agnostic)
model, known hardness results [Dan16, DKMR22a] rule out efficient constant factor approximations
to the optimal loss for a range of activations including ReLUs. The aforementioned negative results
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

