Probabilistic Missing Value Imputation
for Mixed Categorical and Ordered Data

Yuxuan Zhao
Cornell University
yz2295@cornell.edu

Alex Townsend
Cornell University
townsend@cornell.edu

Madeleine Udell
Stanford University
udell@stanford.edu

Abstract
Many real-world datasets contain missing entries and mixed data types including
categorical and ordered (e.g. continuous and ordinal) variables. Imputing the
missing entries is necessary, since many data analysis pipelines require complete
data, but this is challenging especially for mixed data. This paper proposes a probabilistic imputation method using an extended Gaussian copula model that supports
both single and multiple imputation. The method models mixed categorical and
ordered data using a latent Gaussian distribution. The unordered characteristics of
categorical variables is explicitly modeled using the argmax operator. The method
makes no assumptions on the data marginals nor does it require tuning any hyperparameters. Experimental results on synthetic and real datasets show that imputation
with the extended Gaussian copula outperforms the current state-of-the-art for both
categorical and ordered variables in mixed data.

1

Introduction

Modern datasets from healthcare, the sciences, and the social sciences often contain missing entries
and mixed data types such as continuous, ordinal, and categorical. Social survey datasets, for
example, are typically mixed because they include variables like age (continuous), demographic
group (categorical), and Likert scales (ordinal) measuring how strongly a respondent agrees with
certain stated opinions. Continuous variables are encoded as real numbers and sometimes called
numeric. We refer to variables that admit a total order (e.g. continuous and ordinal) as ordered
variables. In contrast, a categorical variable, also called nominal, can take one of a fixed number of
unordered values such as “A", “B", “AB", or "O" for blood type.
Most data analysis techniques require a complete dataset, so missing data imputation is an essential
preprocessing step. It is also often of interest to propagate imputation uncertainty into subsequent
analyses through multiple imputation, which generates several potentially different imputed datasets
[25]. An imputation method should ideally use all the collected data—regardless of data type—
to impute any missing data entries. However, most imputation approaches, whether explicitly or
implicitly, assume that each variable admits a total order and, as a result, cannot impute categorical
variables without proper preprocessing.
There is no satisfying, successful, and widely adopted method for imputing categorical variables,
especially in mixed datasets. It is tempting to reduce categorical imputation to ordinal imputation
using an integer encoding in which each category is assigned a number; however, this encoding
requires choosing an arbitrary ordering for the categories that may affect the results of downstream
(e.g., predictive) models. (This problem is most severe for linear and neural network models, whereas
tree-based models are less sensitive [31].) Instead, it is more common to use one-hot encoding to
represent a categorical variable using a binary vector with one entry for each category. With this
encoding, imputation methods developed for continuous or binary data, such as the popular low rank
matrix completion methods (LRMC) [24, 17, 29], can be jerry-rigged for categorical imputation.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

