Formulating Robustness Against Unforeseen Attacks

Sihui Dai
Princeton University
sihuid@princeton.edu

Saeed Mahloujifar
Princeton University
sfar@princeton.edu

Prateek Mittal
Princeton University
pmittal@princeton.edu

Abstract
Existing defenses against adversarial examples such as adversarial training typically assume that the adversary will conform to a specific or known threat model,
such as ℓp perturbations within a fixed budget. In this paper, we focus on the
scenario where there is a mismatch in the threat model assumed by the defense
during training, and the actual capabilities of the adversary at test time. We ask the
question: if the learner trains against a specific “source" threat model, when can
we expect robustness to generalize to a stronger unknown “target" threat model
during test-time? Our key contribution is to formally define the problem of learning
and generalization with an unforeseen adversary, which helps us reason about the
increase in adversarial risk from the conventional perspective of a known adversary.
Applying our framework, we derive a generalization bound which relates the generalization gap between source and target threat models to variation of the feature
extractor, which measures the expected maximum difference between extracted features across a given threat model. Based on our generalization bound, we propose
variation regularization (VR) which reduces variation of the feature extractor across
the source threat model during training. We empirically demonstrate that using
VR can lead to improved generalization to unforeseen attacks during test-time, and
combining VR with perceptual adversarial training (Laidlaw et al., 2021) achieves
state-of-the-art robustness on unforeseen attacks. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/inspire-group/variation-regularization.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have impressive performance on a variety of datasets (LeCun et al., 1998; He
et al., 2015; Krizhevsky et al., 2017; Everingham et al., 2010) but can be fooled by imperceptible
perturbations known as adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014). The conventional paradigm to
mitigate this threat often assumes that the adversary generates these examples using some known
threat model, primarily ℓp balls of specific radius (Cohen et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020b; Madry
et al., 2018), and evaluates the performance of defenses based on this assumption. This assumption,
however, is unrealistic in practice. In general, the learner does not know exactly what perturbations
the adversary will apply during test-time.
To bridge the gap between the setting of robustness studied in current adversarial ML research and
robustness in practice, we study the problem of learning with an unforeseen adversary. In this
problem, the learner has access to adversarial examples from a proxy “source" threat model but wants
to be robust against a more difficult “target" threat model used by the adversary during test-time. We
ask the following questions:
1. When can we expect robustness on the source threat model to generalize to the true unknown
target threat model used by the adversary?
2. How can we design a learning algorithm that reduces the drop in robustness from source
threat model to target threat model?
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

