Optimal Transport of Classifiers to Fairness

Maarten Buyl
Ghent University
maarten.buyl@ugent.be

Tijl De Bie
Ghent University
tijl.debie@ugent.be

Abstract
In past work on fairness in machine learning, the focus has been on forcing the
prediction of classifiers to have similar statistical properties for people of different
demographics. To reduce the violation of these properties, fairness methods usually
simply rescale the classifier scores, ignoring similarities and dissimilarities between
members of different groups. Yet, we hypothesize that such information is relevant
in quantifying the unfairness of a given classifier. To validate this hypothesis,
we introduce Optimal Transport to Fairness (OTF), a method that quantifies the
violation of fairness constraints as the smallest Optimal Transport cost between
a probabilistic classifier and any score function that satisfies these constraints.
For a flexible class of linear fairness constraints, we construct a practical way
to compute OTF as a differentiable fairness regularizer that can be added to any
standard classification setting. Experiments show that OTF can be used to achieve
an improved trade-off between predictive power and fairness.

1

Introduction

Machine learning methods are increasingly being deployed for automated decision making due to
the potential benefits in terms of efficiency and effectiveness. Yet, making automated decisions
about people comes with substantial legal and ethical risks, as evidenced by more and more cases of
undesirable algorithmic discrimination [27, 13, 10] with respect to the protected traits of individuals.
Even decisions that appear neutral because they do not use such sensitive information, may still
disproportionately affect certain groups indirectly [38].
The research field of fairness in machine learning [30] therefore studies ways in which a model’s
discrimination with respect to a person’s sensitive features can be reduced or removed. Many notions
of fairness have been proposed for binary classification tasks [37]. A popular example is demographic
parity, which is expressed as a constraint that enforces equality between the rates at which positive
decisions are made for each protected group [6].
Motivation For a given fairness notion, we would like to tune a model that satisfies the constraint
that expresses the notion. To this end, it can be practical to quantify the violation of this constraint as
a fairness regularization term that can be added to any probabilistic classifier [26]. Such an approach
provides an incentive to the model to learn parameters that result in fair probability scores, e.g. by
learning to ignore highly biased features. A straightforward fairness regularizer is the norm of the
difference between the quantities that should be equal according to the fairness notion [41, 31].
However, such a quantification of unfairness may be limiting, as it only considers the statistical
properties of the model’s output, while ignoring the input features for which those scores were
computed. We argue that, to quantify the unfairness of a model as a fairness regularizer, it can
be beneficial to more strongly consider data points with similar features but significant unfair
discrepancies in probability scores. To this end, we employ Optimal Transport (OT) [33] as a way to
measure these discrepancies while taking feature similarity into account.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

