Training Spiking Neural Networks
with Local Tandem Learning
Qu Yang1 , Jibin Wu2⇤, Malu Zhang3 , Yansong Chua4 , Xinchao Wang1 , Haizhou Li5,6,1
1
National University of Singapore
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
China Nanhu Academy of Electronics and Information Technology
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
6
Kriston AI, Xiamen, China

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are shown to be more biologically plausible and
energy efficient over their predecessors. However, there is a lack of an efficient
and generalized training method for deep SNNs, especially for deployment on
analog computing substrates. In this paper, we put forward a generalized learning
rule, termed Local Tandem Learning (LTL). The LTL rule follows the teacherstudent learning approach by mimicking the intermediate feature representations of
a pre-trained ANN. By decoupling the learning of network layers and leveraging
highly informative supervisor signals, we demonstrate rapid network convergence
within five training epochs on the CIFAR-10 dataset while having low computational complexity. Our experimental results have also shown that the SNNs thus
trained can achieve comparable accuracies to their teacher ANNs on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and Tiny ImageNet datasets. Moreover, the proposed LTL rule is
hardware friendly. It can be easily implemented on-chip to perform fast parameter
calibration and provide robustness against the notorious device non-ideality issues.
It, therefore, opens up a myriad of opportunities for training and deployment of
SNN on ultra-low-power mixed-signal neuromorphic computing chips.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have improved the perceptual and cognitive
capabilities of machines by leaps and bounds, and have become the de-facto standard for many pattern
recognition tasks including computer vision [30, 52, 53, 62, 35], speech processing [60, 39], language
understanding [3], and robotics [51]. Despite their superior performance, ANNs are computationally
expensive to be deployed on ubiquitous mobile and edge computing devices due to high memory and
computation requirements.
Spiking neural networks (SNNs), the third-generation artificial neural networks, have gained growing
research attention due to their greater biological plausibility and potential to realize ultra-lowpower computation as observed in biological neural networks. Leveraging the sparse, spike-driven
computation and fine-grain parallelism, the fully digital neuromorphic computing (NC) chips like
TrueNorth [2], Loihi [11], and Tianjic [42], that support the efficient inference of SNNs, have
indeed demonstrated orders of magnitude improved power efficiency over GPU-based AI solutions.
Moreover, the emerging in situ mixed-signal NC chips [54, 47], enabled by nascent non-volatile
technologies, can further boost the hardware efficiency by a large margin over the aforementioned
digital chips.
⇤

Corresponding Author: jibin.wu@polyu.edu.hk

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

