Self-Supervised Fair Representation Learning
without Demographics

Junyi Chai, Xiaoqian Wang∗
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
{chai28,joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Fairness has become an important topic in machine learning. Generally, most
literature on fairness assumes that the sensitive information, such as gender or race,
is present in the training set, and uses this information to mitigate bias. However,
due to practical concerns like privacy and regulation, applications of these methods
are restricted. Also, although much of the literature studies supervised learning,
in many real-world scenarios, we want to utilize the large unlabelled dataset to
improve the model’s accuracy. Can we improve fair classification without sensitive
information and without labels? To tackle the problem, in this paper, we propose a
novel reweighing-based contrastive learning method. The goal of our method is
to learn a generally fair representation without observing sensitive attributes. Our
method assigns weights to training samples per iteration based on their gradient
directions relative to the validation samples such that the average top-k validation
loss is minimized. Compared with past fairness methods without demographics,
our method is built on fully unsupervised training data and requires only a small
labelled validation set. We provide rigorous theoretical proof of the convergence of
our model. Experimental results show that our proposed method achieves better or
comparable performance than state-of-the-art methods on three datasets in terms
of accuracy and several fairness metrics.

1

Introduction

As machine learning systems are increasingly used for automated decision making with social impact,
discrimination across different demographic groups has become an important concern (Ntoutsi et al.,
2020). There have been growing evidence of disparities across different demographic groups in
real-world machine learning systems. Research on the COMPAS dataset shows a strong correlation
between recidivism prediction and race, where black individuals are more likely to be classified as
high risk (Larson et al., 2016). Gender bias has been identified in image captioning models (Hendricks
et al., 2018), where the model is likely to recognize the person in the image (without considering the
person’s appearance) as a man if the scene shows snowboarding. It is crucial to ensure that algorithm
makes fair predictions without explicit or implicit consideration of biased information, so as not to
reveal or amplify social biases.
Due to distributional disparity, historical bias, or indirect discrimination (Hajian and DomingoFerrer, 2012), simply removing sensitive attribute during training is not enough to guarantee fairness.
In response, methods (Hardt et al., 2016; Creager et al., 2019; Bahng et al., 2020) have been
proposed to achieve fairness under certain fairness notions. Generally, these methods assume one
predefined sensitive attribute, and apply fairness constraints based on such information. However,
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

