Coordinates Are NOT Lonely - Codebook Prior Helps
Implicit Neural 3D Representations

Fukun Yin1∗

Wen Liu2∗

Zilong Huang2

fkyin21@m.fudan.edu.cn

liuwen.steven.1994@gmail.com

zilong.huang2020@gmail.com

Pei Cheng2

Tao Chen1†

Gang YU2

peicheng@tencent.com

eetchen@fudan.edu.cn

iskicy@gmail.com

1

School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University, China
2

Tencent PCG, China

Abstract
Implicit neural 3D representation has achieved impressive results in surface or
scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis, which typically uses the coordinatebased multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to learn a continuous scene representation.
However, existing approaches, such as Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [15], and its
variants [16, 26, 29], usually require dense input views (i.e. 50-150) to obtain decent
results. To relive the over-dependence on massive calibrated images and enrich the
coordinate-based feature representation, we explore injecting the prior information
into the coordinate-based network and introduce a novel coordinate-based model,
CoCo-INR, for implicit neural 3D representation. The cores of our method are
two attention modules: codebook attention and coordinate attention. The former
extracts the useful prototypes containing rich geometry and appearance information
from the prior codebook, and the latter propagates such prior information into each
coordinate and enriches its feature representation for a scene or object surface.
With the help of the prior information, our method can render 3D views with more
photo-realistic appearance and geometries than the current methods using fewer
calibrated images available. Experiments on various scene reconstruction datasets,
including DTU [9] and BlendedMVS [28], and the full 3D head reconstruction
dataset, H3DS [19], demonstrate the robustness under fewer input views and fine
detail-preserving capability of our proposed method.

1

Introduction

3D scene reconstruction aims to recover the underlying scene geometry and appearance from a set of
posed images. It is a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics with wide usage in 3D
object surface reconstruction and scene novel view synthesis. Recently, implicit neural representation
(INR) with coordinated-based learning has been driving significant advantages in producing highfidelity 3D shapes [16, 26, 29] and photo-realistic images [15, 14, 2]. With the per-scene optimized
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), such methods usually require a dense set of calibrated views to
∗
†

Joint first authors.
Corresponding author.
This work was done when Fukun Yin was an intern at Tencent PCG.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

