SCINet: Time Series Modeling and Forecasting with
Sample Convolution and Interaction

Minhao Liu∗ , Ailing Zeng, Muxi Chen, Zhijian Xu, Qiuxia Lai, Lingna Ma, Qiang Xu∗
CUhk REliable Computing (CURE) Lab.
Dept. of Computer Science & Egnineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
∗
{mhliu,qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
One unique property of time series is that the temporal relations are largely preserved after downsampling into two sub-sequences. By taking advantage of this
property, we propose a novel neural network architecture that conducts sample
convolution and interaction for temporal modeling and forecasting, named SCINet.
Specifically, SCINet is a recursive downsample-convolve-interact architecture. In
each layer, we use multiple convolutional filters to extract distinct yet valuable
temporal features from the downsampled sub-sequences or features. By combining these rich features aggregated from multiple resolutions, SCINet effectively
models time series with complex temporal dynamics. Experimental results show
that SCINet achieves significant forecasting accuracy improvements over both
existing convolutional models and Transformer-based solutions across various
real-world time series forecasting datasets. Our codes and data are available at
https://github.com/cure-lab/SCINet.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting (TSF) enables decision-making with the estimated future evolution of metrics or events, thereby playing a crucial role in various scientific and engineering fields such as
healthcare [1], energy management [42], traffic flow [42], and financial investment [10], to name a
few.
There are mainly three kinds of deep neural networks used for sequence modeling, and they are all
applied for time series forecasting [24]: (i). recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [13]; (ii). Transformerbased models [37]; and (iii). temporal convolutional networks (TCN) [4].
Despite the promising results of TSF methods based on these generic models, they do not consider the
specialty of time series data during modeling. For example, one unique property of time series is that
the temporal relations (e.g., the trend and the seasonal components of the data) are largely preserved
after downsampling into two sub-sequences. Consequently, by recursively downsampling the time
series into sub-sequences, we could obtain a rich set of convolutional filters to extract dynamic
temporal features at multiple resolutions.
Motivated by the above, in this paper, we propose a novel neural network architecture for time series
modeling and forecasting, named sample convolution and interaction network (SCINet). The main
contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We propose SCINet, a hierarchical downsample-convolve-interact TSF framework that
effectively models time series with complex temporal dynamics. By iteratively extracting
and exchanging information at multiple temporal resolutions, an effective representation with
enhanced predictability can be learned, as verified by its comparatively lower permutation
entropy (PE) [16].
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

