From Gradient Flow on Population Loss to
Learning with Stochastic Gradient Descent
Ayush Sekhari‡

as3663@cornell.edu

Satyen Kale∗

satyenkale@google.com

Chris De Sa‡

Jason D. Lee†

jasonlee@princeton.edu

Karthik Sridharan‡

cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

ks999@cornell.edu

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) has been the method of choice for learning
large-scale non-convex models. While a general analysis of when SGD works
has been elusive, there has been a lot of recent progress in understanding the
convergence of Gradient Flow (GF) on the population loss, partly due to the
simplicity that a continuous-time analysis buys us. An overarching theme of our
paper is providing general conditions under which SGD converges, assuming that
GF on the population loss converges. Our main tool to establish this connection
is a general converse Lyapunov like theorem, which implies the existence of a
Lyapunov potential under mild assumptions on the rates of convergence of GF. In
fact, using these potentials, we show a one-to-one correspondence between rates of
convergence of GF and geometrical properties of the underlying objective. When
these potentials further satisfy certain self-bounding properties, we show that they
can be used to provide a convergence guarantee for Gradient Descent (GD) and
SGD (even when the paths of GF and GD/SGD are quite far apart). It turns out that
these self-bounding assumptions are in a sense also necessary for GD/SGD to work.
Using our framework, we provide a unified analysis for GD/SGD not only for
classical settings like convex losses, or objectives that satisfy PŁ / KŁ properties,
but also for more complex problems including Phase Retrieval and Matrix sq-root,
and extending the results in the recent work of Chatterjee [13].

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) has been a method of choice to train complex, large scale machine
learning models. While understanding of SGD for convex objectives is comprehensive, a general
understanding of when SGD works for non-convex models has been somewhat elusive. A large
slew of properties like, convexity [47], one-point-convexity [35], linearizability [32], KŁ [5, 40] and
PŁ [33, 49, 41] properties, and more problem specific, tailored analysis of SGD and Gradient Descent
(GD) for specific problem instances like matrix square-root problem, matrix completion [31], phase
retrieval [11, 16, 53] and Dictionary learning [4] have been proposed. Recent success of SGD in
over-parameterized deep learning models have lead to the idea that SGD perhaps optimizes training
objective with an implicit bias given by some implicit regularizer [24, 50, 29, 25, 26]. However,
in [32] it is argued that there are over-parameterized models for which SGD works but no method
that minimizes an implicit regularized training objective can learn successfully, thus showing that in
general, the success of SGD cannot be explained by implicit regularization.
∗

Google Research, NY
Princeton University and Google Research, Princeton
‡
Cornell University
†

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

