Revisiting Graph Contrastive Learning from the
Perspective of Graph Spectrum
Nian Liu1 , Xiao Wang1,2∗ , Deyu Bo1 , Chuan Shi1,2∗, Jian Pei3
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Simon Fraser University
{nianliu, xiaowang, bodeyu, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, jpei@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL), learning the node representations by augmenting graphs, has attracted considerable attentions. Despite the proliferation of
various graph augmentation strategies, some fundamental questions still remain
unclear: what information is essentially encoded into the learned representations
by GCL? Are there some general graph augmentation rules behind different augmentations? If so, what are they and what insights can they bring? In this paper,
we answer these questions by establishing the connection between GCL and graph
spectrum. By an experimental investigation in spectral domain, we firstly find
the General grAph augMEntation (GAME) rule for GCL, i.e., the difference of
the high-frequency parts between two augmented graphs should be larger than
that of low-frequency parts. This rule reveals the fundamental principle to revisit
the current graph augmentations and design new effective graph augmentations.
Then we theoretically prove that GCL is able to learn the invariance information
by contrastive invariance theorem, together with our GAME rule, for the first
time, we uncover that the learned representations by GCL essentially encode the
low-frequency information, which explains why GCL works. Guided by this
rule, we propose a spectral graph contrastive learning module (SpCo1 ), which is
a general and GCL-friendly plug-in. We combine it with different existing GCL
models, and extensive experiments well demonstrate that it can further improve the
performances of a wide variety of different GCL methods.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) learn the node representations in a graph mainly by message
passing. GNNs have attracted significant interest and found many applications [11, 23, 14]. Training
the high quality GNNs heavily relies on task-specific labels, while it is well known that manually
annotating nodes in graphs is costly and time-consuming [10]. Therefore, Graph Contrastive Learning
(GCL) is developed as a typical technique for self-supervised learning without the explicit usage of
labels [28, 9, 36].
The traditional GCL framework (Fig. 1 (a)) mainly includes three components: graph augmentation,
graph representation learning by an encoder, and contrastive loss. In essence, GCL aims to maximize
agreement between augmentations to learn invariant representations [36]. Typical GCL methods have
∗
1

Corresponding authors.
Code available at https://github.com/liun-online/SpCo

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

