On the Tradeoff Between Robustness and Fairness
Xinsong Ma
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
maxinsong1018@gmail.com

Zekai Wang
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
wzekai99@gmail.com

Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
liuweiwei863@gmail.com

Abstract
Interestingly, recent experimental results [2, 26] have identiﬁed a robust fairness
phenomenon in adversarial training (AT), namely that a robust model well-trained
by AT exhibits a remarkable disparity of standard accuracy and robust accuracy
among different classes compared with natural training. However, the effect of
different perturbation radii in AT on robust fairness has not been studied, and one
natural question is raised: does a tradeoff exist between average robustness and
robust fairness? Our extensive experimental results provide an afﬁrmative answer
to this question: with an increasing perturbation radius, stronger AT will lead to
a larger class-wise disparity of robust accuracy. Theoretically, we analyze the
class-wise performance of adversarially trained linear models with mixture Gaussian distribution. Our theoretical results support our observations. Moreover, our
theory shows that adversarial training easily leads to more serious robust fairness
issue than natural training. Motivated by theoretical results, we propose a fairly
adversarial training (FAT) method to mitigate the tradeoff between average robustness and robust fairness. Experimental results validate the effectiveness of our
proposed method.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNN) have achieved impressive performance on numerous challenging tasks
ranging from computer vision [10, 16] and natural language processing [9, 11] to autonomous driving. Despite this success, it turns out that DNN is vulnerable to adversarial examples. In other words,
very small and even imperceptible perturbations are sufﬁcient to deceive DNN models, resulting in
erroneous predictions [7, 8, 12, 19]. As one of the most popular methods against adversarial examples, adversarial training (AT) can effectively improve model’s robustness [17, 21, 24, 29].
Recently, numerous authors [2, 26] have identiﬁed an interesting robust fairness phenomenon in
AT, speciﬁcally that a robust model well-trained by AT exhibits a remarkable disparity of standard
accuracy and robust accuracy among different classes compared with natural training. Usually, the
performance of a naturally trained model is similar across classes. However, adversarially trained
models tend to perform well in some classes and poorly in others, which will lay serious hidden
dangers for some applications. For example, an autonomous driving system may achieve a satisfying
average robust accuracy for recognizing objects in the road. Nevertheless, this system is robust to
the classes of inanimate objects (high robust accuracy) but vulnerable to some important classes
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

