Turbocharging Solution Concepts: Solving NEs, CEs
and CCEs with Neural Equilibrium Solvers
Luke Marris
DeepMind (marris@deepmind.com), UCL
Ian Gemp
DeepMind

Thomas Anthony
DeepMind

Andrea Tacchetti
DeepMind

Siqi Liu
DeepMind, UCL

Karl Tuyls
DeepMind

Abstract
Solution concepts such as Nash Equilibria, Correlated Equilibria, and Coarse
Correlated Equilibria are useful components for many multiagent machine learning
algorithms. Unfortunately, solving a normal-form game could take prohibitive
or non-deterministic time to converge, and could fail. We introduce the Neural
Equilibrium Solver which utilizes a special equivariant neural network architecture
to approximately solve the space of all games of fixed shape, buying speed and
determinism. We define a flexible equilibrium selection framework, that is capable
of uniquely selecting an equilibrium that minimizes relative entropy, or maximizes
welfare. The network is trained without needing to generate any supervised training
data. We show remarkable zero-shot generalization to larger games. We argue that
such a network is a powerful component for many possible multiagent algorithms.

1

Introduction

Normal-form solution concepts such as Nash Equilibrium (NE) [28, 46], Correlated Equilibrium
(CE) [3], and Coarse Correlated Equilibrium (CCE) [45] are useful components and subroutines for
many multiagent machine learning algorithms. For example, value-based reinforcement learning
algorithms for solving Markov games, such as Nash Q-learning [27] and Correlated Q-Learning
[19] maintain state action values for every player in the game. These action values are equivalent
to per-state normal-form games, and policies are equilibrium solutions of these games. Critically,
this policy will need to be recomputed each time the action-value is updated during training, and for
large or continuous state-space Markov games, every time the agents need to take an action. Another
class of multiagent algorithms are those in the space of Empirical Game Theoretic Analysis (EGTA)
[60, 61] including PSRO [35, 44], JPSRO [40], and NeuPL [39, 38]. These algorithms are capable
of training policies in extensive-form games, and require finding equilibria of empirically estimated
normal-form games as a subroutine (the “meta-solver” step). In particular, these algorithms have
been critical in driving agents to superhuman performance in Go [54], Chess [55], and StarCraft [59].
Unfortunately, solving for an equilibrium can be computationally complex. NEs are known to be
PPAD [9, 8]. (C)CEs are defined by linear constraints, and if a linear objective is used to select an
equilibrium, can be solved by linear programs (LPs) in polynomial time. However, in general, the
solutions to LPs are non-unique (e.g. zero-sum games), and therefore are unsuitable equilibrium
selection methods for many algorithms, and unsuitable for training neural networks which benefit
from unambiguous targets. Objectives such as Maximum Gini [41] (a quadratic program (QP)), and
Maximum Entropy [48] (a nonlinear program), are unique but are more complex to solve.
As a result, solving for equilibria often requires deploying iterative solvers, which theoretically can
scale to large normal-form games but may (i) take an unpredictable amount of time to converge, (ii)
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

