On Efficient Online Imitation Learning
via Classification
Yichen Li
University of Arizona
yichenl@arizona.edu

Chicheng Zhang
University of Arizona
chichengz@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
Imitation learning (IL) is a general learning paradigm for tackling sequential
decision-making problems. Interactive imitation learning, where learners can interactively query for expert demonstrations, has been shown to achieve provably
superior sample efficiency guarantees compared with its offline counterpart or
reinforcement learning. In this work, we study classification-based online imitation
learning (abbrev. COIL) and the fundamental feasibility to design oracle-efficient
regret-minimization algorithms in this setting, with a focus on the general nonrealizable case. We make the following contributions: (1) we show that in the
COIL problem, any proper online learning algorithm cannot guarantee a sublinear
regret in general; (2) we propose L OGGER, an improper online learning algorithmic
framework, that reduces COIL to online linear optimization, by utilizing a new definition of mixed policy class; (3) we design two oracle-efficient algorithms within
the L OGGER framework that enjoy different sample and interaction round complexity tradeoffs, and conduct finite-sample analyses to show their improvements
over naive behavior cloning; (4) we show that under the standard complexitytheoretic assumptions, efficient dynamic regret minimization is infeasible in the
L OGGER framework. Our work puts classification-based online imitation learning,
an important IL setup, into a firmer foundation.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL), also known as learning from expert demonstrations [47, 44], is a general
paradigm for training intelligent behavior for sequential decision making tasks. IL has been successfully deployed in many applications, such as autonomous driving [47, 45], robot arm control [69],
game playing [60], and sequence prediction [23, 8]. It is now well-known that with the help of a
demonstrating expert, an IL agent can bypass the exploration challenges of reinforcement learning,
achieving a much lower sample requirement than reinforcement learning agents [63].
Two major IL paradigms have been studied in the literature: offline and interactive. In offline
IL [1, 64, 74, 30], the learner receives a set of expert demonstrations ahead of time; in contrast,
in interactive IL [23, 56, 55, 32], the learner has the ability to interactively query the expert for
demonstrations on states at its disposal, allowing expert feedback to be provided in a targeted manner.
In both settings, the goal of the learner is to output a policy π̂ that competes with the expert’s
policy π E , by consuming as few resources (e.g. expert annotations) as possible. Between these two,
interactive IL is known to be able to achieve superior policy performance than its offline counterpart
under certain favorable assumptions on the expert policy and the environment, in that learning agents
can use interaction to address the compounding error challenge [54, 49].
Despite the recent progress in the fundamental limits of the interactive imitation learning in the
realizable setting [63, 50, 49], the statistical and computational limits of the interactive imitation
learning in the general nonrealizable setting remain open. One promising and influential algorithmic
framework for studying and analyzing interactive IL in the nonrealizable setting is DAGGER (Data
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

