Invariance Learning based on Label Hierarchy
Shoji Toyota
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies
Tokyo 190-8562, Japan
shoji@ism.ac.jp
Kenji Fukumizu
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
The Graduate University for Advanced Studies
Tokyo 190-8562, Japan
fukumizu@ism.ac.jp

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks inherit biased correlations embedded in training data and
hence may fail to predict desired labels on unseen domains (or environments),
which have different distributions from the domain to provide training data. Invariance Learning (IL) has been developed recently to overcome this shortcoming;
using training data in many domains, IL estimates such a predictor that is invariant to a change of domain. However, the requirement of training data in multiple
domains is a strong restriction of using IL, since it demands expensive annotation.
We propose a novel IL framework to overcome this problem. Assuming the availability of data from multiple domains for a classification task at a higher level, for
which the labeling cost is lower, we estimate an invariant predictor for the target
classification task with training data gathered in a single domain. Additionally, we
propose two cross-validation methods for selecting hyperparameters of invariance
regularization, which has not been addressed properly in existing IL methods.
The effectiveness of the proposed framework, including the cross-validation, is
demonstrated empirically. Theoretical analysis reveals that our framework can
estimate the desirable invariant predictor with a hyperparameter fixed correctly,
and that such a preferable hyperparameter is chosen by the proposed CV methods
under some conditions.

1

Introduction

Training data used in machine learning may contain features that are spuriously correlated to the labels of data. Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) often learn such biased correlations embedded in training data and hence may fail to predict desired labels of test data generated by a different distribution
from one to provide training data. In classification of animal images, DNNs tend to misclassify cows
on sandy beaches, since most training pictures are taken in green pastures and DNNs inherit context
information in training [3, 9]. Another example is learning from medical data. Systems trained with
data collected in one hospital do not generalize well to other hospitals; DNNs unintentionally extract
environmental factors specific to a particular hospital in training [16–18].
Invariance Learning (IL) is a rapidly developed approach to overcome the issue of biased correlation,
which is caused by some bias in the distribution of a training dataset [10–15, 21, 33–36, 54]. In this
paper, we use the term domain to specify the bias in the distribution of a dataset. IL is thus a
method for removing the influence of domain shits. Using training data from multiple domains, IL
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

