Reinforcement Learning with Neural Radiance Fields

Danny Driess∗
TU Berlin

Ingmar Schubert∗
TU Berlin

Pete Florence
Google

Yunzhu Li
MIT

Marc Toussaint
TU Berlin

Abstract
It is a long-standing problem to find effective representations for training reinforcement learning (RL) agents. This paper demonstrates that learning state
representations with supervision from Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) can improve the performance of RL compared to other learned representations or even
low-dimensional, hand-engineered state information. Specifically, we propose to
train an encoder that maps multiple image observations to a latent space describing
the objects in the scene. The decoder built from a latent-conditioned NeRF serves
as the supervision signal to learn the latent space. An RL algorithm then operates
on the learned latent space as its state representation. We call this NeRF-RL. Our
experiments indicate that NeRF as supervision leads to a latent space better suited
for the downstream RL tasks involving robotic object manipulations like hanging
mugs on hooks, pushing objects, or opening doors.
Video: https://dannydriess.github.io/nerf-rl

1

Introduction

The sample efficiency of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms crucially depends on the representation of the underlying system state they operate on [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Sometimes, a low-dimensional
(direct) representation of the state, such as the positions of the objects in the environment, is considered to make the resulting RL problem most efficient [2].
However, such low-dimensional, direct state representations can have several disadvantages. On the
one hand, a perception module, e.g., pose estimation, is necessary in the real world to obtain the
representation from raw observations, which often is difficult to achieve in practice with sufficient
robustness. On the other hand, if the goal is to learn policies that generalize over different object
shapes [8], using a low-dimensional state representation is often impractical. Such scenarios, while
challenging for RL, are common, e.g., in robotic manipulation tasks.
Therefore, there is a large history of approaches that consider RL directly from raw, high-dimensional
observations like images (e.g., [9, 10]). Typically, an encoder takes the high-dimensional input and
maps it to a low-dimensional latent representation of the state. The RL algorithm (e.g., the Q-function
or the policy network) then operates on the latent vector as state input. This way, no separate
perception module is necessary, the framework can extract information from the raw observations that
are relevant for the task, and the RL agent, in principle, may generalize over challenging environments,
in which, e.g., object shapes are varied. While these are advantages in principle, jointly training
encoders capable of processing high-dimensional inputs from the RL signal alone is challenging. To
address this, one approach is to pretrain the encoder on a different task, e.g., image reconstruction
[1, 4, 11], multi-view consistency [6], or a time-constrastive task [3]. Alternatively, an auxiliary loss
on the latent encoding can be added during the RL procedure [5].
In both cases, the choice of the actual (auto-)encoder architecture and associated (auxiliary) loss
function has a significant influence on the usefulness of the resulting latent space for the downstream
∗

equal contribution. Correspondence: danny.driess@gmail.com

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

