Off-Policy Evaluation for Action-Dependent
Non-Stationary Environments

Yash Chandak
University of Massachusetts
Bruno Castro da Silva
University of Massachusetts

Shiv Shankar
University of Massachusetts
Emma Brunskill
Stanford University

Nathaniel D. Bastian
United States Military Academy
Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts

Abstract
Methods for sequential decision-making are often built upon a foundational assumption that the underlying decision process is stationary. This limits the application
of such methods because real-world problems are often subject to changes due to
external factors (passive non-stationarity), changes induced by interactions with
the system itself (active non-stationarity), or both (hybrid non-stationarity). In this
work, we take the first steps towards the fundamental challenge of on-policy and
off-policy evaluation amidst structured changes due to active, passive, or hybrid
non-stationarity. Towards this goal, we make a higher-order stationarity assumption such that non-stationarity results in changes over time, but the way changes
happen is fixed. We propose, OPEN, an algorithm that uses a double application
of counterfactual reasoning and a novel importance-weighted instrument-variable
regression to obtain both a lower bias and a lower variance estimate of the structure
in the changes of a policy’s past performances. Finally, we show promising results
on how OPEN can be used to predict future performances for several domains
inspired by real-world applications that exhibit non-stationarity.

1

Introduction

Methods for sequential decision making are often built upon a foundational assumption that the
underlying decision process is stationary [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. While this assumption was a
cornerstone when laying the theoretical foundations of the field, and while is often reasonable, it
is seldom true in practice and can be unreasonable [Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019]. Instead, real-world
problems are subject to non-stationarity that can be broadly classified as (a) Passive: where the
changes to the system are induced only by external (exogenous) factors, (b) Active: where the changes
result due to the agent’s past interactions with the system, and (c) Hybrid: where both passive and
active changes can occur together [Khetarpal et al., 2020].
There are many applications that are subject to active, passive, or hybrid non-stationarity, and where
the stationarity assumption may be unreasonable. Consider methods for automated healthcare where
we would like to use the data collected over past decades to find better treatment policies. In such
cases, not only might there have been passive changes due to healthcare infrastructure changing over
time, but active changes might also occur because of public health continuously evolving based on
the treatments made available in the past, thereby resulting in hybrid non-stationarity. Similar to
automated healthcare, other applications like online education, product recommendations, and in
fact almost all human-computer interaction systems need to not only account for the continually
drifting behavior of the user demographic, but also how the preferences of users may change due
to interactions with the system [Theocharous et al., 2020]. Even social media platforms need to
account for the partisan bias of their users that change due to both external political developments
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

