An Investigation into Whitening Loss for
Self-supervised Learning

Xi Weng∗1 , Lei Huang∗ 1,2 , Lei Zhao∗1 ,
Rao Muhammad Anwer2 , Salman Khan2 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2
1
SKLSDE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Abstract
A desirable objective in self-supervised learning (SSL) is to avoid feature collapse.
Whitening loss guarantees collapse avoidance by minimizing the distance between
embeddings of positive pairs under the conditioning that the embeddings from
different views are whitened. In this paper, we propose a framework with an
informative indicator to analyze whitening loss, which provides a clue to demystify
several interesting phenomena as well as a pivoting point connecting to other SSL
methods. We reveal that batch whitening (BW) based methods do not impose
whitening constraints on the embedding, but they only require the embedding
to be full-rank. This full-rank constraint is also sufficient to avoid dimensional
collapse. Based on our analysis, we propose channel whitening with random
group partition (CW-RGP), which exploits the advantages of BW-based methods
in preventing collapse and avoids their disadvantages requiring large batch size.
Experimental results on ImageNet classification and COCO object detection reveal
that the proposed CW-RGP possesses a promising potential for learning good
representations. The code is available at https://github.com/winci-ai/CW-RGP.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has made significant progress over the last several years [1, 19, 6, 16,
8], almost reaching the performance of supervised baselines on many downstream tasks [33, 24, 35].
Several recent approaches rely on a joint embedding architecture in which a dual pair of networks are
trained to produce similar embeddings for different views of the same image [8]. Such methods aim
to learn representations that are invariant to transformation of the same input. One main challenge
with the joint embedding architectures is how to prevent a collapse of representation, in which the
two branches ignore the inputs and produce identical and constant output representations [6, 8].
One line of work uses contrastive learning methods that attract different views from the same image
(positive pairs) while pull apart different images (negative pairs), which can prevent constant outputs
from the solution space [43]. While the concept is simple, these methods need large batch size to
obtain a good performance [19, 6, 37]. Another line of work tries to directly match the positive targets
without introducing negative pairs. A seminal approach, BYOL [16], shows that an extra predictor
and momentum is essential for representation learning. SimSiam [8] further generalizes [16] by
empirically showing that stop-gradient is essential for preventing trivial solutions. Recent works
generalize the collapse problem into dimensional collapse [21, 25]2 where the embedding vectors only
span a lower-dimensional subspace and would be highly correlated. Therefore, the embedding vector
dimensions would vary together and contain redundant information. To prevent the dimensional
∗
equal contribution
corresponding author (huangleiAI@buaa.edu.cn). This work was partially done while
Lei Huang was a visiting scholar at Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE.
2
This collapse is also referred to informational collapse in [2].

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

