Chaotic Dynamics are Intrinsic to Neural Network
Training with SGD
Luis M. Herrmann
Center for Digital Health - AG Roland Eils
Berlin Institute of Health
Kapelle-Ufer 2, 10117 Berlin
luis.herrmann@charite.de

Maximilian Granz
FU BioRobotics Lab
Freie Universität Berlin
Arnimallee 7, 14195 Berlin
maximilian.granz@fu-berlin.de

Tim Landgraf
FU BioRobotics Lab
Freie Universität Berlin
Arnimallee 7, 14195 Berlin
tim.landgraf@fu-berlin.de

Abstract
With the advent of deep learning over the last decade, a considerable amount
of effort has gone into better understanding and enhancing Stochastic Gradient
Descent so as to improve the performance and stability of artificial neural network training. Active research fields in this area include exploiting second order
information of the loss landscape and improving the understanding of chaotic
dynamics in optimization. This paper exploits the theoretical connection between
the curvature of the loss landscape and chaotic dynamics in neural network training
to propose a modified SGD ensuring non-chaotic training dynamics to study the
importance thereof in NN training. Building on this, we present empirical evidence
suggesting that the negative eigenspectrum - and thus directions of local chaos cannot be removed from SGD without hurting training performance. Extending
our empirical analysis to long-term chaos dynamics, we challenge the widespread
understanding of convergence against a confined region in parameter space. Our
results show that although chaotic network behavior is mostly confined to the initial
training phase, models perturbed upon initialization do diverge at a slow pace even
after reaching top training performance, and that their divergence can be modelled
through a composition of a random walk and a linear divergence. The tools and
insights developed as part of our work contribute to improving the understanding
of neural network training dynamics and provide a basis for future improvements
of optimization methods.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, the advent of Deep Learning has led to an explosive development of powerful
machine learning models capable of solving ever more complex problems. However, while numerous
different architectures have been developed, the underlying optimization procedure - Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD) (Robbins, 2007) and its descendants (Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma and Ba,
2017) - has largely remained the same, with many aspects of its nature not being fully understood yet.
The role of second order dynamics is one of those aspects, as are chaotic dynamics of Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) training, both being notoriously difficult to investigate due to the high computational
cost involved. In this paper, we establish a connection between the two aspects and generate new
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

