Characterizing the Ventral Visual Stream with
Response-Optimized Neural Encoding Models

Meenakshi Khosla1,∗ , Keith Jamison3 , Amy Kuceyeski3,4 and Mert R. Sabuncu1,2,3
1

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139
2
Nancy E. and Peter C. Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
3
Radiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065
4
Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065
∗
Correspondence: mkhosla@mit.edu

Abstract
Decades of experimental research based on simple, abstract stimuli has revealed
the coding principles of the ventral visual processing hierarchy, from the presence of edge detectors in the primary visual cortex to the selectivity for complex
visual categories in the anterior ventral stream. However, these studies are, by
construction, constrained by their a priori hypotheses. Furthermore, beyond the
early stages, precise neuronal tuning properties and representational transformations along the ventral visual pathway remain poorly understood. In this work, we
propose to employ response-optimized encoding models trained solely to predict
the functional MRI activation, in order to gain insights into the tuning properties
and representational transformations in the series of areas along the ventral visual
pathway. We demonstrate the strong generalization abilities of these models on
artificial stimuli and novel datasets. Intriguingly, we find that response-optimized
models trained towards the ventral-occipital and lateral-occipital areas, but not
early visual areas, can recapitulate complex visual behaviors like object categorization and perceived image-similarity in humans. We further probe the trained
networks to reveal representational biases in different visual areas and generate
experimentally testable hypotheses.

1

Introduction

Understanding the nature of representations and computations in the visual system has been a
longstanding goal in neuroscience. Substantial progress been made by presenting model organisms
with simple, abstract stimuli like noise or sine-wave gratings and studying the evoked responses.
These carefully crafted experiments, for instance, revealed the presence of edge detectors in the
primary visual cortex [1] and sparked the search for the ‘optimal input’ beyond early visual areas
across the visual cortical hierarchy. Significant efforts have also been made to understand the feature
complexity of tuning in V4 and IT neurons [2, 3, 4, 5]. Over the last two decades, through numerous
experiments, recording and analysis techniques, a conceptual understanding has emerged that early
visual areas extract low-level features like edges or curves, mid-level regions extract complex local
shapes, and high-level regions encode semantic categories, like faces or scenes [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. While
much of the details remain unknown, there is accumulating evidence that visual categorization occurs
in the ventral temporal cortex in humans [11]. This understanding was enabled by synthesizing
findings across different hypothesis-driven studies, most of them employing artificial stimuli atypical
of real-world vision, thus lacking ethological validity.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

