On Robust Multiclass Learnability

Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
liuweiwei863@gmail.com

Jingyuan Xu
School of Computer Science
Wuhan University
jingyuanxu777@gmail.com

Abstract
This work analyzes the robust learning problem in the multiclass setting. Under the
framework of Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) learning, we first show that
the graph dimension and the Natarajan dimension, which characterize the standard
multiclass learnability, are no longer applicable in robust learning problem. We then
generalize these notions to the robust learning setting, denoted as the adversarial
graph dimension (AG-dimension) and the adversarial Natarajan dimension (ANdimension). Upper and lower bounds of the sample complexity of robust multiclass
learning are rigorously derived based on the AG-dimension and AN-dimension,
respectively. Moreover, we calculate the AG-dimension and AN-dimension of the
class of linear multiclass predictors, and show that the graph (Natarajan) dimension
is of the same order as the AG(AN)-dimension. Finally, we prove that the AGdimension and AN-dimension are not equivalent.

1

Introduction

Learning models that are robust to adversarial perturbations has attracted significant research attention
in recent years[1, 2, 3]. Notably, prior work on this subject has largely studied the theory of robust
learnability in the context of binary supervised learning. However, many important problems require
classification into a great number of target classes. For example, in image object recognition and
language models building[4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], the number of classes scales as the number of possible
objects or the dictionary size respectively. It is thus of both practical and theoretical interest to
generalize the robust binary learning theory to the robust multiclass setting.
In the standard multiclass learning setting, the finiteness of the Natarajan dimension or graph
dimension [10] (both of which are generalized from the VC-dimension [11]) is necessary and
sufficient to ensure learnability [12]. Recent work has shown that the finiteness of the VC-dimension
is neither sufficient nor necessary for (proper) robust binary classification [13]. Inspired by [13], this
paper demonstrates that the Natarajan/graph dimension can no longer characterize robust learnability
in the multiclass problem. Meanwhile, some questions naturally arise: In multiclass setting, how can
robust learning be ensured? And what is necessary for robust learning?
To answer these questions, we generalize the corrupted hypothesis classes [14], which arise from
standard hypothesis classes in the binary setting in the presence of an adversary, and use them to
reduce the robust learning problem to a non-robust one. By considering the graph dimension and
Natarajan dimension of the corrupted hypothesis classes—which are defined as the adversarial graph
dimension (AG-dimension) and adversarial Natarajan dimension (AN-dimension) respectively—we
derive the upper and lower bounds of sample complexity of the robust multiclass learning problem.
We then analyze the AG-dimension and the AN-dimension of linear multiclass predictor class,
showing that the AG(AN)-dimension and the graph (Natarajan) dimension are of the same order.
Since it is proven that the graph dimension and the Natarajan dimension are equivalent when the
∗

Corresponding author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

