Missing Data Imputation and Acquisition with Deep
Hierarchical Models and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Ignacio Peis
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
Madrid, Spain
ipeis@tsc.uc3m.es

Chao Ma
Microsoft Research
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
cm905@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) have recently been highly successful at imputing
and acquiring heterogeneous missing data. However, within this specific application domain, existing VAE methods are restricted by using only one layer of
latent variables and strictly Gaussian posterior approximations. To address these
limitations, we present HH-VAEM, a Hierarchical VAE model for mixed-type incomplete data that uses Hamiltonian Monte Carlo with automatic hyper-parameter
tuning for improved approximate inference. Our experiments show that HH-VAEM
outperforms existing baselines in the tasks of missing data imputation and supervised learning with missing features. Finally, we also present a sampling-based
approach for efficiently computing the information gain when missing features are
to be acquired with HH-VAEM. Our experiments show that this sampling-based
approach is superior to alternatives based on Gaussian approximations.

1

Introduction

Many real-world unsupervised learning tasks require dealing with complicated datasets with mixed
types (real, positive-valued, continuous, or discrete) and missing values. For this purpose, variational
autoencoders [24, 25, 41] stand out in the recent literature as robust generative models that efficiently
handle high-dimensional data. However, in their naive configuration, every data dimension is assumed
to have similar statistical properties (i.e., homogeneity), and all dimensions are considered to be
completely observed. Both assumptions won’t hold in many real-world scenarios. Recent works
have adapted VAEs to handle incomplete [9, 14, 34, 36] and mixed-type data [18, 33, 38], and
demonstrated improved performance in downstream tasks such as missing data imputation and active
information acquisition. Despite these advances, existing approaches are far from optimal as they are
based on restrictive design choices: 1), only one layer of latent variables are considered; 2), Gaussian
posterior approximations are usually adopted. These will lead to limited flexibility and additional
bias, especially under real-world settings with complex mixed-type incomplete data.
In the literature, the issue of model flexibility and inference bias are often addressed separately. For
example, approximate inference bias can be reduced by using Monte Carlo sampling [46, 50]. More
specifically, Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [5, 12] stands out among MCMC methods in machine
learning due to its superior efficiency for exploring the target density. In the context of VAE, HMC
has also been combined with stochastic variational inference [7] for improving the training of VAEs.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

