On the convergence of policy gradient methods to
Nash equilibria in general stochastic games

Angeliki Giannou
University of Wisconsin-Madison
giannou@wisc.edu

Kyriakos Lotidis
Stanford University
klotidis@stanford.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France
Criteo AI Lab
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr
Emmanouil V. Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis
University of California, Berkeley
emvlatakis@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Learning in stochastic games is a notoriously difficult problem because, in addition
to each other’s strategic decisions, the players must also contend with the fact
that the game itself evolves over time, possibly in a very complicated manner.
Because of this, the convergence properties of popular learning algorithms – like
policy gradient and its variants – are poorly understood, except in specific classes
of games (such as potential or two-player, zero-sum games). In view of this, we
examine the long-run behavior of policy gradient methods with respect to Nash
equilibrium policies that are second-order stationary (SOS) in a sense similar to
the type of sufficiency conditions used in optimization. Our first result is that
SOS policies are locally attracting with high probability, and we show that policy
gradient trajectories
√ with gradient estimates provided by the Reinforce algorithm
achieve an O(1/ n) distance-squared convergence rate if the method’s step-size is
chosen appropriately. Subsequently, specializing to the class of deterministic Nash
policies, we show that this rate can be improved dramatically and, in fact, policy
gradient methods converge within a finite number of iterations in that case.

1

Introduction

Ever since they were introduced by Shapley [50] in the 1950’s, stochastic games have been one
of the staples of non-cooperative game theory, with a range of pioneering applications to multiagent reinforcement learning [51], unmanned vehicles [49], general game-playing [37, 52, 57], etc.
Informally, a stochastic game unfolds in discrete time as follows: At each point in time, the players
are at a given state which determines the rules of the game for that stage. The actions of the players in
this state determine not only their instantaneous payoffs (as defined by the stage game), but also the
transition probabilities towards the next state of the process. In this way, each player has to balance
two distinct – and often competing – objectives: optimizing the payoffs of today versus picking a
possibly suboptimal action which could yield significant benefits tomorrow (i.e., by influencing the
transitions of the process towards a more favorable state for the player).
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

