Invariant and Transportable Representations for
Anti-Causal Domain Shifts
Yibo Jiang1 and Victor Veitch2,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
2
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago
3
Google Research

Abstract
Real-world classification problems must contend with domain shift, the (potential)
mismatch between the domain where a model is deployed and the domain(s)
where the training data was gathered. Methods to handle such problems must
specify what structure is common between the domains and what varies. A natural
assumption is that causal (structural) relationships are invariant in all domains.
Then, it is tempting to learn a predictor for label Y that depends only on its causal
parents. However, many real-world problems are “anti-causal” in the sense that
Y is a cause of the covariates X—in this case, Y has no causal parents and the
naive causal invariance is useless. In this paper, we study representation learning
under a particular notion of domain shift that both respects causal invariance and
that naturally handles the “anti-causal” structure. We show how to leverage the
shared causal structure of the domains to learn a representation that both admits an
invariant predictor and that also allows fast adaptation in new domains. The key is
to translate causal assumptions into learning principles that disentangle “invariant”
and “non-stable” features. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world data
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed learning algorithm. Code is available
at https://github.com/ybjiaang/ACTIR.

1

Introduction

This paper concerns the problem of domain shift in supervised learning, the phenomenon where
a predictor with good performance in some (training) domains may have poor performance when
deployed in a novel (test) domain. There are two goals when faced with domain shifts. First, we
would like to learn a fixed predictor that is domain-invariant in the sense that it has good performance
in all domains. Note, however, that even a good domain-invariant predictor may still be far from
optimal in any given target domain. In such cases, we’d like to learn an optimal domain-specific
predictor as quickly as possible. Then, the second goal is to learn a representation for our data that
is transportable in the sense that, when given data from a new domain, we can use the representation
to learn a domain-specific predictor using only a small number of examples.
Domain shifts plague real-world applications of machine learning and there is a large and active
literature aimed at mitigating the problem [e.g., Arj+19; Vei+21; PBM16; Rot+21; Wan+21; Zho+21;
Koh+21; Zhu+20; Cai+21; Shi+21; Sag+19; Bai+20; SSS19; Zhe+21; Liu+21; Lu+21]. Empirically,
when domain shift methods are applied to wide-ranging benchmarks, there is no single dominant
method—indeed, it’s common for methods that work well in one context to do worse than naive
empirical risk minimization (i.e., ignore the shift problem) in another context [Koh+21; GL21]. This
problem is fundamental: it is impossible to build predictors that are robust to all possible kinds of
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

