Gradient Descent Is Optimal Under Lower Restricted
Secant Inequality And Upper Error Bound

Charles Guille-Escuret
Mila, Université de Montréal
guillech@mila.quebec

Adam Ibrahim
Mila, Université de Montréal
adam.ibrahim@mila.quebec

Baptiste Goujaud
Ecole Polytechnique
baptiste.goujaud@gmail.com

Ioannis Mitliagkas
Mila, Université de Montréal,
Canada CIFAR AI chair
ioannis@mila.quebec

Abstract
The study of first-order optimization is sensitive to the assumptions made on the
objective functions. These assumptions induce complexity classes which play a
key role in worst-case analysis, including the fundamental concept of algorithm
optimality. Recent work argues that strong convexity and smoothness—popular
assumptions in literature—lead to a pathological definition of the condition number
[12]. Motivated by this result, we focus on the class of functions satisfying a
lower restricted secant inequality and an upper error bound. On top of being
robust to the aforementioned pathological behavior and including some non-convex
functions, this pair of conditions displays interesting geometrical properties. In
particular, the necessary and sufficient conditions to interpolate a set of points and
their gradients within the class can be separated into simple conditions on each
sampled gradient. This allows the performance estimation problem (PEP, [7, 33])
to be solved analytically, leading to a lower bound on the convergence rate that
proves gradient descent to be exactly optimal on this class of functions among all
first-order algorithms.

1

Introduction

The typical framework to study convergence properties of first-order algorithms in the context of
machine learning is to first establish a class of objective functions to optimize through assumptions
usually bound to a constant, such as L-smoothness and µ-strong convexity. A tuning prescription of
2
an algorithm is then made based on the constants, (e.g. step size α = µ+L
in the case of the gradient
descent method on smooth and strongly convex functions), and finally a worst-case convergence rate
can be derived for this algorithm when using this tuning prescription. In some cases, a lower bound on
the achievable worst-case convergence rate can also be derived, leading to the theoretical optimality
of an algorithm on the considered class of function, for instance the Nesterov accelerated gradient
method [27] is known to be optimal up to a constant on strongly convex and smooth functions.
However in [12], the authors establish that such framework and its derived results are very sensitive
to the choice of assumptions, and that strong convexity and smoothness can exhibit pathological
behaviors leading to conservative tuning and arbitrarily sub-optimal convergence rates, even when the
resulting algorithm achieves theoretical worst-case optimality on this class of functions. Furthermore,
they propose a set of more robust alternative conditions. In this work, we focus on a specific pair
of such alternative conditions : lower restricted secant inequality (RSI− ) and upper error bounds
(EB+ ). Our main contribution is to show that the gradient descent (GD) method with a certain tuning
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

