Log-Linear-Time Gaussian Processes
Using Binary Tree Kernels
Michael K. Cohen
University of Oxford
michael.cohen@eng.ox.ax.uk

Samuel Daulton
University of Oxford, Meta
sdaulton@meta.com

Michael A. Osborne
University of Oxford
mosb@robots.ox.ax.uk

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) produce good probabilistic models of functions, but
most GP kernels require O((n + m)n2 ) time, where n is the number of data points
and m the number of predictive locations. We present a new kernel that allows for
Gaussian process regression in O((n + m) log(n + m)) time. Our “binary tree”
kernel places all data points on the leaves of a binary tree, with the kernel depending
only on the depth of the deepest common ancestor. We can store the resulting kernel
matrix in O(n) space in O(n log n) time, as a sum of sparse rank-one matrices,
and approximately invert the kernel matrix in O(n) time. Sparse GP methods also
offer linear run time, but they predict less well than higher dimensional kernels. On
a classic suite of regression tasks, we compare our kernel against Matérn, sparse,
and sparse variational kernels. The binary tree GP assigns the highest likelihood to
the test data on a plurality of datasets, usually achieves lower mean squared error
than the sparse methods, and often ties or beats the Matérn GP. On large datasets,
the binary tree GP is fastest, and much faster than a Matérn GP.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) can be used to perform regression with high-quality uncertainty estimates,
but they are slow. Naïvely, GP regression requires O(n3 + n2 m) computation time and O(n2 )
computation space when predicting at m locations given n data points [28]. A kernel matrix of size
n ⇥ n must be inverted (or Cholesky decomposed), and then m matrix-vector multiplications must
be done with that inverse matrix (or m linear solves with the Cholesky factors). A few methods that
we will discuss later achieve O(n2 m) time complexity [25, 30].
With special kernels, GP regression can be faster and use less space. Inducing point methods, using
z inducing points, allow regression to be done in O(z 2 (n + m)) time and in O(z 2 + zn) space
[21, 22, 23, 13]. We will discuss the details of these inducing point kernels later, but they are kernels
in their own right, not just approximations to other kernels. Unfortunately, these kernels are low
dimensional (having a z-dimensional Hilbert space), which limits the expressivity of the GP model.
We present a new kernel, the binary tree kernel, that also allows for GP regression in O(n + m)
space and O((n + m) log(n + m)) time (both model fitting and prediction). The time and space
complexity of our method is also linear in the depth of the binary tree, which is naïvely linear in the
dimension of the data, although in practice we can increase the depth sublinearly. Training some
kernel parameters takes time quadratic in the depth of the tree. The dimensionality of the binary
tree kernel is exponential in the depth of the tree, making it much more expressive than an inducing
points kernel. Whereas for an inducing points kernel, the runtime is quadratic in the dimension of the
Hilbert space, for the binary tree kernel, it is only logarithmic—an exponential speedup.
A simple depiction of our kernel is shown in Figure 1, which we will define precisely in Section
3. First, we create a procedure for placing all data points on the leaves of a binary tree. Given the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

