Structure-Preserving 3D Garment Modeling with
Neural Sewing Machines

Xipeng Chen1 , Guangrun Wang2 , Dizhong Zhu2 , Xiaodan Liang1 , Philip H. S. Torr2 , Liang Lin1∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University
2
University of Oxford
chenxp37@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wanggrun@gmail.com,
Amos.Zhu@hotmail.com, liangxd9@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
3D Garment modeling is a critical and challenging topic in the area of computer
vision and graphics, with increasing attention focused on garment representation
learning, garment reconstruction, and controllable garment manipulation, whereas
existing methods were constrained to model garments under specific categories
or with relatively simple topologies. In this paper, we propose a novel Neural
Sewing Machine (NSM), a learning-based framework for structure-preserving
3D garment modeling, which is capable of learning representations for garments
with diverse shapes and topologies and is successfully applied to 3D garment
reconstruction and controllable manipulation. To model generic garments, we first
obtain sewing pattern embedding via a unified sewing pattern encoding module, as
the sewing pattern can accurately describe the intrinsic structure and the topology
of the 3D garment. Then we use a 3D garment decoder to decode the sewing
pattern embedding into a 3D garment using the UV-position maps with masks.
To preserve the intrinsic structure of the predicted 3D garment, we introduce an
inner-panel structure-preserving loss, an inter-panel structure-preserving loss, and
a surface-normal loss in the learning process of our framework. We evaluate
NSM on the public 3D garment dataset with sewing patterns with diverse garment
shapes and categories. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
NSM is capable of representing 3D garments under diverse garment shapes and
topologies, realistically reconstructing 3D garments from 2D images with the
preserved structure, and accurately manipulating the 3D garment categories, shapes,
and topologies, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods by a clear margin.

1

Introduction

A long-standing vision in computer vision and graphics is generic 3D garment modeling, which
can discover patterns in the clothing data, provide a better understanding of the clothing data, and
learn reconstructable and manipulable representations for the clothing data. In the past decades,
the dominant paradigm in 3D garment modeling resolves to physics-based simulators, which were
computationally expensive and time-consuming [3, 35]. Recently, deep learning has been introduced
and has made great strides [24, 49], allowing a wide range of applications, e.g., 3D virtual try-on
[48], garment design [44], and virtual digital humans [1].
Despite achieving remarkable progress, prior works can only model specific categories or clothes
with relatively simple topologies. Specifically, template-based methods [17, 49, 13, 12] use predefined templates with fixed topology to model garments for each category, which have difficulty
∗

Corresponding author is Liang Lin.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

