Learning to Drop Out: An Adversarial Approach to
Training Sequence VAEs

Ðord̄e Miladinović ∗† Kumar Shridhar ∗ ‡ Kushal Jain ¶
Max B. Paulus ‡ Joachim M. Buhmann ‡ Mrinmaya Sachan ‡ Carl Allen ‡
†

GSK.ai

‡

ETH Zürich

¶

University of California, San Diego

Abstract
In principle, applying variational autoencoders (VAEs) to sequential data offers a
method for controlled sequence generation, manipulation, and structured representation learning. However, training sequence VAEs is challenging: autoregressive
decoders can often explain the data without utilizing the latent space, known as
posterior collapse. To mitigate this, state-of-the-art models ‘weaken’ the ‘powerful’
decoder by applying uniformly random dropout to the decoder input. We show theoretically that this removes pointwise mutual information provided by the decoder
input, which is compensated for by utilizing the latent space. We then propose
an adversarial training strategy to achieve information-based stochastic dropout.
Compared to uniform dropout on standard text benchmark datasets, our targeted
approach increases both sequence modeling performance and the information
captured in the latent space.

1

Introduction

Training autoregressive models via maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is a common strategy
for representing sequential data. Such autoregressive models obtain state-of-the-art in modeling text
[Brown et al., 2020, Chowdhery et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2022], speech [Oord et al., 2018, Conneau
et al., 2021] , and video sequences [Babaeizadeh et al., 2018]. In this simple and intuitive approach,
the joint distribution of a sequence is factorized into a product of conditional distributions, with each
sequence element conditioned on its history. However, in their basic form, autoregressive models
do not necessarily learn latent variables that encode informative content, as often desired. As such,
supplementing autoregressive models with latent variables is a promising way to enhance control in
sequence generation, and enable structured representation learning.
A recent approach to latent variable modeling of sequences is to integrate autoregressive components
into the variational autoencoder (VAE) framework [Kingma and Welling, 2014, Rezende et al., 2014].
Sequence VAEs offer a theoretically principled solution, but have not been widely adopted. Arguably,
this is largely due to the phenomenon of posterior collapse [Bowman et al., 2016, Chen et al., 2017,
Van Den Oord et al., 2017, Chen et al., 2020]. Posterior collapse describes when a VAE’s posterior
probability over latent variables ‘collapses’ to the latent prior, rendering the latent space completely
uninformative, or independent, of the data. Recent years have seen an abundance of research into
posterior collapse [Bowman et al., 2015, Chen et al., 2017, Lucas et al., 2019, Dai et al., 2020, Fang
et al., 2021, Pang et al., 2021], identifying the ‘power’ of autoregressive decoding as a main cause. In
particular, autoregressive decoders are shown to obtain satisfactory sequence modeling performance
without utilizing the latent space [Bowman et al., 2016, Chen et al., 2017]. This suggests that for
sequence VAEs to progress, improved techniques are needed to understand and alleviate posterior
∗

Equal contribution; correspondence at: shkumar@ethz.ch

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

