Embrace the Gap: VAEs Perform
Independent Mechanism Analysis
Patrik Reizinger∗ 1 , Luigi Gresele∗2 , Jack Brady∗1 , Julius von Kügelgen2,3 , Dominik Zietlow2,4 ,
Bernhard Schölkopf2 , Georg Martius2 , Wieland Brendel1 , and Michel Besserve† 2
1

University of Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
4
Amazon Web Services, Tübingen, Germany
{patrik.reizinger,jack.brady,wieland.brendel}@uni-tuebingen.de,
{luigi.gresele,jvk,bs,gmartius,besserve}@tue.mpg.de, zietld@amazon.de
2

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are a popular framework for modeling complex
data distributions; they can be efficiently trained via variational inference by
maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO), at the expense of a gap to the
exact (log-)marginal likelihood. While VAEs are commonly used for disentangled
representation learning, it is unclear why ELBO maximization would yield such
representations, since unregularized maximum likelihood estimation generally
cannot invert the data-generating process without additional assumptions. Yet,
VAEs often succeed at this task. We seek to elucidate this apparent paradox by
studying nonlinear VAEs in the limit of near-deterministic decoders. We first prove
that, in this regime, the optimal encoder approximately inverts the decoder—a
commonly used but unproven conjecture—which we refer to as self-consistency.
Leveraging self-consistency, we show that the ELBO converges to a regularized
log-likelihood. This allows VAEs to perform what has recently been termed
independent mechanism analysis (IMA): it adds an inductive bias towards decoders
with column-orthogonal Jacobians, which helps recovering the true latent factors.
The gap between ELBO and log-likelihood is therefore welcome, since it bears
unanticipated benefits for nonlinear representation learning. In experiments on
synthetic and image data, we show that VAEs uncover the true latent factors when
the data generating process satisfies the IMA assumption.

1

Introduction

Latent Variable Models (LVMs) allow to effectively approximate a complex data distribution and
to sample from it [3, 48]. Deep LVMs employ a neural network (the decoder or generator) to
parameterize the conditional distribution of the observations given latent variables, which are typically
assumed to be independent. However, Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) of the model
parameters is computationally intractable. In Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [35, 56], the exact
log-likelihood is substituted with a tractable lower bound, the evidence lower bound (ELBO). This
objective introduces an approximate posterior of the latents given the observations (the encoder) from
a suitable variational distribution whose mean and covariance are parametrized by neural networks.
The encoder is introduced to efficiently train a deep LVM: however, it is not explicitly designed to
extract useful representations [17, 58].
∗
†

Equal contribution. Code available at: github.com/rpatrik96/ima-vae
Senior author

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

