Cluster and Aggregate:
Face Recognition with Large Probe Set

Minchul Kim
Department of Computer Science
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
kimminc2@msu.edu

Feng Liu
Department of Computer Science
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
liufeng6@msu.edu

Anil Jain
Department of Computer Science
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
jain@msu.edu

Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
liuxm@msu.edu

Abstract
Feature fusion plays a crucial role in unconstrained face recognition where inputs
(probes) comprise of a set of N low quality images whose individual qualities
vary. Advances in attention and recurrent modules have led to feature fusion that
can model the relationship among the images in the input set. However, attention
mechanisms cannot scale to large N due to their quadratic complexity and recurrent
modules suffer from input order sensitivity. We propose a two-stage feature fusion
paradigm, Cluster and Aggregate, that can both scale to large N and maintain
the ability to perform sequential inference with order invariance. Specifically,
Cluster stage is a linear assignment of N inputs to M global cluster centers, and
Aggregation stage is a fusion over M clustered features. The clustered features play
an integral role when the inputs are sequential as they can serve as a summarization
of past features. By leveraging the order-invariance of incremental averaging
operation, we design an update rule that achieves batch-order invariance, which
guarantees that the contributions of early image in the sequence do not diminish as
time steps increase. Experiments on IJB-B and IJB-S benchmark datasets show the
superiority of the proposed two-stage paradigm in unconstrained face recognition.
Code and pretrained models are available in Link.

1

Introduction

Face Recognition (FR) matches a set of input query imagery, known as probe, to enrolled identity
database, known as gallery. Verification is to confirm the claimed probe’s identity and identification
is to identify the unknown probe’s identity by searching a known database [41]. In either case, a
probe can go beyond an image and include a set of images, videos, or their combinations [4]. Thus
FR involves fusing features of multiple images or videos to create a discriminative feature for a probe.
Due to the interest in unconstrained surveillance scenarios, e.g. IJB-S [21], the role of fusion is
becoming more important. Unconstrained FR is often based on probes from low quality images and
videos. It is challenging due to two issues: 1) individual video frames can be of poor quality, causing
erroneous FR model prediction and 2) the number of images in a probe can be very large, e.g., a
probe video in IJB-S may have 500, 000 frames. Feature fusion across all frames in the probe is
especially crucial if frame-based predictions are unreliable. While prior works [23, 36] address the
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

