Iterative Scene Graph Generation

1

Siddhesh Khandelwal1,2 and Leonid Sigal1,2,3
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2
Vector Institute for AI
3
CIFAR AI Chair
{skhandel, lsigal}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
The task of scene graph generation entails identifying object entities and their
corresponding interaction predicates in a given image (or video). Due to the
combinatorially large solution space, existing approaches to scene graph generation
assume certain factorization of the joint distribution to make the estimation feasible
(e.g., assuming that objects are conditionally independent of predicate predictions).
However, this fixed factorization is not ideal under all scenarios (e.g., for images
where an object entailed in interaction is small and not discernible on its own).
In this work, we propose a novel framework for scene graph generation that
addresses this limitation, as well as introduces dynamic conditioning on the image,
using message passing in a Markov Random Field. This is implemented as an
iterative refinement procedure wherein each modification is conditioned on the
graph generated in the previous iteration. This conditioning across refinement
steps allows joint reasoning over entities and relations. This framework is realized
via a novel and end-to-end trainable transformer-based architecture. In addition,
the proposed framework can improve existing approach performance. Through
extensive experiments on Visual Genome [30] and Action Genome [25] benchmark
datasets we show improved performance on the scene graph generation task. The
code is available at github.com/ubc-vision/IterativeSG.

1

Introduction

Scene graphs allow for structured understanding of objects and their interactions within a scene. A
scene graph is a graph where nodes represent objects within the scene, each detailed by the class label
and spatial location, and the edges capture the relationships between object pairs. These relationships
are usually represented by a <subject, predicate, object> triple. Effectively generating such
graphs, from either images or videos, has emerged as a core problem in computer vision [14, 35, 39,
46, 50, 52, 54]. Scene graph representations can be leveraged to improve performance on a variety of
complex high-level tasks like VQA [24, 47], Image Captioning [17, 53], and Image Generation [26].
The task of scene graph generation involves estimating the conditional distribution of the relationship triplets given an image. Naively modelling this distribution is often infeasible as the space of
possible relationship triplets is considerably larger than the space of possible subjects, objects, and
predicates. To circumvent this issue, existing methods factorize the aforementioned distribution
into easy-to-estimate conditionals. For example, two-stage approaches, like [11, 47, 55], follow the
graphical model image Ñ rsubject, objects Ñ predicate, wherein the subjects and objects are
independently obtained via a pre-trained detector like Faster-RCNN [41]. These are then consumed
by a downstream network to estimate predicates. Any such factorization induces conditional dependencies (and independencies) that heavily influence model characteristics. For example, in the
aforesaid graphical model, errors made during the estimation of the subjects and objects are naturally
propagated towards the predicate distribution, which makes the estimation of predicates involving
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

