Evaluating Robustness to Dataset Shift
via Parametric Robustness Sets
Nikolaj Thams∗
Dept. of Mathematical Sciences
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
thams@math.ku.dk

Michael Oberst∗
CSAIL & IMES
MIT
Cambridge, MA
moberst@mit.edu

David Sontag
CSAIL & IMES
MIT
Cambridge, MA
dsontag@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We give a method for proactively identifying small, plausible shifts in distribution
which lead to large differences in model performance. These shifts are defined
via parametric changes in the causal mechanisms of observed variables, where
constraints on parameters yield a “robustness set” of plausible distributions and
a corresponding worst-case loss over the set. While the loss under an individual
parametric shift can be estimated via reweighting techniques such as importance
sampling, the resulting worst-case optimization problem is non-convex, and the
estimate may suffer from large variance. For small shifts, however, we can construct
a local second-order approximation to the loss under shift and cast the problem
of finding a worst-case shift as a particular non-convex quadratic optimization
problem, for which efficient algorithms are available. We demonstrate that this
second-order approximation can be estimated directly for shifts in conditional
exponential family models, and we bound the approximation error. We apply our
approach to a computer vision task (classifying gender from images), revealing
sensitivity to shifts in non-causal attributes.

1

Introduction

Predictive models may perform poorly outside of the training distribution, a problem broadly known
as dataset shift [Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2008]. In high-stakes applications, such as healthcare, it is
important to understand the limitations of a model in advance [Finlayson et al., 2021]: given a model
trained on data from one hospital, how will it perform under changes in the population of patients, in
the incidence of disease, or in the treatment policy?
In this paper, our goal is to proactively understand the sensitivity of a predictive model to dataset
shift, using only data from the training distribution. This requires domain knowledge, to specify
what type of distributional changes are plausible. Formally, for a model f (X) trained on data from
P(X, Y ), with loss function ℓ(f (X), Y ), we seek to understand the loss of the model under a set of
plausible future distributions P. We seek to evaluate the worst-case loss over P,
sup EP [ℓ(f (X), Y )],

(1)

P ∈P

and provide an interpretable description of a distribution P which maximizes this objective. If the
value of the worst-case loss is low, this can build confidence prior to deployment, and otherwise,
examining the worst-case distribution P can help identify weaknesses of the model. To illustrate, we
use the following running example, inspired by Subbaswamy et al. [2021].
∗

Equal Contribution, order determined by coin flip. Code is available at this link.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

