Transferring Fairness under Distribution Shifts
via Fair Consistency Regularization

Bang An
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
bangan@umd.edu

Zora Che
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
zche@bu.edu

Mucong Ding
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
mcding@umd.edu

Furong Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park
furongh@umd.edu

Abstract
The increasing reliance on ML models in high-stakes tasks has raised a major
concern about fairness violations. Although there has been a surge of work that
improves algorithmic fairness, most are under the assumption of an identical
training and test distribution. In many real-world applications, however, such an
assumption is often violated as previously trained fair models are often deployed
in a different environment, and the fairness of such models has been observed to
collapse. In this paper, we study how to transfer model fairness under distribution
shifts, a widespread issue in practice. We conduct a fine-grained analysis of how
the fair model is affected under different types of distribution shifts and find that
domain shifts are more challenging than subpopulation shifts. Inspired by the
success of self-training in transferring accuracy under domain shifts, we derive
a sufficient condition for transferring group fairness. Guided by it, we propose
a practical algorithm with fair consistency regularization as the key component.
A synthetic dataset benchmark, which covers diverse types of distribution shifts,
is deployed for experimental verification of the theoretical findings. Experiments
on synthetic and real datasets, including image and tabular data, demonstrate that
our approach effectively transfers fairness and accuracy under various types of
distribution shifts1 .

1

Introduction

Machine learning’s social impact has broadened as it is widely used to aid decision-making in
real-world applications, such as hiring, loan approval, facial recognition, and criminal justice. To
avoid discrimination against a subset of the population (e.g., w.r.t race or gender), many efforts on
algorithmic fairness have been carried out [12, 21, 65, 44, 46, 15, 7]. Although existing work has
achieved remarkable success in ensuring fairness, most of them assume the distribution of data at
test time is identical to that in the training set. However, recent studies show that the fairness of a
model is likely to collapse when encountering a distribution shift. For example, [19] observes that a
fair income predictor trained with data from one state might not be fair when used in other states.
[50] tries to maintain fairness in healthcare settings, but a model that performs fairly according to the
metric evaluated in “Hospital A” shows unfairness when applied to “Hospital B”. Such observations
1

Code is available at https://github.com/umd-huang-lab/transfer-fairness.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

