Learning Long-Term Crop Management Strategies
with CyclesGym
Matteo Turchetta
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
matteotu@ethz.ch

Luca Corinzia
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
lucac@ethz.ch

Amanda Burton
Agroscope
Nyon, Switzerland
amanda.burton@agroscope.admin.ch
Ioannis N. Athanasiadis
Wageningen University & Research
Wageningen, Netherlands
ioannis.athanasiadis@wur.nl

Scott Sussex
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
ssussex@ethz.ch

Juan Herrera
Agroscope
Nyon, Switzerland
juan.herrera@agroscope.admin.ch

Joachim M. Buhmann
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
jbuhmann@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
To improve the sustainability and resilience of modern food systems, designing
improved crop management strategies is crucial. The increasing abundance of data
on agricultural systems suggests that future strategies could benefit from adapting
to environmental conditions, but how to design these adaptive policies poses a
new frontier. A natural technique for learning policies in these kinds of sequential
decision-making problems is reinforcement learning (RL). To obtain the large
number of samples required to learn effective RL policies, existing work has used
mechanistic crop growth models (CGMs) as simulators. These solutions focus on
single-year, single-crop simulations for learning strategies for a single agricultural
management practice. However, to learn sustainable long-term policies we must
be able to train in multi-year environments, with multiple crops, and consider
a wider array of management techniques. We introduce C YCLES GYM, an RL
environment based on the multi-year, multi-crop CGM Cycles. C YCLES GYM
allows for long-term planning in agroecosystems, provides modular state space and
reward constructors and weather generators, and allows for complex actions. For
RL researchers, this is a novel benchmark to investigate issues arising in real-world
applications. For agronomists, we demonstrate the potential of RL as a powerful
optimization tool for agricultural systems management in multi-year case studies
on nitrogen (N) fertilization and crop planning scenarios.

1

Introduction

The global food system is under increasing pressure from several fronts. First, it must meet the
caloric demand of the world population, which is projected to reach 9.8 billion by 2050 [59], despite
constrained resources like fresh water and arable land. Second, our agricultural system must adapt
to more frequent and extreme weather events induced by climate change [24]. At the same time,
agriculture has a profound environmental impact. For example, Nitrogen (N) is fundamental for
plant growth, but its production in the form of mineral fertilizer and its incomplete uptake by plants
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

