Theoretically Better and Numerically Faster
Distributed Optimization with
Smoothness-Aware Quantization Techniques

Bokun Wang
Texas A&M University, United States∗
bokunw.wang@gmail.com

Mher Safaryan
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
mher.safaryan.1@kaust.edu.sa

Peter Richtárik
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
To address the high communication costs of distributed machine learning, a large
body of work has been devoted in recent years to designing various compression
strategies, such as sparsification and quantization, and optimization algorithms
capable of using them. Recently, Safaryan et al. [2021] pioneered a dramatically
different compression design approach: they first use the local training data to form
local smoothness matrices and then propose to design a compressor capable of
exploiting the smoothness information contained therein. While this novel approach
leads to substantial savings in communication, it is limited to sparsification as it
crucially depends on the linearity of the compression operator. In this work, we
generalize their smoothness-aware compression strategy to arbitrary unbiased
compression operators, which also include sparsification. Specializing our results
to stochastic quantization, we guarantee significant savings in communication
complexity compared to standard quantization. In particular, we prove that block
quantization with n blocks theoretically outperforms single block quantization,
leading to a reduction in communication complexity by an O(n) factor, where n
is the number of nodes in the distributed system. Finally, we provide extensive
numerical evidence with convex optimization problems that our smoothness-aware
quantization strategies outperform existing quantization schemes as well as the
aforementioned smoothness-aware sparsification strategies with respect to three
evaluation metrics: the number of iterations, the total amount of bits communicated,
and wall-clock time.

1

Introduction

Training modern machine learning models is typically cast in terms of (regularized) empirical risk
minimization problem and requires increasingly more training data to make empirical risk closer to
the true risk [Schmidhuber, 2015, Vaswani et al., 2019]. This natural requirement makes it harder (and
in some scenarios impossible) to collect all data in one place and carry out the training using a single
data source. As a result, we reconciled with a flock of datasets disseminated across various compute
nodes holding the actual training data [Bekkerman et al., 2011, Vogels et al., 2019]. However, such
divide-and-conquer approach of handling vast amount of data means that local updates need to be
communicated among the nodes (or through some central server orchestrating the process), which
∗

Work done when the author was a research intern at KAUST, Saudi Arabia.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

