Learning a Condensed Frame for Memory-Efficient
Video Class-Incremental Learning

Yixuan Pei1∗ Zhiwu Qing2∗ Jun Cen3 Xiang Wang2 Shiwei Zhang4
Yaxiong Wang1 Mingqian Tang4 Nong Sang2 Xueming Qian1
Xi’an Jiaotong University1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology3
Alibaba Group4
{peiyixuan@stu, wangyx15@stu, qianxm@mail}.xjtu.edu.cn,
{qzw,wxiang,nsang}@hust.edu.cn,
jcenaa@connect.ust.hk, {zhangjin.zsw, mingqian.tmq}@alibab-inc.com

Abstract
Recent incremental learning for action recognition usually stores representative
videos to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. However, only a few bulky videos
can be stored due to the limited memory. To address this problem, we propose FrameMaker, a memory-efficient video class-incremental learning approach
that learns to produce a condensed frame for each selected video. Specifically,
FrameMaker is mainly composed of two crucial components: Frame Condensing
and Instance-Specific Prompt. The former is to reduce the memory cost by preserving only one condensed frame instead of the whole video, while the latter aims to
compensate the lost spatio-temporal details in the Frame Condensing stage. By this
means, FrameMaker enables a remarkable reduction in memory but keep enough information that can be applied to following incremental tasks. Experimental results
on multiple challenging benchmarks, i.e., HMDB51, UCF101 and SomethingSomething V2, demonstrate that FrameMaker can achieve better performance to
recent advanced methods while consuming only 20% memory. Additionally, under
the same memory consumption conditions, FrameMaker significantly outperforms
existing state-of-the-arts by a convincing margin.

1

Introduction

Training video action recognition models with all classes in a single fine-tuning stage have been
widely studied [6, 13, 30, 34, 37, 50, 51, 61] in recent years. However, in many realistic scenarios,
limited by privacy matters or technologies, the different classes can only be presented in sequence,
where the previously trained classes are either unavailable or partially available in limited memory.
Naively training models will overfit currently available data and cause performance deterioration on
previously seen classes, which is named catastrophic forgetting [39]. Class-incremental learning is a
machine learning paradigm to fight this challenge when fine-tuning a single model in a sequence of
independent classes.
A branch of class-incremental learning methods [5, 7, 9, 12, 21, 33, 45, 59] has achieved remarkable
performances in the image domain by re-training a portion of past examples. Meanwhile, some
existing video incremental learning methods [41, 53] have demonstrated that storing more past
∗

equal contribution

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

