Turning the Tables: Biased, Imbalanced, Dynamic
Tabular Datasets for ML Evaluation
Sérgio Jesus1,2 , José Pombal1 , Duarte Alves1 , André F. Cruz1 ,
Pedro Saleiro1 , Rita P. Ribeiro2,3 , João Gama3 , Pedro Bizarro1
1
Feedzai
DCC Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade do Porto
3
LIAAD, INESCTEC Universidade do Porto
{sergio.jesus, pedro.saleiro}@feedzai.com

2

Abstract
Evaluating new techniques on realistic datasets plays a crucial role in the development of ML research and its broader adoption by practitioners. In recent years,
there has been a significant increase of publicly available unstructured data resources for computer vision and NLP tasks. However, tabular data — which is
prevalent in many high-stakes domains — has been lagging behind. To bridge this
gap, we present Bank Account Fraud (BAF), the first publicly available1 privacypreserving, large-scale, realistic suite of tabular datasets. The suite was generated
by applying state-of-the-art tabular data generation techniques on an anonymized,
real-world bank account opening fraud detection dataset. This setting carries a set
of challenges that are commonplace in real-world applications, including temporal
dynamics and significant class imbalance. Additionally, to allow practitioners to
stress test both performance and fairness of ML methods, each dataset variant of
BAF contains specific types of data bias. With this resource, we aim to provide the
research community with a more realistic, complete, and robust test bed to evaluate
novel and existing methods.

1

Introduction

The ability to collect and handle large-scale data has laid the foundations for the widespread adoption
of Machine Learning (ML) [1, 2]. Regardless of the application, evaluating new ML techniques on
realistic datasets plays a crucial role in the development of ML research, and subsequent adoption
by practitioners [3] [4]. Additionally, with the growing ethical concerns around the potential of bias
in algorithmic decision-making [5–7], fairness evaluation is becoming a standard practice in ML
[8–10]. However, the vast majority of publicly available datasets are directed to computer vision and
NLP tasks, and there is a scarcity of large-scale domain-specific tabular datasets. The latter are the
centerpiece of most high-stakes decision-making applications, where fairness testing is of paramount
importance. As it stands, the most relevant tabular datasets in the Fair ML literature suffer from a
series of limitations [11–13], which we will detail in Section 2. Furthermore, most real-world settings
are dynamic, featuring temporal distribution shifts, class imbalance, and other phenomena that are
not reflected in most of the datasets in Fair ML literature [14]. We will discuss how the Bank Account
Fraud (BAF) suite of datasets tackles these limitations, and outline its utility as a general-purpose
tool for the evaluation of performance and fairness in dynamic environments.

1

Available at https://github.com/feedzai/bank-account-fraud

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022) Datasets and Benchmarks track.

