Adaptively Exploiting d-Separators
with Causal Bandits
Blair Bilodeauú
University of Toronto

Linbo Wang
University of Toronto

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto

Abstract
Multi-armed bandit problems provide a framework to identify the optimal intervention over a sequence of repeated experiments. Without additional assumptions,
minimax optimal performance (measured by cumulative regret) is well-understood.
With access to additional observed variables that d-separate the intervention from
the outcome (i.e., they are a d-separator), recent “causal bandit” algorithms provably incur less regret. However, in practice it is desirable to be agnostic to whether
observed variables are a d-separator. Ideally, an algorithm should be adaptive; that
is, perform nearly as well as an algorithm with oracle knowledge of the presence
or absence of a d-separator. In this work, we formalize and study this notion of
adaptivity, and provide a novel algorithm that simultaneously achieves (a) optimal
regret when a d-separator is observed, improving on classical minimax algorithms,
and (b) significantly smaller regret than recent causal bandit algorithms when the
observed variables are not a d-separator. Crucially, our algorithm does not require
any oracle knowledge of whether a d-separator is observed. We also generalize this
adaptivity to other conditions, such as the front-door criterion.

1

Introduction

Given a set of interventions (actions) for a specific experiment, we are interested in learning the best
one with respect to some outcome of interest. Without knowledge of specific causal structure relating
the observed variables, this task is impossible from solely observational data (c.f. Theorem 4.3.2
of [29]). Instead, we seek the most efficient way to sequentially choose interventions for i.i.d.
repetitions of the experiment, where the main challenge is that we cannot observe the counterfactual
effect of interventions we did not choose. Without any structural assumptions beyond i.i.d., one
can always learn the best intervention with high confidence by performing each intervention a
sufficient number of times [10]. In the presence of additional structure—such as a causal graph on
observables—this strategy may result in performing suboptimal interventions unnecessarily often.
However, the presence of such structure is often unverifiable, and incorrectly supposing that it exists
may catastrophically mislead the experimenter. Thus, a fundamental question arises: Can we avoid
strong, unverifiable assumptions while simultaneously performing fewer harmful interventions when
advantageous structure exists?
A natural framework in which to study this question is that of (multi-armed) bandit problems: Over
a sequence of interactions with the environment, the experimenter chooses an action using their
experience of the previous interactions, and then observes the reward of the chosen action. The goal
is to achieve comparable performance with what would have been achieved if the experimenter had
chosen the (unknown) optimal action in each interaction. Formally, performance is measured by
regret, which is the difference of the cumulative reward incurred by the experimenter compared to
the optimal action. In this partial-information setting, regret induces the classical trade-off between
exploration (choosing potentially suboptimal actions to learn if they’re optimal) and exploitation
ú

Correspondence to blair.bilodeau@mail.utoronto.ca

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

