Double Bubble, Toil and Trouble: Enhancing Certified
Robustness through Transitivity

Andrew C. Cullen1∗ Paul Montague2 Shijie Liu1
Sarah M. Erfani1 Benjamin I.P. Rubinstein1
1
School of Computing and Information Systems, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia
2
Defence Science and Technology Group, Adelaide, Australia
andrew.cullen@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
In response to subtle adversarial examples flipping classifications of neural network
models, recent research has promoted certified robustness as a solution. There, invariance of predictions to all norm-bounded attacks is achieved through randomised
smoothing of network inputs. Today’s state-of-the-art certifications make optimal
use of the class output scores at the input instance under test: no better radius of
certification (under the L2 norm) is possible given only these score. However, it
is an open question as to whether such lower bounds can be improved using local
information around the instance under test. In this work, we demonstrate how
today’s “optimal” certificates can be improved by exploiting both the transitivity
of certifications, and the geometry of the input space, giving rise to what we term
Geometrically-Informed Certified Robustness. By considering the smallest distance
to points on the boundary of a set of certifications this approach improves certifications for more than 80% of Tiny-Imagenet instances, yielding an on average 5%
increase in the associated certification. When incorporating training time processes
that enhance the certified radius, our technique shows even more promising results,
with a uniform 4 percentage point increase in the achieved certified radius.

1

Introduction

Learned models, including neural networks, are well known to be susceptible having the output
changed by crafted perturbations to an input, that preserve the inputs semantic properties [2]. Neural
networks not only misclassify these perturbations—known as adversarial examples—but they also
assign high confidence to these incorrect predictions. These behaviours have been observed across a
wide range of models and datasets, and appear to be a product of piecewise-linear interactions [13].
Crafting these adversarial examples typically involves gradient-based optimisation to construct small
perturbations. These attacks have been applied to both black- and white-box models [31], and can
be used to target class changes, to attack all classes [10], or even introduce backdoors into model
behaviour [5]. To mitigate the influence of these attacks, defences have typically been designed
to minimise the effect of a specific attack (or attacks). Such defences are known as best response
strategies in a Stackelberg security game where the defender leads the attacker. Best response defences
inherently favour the attacker, as deployed mitigations can be defeated by identifying undefended
attack frameworks. Moreover, the defender typically has to incorporate the defence at training time,
and as such cannot response reactively to newly developed attacks.
To circumvent these limitations, certified guarantees of adversarial robustness can be constructed to
identify class-constant regions around an input instance, that guarantee that all instances within a normbounded distance (typically L2 ) are not adversarial examples. Certifications based on randomised
smoothing of classifiers around an input point are in a sense optimal [8]: based only on the prediction
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

