Distributional Reinforcement Learning for
Risk-Sensitive Policies
Shiau Hong Lim
IBM Research, Singapore
shonglim@sg.ibm.com

Ilyas Malik
IBM Research, Singapore
malikilyas1996@gmail.com

Abstract
We address the problem of learning a risk-sensitive policy based on the CVaR risk
measure using distributional reinforcement learning. In particular, we show that
the standard action-selection strategy when applying the distributional Bellman
optimality operator can result in convergence to neither the dynamic, Markovian
CVaR nor the static, non-Markovian CVaR. We propose modifications to the
existing algorithms that include a new distributional Bellman operator and show
that the proposed strategy greatly expands the utility of distributional RL in learning
and representing CVaR-optimized policies. Our proposed approach is a simple
extension of standard distributional RL algorithms and can therefore take advantage
of many of the recent advances in deep RL. On both synthetic and real data,
we empirically show that our proposed algorithm is able to learn better CVaRoptimized policies.

1

Introduction

In standard reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton and Barto, 2018), one seeks to learn a policy that
maximizes an objective, usually the expected total discounted rewards or the long-term average
rewards. In stochastic domains, especially when the level of uncertainty involved is high, maximizing
the expectation may not be the most desirable since the solution may have high variance and
occasionally performs badly. In such scenarios one may choose to learn a policy that is more riskaverse and avoids bad outcomes, even though the long-term average performance is slightly lower
than the optimal.
In this work we consider optimizing the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) (Rockafellar and Uryasev,
2000), a popular risk measure, widely used in financial applications, and is increasingly being used
in RL. The CVaR objective focuses on the lower tail of the return and is therefore more sensitive to
rare but catastrophic outcomes. Various settings and RL approaches have been proposed to solve this
problem (Petrik and Subramanian, 2012; Chow and Ghavamzadeh, 2014; Chow and Pavone, 2014;
Tamar et al., 2015; Tamar et al., 2017; Huang and Haskell, 2020). Most of the proposed approaches,
however, involve more complicated algorithms than standard RL algorithms such as Q-learning
(Watkins and Dayan, 1992) and its deep variants, e.g. DQN (Mnih et al., 2015).
Recently, the distributional approach to RL (Bellemare et al., 2017; Morimura et al., 2010) has
received increased attention due to its ability to learn better policies than the standard approaches
in many challenging tasks (Dabney et al., 2018a,b; Yang et al., 2019). Instead of learning a value
function that provides the expected return of each state-action pair, the distributional approach learns
the entire return distribution of each state-action pair. The approach itself is a simple extension to
standard RL and is therefore easy to implement and able to leverage many of the advances in deep
RL.
Since the entire distribution is available, one naturally considers exploiting this information to
optimize for an objective other than the expectation. Dabney et al. (2018a) presented a simple way to
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

