Provably Efficient Model-Free Constrained RL with
Linear Function Approximation

Arnob Ghosh
Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
ghosh.244@osu.edu

Xingyu Zhou
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Wayne State University
Detroit, MI, USA
xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu

Ness Shroff
Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, USA
shroff.11@osu.edu

Abstract
We study the constrained reinforcement learning problem, in which an agent
aims to maximize the expected cumulative reward subject to a constraint on the
expected total value of a utility function. In contrast to existing model-based
approaches or model-free methods accompanied with a ‘simulator’, we aim to
develop the first model-free, simulator-free algorithm that achieves a sublinear
regret and a sublinear constraint violation even in large-scale systems. To this
end, we consider the episodic constrained Markov decision processes with linear
function approximation, where the transition dynamics and the reward function can
be represented
as a linear function
of some known feature mapping. We show that
√
√
Õ( d3 H 3 T ) regret and Õ( d3 H 3 T ) constraint violation bounds can be achieved,
where d is the dimension of the feature mapping, H is the length of the episode, and
T is the total number of steps. Our bounds are attained without explicitly estimating
the unknown transition model or requiring a simulator, and they depend on the
state space only through the dimension of the feature mapping. Hence our bounds
hold even when the number of states goes to infinity. Our main results are achieved
via novel adaptations of the standard LSVI-UCB algorithms. In particular, we
first introduce primal-dual optimization into the LSVI-UCB algorithm to balance
between regret and constraint violation. More importantly, we replace the standard
greedy selection with respect to the state-action function in LSVI-UCB with a
soft-max policy. This turns out to be key in establishing uniform concentration for
the constrained case via its approximation-smoothness trade-off. Finally, we also
show that one can achieve an even zero constraint violation for large enough T by
trading the regret a little bit but still maintaining the same order with respect to T .

1

Introduction

In many practical applications of online reinforcement learning (RL) (e.g., financial regulations,
safety), there exist additional constraints on the learned policy in the sense that it also needs to ensure
that the expected total utility (cost, resp.) exceeds a given threshold (is below a threshold, resp.).
Constrained RL problem is formulated as a constrained Markov Decision Process (CMDP), in which
the celebrated exploration-exploitation trade-off in online RL becomes more challenging due to the
additional need to find a balance between reward regret and constraint violations.
36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

