Coresets for Relational Data and The Applications
Jiaxiang Chen1

Qingyuan Yang2

Ruomin Huang1

Hu Ding∗ 2

1
School of Data Science
School of Computer Science and Technology
University of Science and Technology of China
{czar, yangqingyuan, hrm}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, huding@ustc.edu.cn
2

Abstract
A coreset is a small set that can approximately preserve the structure of the original
input data set. Therefore we can run our algorithm on a coreset so as to reduce
the total computational complexity. Conventional coreset techniques assume that
the input data set is available to process explicitly. However, this assumption
may not hold in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we consider the problem
of coresets construction over relational data. Namely, the data is decoupled into
several relational tables, and it could be very expensive to directly materialize the
data matrix by joining the tables. We propose a novel approach called “aggregation
tree with pseudo-cube” that can build a coreset from bottom to up. Moreover, our
approach can neatly circumvent several troublesome issues of relational learning
problems [Khamis et al., PODS 2019]. Under some mild assumptions, we show
that our coreset approach can be applied for the machine learning tasks, such as
clustering, logistic regression and SVM.

1

Introduction

As the rapid development of information technologies, we are often confronted with large-scale data
in many practical scenarios. To reduce the computational complexity, a number of data summarization
techniques have been proposed [46]. Coreset is a well-known sampling technique for compressing
large-scale data sets [43; 27]. Roughly speaking, for a given large data set P , the coreset approach is
to construct a new (weighted) set P̃ that approximately preserves the structure of P , and meanwhile
the size |P̃ | is much smaller than |P |. Therefore, if we run an existing algorithm on P̃ rather than
P , the runtime can be significantly reduced and the computational quality (e.g., the optimization
objectives for the machine learning tasks [53]) can be approximately guaranteed. In the past decades,
the coreset techniques have been successfully applied for solving many optimization problems, such
as k-means clustering [27; 20], logistic regression [33; 44], Gaussian mixture models [39], and
continual learning [11].
Usually we assume that the input data is stored in a matrix such that the coreset algorithm can easily
access the whole data. But this assumption may not hold in real-world scenarios. For example,
according to the Kaggle 2017 “State of Data Science Survey”, 65.5% of the data sets are relational
data. Namely, the data is decoupled into several relational tables, and we cannot obtain the data
matrix (which is also called the “design matrix”) unless joining all the tables. Relational database
has a very large and fast growing market in this big data era. It is expected to reach USD 122.38
billion by 2027 [48]. Relational database has several favorable properties [54], e.g., the decoupled
relational data can save a large amount of space, and it is friendly to several common statistical
queries such as the aggregate functions COUNT, SUM and AVG in SQL. In recent years, the study on
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

