Unsupervised Point Cloud Completion and
Segmentation by Generative Adversarial
Autoencoding Network

Changfeng Ma
Nanjing University
changfengma@smail.nju.edu.cn
Fei Pan
Nanjing University
panfei@smail.nju.edu.cn

Yang Yang
Nanjing University
yyang_nju@outlook.com

Jie Guo
Nanjing University
guojie@nju.edu.cn

Chongjun Wang
Nanjing University
chjwang@nju.edu.cn

Yanwen Guo∗
Nanjing University
ywguo@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing point cloud completion methods assume the input partial point cloud
is clean, which is not the case in practice, and are generally based on supervised
learning. In this paper, we present an unsupervised generative adversarial autoencoding network, named UGAAN, which completes the partial point cloud
contaminated by surroundings from real scenes and cutouts the object simultaneously, only using artificial CAD models as assistance. The generator of UGAAN
learns to predict the complete point clouds on real data from both the discriminator
and the autoencoding process of artificial data. The latent codes from generator
are also fed to discriminator which makes encoder only extract object features
rather than noises. We also devise a refiner for generating better complete cloud
with a segmentation module to separate the object from background. We train
our UGAAN with one real scene dataset and evaluate it with the other two. Extensive experiments and visualization demonstrate our superiority, generalization
and robustness. Comparisons against the previous method show that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on unsupervised point cloud completion
and segmentation on real data.

1

Introduction

In recent years, point clouds have gained more popularity [11] as the standard outputs of 3D scanning
devices [17, 39] and the fundamental data structure to represent and process 3D data [7, 6, 19].
However, clean and complete point clouds of objects, on which the downstream applications such
as reconstruction [13] significantly rely, are hard to obtain in practice due to the nature of scanners
and occlusions. Point cloud completion which infers a complete object model given a partial point
cloud thus has received considerable attention. Recent supervised methods [42, 41, 31, 26, 36, 34]
show remarkable performance on recovering the original shapes from incomplete point clouds, but
generally assume that the input point cloud is clean and does not contain any noises and outliers. Such
an assumption does not always hold in practice, because the surroundings around the target object
will be inevitably seen by the cameras during scanning real scenes. Though semantic or instance
segmentation on point clouds has been investigated in the literature, the state-of-the-art instance
segmentation methods [21, 5] only report around 68% average precision on the public ScanNet [7]
and [1] datasets. That is to say, accurately cutting out the target object from the whole point cloud
∗

Corresponding author.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

